DOCUMENT RESUME
ED 393 593
PS 024 111
AUTHOR
Polland, Mark J.
TITLE
Mental Imagery in Creative Problem Solving.
PUB DATE
96
NOTE
205p.; Ph.D. Dissertation, Claremont Graduate
School.
PUB TYPE
Dissertations/Theses
Doctoral Dissertations (041)
EDRS PRICE
MF01/PC09 Plus Postage.
DESCRIPTORS
Artists; Authors; Creativity; *Discovery Processes;
Imagination; Inventions; Musicians; *Problem Solving;
.
*Productive Thinking; *Scientists; Spontaneous
Behavior; Visual Arts; *Visualization
IDENTIFIERS
*Creative Problem Solving; *Mental Imagery
ABSTRACT
In order to investigate the relationship between
mental imagery and creative problem solving, a study of 44 separate
accounts reporting mental imagery experiences associated with
creative discoveries were examined. The data included 29 different
scientists, among them Albert Einstein and Stephen Hawking, and 9
artists, musicians, and writers, including Leonardo da Vinci and
Richard Wagner. Thirty-three of the incidents were reported by the
subjects themselves, and 11 were written by biographers and
historians. The study analyzed reports of mental imagery according to
the following three factors:
(1) possible causes for the reported
perception of mental imagery;
(2) what perceptual modalities were
involved in the reported mental imagery; and (3) at what stage in the
problem solving process imagery was reportedly involved. Findings
included the following: (1) mental images occurred more often in a
spontaneous way when the subjects were occupied with routine
behaviors; (2) imagery that occurred in the visual modality was the
single most reported factor, which may reflect the fact that the
research focused on scientific fields that tend to rely on visual
representations; and (3) mental imagery was reported to occur most
frequently during the later stages in the creative process. Contains
approximately 305 references. (AJH)
***********************************************************************
Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made
*
from the original document.
***********************************************************************

S DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
O".ce of Eaf,cal.oriat ReSoil,C1, anc Innvovon'ent
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION
CENTER (ERIC)
This document has been reproduced as
received from the person or organization
originating it
CI Minor changes have been made to
improve reproduction quality
Points 01 view or opinions stated in this
document do not necessarily represent
official OERI position or policy
Mental Imagery in Creative Problem Solvin
by Mark J. Polland
A Dissertation submitted to the Faculty
of Claremont Graduate School in partial
fulfillment of the requirements for the
degree of Doctor of Philosophy in the
Graduate Faculty of Education.
P1114
PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL
V2114
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY
nox kt.
kkoA
Vz-,1
4
TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)
Claremont, CA
1
1996
Approved by:
John 0. Regan
BEST COPY AVAILABLE

We, the undersigned, certify that we have read this
dissertation and approve it as adequate in scope and quality for the
degree of Doctor of Philosophy
Dissertation Committee:
John 0. Regan, Chair
Malcolm P. Douglass, Member
Michael Brewster, Member
Mary J. Martz, Visiting Examiner
2
I)0

Dedication
To my mother, Barbara Kay Po Hand, for
her endless commitment and support.
To John Regan, whose vision is a guiding
light.
And to my Grandmother and
Grandfather, who helped to make this
dream a reality.
3

0
Contents
Page #
Chapter 1
8
1.1 Abstract
8
1.2 Introduction
9
1.3 Summary
10
1.4 What are mental images?
12
Chanter 2
16
2.1 Problems in the observation of creative behaviors
16
2.2 Data validation
19
2.3 Describing mental images
20
2.4 Creativity in education
22
Chapter 3
23
3.1 Literature review
23
3.2 Thinking without words
26
3.3 Reports of mental imagery
27
3.3.1 Galton
27
3.3.2 Myers
29
4

3.3.3 Richardson
30
3.3.4 McKellar
31
3.3.5 Luria
32
3.4 Creative visualization
34
3.5 Mental practice
34
3.6 Mental imagery in healing
36
c
3.7 Stages in the creative process
36
Chapter 4
39
4.1 Data and analysis
39
4.2 Data selection criteria
40
4.3 Primary data
41
4.3.1 Oliver Evans
41
4.3.2 James Nasmyth
43
4.3.3 James Watt, part 1
45
4.3.4 Dimitri Mendeleev
49
4.3.5 Herman Hilprecht
52
4.3.6 Friedrich Kekule
57
4.3.7 Jacques Hadamard
64
4.3.8 Niko la Tesla
66
4.3.9 Albert Einstein, part 1
73
4.3.10 Albert Einstein, part 2
77
4.3.11 John Yellot
79
4.3.12 Omar Snyder
83
4.3.13 James Watson
85
4.3.14 Richard Feynman
89
4.3.15 Stephen Hawking
92
5

4.4 Secondary data
95
4.4.16 Thomas Blanchard
96
4.4.17 Niels Bohr
97
4.4.18 James Watt, part 2
100
4.4.19 Elias Howe
102
4.4.20 Michael Faraday
104
4.5 Thought experiments
107
4.5.21 Galileo Gan lei, part 1
108
4.5.22 Galileo Gall lei, part 2
109
4.5.23 Isaac Newton, part 1
110
4.5.24 Isaac Newton, part 2
112
4.5.25 James Clerk Maxwell
113
4.5.26 Henri Poincare
115
4.5.27 Albert Einstein, part 3
118
4.5.28 Albert Einstein, part 4
119
4.6 Inventors
120
4.6.29 Walter Chrysler
120
4.6.30 Flinders Petrie
122
4.6.31 A. Y. Dodge
124
4.6.32 E. Thompson
125
4.6.33 F. F. Forshee
127
4.6.34 H. A. W Wood
128
4.6.35 Seymour Cray
129
4.7 Poets, painters and composers, etc.
130
4.7.36 Samuel Taylor Coleridge
130
4.7.37 Joan Didion
134
4.7.38 Leonardo da Vinci
134
4.7.39 Max Ernst
135
4.7.40 Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart
136
6

4.7.41 Richard Wagner
139
4.7.42 Guiseppe Tartini
140
4.7.43 Hector Berlioz
141
4.7.44 The Eskimo
143
Chanter 5
145
5.1 Results of analysis
145
5.2 Distribution results
169
5.3 Conclusions
171
5.3.1 Possible causes
171
5.3.2 Perceptual modalities
182
5.3.3 Stages in the creative process
184
5.4 Summary
187
References
189
7

Chavter 1
1.1 Abstract
A number of scientists, as well as artists, musicians and writers
have reported experiencing mental imagery in conjunction with
significant creative discoveries. Is it possible to learn about the
creative from these reported experiences? This study presents a
total of 44 separate accounts reporting mental imagery experiences
associated with creative discoveries. The data include 29 different
scientists and 9 artists, musicians and writers. Thirty-three (33) of
the incidents were reported by the subjects themselves, and 11 were
written by biographers and historians. The reports were collected
from research into the literature concerning "mental imagery," "the
creative process," and "scientific discovery."
Do these reported experiences have any characteristics in
common? Do they suggest a connection between mental imagery and
creative problem solving? This study analyzed reports of mental
imagery according to these three factors:
1. Possible causes for the re4)orted perception of mental
imagery, including behavioral, psychological and environmental
factors. What was the person doing and thinking at the time? Could
that behavior have facilitated the reported imagery? Were other
incidents of mental imagery reported, either in association with the
experience in question or not?
2. What perceptual modalities were involved in the reported
mental imagery? Though mental imagery is often associated with
the visual modality, it is not limited to perceptions in the visual
mode (see what are mental images below). Were non-visual
modalities involved? Are multiple modalities indicated? Is there a
8

40
connection between the specific type of problem and the mode of
perception?
3. At ssh41.5.1age_In the problem solving process was imagery
reportedly involved? What function did the reported mental
imagery perform in facilitating the problem solving process? To
what degree, if any did the reported imagery contribute to the
completed solution?
The purpose of the analysis is to develop a profile that outlines
both the range and frequency of the data within each of three
factors, insofar as it may be determined from the accounts presented.
It is possible to determine any common factors in these reports that
might provide insight into the creative process? Are there ways to
develop this kind of (reported) creative behavior, or to teach it to
others?
Such reports are unverifiable because they represent purely
cognitive phenomena. However, the significance of the discoveries
associated with the accounts of imagery presented here warrants
consideration of the reported circumstances involved.
1.2 Introduction
Mental imagery is more commonly associated with the arts,
such as painting and poetry, than with the scientific prc ilem solving.
This study documents reported incidents of mental imagery in a
wider context, specifically broadening the scope to encompass the
field of scientific discovery. Mental imagery has been reported in
conjunction with a number of significant discoveries. Einstein, for
example, reported that the Theory of Relativity was first conceived
as a mental image. This study examines the role of mental imagery
in scientific discoveries in an effort to develop a broader, as well as a
deeper understanding of the creative process.
9
1 0

The data present a compilation of anecdotal accounts reporting
the perception of mental imagery in association with scientific
discoveries. The data provide two functions. They document the
importance of mental imagery in scientific discovery, and second,
they provide the material with which to analyze the unique
characteristics of this reported phenomenon. What are these
characteristics like, and is it possible to determine any factors that
may facilitate these experiences? Is it possible to develop or teach
these abilities?
Although accounts from nine artists, musicians and writers are
included, the primary focus of the data is on the thirty scientists and
inventors presented. The emphasis on the sciences is for two
reasons. First, as mentioned above, mental imagery is less commonly
associated with scientific investigation, and this may not reflect an
accurate assessment of this relationship. Second, the products of
creative problem solving in the sciences are (generally) less
subjective than in the arts. This is to preclude any question that the
data represent creative accomplishments. The group of artists,
composers, etc., are included as a foil to the larger body of data from
the sciences, and to further identify the range of reported imagery
experiences within the larger scope of creative behaviors.
1.3 Summary
Fifteen reported incidents were found to meet the standards of
the primary data, and forty-four for the combined primary and
secondary. The single most frequently reported factor was imagery
that occurred in the visual modality, though imagery in the auditory
and tactile/kinesthetic modalities werealso reported. The frequency
of reported imagery experiences in the visual mode may reflect the
types of investigations represented. Physics and mechanical
engineering both tend to rely on pictures (diagrams), suggesting that
relevant imagery was more likely to have been perceived in the
visual mode. All four composers included in the secondary data
reported to have perceived auditory (musical) imagery.
10
1 1

There were twenty-two different factors found that may have
contributed to the imagery experiences reported in the primary data,
and twenty-four in the combined results. The individual factors
measured relatively low frequencies, however, several factors seem
to indicate a similar trend toward a range of activities involving
common everyday behaviors. Results of this study indicate that
mental images occurred more often in a spontaneous, unexpected
way while the subjects were relaxing or otherwise preoccupied with
routine behaviors. Specific behaviors include walking, sitting, riding
in a bus or carriage, lying down, and sleeping. These behaviors may
have provided a certain degree of distraction perhaps, but were not
so demanding that they required complete and undivided attention.
Not thinking about the problem when the solution occurred, and not
consciously directing the imagery were two of the most frequent
factors; they may also be related to the same trend.
The results suggest that mental imagery more often occurs in
conjunction with routine behaviors while the subject may not be
aware that they were thinkhig about a specific problem at the time.
This study suggests that mental imagery is often the result of
indirect causes, though a few people reported to have perceived
them at will. The data suggest that mental imagery has occurred
across the range of stages in the creative process (see below), but
mental imagery was reported to occur more frequently during the
later stages (illumination, verification). Several imagery experiences
were reportedly accompanied by affective qualities; in some
instances the affective qualities were perceived as positive, in others
they were perceived as negative.
Mental imagery has been reported in conjunction with a range
of creative behaviors from fiction to physics. Although mental
imagery is more often associated with fiction, this study helps to
establish the significance of mental imagery within the scope of
scientific reasoning. One of the remarkable aspects of mental
imagery is its application to scientific observation and
11
12

0
experimentation. In several cases scientifically verifiable results
have been reported from experiments conducted exclusively within
an individual's mind.
Dream-like imagery, such as sleeping dreams and hypnagogic
experiences was reported with surprisingly high frequency in
conjunction with scientific discoveries, confirming the theories of
several writers that conscious thought processes are sometimes an
impediment to creativity. Apparently this is true not only in the arts
but in the sciences as well.
Though there were cases where mental imagery skills were
reportedly developed through practice and exercise, these reports
were rare, reportedly occurring in only two cases in the primary
data, and a total of three in the combined. In cases where mental
imagery was not a customary part of the thinking process, it was
reported to occur more often by not thinking about the problem than
by thinking about it. As Kekule wrote, "Let us learn to dream . . ."
1.4 What are mental images?
Mental images are distinguished from other cognitive processes
by the experience of sensory perceptions; however these perceptions
are different from normal sensory perceptions (of the external
world) because they are disassociated from stimuli in the immediate
physical environment. Within the context of this study, the word
"image" is used to refer not only to visual perceptions but to
perceptions across the spectrum of sensory modalities: an image is a
representation of a sensory perception. Accordingly, a "mental
image" is the internal recreation or representation of a sensory
perception and may involve multiple sensory modalities. Although
they are less frequently cited, there is cause to suspect that non-
visual modalities play a significant role in creative problem solving.
Miller writes that "Mental imagery in auditory, sensual, and visual
modes has played a central role in creative thought" (1984, p. 221).
The research for this study has revealed several cases involving non-
12
13

visual modalities. Unfortunately, the evidence from non-visual
modalities has not been sufficiently developed in the literature as of
yet. This may change with future research.
Mental images are potentially comprised of visual, auditory,
gustatory, olfactory and/or tactile/kinesthetic sensations. Mental
images that are perceived in the visual modality are described as
pictorial if they represent the perception of scenery or solid forms,
like but not limited to photographic representations. Visual mental
images are described as alarammpak if they involve schematic
types of representation, like blueprints or transparent line drawings.
The categories overlap; but sometimes they provide a useful
distinction. I reserve the word graphic to denote real, not mental
images. Actual photographs, as well as paintings, blueprints and
written text are graphic.
Auditory images represent acoustic perceptions. Reports of
hearing "voices" suggest the perception of auditory imagery, but
these images may also carry a verbal content, as do visual images
involving the perception of words printed on a page. It is the
perception of a sensory component that distinguishes mental
imagery from other cognitive processes. This definition of mental
imagery is in accordance with several leading contemporary
researchers in this field. Paivio described the difference between
images and verbal representations in this way:
Images are thought to be concrete (i.e., they represent
specific instances and are modality specific) and parallel, in
contrast to verbal representations, which are abstract (can
represent classes directly and are modal) and sequential
(from Pinker & Kosslyn, 1983, p. 48).
Although this distinction is helpful, imagery and verbal
representations are not mutually exclusive and often, if not usually,
occur in conjunction with one another. Nevertheless, there are
apparent differences. Bower states that:
13
14

Images provide a kind of "direct contact" with the
appearance of a thing by essentially recreating the experience
of seehig it; verbal or propositional representations do not
evoke a precept like experience but convey information only
about a thing's properties. The two sorts of information are
stored in qualitatively different kinds of codes (from Pinker &
Kosslyn, 1983, p. 48).
Though this may simply have been an oversight, Bower
weakens his argument by unnecessarily limiting his discussion to
imagery in the visual mode. Still, the proposition that imagery is
stored in different kinds of codes from verbal representations
suggests that it may be subject to different processing mechanisms.
The application of the term mental imagery to the range of
(disassociated) sensory perceptions is also consistent with Scheibel
and Schelbel's use of the term: "not-object-bound sensory
phenomena" (Scheibel & Scheibel, 1962). Their rationale for
applying this blanket term is that, "the mechanisms underlying
hallucinations are the same as, or at least are overlapping with, the
mechanisms that mediate other imaginal states such as dreams,
eidetic images, intense memory images, etc." (Scheibel & Scheibel,
1962, p. 17).
Horowitz wrote, "Any thought representation that has a
sensory quality we call an image" (Horowitz, 1978, p. 3). The sensory
quality, as Horowitz puts it, of images is based on the appearance of a
physical correspondence, or resemblance; though, as previously
mentioned, this correspondence is not limited to strictly visual
correspondences but extends across the range of modalities.
Daniel Dennett writes that,
An image represents something else always in virtue of
having at least one quality or characteristic of shape, form or
color in common with what it represents. Images can be in two
or three dimensions, can be manufactured or natural,
permanent or fleeting, but they must resemble what they
14

represent and not merely represent it by playing a role
symbolic, conventional or functionalin some system (Dennett,
1981, p. 52).
Finke, like Dennett, also writes that images resemble (external)
sensory stimulus.
Mental imagery is defined as the mental invention or
recreation of an experience that in at least some respects
resembles the experience of actually perceiving an object or
event, either in conjunction with, or in the absence of, direct
sensory stimulation (Finke, 1989, p. 2).
Finke distinguishes mental images from the real or actual
perception of the external world, although this is somewhat
confusing because he also indicates that mental imagery can occur "in
conjunction with direct sensory stimulation."
The academic debate concerning mental imagery centers
largely around this issue concerning the cognitive structures that
enable mental images to be perceived. Visual mental images do not
involve seeing through the eyes, but, somewhere down the line the
information from both systems is processed in similar ways. There
may be cognitive and/or neurological connections fundamental to
both systems. Although the research in this area is focused almost
exclusively on visual imagery, there are presumably implications for
the study of other modalities as well. As the poet William Blake
wrote: "Those are led to believe a lie who see with, not through the
eyes."
Stephen Kosslyn is a leading contemporary researcher in this
field and represents a school of thought that maintains images are
like projections in an imaginary three dimensional space. Kosslyn
describes imagery as an "array like medium, also subserving visual
perception, that mimics a coordinate space" (Pinker & Kosslyn, 1983,
p. 52). This theory is closely related to a proposal by Shepard, who
wrote:
15
ic

An imagined or perceived shape is represented as a set of
points, with each point embedded in a multidimensional
"space" with its own non-Euclidean geometry. These spaces do
not literally correspond to isolatable spatial regions of the
brain, but they presumably reside in neural networks whose
interconnections mimic the hypothesized geometry of the space
(i.e., the strength of the connections between neurons, or
perhaps neural assemblies, is proportional to the distance
between corresponding points in the abstract "space" posited
by the theory) (from Pinker & Kosslyn, 1983, p. 59).
While Kosslyn concludes that "imagery is centrally involved in
directing thought processes" (Forisha, 1983, p. 318), and furthermore
that "imagery itself places constraints on thought" (Forisha, 1983, p.
318), this is in direct contrast to other researchers in this field, such
as Pylyshyn, who attributes less significance to the role of mental
imagery. Pylyshyn maintains that "imagery is a by-product of
thought that is directed by underlying knowledge and belief
systems" (Pylyshyn, 1979, 1973; Forisha, 1983, p. 318).
Although researchers still disagree as to the specific nature of
mental images, the collective effort in this area has led one group of
researchers to conclude that, "This work has helped to establish that
mental images consist of more that just verbal description or
propositions" (Finke, Ward & Smith, 1992, p. 47).
Chapter 2
2.1 Importance: Problems in the observation of creative behaviors
Thinking is one thing, the perception of our thoughts
another . . . We are always thinking, but we do not always
perceive our thoughts. Plotinus (from Montmasson, 1932, p.
41).
16
17

Because it is difficult, as Plotinus wrote, "to perceive our
thoughts," even under normal conditions, the situation is exacerbated
when it comes to unraveling the thought processes involved during
extraordinary conditions, such as significant creative discoveries. For
this reason, the reports of mental imagery associated with scientific
discoveries provide a unique opportunity to study the creative
process from an internal perspective, if only insofar as these
sometimes sketchy anecdotal reports permit.
Rudolph Arnheim, author of Visual Thinking, wrote, "The
human mind is not easily accessible. Nobody ever comes to know
more than one specimen of mind directly" (Arnheim, 1974, p. 7).
Arnheim succinctly addressed the very issue that inevitably poses
problems in the observation of creative behaviors. As the data
collected for this study confirm, creativity can be an unobservable
mental phenomenon. The products of scientific inquiry in particular
are often abstract theoretical constructs; rarely are they as tangible
as works of art (conceptual art notwithstanding). If we had been
standing right next to Einstein in that Swiss patent office when the
Theory of Relativity first came to him, would we have known that
something remarkable had occurred?
Niko la Tesla, the inventor of the AC generator who is discussed
in detail below, believed that someday it would actually be possible
to record mental images in such a way that we could all share our
internal perceptions.
If my explanation is correct, it should be possible to
project on a screen the image of any object one conceives and
make it visible. Such an advance would revolutionize all
human relations. I am convinced that this wonder can and will
be accomplished in time to come; I may add that I have
devoted much thought to the solution of the problem (Tesla,
1919, p. 32).
17
Is

This possibility is also realized in a provocative way in a recent
science fiction film by Wim Wenders (1992, Until the End of the
World).
Pablo Picasso wrote,
It would be very interesting to record photographically,
not the stages of a painting, but its metamorphoses. One would
see perhaps by what course a mind finds its way toward the
crystallization of its dream (from Ghiselin, 1952, p. 56; in
Feldman, 1980, p. 112; cf. Clouzot, The Mystery of Picasso,
film).
The film titled The Mystery of Picasso (Henri-Georges Clouzot,
released 1982), records exactly what Picasso described. It shows the
creation of a painting from beginning to end, yet it also provides a
deeper sense of the image that Picasso was striving to achieve, his
frustrations and erasures leading to new visions, and new images.
Studies leading up to Guernica, his monumental painting in response
to the atrocities of the Spanish Civil War provide a similar insight
into the mind of the creator (see Arnheim, 1962; Russell, 1980;
Chipp, 1988; Oppler, 1988; see also Arnheim 1992, p. 74 ff.; Arnheim,
1974, p. 6 ff.; Gardner, 1993, p. 172 ff.).
In his statement, Picasso was referring to painting, but
scientific discovery or invention could be substituted for painting
and the statement remains true. When discoveries emerge before or
independent of tangible results or products, mental images
sometimes provide a rare glimpse into that creative process. Picasso
continued:
What is really very curious is to see that the picture does
not change basically, that the initial vision remains almost
intact in spite of appearances . . . I perceive, when this work is
photographed, that what I have introduced to correct my first
vision has disappeared, and that after all the photographic
image corresponds to my first vision, before the occurrence of
the transformation brought about by my will (from Ghiselin,
18
e
19

1952, p. 56; in Feldman, 1980, p. 112; cf. The Mystery of
Picasso, film).
As data collected for this study demonstrate, many scientific
discoveries have occurred in a complete way, similar to Picasso's
experience, by means of an initial mental image (cf. Tesla; Einstein;
Snyder; Mozart; et al). The moment of creativity is difficult if not
impossible to predict, even when it involves an objectively tangible
event, like the creation of a painting by a master. The reports of
mental imagery associated with creative achievements provide a
small window into that subjective and elusive experience. This study
uses those reports as a way to learn about the moment of creative
discovery, and to circumvent some of the difficulties inherent in the
observation of creative behaviors.
2.2 Data Validation
There is every indication that the discoveries cited in this
study describe authentic creative behaviors. Many were
instrumental not only in the progress of science and technology, but
also in the evolution of human thought. In cases where first person
accounts were unavailable, every effort was taken to ensure the
information was collected from authoritative sources. Many of the
cases are cited repeatedly within the literature, further validating
their historical credibility. All accounts that could reasonably be
interpreted as reports of mental imagery in association with creative
achievements were included.
Several artists and writers are considered in the secondary
data section, but the primary body of evidence focuses on creative
achievements resulting in objectively verifiable conclusions. This
was to ensure that the primary data represent unquestionably
creative incidents. This study is concerned with the role of mental
imagery in creative behavior; in and of itself, mental imagery does
not necessarily constitute a creative behavior.
19
20

a
2.3 Describing mental images
Mental phenomena are often difficult, and sometimes
impossible to describe with words, not only because they may be
perceived as nonverbal signs but also because the language to
describe those experiences may not yet have been invented.
Scientists face the same difficulties in the attempt to codify and
communicate new findings. Heisenberg wrote,
(The) problems of language here are really serious. We
wish to speak in some way about the structure of the atoms
and not about the "facts"the latter being for instance, the
black spots on a photographic plate or the water droplets in a
cloud chamber. But we cannot speak about the atom in
ordinary language (Heisenberg, 1958, p. 179; see Shepard,
1978, p. 139).
And Einstein wrote,
We have forgotten what features in the world of
experience caused us to frame pre-scientific concepts, and we
have great difficulty in representing the world of experience to
ourselves without the spectacles of old-established conceptual
interpretation. There is the further difficulty that our language
is compelled to work with words which are inseparably
connected with those primitive concepts. These are the
obstacles which confront us when we try to describe the
essential nature of the pre-scientific concept of time (from
Bronowski, 1973, p. 255-56; in Schlipp, 1952).
Mental images are similar to the structure of the atom or the
concept of time because they are unobservable phenomena, at least
to an objective eye. But, imagery is susceptible to verbal description
because by definition mental images resemble sensory perceptions.
This resemblance, or iconic nature of mental images enables them to
be described and communicated with the same encyclopedic
vocabulary that applies to the objects they represent. The images
described in these data are often simplistic in nature and readily
accessible to verbal description. Of course, as Heisenberg
20
21

acknowledged, there are images that are difficult if not impossible to
describe with words.
In the eighteenth century, David Hume wrote:
There is a great resemblance betwixt our impressions and
ideas in every other particular, except their degree of force and
vivacity. The one seem to be in a manner the reflection of the
other; so that all the perceptions of the mind are double, and
appear both as impressions and ideas. When I shut my eyes
and think of my chamber, the ideas I form are exact
representations of the impressions I felt; nor is there any
circumstance of the one, which is not to be found in the other.
In running over my other perceptions, I find still the same
resemblance and representation. Ideas and impressions
appear always to correspond to each other (Hume, 1739).
The correspondence between the sensory perceptions involved
with mental images and the perception of things or places in the real
world result in the potential to describe both types of perceptions
using the (encyclopedic) vocabulary of sights and sounds of everyday
life. This is not to say that all mental images are verbally
translatable, or that nothing is lost in the process, but in general it is
possible to convey, through words, the essential nature of a
particular mental image.
Insofar as mental images are subject to verbal description, they
may be communicated to other people. Through language, imagery
provides a connecting link that enables us to recreate, to greater or
lesser degrees, iconic facsimiles of other peoples' internal
perceptions. Menial imagery seems to be unique in this regard.
Einstein wrote,
By the aid of language different individuals can, to a
certain extent, compare their experiences. Then it turns out
that certain sense perceptions of different individuals
correspond to each other (Einstein, 1922, pp. 1-2).
21
22

0
0
We can never know if the images we might construct in
response to the descriptions included in this study is identical to
their author's reported perception, but the message can be
transferred, or translated, so that the essential content is
communicated.
2.4 Creativity in Education
This study is not intended as a prescription for the use of
mental imagery in academic curricula, but it does demonstrate the
importance of mental imagery as a creative behavior. Creativity is
an integral aspect of scientific investigation, and education in the
sciences should offer the opportunity to foster creative development.
Unfortunately, this is not always the case.
Although Einstein was reportedly "never much good at the
'easy' part of mathematics" (West, 1991, p. 121), the schools he
attended consistently neglected to recognize his special talent. His
personal experiences led Einstein to conclude that:
It is, in fact, nothing short of a miracle that the modern
methods of instruction have not yet entirely strangled the holy
curiosity of inquiry; for this delicate little plant, aside from
stimulation, stands mainly in need of freedom; without this it
goes to wrack and ruin without fail (from Schlipp, 1979, p. 17).
In a profile on Einstein, West (1991) wrote that:
(A)rithmetic proficiency with speed and accuracy of
calculation and response is still widely considered to be a major
early indicator of mathematical aptitude, whether in the
classroom or a work group, or in achieving high scores on
standardized aptitude tests. In all these settings the main
concern is getting the largest number of answers right in a
given time. . . The inadequacy of such teaching and testing
methods to recognize deep mathematical ability beneath
superficial difficulties cannot be overemphasized.
22
23

A report from the National Research Council (1989) stated that:
"As computers increase in power, some parts of
mathematics become less important while other parts become
more important. While arithmetic proficiency may have been
"good enough" for many in the middle of the century, anyone
whose mathematical skills are limited to computation has little
to offer today's society that is not better done by an
inexpensive machine (National Research Council, 1989, p. 45).
These arguments are aimed primarily at education in the
sciences, but similar arguments can be made for education in the
humanities. Is early proficiency with reading and writing an
accurate indicator of an individuals ability to express themselves
verbally? West presents evidence to suggest that early language
development is not necessarily indicative of linguistic skills at later
stages of development (West, 1991, see profiles on Churchill and
Yeats, et al.). These perspectives suggest that a more wholistic
approach to the development of each student as an individual in a
complex society may be in order.
Chapter 3
3.1 Literature Review
When I examine myself and my methods of thought, I
come to the conclusion that the gift of fantasy has meant more
to me than my talent for absorbing knowledge Albert Einstein
(from Clark, 1971, p. 87).
The earliest known literature to address the subject of mental
imagery dates back to Ancient Greece. Simonides, an Ancient Greek
scholar, reportedly used visual imagery as a way to increase his
memory capacity (McKellar, 1972, p. 35). Aristotle, who referred to
Simonides in his writings, believed that thinking without imagery
23
2 4

0
was impossible (McKellar, 1972, P. 37; Mandler & Mandler, 1964, pp.
9-15). Aristotle wrote,
If one perceived nothing one would learn and understand
nothing . . . Whenever one is contemplating, it is some image
that one is contemplating; for the images are like sense-data
but without matter . . . What then, distinguishes the primary
thoughts from being images? Is it not better to say that
neither they nor the others are images, but that they cannot
occur without images? (Aristotle, 1986, p. 210).
Ludwig Boltzman was entirely in agreement with Aristotle. In
1897, Boltzman wrote, "I cannot think of any other law of thought
than that our pictures should be clearly and unambiguously
imaginable" (from Miller, 1984, p. 51). Boltzman continued:
It is precisely the unclarities in the principles of
mechanics that seem to me to derive from not starting at once
with hypothetical mental pictures but trying to link up with
experience from the outset (from Miller, 1984, p. 76).
The conviction that imagery is an essential feature of thought
carried into this century as well. Based on his own subjective
observations, Titchener reported that "My mind, in its ordinary
operations, is a fairly complete picture gallery" (Titchener, 1909, P.
187; see Shepard, 1978, P. 156).
Citing two of the most eminent psychologists, Horowitz
reported that Freud and Piaget both were convinced of the primacy
of mental imagery.
Freud postulated that the earliest thinking in infancy was
in hallucinatory images for the purpose of temporary, if
imaginary, gratification. In a parallel line of reasoning, Piaget
suggested that whenever the preverbal child experienced
desire he might form in his mind an image (Horowitz, 1978, p.
77).
24
25

Although children often seem to have especially vivid imagery
abilities, imagery is a crucial aspect of adult thought processes as
welL "This ability to form pictorial images is inherent in the human
brain and provides people with an alternate way of thinking about
things" (Starker, 1985, p. 4).
0
Ferguson states that "Much of the creative thought of the
designers of our technological world is nonverbal; its language is an
object, or a picture or a visual image in the mind" (Ferguson, 1977, p.
835). His conclusion is that "Thinking with pictures is an essential
strand in the intellectual history of technological development"
(Ferguson, 1977, p. 827). David Hume also commented on this
facility.
To join incongruous shapes and appearances costs the
imagination no more trouble than to conceive the most natural
and familiar objects . . . this creative power of the mind
amounts to no more than the faculty of compounding,
transposing, augmenting, or diminishing the material afforded
us by the senses and experience (Hume, 1748; from Shepard &
Cooper, 1982, p. 1).
Herman von He'nholtz wrote,
Thus the memory images of pure sense impressions can
also be used as elements in combinations of ideas, where it is
not necessary to describe these in words. Equipped with an
awareness of the physical form of an object, we can clearly
imagine all of the perspective images which we may expect
upon viewing from this or that side, and we are immediately
disturbed when such an image does not correspond to our
expectations. Indeed, the idea of a three-dimensional figure
has no content other than the ideas of the series of visual
images which can be obtained from it, including those which
can be produced by cross-sectional (Helmholtz, 1894; from
Miller, 1984, p. 49; Warren & Warren, 1968, pp. 252-54;
Shepard, 1978, p. 133; Shepard & Cooper, 1982, p. 1).
25
26

Some of the literature on the role of mental imagery in
creativity tends to emphasize the importance of "visual thinking"
over the auditory and other domains as a cognitive approach.
Arnheim wrote:
A review of what is known about perception, and
especially about sight, made me realize that the remarkable
mechanisms by which the senses understand the environment
are all but identical with the operations described by the
psychology of thinking. Inversely, there was much evidence
that truly productive thinking in whatever area of cognition
takes place in the realm of imagery (Arnheim, 1969, p. v; cf.
Lowenfeld, 1939; Lowenfeld & Brittain, 1951; Gardner, 1973;
1982; Edwards, 1986).
This emphasis has historical antecedents. During the High
Renaissance, the scholar Thesoledia wrote, "Conceptual thinking is
built on visual understanding. Visual understanding is the basis of
all knowledge" (from Mandler & Mandler, 1964). This emphasis on
the visual mode seems over stated now, but "visual understanding" is
certainly a fundamental way of knowing.
0
3.2 Thinking without words
Several important writers on the subject of mental imagery
have themselves expressed an inclination toward imagery as a
method of thought. Francis Galton, who wrote the first in depth
study of mental imagery in 1883 (see reports of mental imagery
below), reported great difficulties in communicating his own
thoughts through verbal means.
It is a serious drawback to me in writing, and still more
in explaining myself, that I do not so easily think in words as
otherwise. It often happens that after being hard at work, and
having arrived at results that are perfectly clear and
satisfactory to myself, when I try to express them in language I
feel that I must begin by putting myself upon quite another
intellectual plane. I have to translate my thoughts into a
language that does not run evenly with them. I therefore
26
2 7

waste a vast deal of time in seeking for appropriate words and
phrases, and am conscious, when requirea
speak on a
sudden, of being often very obscure througn mere verbal
maladroitness, and not through want of clearness of perception.
That is one of the small annoyances of my life (in Hadamard,
1945, P. 69; cf. Tyrrell, 1946, P. 34; Edwards, 1986, P. 47;
Simonton, 1988, p. 27; cf. Shepard, 1978, p. 139-40).
Jacques Hadamard was author of The Psych4ogy of Invention
in the Mathematical Field (1945). He is discussed in greater detail
below (see Hadamard under primary data). As Hadamard himself
acknowledged, he experienced difficulties similar to Galton's.
I insist that words are totally absent from my mind when
I really think and I shall completely align my case with
Galton's in the sense that even after reading or hearing a
question, every word disappears at the very moment I am
beginning to think it over; words do not reappear in my
consciousness before I have accomplished or given up the
research, just as happened to Galton (Hadamard, 1945, p. 75; cf.
Shepard, 1978, p. 140).
Einstein went so far as to write that, "I have no doubt but that
our thinking goes on for the most part without the use of signs
(words) and beyond that to a considerable degree unconsciously"
(Holton, 1978a; in French, 1979, p. 156; for a continued discussion
see Einstein below). Certainly Galton, Hadamard, and Einstein were
unusual cases, but perhaps other people experience their own
thoughts in similar, nonverbal ways.
3.3 Reports of mental imagery
3.3.1 Francis Galton
Galton, who was already presented in this study (see thinking
without words above), was the first writer to attempt a
comprehensive treatise on mental imagery titled Inquiries into
Hwnan Faculty and its Development (1883). Galion was the founder
27
28

of eugenics (Starker, 1985, p. 93), and a cousin of Charles Darwin as
well (Shepard, 1978, p. 139). In his study of mental imagery, Galton
(1883) included numerous reported instances of mental imagery, all
In anecdotal form. His survey of friends, all accomplished men and
including a number of distinguished scientists, produced results that
were quite surprising to him: "I found that the great majority of the
men of science to which I first applied protested that mental imagery
was unknown to them" (Galton, 1883, p. 58).
Like the Ancient Greek philosophers, Galton believed that
images were intrinsic to human thought. His convictions were so
unshakable that he refused to accept the initial response to his
inquiry. He retorted that "They had a mental deficiency of which
they were unaware, and naturally enough supposed that those who
affirmed they possessed it were romancing" (Galion, 1883, p. 58).
A second survey of one hundred scientists and intellectuals
produced responses ranging from reports of no mental imagery
whatsoever, to reportedly vivid perceptions of imagery, though only
select cases are elaborated and no frequency distributions were cited
(Galton, 1883, p. 61). Galton also cites evidence of images he refers
to as number forms (Galton, 1883, pp. 79-105) and color associations
(Galton, 1883, pp. 105-12) which belong to the somewhat rare type
of mental imagery associated with synaesthesia experiences.
Although, strangely enough, Galton does not refer to him, in
1816 John Herschel described personal experiences that bear a close
relationship to Galton's number forms category.
They consist in the involuntary production of visual
impressions, into which geometrical regularity of form enters
as the leading character, and that, under circumstances which
altogether preclude any explanation drawn from a possible
regularity of structure in the retina or optic nerve . . . They are
evidently not dreams. The mind is not dormant, but active and
conscious of the direction of its thoughts; these things, by
calling attention to themselves, direct the train of thought into
28
29

a channel it would not have taken of itself . . . If it be true that
the conception of a regular geometric pattern implies the
exercise of thought and intelligence, it would almost seem that
in such cases as those above adduced we have evidence of a
thought, an intelligence, working within our own organization
distinct from that of our own personality (Herschel, 1816; in
Myers, 1920, p. 56; see Shepard, 1978, p. 143-4).
Herschel never suggested that the reported geometric images
resulted in any significant discoveries, that is, beyond the recognition
of this phenomenon itself.
3.3.2 F. W. H. Myers
After Galton, Myers was one of the earliest writers to present
reported accounts of mental imagery. Myers defined mental imagery
in general as tilt! "entencephalic sensory faculty" (Myers, 1920, p.
72), but then in my opinion he unnecessarily limits his discussion by
referring to imagery as "internal vision" (Myers, 1920, p. 141),
stressing the visual at the expense of the other modalities. Myers is
credited with having introduced the term hypnopompic imagery to
distinguish those images that are perceived in the transitional state
from sleeping to waking up, in contrast with hypnagogic imagery,
indicating the transitional state between waking and falling asleep.
Hypnopompic imagery occurs "at the moment when slumber is
departing . . . a figure which has formed part of a dream continues to
be seen as a hallucination for some moments after waking" (Myers,
1892, p. 335).
Myers also identified a type of imagery he called imagination
imagery. He wrote,
I give the name of imagination images to those conscious
recombinations of our store of visual imagery which we
compose either for our mere enjoyment, as "waking dreams," or
as artifices to help us to the better understanding of facts of
nature confusedly discerned (Myers, 1920, p. 141).
29
30

0
In addition to hypnopompic and imagination imagery, Myers
also identified dream and memory imagery, but sometimes blurred
the distinction between the two. At one point he wrote that, "Dreams
actually are hallucinations; but they are usually hallucinations of low
intensity" (Myers, 1920, p. 142). And at another point he wrote that
dreams "consist of confused memory images" (Myers, 1920, p. 141).
His categories begin to fall apart under close examination, but they
include a useful range of concepts nonetheless.
3.3.3 Richardson
Further precedent for the analysis of imagery by type has been
presented by Richardson (1969), who identified four types: after
imagery, eidetic imagery, memory imagery, and imagination
imagery. Richardson distinguished the types according to the degree
of intentional control to which they are subject. Unlike Myers'
definition, Richardson uses imagination imagery to refer specifically
to hypnagogic and hallucinatory experiences. According to
Richardson, after images refer to involuntary response to physical
stimuli, like the image of the bright spot that persists after looking
into a bright light. As a subset of this category, Richardson produced
pulse current images by sending electrical currents into the brain
through electrodes affixed to the forehead (Richardson, 1969, p. 112).
After images are not considered here because their significance
within the scope of scientific discovery is presumably negligible.
Richardson rejects the traditional interpretation of eidetic
imagery as photographic in nature. Instead, he favors an
interpretation that is less rigid. Kagan and Havemann have defined
photographic imagery (1972) as "the ability possessed by a minority
of people to 'see' an image that is an exact copy of the original
sensory experience." In rebuttal, Richardson states that "no
contemporary researchers on eidetic imagery employ exceptional
accuracy as one of its defining properties" (Richardson, 1983, p. 22).
Richardson defined eidetic imagery, following Jaensch (1923) as the
type of vivid memory images that are often experienced by children.
30
31

Several other researchers have documented this phenomenon in
children; most report that they decreased over time and usually
disappeared by early adolescence (Reed, 1988, P. 88; Richardson,
1983, p. 22; McKim, 1980, p. 95; Jaensch, 1923; see also Corliss,
1976). Interestingly, many so-called human calculators were
reported to be only in temporary possession of their unique faculties,
which frequently faded or disappeared altogether after a few years
(Myers, 1920; Galton, 1883). Richardson has also conducted
extensive research into the use of imagery to enhance athletic
performance (see mental practice below).
3.3.4 McKellar
Like Myers and Richardson, McKellar (1972) outlined several
general types of imagery: Dream, memory, hallucinatory,
hypnagogic, and hypnopompic. Under the heading of hypnagogic
experiences, McKellar identified some less frequently cited examples,
including: perseverative imagery, involving the re-experience of
repetitive behaviors, such as picking berries, or pulling weeds; and
impersonal imagery, which is difficult to describe (even for
McKellar), but is related to a sense of unfamiliarity with one's
surroundings. Impersonal imagery could potentially benefit problem
solving by providing the opportunity to consider a problem in a new,
unfamiliar wayin a different light. However, no reports of this
nature were found.
McKellar includes a discussion of after sensations, equivalent to
Richardson's description of after imagery (Richardson, 1969)
presented above. He also presents evidence of mental images
involving synaesthesia, citing Galton's earlier interest in this subject.
Incidents including both sounds and numbers associated with colors
or shapes are cited (McKellar, 1972; Galton, 1883; see also Cytowic,
1989; 1993; cf. Sacks, 1985).
31
32

3.3.5 Luria
In The Mind of a Mnemonist (1968), Luria reported many
types of imagery related to synaesthesia in his mnemonist subject,
called simply S., in deference to professional confidentiality. Luria
has since revealed his name (see Reed, 1988, p. 88), but it is
irrelevant for all intents and purposes here. The subject reportedly
possessed a seemingly infinite memory, that was based primarily on
the use of visual images. "The only mechanisms he employed were
one of the following: either he continued to see series of words or
numbers which had been presented to him, or he converted these
elements into visual images" (Luria, 1968, p. 16). The subject did not
produce any specifically original scientific discoveries, but the
reportedly prodigious nature of his memory, and its visual character,
are worth considering.
Luria reported that,
I simply had to admit that the capacity of his memory
had no distinct limits. Experiments indicated that he had no
difficulty reproducing any lengthy series of words whatever,
even though these had originally been presented to him a
week, a month, a year, or even many years earlier. In fact,
some of these experiments designed to test retention were
performed (without his being given any warning) fifteen or
sixteen years after the session in which he had originally
recalled the words. Yet invariably they were successful.
During these test sessions S. would sit with his eyes closed,
pause, then comment: "Yes, yes . . . This was a series you gave
me once when we were in your apartment . . . You were sitting
at the table and I at the rocking chair. . . . You were wearing a
gray suit and you looked at me like this . . . Now, then, I can see
you saying . . . " and with that he would reel off the series
precisely as I had given it to him at the earlier session. If one
takes into the account that S. had by then become a well known
mnemonist, who had to remember hundreds and thousands of
series, the feat seems even more remarkable (Luria, 1968, pp.
11-12).

Although Luria's description suggests S.'s memory involved
both visual and auditory imagery, it is interesting that he recorded S.
as having said "I 5. c a you saying." In another passage Luria further
emphasizes the visual character of S.'s reported ability:
S. told us that he continued to see the table (of numbers)
which had been written on the blackboard or a sheet of paper,
that he merely had to "read it off," successively enumerating
the numbers or letters it contained. Hence, it generally made
no difference to him whether he "read" the table from the
beginning or the end, whether he listed the elements that
formed the vertical or the diagonal the groups, or "read off'
numbers that formed the horizontal rows.
S. continued to see the numbers he had "imprinted" in his
memory just as they had appeared on the board or the sheet of
paper the numbers presented exactly the same configuration
they had as written, so that if one of the numbers had not been
written distinctly, S. was liable to "misread" it, to take a 3 for
an 8, for example, or a 4 for a 9.
S. had remarked on a number of occasions that if the
examiner said something during the experimentif, for
example, he said "yes" to confirm S. had reproduced the
material correctly or "no" to indicate he had made a mistakea
blur would appear on the table and would spread and block off
the numbers, so that S. in his mind would be forced to "shift"
the table over, away from the blurred section that was
covering it. The same thing happened if he heard noise in the
auditorium; this was immediately converted into "puffs of
steam" or "splashes" which made it more difficult for him to
read (Luria, 1968, pp. 20-21).
Corliss also reported several cases involving this seemingly
photographic memory phenomenon (Corliss, 1976, pp. 167-84).
Luria considered his own research on S. to be significant, however, he
reported no specific discoveries to have resulted from S.'s reported
abilities.
33
3 4

3.4 Creative visualization
Imagery has been used as a meditative technique in Tantric
yoga, as well as Buddhism and Hinduism for over a thousand years.
A person studying Tantrism is taught to visualize a divine
image, to construct it mentally or, more precisely, to project it
on a sort of inner screen through an act of creative imagination.
It is a question of awakening one's inner forces, yet at the same
time maintaining perfect lucidity and self-control (Eliade, 1958,
pp. 207-8; in Samuels & Samuels, 1975, P. 23).
Mental imagery has received growing popular interest in
recent years. Part of this attention derives from spiritualist interest
in the subject. Shakti Gawain has written that,
In creative visualization you use your imagination to
create a clear image of something you wish to manifest. Then
you continue to focus on the idea or picture regularly, giving it
positive energy until it becomes objective reality. . . . in other
words until you actually achieve what you have been
visualizing (Gawain, 1978).
Unfortunately, claims as to the effects of mental imagery are
often overstated. Techniques such as this seem better suited to
issues of personal motivation and self-esteem, although these are
critical ingredients in the creative process. However, a growing body
of evidence suggests that this type of imagery might be more
effective than many of us are inclined to believe (see mental
practice; and mental imagery in healing below).
3.5 Mental practice
Galion described a technique used by one teacher to facilitate
the development of imagery skills among his students.
He trained his pupils with extraordinary success,
beginning with the simplest figures. They were made to study
34

the models thoroughly before they tried to draw them from
memory. One favorite expedient was to associate the sight
memory with the muscular memory, by making his pupils
follow at a distance the outlines of the figures with a pencil
held in their hands. After three or four months' practice, their
visual memory became greatly strengthened. They had no
difficulty in summoning images at will, in holding them steady,
and in drawing them (Galton, 1883, p. 73).
Several researchers have reported promising results in the
improvement of motor performance after mental practice (Corbin,
1972; Oxendine, 1968; Richardson, 1967a, b). Richardson found
statistical evidence that the practice of mental imagery improved
overall performance among a group of athletes. In fact, most
professional athletes practice some form of mental imagery to
improve their performance (Richardson, 1969). Mental practice has
itself become a valuable skill requiring attention and development.
Suinn wrote that "The value of mental practice is influenced by the
subject's level of skill in the mental process itself' (Suinn, 1983, p.
510). Suinn wrote further that,
Jean Claude Ki lly reports that the only preparation he had
for one race was to mentally ski the course because an injury
prevented on-snow practice. He believes that this race turned
out to be one of his best performances. Jack Nicklaus first
visualizes the ball landing on the green and actually seeing the
bounce, then visualizes the arc of the ball in flight, and then his
swing and the ball leaving the ground. His final step is to link
these together in proper sequence: visualizing the swing; the
ball's Trajectory; and its landing and bouncing on the green.
Dwight Stones is identified by his pre jump preparation, during
which his head can be seen bobbing up and down in rhythm
with his mental image of himself approaching and clearing the
bar. Chris Everet Uoyd centers on anticipating her oppor,at's
strategy and style and visualizes herself countering with her
own attack (Suinn, 1983, pp. 514-15).
0
35
36

3.6 Mental imagery in healing
Paracelsus, a sixteenth century physician from Switzerland
wrote "The power of the imagination is a great factor in medicine. It
may produce diseases in man and it may cure them" (Hartmann,
1973, P. 129; in Samuels & Samuels, p. 33).
In contemporary times, Bffl Moyers recently reported, through
a series of interviews with both doctors and patients, on the potential
of the mind to influence the healing process (1993). Moyers
presented evidence to suggest that mental imagery can play a
significant role in the bodies own healing process. Dr. Remen said,
What we imagine, we experience, and what we imagine
affects us. It affects our immune system, and our strength, and
our optimism. So we need to take control of our imagination
and use it for our well-being. . . .
Imagery is the way the mind and body talk to each other.
That's why Olympic athletes often have imagery coaches to
help them to imagine their optimal performance and thus
improve their actual performance. . . .
Images are the primal language. Maybe the first way we
experience the world is through images. And images bring
back the old memories and feelings.. . .
My sense is that creativity and healing are very close to
each other, in some way that I really could not say more about
(Moyers, 1993, pp. 347-48).
3.7 Stages in the creative process
Several stages in the creative process have been identified
variously by different authors (cf. Wallas, 1926; Murphy, 1947;
Edwards, 1986, p. 47). The majority of theories follow a roughly
standard sequence involving some or all of the stages listed below:
36
37

"7,7731.7707,S71
1) First Insight is the initial recognition of a problem or a
question. Although this description characterizes the earliest stage in
the creative process, it can be the most important. Einstein wrote,
"The formulation of a problem is often more essential than its
solution" (1938). The term was coined in the 1960's by Kneller to
describe Gerzels' identification of a preliminary questioning process,
preceding the investigation of the subject (Kneller, 1965; Getzels,
1980). The choice of the word "insight" suggests a visual metaphor,
which is perhaps misleading because this stage is not limited to the
visual modality. The first insight is simply an initial idea,
irrespective of imagistic content.
2) Saturation is the process of immersing one's self in the
material. This is the stage for research and development. This stage,
along with incubation and illumination were coined by Helmholtz in
the late nineteenth century (1896b). Helmholtz described saturation
as the first stage in his creative process. Because mastering a
discipline is a lifelong process without a definite starting point, it is
understandable that Helmholtz recognized this as the first stage in
the creative process. The realization of a significant insight to a
significant problem or question is highly unlikely without some
initial degree of familiarity with the subject, though perhaps that
would constitute a pre-insight saturation phase.
3) Incubation is the process of considering the material after
sufficient data have been collected. Incubation is a more reflective
process than saturation, and, accordhig to Helmholtz, represents the
interim between saturation and illumination.
4) Blumination is realization of the solution: the point at
which the question is answered or the problem is solved. It is the
experience Archimedes acknowledged with his famous exclamation
"Eureka" (I have found it). While the other stages are indeterminate
in duration, most writers, including Helmholtz who first identified
this stage, describe the process of illumination as a brief or sudden
experience, or the moment of discovery. As with insight, the
37

application of the word illumination suggests a connection to visual
imagery. Although this study is concerned specifically with imagery
in creative problem solving, imagery is certainly nat indicated by
every creative act. The visually oriented words used to describe
these processes reflects a predisposition to visual imagery deriving
either from the writers, or the language, or possibly a combination of
both.
5) Verification is the process of checking the results for errors,
and possibly confirming them through (objective) observation.
Although verification necessarily occurs after illumination, and is the
confirmation that a creative discovery has occurred. Until the
verification, only the subjects themselves have any awareness that
the results are creative and/or productive. The verification stage
was first identified by Poincare (1908; see Poincare under secondary
below).
According to the data collected for this study, the time span
involved in each stage of the creative varies dramatically between
the reported incidents. Some reports suggest the entire process
occurred in an almost instantaneous way. Others indicate that the
stages developed slowly, over long periods of time. The stages
represent a useful concept, but the sequence may in reality not be as
rigid as it seems. Helmholtz's description of saturation as the initial
process, as opposed to first insight, has some merit. Perhaps a pre-
insight saturation process precedes the first insight, which is in turn
followed by a second saturation stage. Although Helmholtz posits
incubation as the reflective analysis following saturation, there is
necessarily some measure of ongoing deliberation and reflection
(incubation) involved during the saturation process. Furthermore, if
saturation precedes insight, perhaps a pre-insight incubation stage is
indicated as well.
Although there are limitations to the staged conception of the
creative process, they represent a useful guideline with which to
begin. This study will determine, insofar as may be determined from
38
39

the data, the stage in the creative process at which the reported
incidents of mental imagery occurred.
Chapter 4
4.1 Data and Analysis
The data are divided into two sections: primary, and
secondary. The primary data represent the core evidence of mental
imagery reported in conjunction with scientific discoveries. The
analysis of the primary data is the main focus of this study, however,
research revealed a number of other incidents that, although they
failed to meet the primary selection criteria, nevertheless they
further elucidate certain aspects mental imagery in creative problem
solving that are both valuable to this research and closely related to
the primary data. The secondary data include incidents from the
sciences that were insufficiently documented and/or elaborated to
warrant inclusion in the primary set, as well as incidents from the
arts and humanities (painters, poets and composers as I refer to
them below), where the products are far more subjective, at least in
a cultural sense than scientific discoveries, which must carry
universal application or they are invalid. Although they are not
included in the primary data, which is the main body of evidence,
they are considered here because they each help to illustrate certain
aspects of mental imagery.
With respect to the difference between scientific and artistic
production, Richard Feynman (see primary data below), has written
that
Scientific creativity is imagination in a straitjacket. The
whole question of imagination in science is often
misunderstood by people in other dikiplines. They overlook
the fact that whatever we are allowed to imagine in science
must be consistent with everything else we know. . . .
(Scientific discoveries are) not just some happy thoughts which
we are free to make as we wish, but ideas which must be
39
,
40

consistent with all the laws of physics we know. We can't allow
ourselves to seriously imagine things which are obviously
contradictory to the known laws of nature. And so our kind of
imagination is quite a difficult game. . . . Our imagination is
stretched to the utmost, not, as in fiction, to imagine things
which are not really there, but just to comprehend those things
which are there (Gleick, 1992, pp. 324-5).
4.2 Data selection criteria
The primary data were selected according to the following
criteria:
First, the incident had to involve a report of mental imagery in
conjunction with creative problem solving. Incidents involving
imagery not associated with scientific discoveries or inventions are
presented in the secondary data. Reports of mental imagery in
conjunction with artistic production (9 in total) are also included in
the secondary data set. These cases are included because they help
to illustrate the depth and scope of mental imagery in creative
problem solving, as well as its importance.
Second, the incidents had to involve a first person report,
though sometimes statements by colleagues or biographers are
included as supporting evidence. Because mental imagery is a purely
cognitive phenomenon, first person accounts provided the most
persuasive evidence that mental imagery had actually occurred.
However, citations from respected scientists, researchers in the field
of mental imagery, and/or eminent historians were accepted for the
secondary data. In many cases, multiple citations are recorded in the
literature.
Third, there needed to be enough details included in the
descriptions to provide some sense of the content of the reported
imagery and the modality in which it occurred. The content and
modality of the reported imagery, as well as the circumstances
surrounding it provide the material by which the incidents are
40
41

analyzed. Furthermore, they help to substantiate the report that
mental images were involved.
Fourth, the incident must have resulted in scientifically
verifiable results. This ensured that the incidents represented
unquestionably creative behaviors. The primary data is limited to
incidents of scientific discovery and/or invention. This decision is
based on the presumption that scientific discoveries are objectively
and universally recognizable (or they are invalid), whereas the
products of artistic creativity are subjective and culture bound.
4.3 Primary Da ta: First Person Accounts
This first group of data are organized according to a roughly
chronological sequence; in some cases the chronological order has
been violated in order to group cases according to similarities with
respect to either the specific imagery or the nature of the research
involved. Immediately following the data are analyses of the cause
and function of the reported imagery, as outlined in the introduction.
4.3.1 Oliver Evans
Ferguson (1977; 1992) cites the case of Oliver Evans who, in
the 1870's, invented the automatic flour mill. Evans reported that:
The arrangement I so far completed (in my mind) before
I began (to build) my mill that I have in my bed viewed the
whole operation with much mental anxiety.. . . from the time
the wheat is emitted from the wagon until it is completely
manufactured into superfine flour the whole is done by
machinery without any part thereof being moved by manual
labor (Ferguson, 1977, p. 834; 1992, p. 47; see Starker, 1985, p.
93; cf. Shepard, 1978, p. 141).
The incident reportedly occurred while Evans was lying in bed.
Evans' position (lying down), and location (in bed) are presumably
highly conducive to comfort and relaxation. Generally speaking,
41
42

lying down is the position that allows the muscles to relax the most
completely. Being in bed by his own account, there must have been
some measure of padding and/or insulation under him, if only straw.
These factors may have contributed to his state of mind, possibly
facilitating the flow of ideas, or in this case the (reported) flow of
images. It is unclear from the description whether the reported
"mental anxiety" was perceived as a positive or a negative factor. His
anxiety seems unrelated to any apparent cause and there is no
suggestion that he was asleep or dreaming at the time, which might
have accounted for such feelings. Nevertheless, it is interesting to
note that the reported imagery was accompanied by this affective
element.
Evans' report of having "viewed" the operadon suggests visual
imagery was involved. His description of the (automatic) handling
and transportation of wheat throughout the milling process also
suggests visual imagery. This is not surprising considering that the
design was probably best adapted to pictorial means of
representation. There are no indications of other modalities
involved.
There is a silent implication in the presentation of this account
that this was the first time Evans had considered a pictorial
representation of his mill, but this is in fact unknown. It is not clear
whether any drawings, or even mental images had been considered
prior to this reported experience. Possibly drawings for the mill had
already been drafted, and this was simply the first time that Evans
had perceived mental imagery in connection with the mill. The
statement begins, "The arrangement I so far completed in my mind."
Evans did not report on the means by which he had arrived at that
arrangement. The imagery he reported was involved specifically in
"viewing the operation," but this seems to have occurred at an
advanced stage in the creative process, perhaps after the design had
been completed. Evans' description that the arrangement was so far
completed suggests that although it had been substantially
developed, perhaps it was not entirely completed at the time of the
42
4 '3

reported imagery. On the other hand, he reported to have viewed
"the whole operation," suggesting that the imagery encompassed
every aspect of the automatic miii, and that the design was at least
approaching completion.
The reported imagery seems to have occurred at an advanced
stage in the creative process, after the overall plan had already been
established. There is some ambiguity as to whether imagery was
involved in the development process or not. The reported imagery
was not specifically related to the process of developing the idea as
much as it was itself a byproduct of Evans' involvement in that
process. The reported imagery may have simply provided a
reflection of his plan and nothing more; though his tone suggests it
may have provided some degree of affirmation (verification), at least
for Evans himself. If this was in fact the first time Evans had
conceived of the mill in pictorial terms, then perhaps the imagery
provided some degree of illumination as to the completed design as
well.
There is no record of other incidents of mental imagery
involving Evans, and it is not apparent from the report whether he
was suggesting that the reported imagery was an isolated incident, or
if there may have been other related experiences leading up to or
subsequent to this event.
0
4.3.2 lames Nasmyth
According to Nasmyth's report, also provided by Ferguson,
mental imagery was reportedly perceived in conjunction with his
invention of the steam pile driver.
In describing the origin of his steam pile driver, James
Nasmyth, a mid-nineteenth-century English engineer, said that
the machine "was in my mind's eye long before I saw it in
action." He explained that he could "build up in the mind the
mechanical structures and set them to work in imagination, and
observe beforehand the various details performing the
43
44

respective functions, as if they were in absolute material form
and action" (from Ferguson, 1992, p. 49; Nasmyth, 1883, p.
272).
Although this account is embellished by Ferguson, Nasmyth
himself reported that imagery was involved. Nasmyth reported that
the machine was in his mind's eye, and also that he was able to
observe it in his imagination. These remarks further suggest that the
reported imagery was perceived in the visual mode, as does his
reference to the mechanical structures represented by the imagery.
Nasmyth's report that he observed the "mechanical structures
performing the respective functions" suggests that the imagery was
kinetic. No other modalities were indicated.
Nasmyth's description of having perceived the mechanical
structures "as if they were in absolute material form and action"
seems to refer more specifically to the accuracy with which the
imagery represented the respective functions those structures were
to perform, as opposed to a confusion concerning the reality of the
perceptions or the objects contained therein. Nasmyth seemed to
recognize all along that he was perceiving mental images, or as he
put it, products of the "imagination." His description of the images as
having a "material" quality may be a reference to their pictorial
quality, suggesting that they represented objects as seen in the real
world, as opposed to diagrammatic schema or blueprints, which
represent only the conceptual design and not the way the finished
product would look. His description suggests that the images
represented the operation of the machine as if they had been
observed in the real world.
Nasmyth's report that could "build up in the mind the
mechanical structures" is somewhat ambiguous. It could be a
reference to the construction (building) of mental imagery to
represent the machine; or it could suggest that mental imagery was
involved in the development of the design for the machine. If
mental imagery was involved in the development process, that could
44

indicate it was part of the saturation stage. On the other hand, if
mental images were exclusively a way to "observe" the completed
design before the machine was built, then the incubation stage in
indicated. Furthermore, as with Evan's case (above), Nasmyth's
report seems to suggest that the imagery provided a certain degree
of confirmation or verification for his design as well. There is no
indication that mental imagery was involved in the illumination or
first insight.
Although it is unclear whether or not this report represents an
isolated event, Nasmyth's report that this imagery "was in my mind's
eye long before I saw it in action" leaves open the possibility that
this was not a one time isolated event, but perhaps had occurred
several times within the context of this invention. Nevertheless,
there are no other reports of mental imagery involving Nasmyth, and
there is no further indication as to circumstances that may have
facilitated this experience or its role in the creative process.
4.3.3 James Watt, part 1
James Watt, the Scottish inventor, is credited with
revolutionizing the steam engine. Watt reported that the design to
improve the efficiency of the steam engine occurred to him as a
mental image, durhig an evening walk.
It was in the Green of Glasgow. I had just gone to take a
walk on a fine Sabbath afternoon. I had entered the Green by
the gate at Charlotte Street--had passed the old washing house.
I was thinking upon the engine . . . and gone so far as the
Herd's House, when the idea came into my mind that as steam
was an elastic body it would rush into a vacuum, and if a
communication was made between the cylinder and an
exhausted vessel, it would rush into it and might be there
condensed without cooling the cylinder. I then saw that I must
get quit of the condensed steam and injection water. Two ways
of doing this occurred to me. First the water might run off by a
descending pipe, if an outlet could be got at a depth of 35 or 36
feet, and any air might be extracted by a small pump, the
45
46

second was to make the pump large enough to extract both
water and air. . . . I had not walked further than the Golf House
when the whole thing was arranged in my mind (Thurston,
1878, p. 87-8; see Montmasson, 1932, pp. 176-7; cf. Shepard,
1978, p. 141).
There is something about the act of walking itself that relieves
stress and promotes relaxation, possibly related to the physical
exertion involved and maybe to the prolonged repetition of
movement as well. Furthermore, Watt was outdoors in "the Green of
Glasgow," and the unique scenery around him, or even the change of
scenery alone could have contributed, along with the act of walking,
to an auspicious state of mind. Watt's recognition that it was the
Sabbath, a religious day of rest, suggests that he may have been
observing that tradition by taking a walk. There is also a possibility
that Watt may have taken the walk expressly for the purpose of
stimulating his thinking processes, because he reported to have been
specifically thinking about the engine at about the time when he
entered the Green. This was a problem he had been working on for
some time, yet without apparent success. The act of walking,
together with the change of scenery or perhaps the fresh Scottish air
could have facilitated his creative process. Watt reported that he
had walked an apparently short distance, "as far as the Herd's House,
when the idea came into my mind." Did being outdoors stimulate his
thinking? Was the change in scenery a necessary diversion? Did the
exercise help him to relax? The answer is not apparent; perhaps all
three possibilities apply.
The exact point in the creative process at which mental
imagery became involved is unclear. His description of the incident
begins with, as he says, an "idea." An idea does not necessarily
suggest the perception of mental imagery; however, as he continued
to describe the idea in detail he begins to suggest imagery more
strongly. Watt's description of steam as elastic, and that it would
rush into a vacuum, suggest that spatial relationships, ergo visual
imagery (pictorial representation) were involved, and perhaps is an
46
47

indicator that kinesthetic associations were involved. Watt may have
perceived the expansion of the steam not only in a visual but
perhaps also in a physical (tactile/kinesthetic) way. He was
reportedly able to implement this knowledge by applying it to the
design of the engine immediately. Watt's description of a
"communication between a cylinder and an exhausted vessel," seems
to refer to either a pictorial or diagrammatic representation of some
part of the engine, perceived as a mental image. Watt's report
involves the intentional control and manipulation of imagery. Only
the idea, which itself may have been non-imagistic, seems to have
occurred spontaneously, or should I say suddenly because he was
admittedly thinking about the problem shortly prior to the
realization of the,idea.
When Watt wrote that, "I then saw that I must get quit of the
condensed steam" he may have been describing perceptions of
mental imagery in the visual mode. But there is also a possibility
that he used the phrase metaphorically as the recognition of an
abstract impediment (between himself and the solution). This choice
of words is a bit confusion and tends to obscure the imagistic feature
of his reported experience. However, the way Watt continued to
describe the descending pipe for run off, specifying the exact depth
of the outlet at 35 or 36 feet, there is again a strong suggestion that
mental images were involved. The final confirmation occurs in the
last sentence where Watt wrote, "the whole thing was arranged in
my mind." The arrangement of cylinders, vessels, pipes, outlets and
pumps, and the flow of steam water and air through them is an
engineering problem that necessitates a diagrammatic solution. The
remarkable feature is that Watt reported to have designed the
solution with mental images.
This invention was perhaps Watt's most important contribution
and he did convey a certain of degree of surprise at the short time
period involved. Yet, he described the reported perception of mental
imagery as if it were an entirely familiar aspect of his thought
processes. Although there is another incident concernhig Watt in
47
4

which mental imagery was reportedly involved (see Watt, part 2
under second hand accounts below), that report was not reported by
Watt, and he made no statement concerning the frequency of these
reported perceptions. Nevertheless, his nonchalant attitude suggests
that mental imagery was not altogether unfamiliar to him.
Watt had been working on this problem for some time before
this reported incident, indicating both that, 1) he had identified a
problem or an area in need of improvement, representing the first
insight, and 2) he had saturated himself in the issues involved.
These are considered to be the two first stages in the creative
process and the report suggests they occurred prior to the reported
incident. Watt's description focuses entirely on his experience of the
moment of discovery, or the moment of illumination. Watt suggested
that this experience occurred over the relatively short period of time,
during which he was taking a walk, but there seem to be several
distinct stages within this illuminating experience as well. The idea
that first came to Watt, "as steam was an elastic body. . . ." seems to
have provided the ,nsight to the solution, but not the completed
design. There was some necessary experimentation involving the
consideration of two alternate methods to "get quit" of the water,
which he reported to have performed in his mind and with apparent
facility. Finally he is confident he has the solution and the whole
thing arranged. The illuminating experience itself seems to have
involved its own micro creative process, including a moment of
insight where he gets the idea, an experimental
(saturation/incubation) phase where he considered alternate
possibilities, then finally arriving at a solution. Watt seemed to have
been convinced he had found the solution on the basis of the
reported imagery, suggesting it may have provided the verification
as well, at least on some personal level.
Watt's report suggests that several distinct stages were
involved in his illuminating experience. Visual imagery was possibly
involved in the first insight, but is more clearly indicated in
conjunction with the developmental and realization of the micro
48
49

processes contained within the illumination stage, and also as a
method of verification.
4.3.4 Dimitri Mendeleev
Mendeleev reported that his discovery of the Periodic Table of
the Elements occurred while he was asleep.
Mendeleev went to bed exhausted after struggling to
conceptualize a way to categorize the elements based on their
atomic weights. He reported, "I saw in a dream a table where
all the elements fell into place as required. Awakening, I
immediately wrote it down on a piece of paper. Only in one
place did a correction later seem necessary." In this manner,
Mendeleev's Periodic Table of the Elements was created
(Krippner, 1972; from Gowan, 1977, p. 85; see Arieti, 1976, pp.
273-4; Goldberg, 1983, p. 77; Starker, 1985, p. 92).
Mendeleev's description of what he reportedly "saw" in his
dream, "a table where all the elements fell into place," suggests that
the experience involved mental imagery in the visual mode. The
reference to a table does not necessarily indicate the image of a piece
of furniture. A table is also a graphic (pictorial) representation of
information according to rows and columns, which is exactly the way
he organized the elements, reportedly in the dream. This second
definition is more consistent with the content Mendeleev described.
Nevertheless, a table is a spatial arrangement. A table can contain
verbal data, numbers, words, etc., however the arrangement itself is
nonverbal. The primary contribution of the periodic table is that it
arranges the elements into rows and colums according to related
groups. The physical properties of the elements precisely
predetermine their position in the table. The spatial arrangement is
the essential feature of the table and requires a graphic
representation.
Mendeleev did not say if the elements themselves were
associated with a visual forni'in the reported dream, but he did
49
50

report that they "all fell into place". Mendeleev may have used the
verb "to fall" in the literal sense to indicate that the elements were
perceived to have fallen onto the table, but more likely he used the
term figuratively to indicate simply that the elements (or numbers,
symbols, whatever they were perceived as) appeared in exactly the
correct position on the table. In either case, there is no suggestion
that he directed or changed the reported imagery in any way. He
simply observed the reported dream as it spontaneously occurred.
His admission that "in one place a correction later seemed necessary"
indicates a relatively minor imperfection. His recognition of that
flaw seems to add credibility to his testimony.
The report that Mendeleev had been struggling with this
problem previously suggests that he had already entered the
saturation and/or incubation stage. His report that he discovered the
solution in virtually its completed form while he was asleep suggests
that it was the reported mental imagery (dream) that represented
the solution, or rather the illumination of the discovery. Possibly
some degree of verification was involved as well, although the report
suggests that he was not entirely convinced until he had awakened
and wrote it down. There is no reference to a first insight.
The report that the solution was discovered in a dream while
Mendeleev was asleep suggests that all the necessary information
had already been collected before going to sleep. He also seems to
suggest that even as the imagery occurred he recognized that the
elements were positioned in the proper places: they fell into place ga
required. This suggests that Mendeleev already knew the
positioning requirements before he fell asleep. Perhaps the
exhaustion and struggle, as Krippner described it, of his work on this
problem prevented him from putting together the information
already at his disposal. Sleep may have provided him with some
necessary distance, so that as soon as the problem came up again,
even while he was sleeping he was able to recognize what he already
knew but had been unable to identify before.
50
51

Krippner reported that "Mendeleev went to bed exhausted
after struggling" with this problem in particular. Being exhausted
may have contributed to an especially deep sleep, and possibly to
active dreaming episodes. Rarely have people reported dreams
entirely devoid of imagery in any modality. Mendeleev may have
been thinking about the problem at or around the time he fell asleep.
His deep involvement in this problem, and his thoughts leading up to
the moment that sleep began could have contributed the imagery he
reported to have perceived in the dream. The imagery that
reportedly occurred during his dream provided the solution
(illumination) to the problem, and in essentially its completed form.
This was apparently an isolated incident.
Mendeleev's reported dream imagery was all the more
remarkable considering it accommodated several elements that had
yet to be discovered:
When Mendeleev dreamed the atomic order of the
elements, he left a hole, where later helium was discovered (or
rather posited), and still later his open-ended model had places
for all the radioactive and trans-uranium elements such as
plutonium (Gowan, 1977, p. 85; cf. Arieti, 1976, p. 274 ff.;
Starker, 1985, p, 92).
According to Arieti, the arrangement of Mendeleev's table
further predicted weights for certain elements that were more
precise than measurements up until that time had revealed:
In several cases the accepted atomic weight of some
elements did not correspond to that anticipated by the periodic
law. He challenged the correctness of those atomic weights and
subsequent investigations proved that he was right (Arieti,
1976, p. 274).
This evidence is indicative of the fact that Mendeleev's Periodic
Table of the Elements follows an underlying pattern or organizational
principle that must be intrinsic to the structure of the elements
themselves. Mendeleev's model somehow reflected that natural
51

structure in an iconic way, preserving their intrinsic characteristics
and resulting in the accommodation of new, unanticipated elements
that had yet to be discovered, as well as predictions for improved
measurements.
James Gleick, author of a biography on Feynman (1992), wrote,
"In part, the process of scientific visualization is a process of putting
one's self in nature" (Gleick, 1992, p. 244).
And Thomas Huxley wrote, "The genesis of a visual
representation is that fashioning by Nature of a picture of herself, in
the mind of man, which we call the progress of science" (Huxley,
1869, p. 10; from Robin, 1992, p. 20).
4.3.5 Herman Hilprecht
This case, once more involving dream imagery, was reported
by Herman Hilprecht (in Myers, 1920, pp. 80-3), an Assyriologist and
professor at the University of Pennsylvania. While this example is
not as eminent as many of the other cases included in this study, it is
a remarkable incident im -..!_ving a discovery reported to have
resulted from the perception of mental imagery in the context of a
dream. This is perhaps one of the least eminent discoveries included
here in terms of the significance of the results; however, it describes
a reported mental imagery experience in such clear and elaborate
detail that it warrants consideration.
One Saturday evening, about the middle of March, 1893, I
had been wearying myself, as I had done so often in the weeks
preceding, in vain attempt to decipher two small fragments of
agate which were supposed to belong to the finger-rings of
some Babylonian. The labor was much increased by the fact
that the fragments presented remnants only of characters and
lines, that dozens of similar small fragments had been found in
the ruins of the temple of Bel at Nippur with which nothing
could be done, that in this case furthermore I had never had
the originals before me, but only a hasty sketch made by one of
the members of the expedition sent by the University of
52
53

Pennsylvania to Babylonia. I could not say more than that the
fragments, taking into consideration the place in which they
were found and the peculiar characteristics of the cuneiform
characters preserved upon them, sprang from the Cassite
period of Babylonian history (circa 1700-1140 B.C.); moreover,
as the first character of the third line of the first fragment
seemed to be KU, I ascribed this fragment, with an
interrogation point, to King Kurigalzu, while I placed the other
fragment, as unclassifiable, with other Cassite fragments upon a
page of my book where I published the unclassifiable
fragments. The proofs already lay before me, but I was far
from satisfied. The whole problem passed yet again through
my mind that March evening before I placed my mark of
approval under the last correction in the book. Even then I had
come to no conclusion. About midnight, weary and exhausted,
I went to bed and was soon in deep sleep. Then I dreamed the
following remarkable dream. A tall, thin priest of the old pre-
Christian Nippur, about forty years of age and clad in a single
abba, led me to the treasure-chamber of the temple, on its
south-east side. He went with me into a small, low room,
without windows, in which there was a large wooden chest,
while scraps of agate and lapis-lazuli lay scattered on the floor.
Here he addressed me as follows: "The two fragments which
you have published separately upon pages 22 and 26, belong
together, are not finger-rings, and their history is as follows:
King Kurigalzu (circa 1300 B.C.) once sent to the temple of Bel,
among other articles of agate and lapis-lazuli, an inscribed
votive cylinder of agate. Then we priests suddenly received the
command to make for the statue of the god Ninib a pair of
earrings of agate. We were in great dismay, since there was no
agate as raw material at hand. In order to execute the
command there was nothing for us to do but to cut the votive
cylinder into three parts, thus making three rings, each of
which contained a portion of the original inscription. The first
two rings served as earrings for the statue of the god; the two
fragments which have given you so much trouble are portions
of them. If you will put the two together you will have
confirmation of my words. But the third ring you have not yet
found in the course of your excavations, and you never will
find it." With this, the priest disappeared. I awoke at once and
immediately told my wife the dream that I might not forget it.
Next morningSunday--I examined the fragments once more
in the light of these disclosures, and to my astonishment found
53

all the details of the dream precisely verified in so far as the
means of verification were in my hands. The original
inscription read: "To the god Ninib, son of Bel, his lord, has
Kurigalzu, pontifex of Bel, presented this." The problem was
thus at last solved (Myers, 1920, pp. 80-82).
Mental imagery is indicated extensively throughout Hilprecht's
report. The way the priest is described: tall, thin, forty years old
and dressed in an apparently ancient style of clothing, suggests that
perceptions of mental imagery in the visual modality were involved.
The reported image of being led through a temple to the treasure
chamber, described as a "small, low room without windows," further
suggests the visual mode, as do the descriptions of objects that were
perceived to be in the room: "a large wooden chest" and "scraps of
agate and lapis lazuli." The narrative story reportedly spoken by the
priest in the dream suggests that auditory imagery was perceived as
well. It was the reported verbal narration that reportedly carried
the part of the dream that reportedly revealed the discovery
connecting the stone fragments. The specific discovery seems to
have been more closely related to the reported auditory images than
to the visual images that Hilprecht described.
Myers reported that "Hilprecht is unable to say what language
the old priest used in addressing him. He is quite certain it was not
Assyrian, and thinks it was either English or German" (Myers, 1920,
p. 83). The use of auditory images in scientific discovery is also
indicated by Howe (see above), but reports such as these are rare in
the context of scientific discovery, so far as this study has revealed
(see poets below). Presumably, dream images are often accompanied
by auditory images, but few other references to specifically auditory
images were found (see Coleridge and composers below).
The narration (auditory imagery) attributed to the priest in the
reported dream revealed the connection between the broken
fragments in a strikingly direct and complete manner. The priest
reportedly told Hilprecht not only the story behind the connection
54

between two fragments, in great detail, but also the page numbers on
which sketches of those fragments were arranged to be published in
an article. This is somewhat ironic considering Hilprecht's report
suggests he perceived the source of the discovery (the narration of
the priest) in the dream as disassociated with his own identity.
Hilprecht had been working on the publication up until that very
night when he had the reported dream, and the report that the
dream included specific page numbers for the fragments suggests
that he may simply have memorized the entire article. It is not
beyond reason to suspect that Hilprecht could have identified every
object according to the page on which it appeared. However, the
reference to those specific artifacts in the reported dream could also
suggest that he had previously registered some special significance
about them, either individually or as a pair, possibly because they
both had a circular form with corresponding diameters.
Although Hilprecht wrote that he was in a "deep sleep" at the
time the dream reportedly occurred, his report that he "awoke at
once" suggests that he was nevertheless conscious of the dream's
significance even as it occurred, like Howe and Mendeleev.
Reportedly, no further investigation was required; Hilprecht only
needed to verify the connection, which he did, adjusting his
manuscript accordingly. The completeness with which Hilprecht
discovered this solution in the dream suggests that he already had all
the necessary information at his disposal before going to sleep that
night. His report suggests that the act of dreaming precipitated his
recognition of the discovery, the moment of illumination.
The report is all the more remarkable considering the incident
was reported to have occurred before Hilprecht had actually seen the
objects, which had then only recently been placed in the Imperial
Museum in Constantinople. Hilprecht had seen only drawings of the
objects, which he described as "hasty sketches." Hilprecht reported
that, "According to the memoranda in our possession, the fragments
were of different colors, and therefore could have scarcely belonged
to the same object" (Myers, 1920, p. 82; see Starker, 1985, p. 92).
55
5C

Yet, the drawings could have been in black and white, which may
have suggested a visual correspondence even though this
correspondence was contradicted by the verbal report of their
respective coloration. In August of the same year, 1893, Hilprecht
traveled to Constantinople to examine the fragments in person for
the first time.
It was to me a matter of the greatest interest to see for
myself the objects which, according to my dream, belonged
together, in order to satisfy myself that they had both
originally been parts of the same votive cylinder. Halil Bey, the
director of the museum, to whom I told my dream, and of
whom I asked permission to see the objects, was so interested
in the matter, that he at once opened all the cases of the
Babylonian section, and requested me to search. Father Scheil,
An Assyriologist from Paris, who had examined and arranged
the articles before me, had not recognized the fact that these
fragments belonged together, and consequently I found one
fragment in one case, and the other in a case far away from it.
As soon as I found the fragments and put them together, the
truth of the dream was demonstrated ad oculos--they had, in
fact, once belonged to one and the same votive cylinder. As it
had been originally a finely veined agate, the stone-cutter's
saw had accidentally divided the object in such a way that the
whitish vein of the stone appeared only upon the one fragment
and the larger gray surface upon the other. Thus I was able to
explain the discordant description of the two fragments (Myers,
1920, pp. 82-83).
Hilprecht's account carries an aura of mysticism, partially
because the messenger in his dream seemed disassociated with his
own identity, and possibly because it concerns dreams and ancient
religious artifacts. Nevertheless, Hilprecht's account suggests that he
was thoroughly familiar beforehand with virtually every element
represented within the reported dream image. The processes that
enabled Hilprecht to connect the two fragments from the available
descriptions are somewhat mysterious themselves, especially
considering that those available descriptions were revealed, in his
dream, to be somewhat inaccurate, as in Mendeleev's prophetic
56
5';

dream leading to the correction of certain atomic weights (see
Mendeleev above). Furthermore Hilprecht's dream included a
reference to a third fragment that, according to the messenger in the
dream, "you have not yet found and never will find." This aspect of
the dream is even more mysterious, considering no evidence was
ever found for the existence of this third fragment.
The solution must have originated in Hilprecht's extensive
knowledge of Assyrian culture, and in his attentive observation of
the artifacts, or at least of the drawings that were available.
However, the solution (illumination) was presented in a strikingly
direct manner by the reported dream experience involving visual,
but perhaps more significantly in this case auditory imagery.
4.3.6 Frieddch Kekule
The Swiss chemist Friedrich Kekule described two incidents
reportedly involving mental imagery that lead up to his discovery of
the structure of the benzene molecule. In the first incident, Kekule
was riding on a bus during his commute home one evening when he
rePortedly experienced a mental image.
One fine summer evening I was returning by the last
omnibus through the deserted streets of the metropolis, which
are at other times so full of life. I fell into a reverie, and lo! the
atoms were gamboling before my eyes. Whenever, hitherto,
these diminutive beings had appeared to me, they had always
been in motion; but up to that time, I had never been able to
discern the nature of their motion. Now, however, I saw how,
frequently, two smaller atoms united to form a pair; how a
larger one embraced two smaller ones; how still larger ones
kept hold of three or even four of the smaller; whilst the whole
kept whirling in a giddy dance. I saw how the larger ones
formed a chain . . . I spent part of the night putting on paper at
least sketches of these dream forms (Findlay, 1948, p. 42;
Koestler, 1964, pp. 169-70; see Shepard, 1978, p. 147).
57

0
Kekule described several factors that may have contributed to
his reported mental imagery. He had spent the day working, and by
the time the imagery reportedly occurred it was evening: He may
have been tired. He reported that the streets were more deserted
than usual so presumably there was also less commotion and fewer
distractions. He was sitting down, which is generally a relaxing
position even on the hardest of benches. At some point or another, a
great many of us have fallen asleep in a sitting position. Kekule
further reported he was riding on a bus, and the vibrations from the
engine sometimes have a relaxing, almost hypnotic effect. Finally, it
was summer, so it was probably warm out. These factors could have
facilitated a more relaxed, quiet state of mind, conducive to
introspection.
Whatever the specific causes were, Kekule reported that he
"fell into a reverie." A reverie is sometimes described as a half sleep,
or a waking dream. Webster's defines reverie as "a state of dreamy
meditation or fanciful musing; a daydream; a fantastic, visionary, or
unpractical idea" (Webster's, 1989, p. 1226), a fascinating aggregate
of meanings in itself. Kekule seemed to describe the middle ground
that sometimes occurs between wakefulness and sleeping, suggesting
specifically a hypnagogic experience. Reports of dream imagery in
conjunction with hypnagogic experiences are not uncommon (see
Myers above), and the fantastic nature of the imagery Kekule
reported further suggests a dream-like experience.
Kekule's reported mental imagery could have been a waking
dream resulting from a hypnagogic state, but his description suggests
another possibility as well. There is an experience typically referred
to as "sparks in the eyes," which is a common experience involving
the perception of bright points of light or sparks, often in motion,
that are caused by the motion of blood cells through capillaries in the
eyes. Sparks in the eyes typically occur after rubbing the eyes,
standing up too suddenly, trauma to the head, or anything that
causes a sudden increase in blood flow to the head (and eyes). They
can also happen when opening the eyes for the first time in the
58
5'3

I.
0
morning. Kekule did not describe the visual appearance of the atoms
in detail; he focused on their behavior. However, his description of
their behavior is not inconsistent with the perceived motion of
sparks in the eyes. Kekule's description of the reported images
simply as atoms could indicate that they were perceived as points of
light, possibly suggest sparks in the eyes. Because sparks are a
relatively common experience, this reading would suggest that: 1)
the reported imagery itself was not an unusual phenomenon, and 2)
that (as a result of his immersion in this subject) he recognized
something relevant to his research in a relatively commonplace
experience.
What would a real atom look like if we could see one? Kekule's
recognition of the reported images as atoms may have resulted from
his ongoing research or scientific background more than the nature
of the images themselves. The images Kekule reported, atoms that
were "gamboling" and "in a giddy dance," are abstract images that do
not represent familiar perceptions, or sights in this case, of the real
world; and yet, he understood that in them was a clue to the
structure of the benzene molecule, part of the hidden order behind
the visible world.
The reported imagery seems to have occurred spontaneously
and without any effort. Although he instantly seemed to recognize
something important in the images, he reported only to have
observed the images as they occurred, without having caused or
manipulated the images in any consciously intentional way. In fact,
the one feature that seemed to distinguish this reported experience
from other previous incidents he reportedly experienced was the
ability "to discern the nature of their motion," indicating a non-
interactive, purely observational (mental) behavior.
This reported imagery experience seems to have functioned as
an inspiration for Kekule to continue work on his research, possibly
providing a new direction as well. He reported that he "spent part of
the night putting on paper at least sketches of these dream forms,"
59
60

indicating that the experience had deeply excited him to work, and
further inspiring him to make sketches as a result. Kekule did not
say whether drawing was a regular part of his process or not, but his
desire to record the reported imagery in a pictorial, or graphic way
suggests that it was the visual aspect of the reported imagery that he
recognized as important. The process of drawing, and consequently
of actually seeing the images (with his eyes) may have helped Kekule
to fix the images more firmly in his mind. Drawing may also have
helped Kekule to develop his acuity for those images, enabling him to
attend more closely to the imagery he reported to have perceived on
subsequent occasions (see below). The diligence with which Kekule
recorded his reported imagery through drawing suggests that he
suspected a pictorial (or diagrammatic) representation would be
involved in the solution to the structure of the benzene molecule. He
seemed to have recognized, in a prescient way, some part of that
structure in the dream forms he reportedly experienced.
The specific number and chronology of any prior imagery
experiences is unknown, but, Kekule clearly indicated that similar
mental images had appeared to him before, "Whenever, hitherto,
these diminutive beings had appeared to me, they had always been
in motion." Shepard notes that over a period of years Kekule had, on
occasion, experienced "images of what he took to be atoms dancing
before his eyes" (Shepard, 1978, p. 147). Kekule described that the
reported experience cited above represented a significant
breakthrough in a series of related imagery experiences: "up to that
time, I had never been able to discern the nature of their motion."
Why Kekule was suddenly abie to discern these features that had
eluded him before is unknown, but the way he described the
incident it is easy to presume that earlier episodes could have
contributed to his facility in observing the reported imagery on this
occasion. Kekule considered his improved ability to discern the
motion of the reported mental images a milestone in his process of
discovery. Those skills may have developed as a result of previous
experiences of this type.
60
61

It was a number of years later that Kekule revolutionized
organic chemistry with the discovery of the benzene structure. He
reported that the solution appeared to him during a second, similar
experience reportedly involving mental imagery.
I turned the chair to the fireplace and sank into a reverie.
The atoms flitting again before my eyes. This time the smaller
groups kept modestly in the background. My mind's eye,
rendered more acute by repeated visions of this kind, could
now distinguish larger structures, of manifold conformation;
long rows, sometimes more closely fitted together; all in
movement wriggling and turning like snakes. And see, what
was that? One of the snakes seized hold of its own tail and the
image whirled scornfully before my eyes. As if struck by
lightning, I awoke; I occupied the rest of the night working out
the consequences of the hypothesis (Findlay, 1948, pp. 36-8;
from Beveridge, 1961, p. 76; see Koestler, 1964, p. 118;
MacKenzie, 1965, p. 135; Burnshaw, 1970, p. 177; Gowan, 1977,
pp. 83-4; Shepard, 1978, p. 147; Starker, 1985, pp. 91-2; cf.
Krippner & Hughes, 1970, p. 42; Krippner, 1972; Rothenberg,
1979, p. 106; West, 1991, p. 195; Goleman, Kaufman & Ray,
1992, p. 23).
As with the bus ride home after a day of work, these
circumstances, sitting at home, in front of the fireplace, are conducive
to quiet and introspection, and may have contributed to the self-
described state of reverie he reported, which, again suggests a
hypnagogic, or fallirig-asleep experience. As with the experience on
the bus, these reported images could have been the result of sparks
in his eyes. There is also a possibility that the reported images were
the result of actual sparks or ashes emitted by the flre in front of
him. There is another possibility that they could have been the
result of staring into the fire which can produce a hypnotic effect,
sometimes called pareidolia, that is often accompanied by the
perception of images. But the fact that Kekule reported these
seemingly related experiences both on the bus after work and at
home in front of the fire suggests that the causes in both instances
were also related. Since neither incident occurred while he was
actually in bed where falling asleep would presumably occur most
61
62

frequently, his reports suggest that there was something unique
about those hypnagogic states that he described as reverie that
might have caused or facilitated the reported perception of mental
imagery. Perhaps being in a quiet, relaxed state of mind, but
specifically someplace other than in bed helped to enhance or
prolong the hypnagogic state.
It is interesting to observe that hypnagogic states are
commonly described by the words "feli.Lal asleep." Kekule described
his experience by writing that he "sank into a reverie." In the earlier
example he wrote that he "fg11 into a reverie." In addition to what I
have characterized as a quiet, introspective state of mind, these
words suggest that, at least for Kekule, hypnagogic experiences may
be accompanied by feelings of relinquishing control, or of allowing
one's self to submit to natural forces, like gravity. Kekule may have
used these words to describe physical sensations associated with
those experiences, but he may also have been using the words
metaphorically to designate the relinquishing of conscious control
over body and mind to sleep. Being asleep is our most helpless,
vulnerable state. This attitude seems to be reflected in the language
commonly used to describe such states as well as in Kekule's
personal account. There is a the suggestion in Kekule's account that
the loosening of conscious controls may, at times, allow the mind to
drift in ways that may create new, previously unconsidered
associations or alternatives.
Kekule's description that the images "whirled scornfully"
suggests that he perceived an emotional quality in the images. The
scornful quality that Kekule perceived may reflect his own
frustration at having worked at the problem for so long without
success. This affective quality may have been present in the earlier
reported incident where he described the images as "united,"
"embraced," and "giddy," although those descriptions suggest an
entirely different range of emotional qualities that are quite distinct
from scorn. Although the reported imagery is closely related in both
62
6 3

incidents, the perception of such different affective qualities suggests
they do not follow any logical pattern.
Kekule wrote that he "awoke, and spent the night working out
the consequences of the hypothesis." It is not entirely clear from his
description, but the hypothesis Kekule seems to refer to, although it
is unsaid, is that the structure of the benzene molecule is circular (a
closed hexagonal ring). This concept was not completely contained
within the imagery alone. There was a conceptual leap he made
from the observation of the imagery involving "whirling" snake
biting its own tail to his scientific hypothesis about the circular
structure of benzene. This transition is not accounted for by the
reported mental imagery. Kekule's report that thereafter he only
needed to work out the consequences suggests that the problem was
solved at that moment; however, there seems to be a significant gap
between the content of imagery and the solution. Imagery seems to
have been the catalyst for his realization of the solution.
Imagery seems to have played a role in facilitating the moment
of illumination, reportedly providing a crucial bit of information that
enabled him to solve the problem. In the first experience cited
above Kekule described that he had recognized some potential
significance in the reported imagery, but the primary significance of
that experience was that it functioned as practice (or training) for
later observations, and possibly as an inspiration to continue his
work as well. Kekule wrote, "my mind's eye (was) rendered more
acute by repeated visions of this kind," suggesting that repeated
imagery experiences had contributed to his reported perception of
imagery in this culminating incident. Furthermore, in response to
the reported imagery he made sketches; that process could have
helped stimulate him to think in pictorial terms. According to his
report, mental imagery was a crucial element involved in the
illumination of his discovery. Kekule's earlier report of mental
imagery may have facilitated the development of his ideas, possibly
functioning as an outlet for the incubation stage. Saturation implies a
more intentional process that is indicated here. The relinquishing or
63
64

loosening up of conscious controls may have facilitated unexpected
but apparently useful associations to form. There is no indication
that imagery was involved in the first insight.
4.3.7 Iacques Hadamard
Jacques Hadamard was a mathematician who has written
extensively on the subject of mathematical invention (Hadamard,
1945; see literature review above). Apparently, his interest in this
subject stemmed in part from a personal experience where mental
imagery was reportedly involved in the solution to a problem. This
is the way he described his reported imagery.
I see a schematic diagram: a square of whose sides only
the verticals are drawn and inside of it, four points being the
vertices of a rectangle and joined by (barely discernible)
diagonals. It seems to me that such was my visualization of the
discovery as far as I can recollect (in Rothenberg, 1979, P. 105).
Hadamard admits to limitations in his memory of the
experience, but his intent to describe mental imagery, and in the
visual mode, is clear. He described the reported experience as a
"visualization." A visualization can indicate a graphic representation,
i.e. a physical embodiment of an idea or mental image. But
Hadamard seems to suggest that his visualization was purely a
mental event. Hadamard's description of the image supports his
assessment of the reported perception as a (mental) visualization: "a
square of whose sides only the verticals are drawn and inside of it,
four points being the vertices of a rectangle and joined by (barely
discernible) diagonals." Hadamard's reference to the image as a
diagram is entirely consistent with my definition of diagrammatic
imagery. In fact, Hadamard's is an exemplary model because the
image is only related to the illustration of an idealized geometry. His
additional reference to the diagram as "schematic" adds further
emphasis to the linear, blueprint quality of the imagery, and perhaps
to the visual modality as well. Hadamard's description of the
reported perception as a mental image suggests that his opening
64
6 5

statement, "I see," was apparently a metaphor for the perception of
mental imagery and not the effect of light on the eyes.
Hadamard also remarked that the reported imagery involved a
discovery, although this point, as well as the circumstances
surrounding this incident were more fully elaborated in a second
statement made by Hadamard in reference to the same event.
One phenomenon is certain I can vouch for its absolute
certainty: the sudden and immediate appearance of a solution
at the very moment of a sudden awakening. On being very
abruptly awakened by an external noise, a solution long
searched for appeared to me at once without the slightest
instant of reflection on my partthe fact was remarkable
enough to have struck me unforgettablyand in a quite
different direction from any of those which I had previously
tried to follow (Hadamard, 1945, p. 8; see Rugg, 1963, p. 8;
Koestler, 1964, pp. 116-7; cf. Shepard, 1978, p. 140).
In this statement Hadamard insists that the solution was
discovered at the moment of awakening, but he did not mention the
mental imagery described in the earlier statement. His description
that the imagery "appeared" could be a metaphor to indicate a
moment of realization or discovery, potentially non-imagistic, but
this reading is inconsistent with his report in the earlier statement.
Hadamard's statement that the solution appeared could indicate the
perception of mental imagery, because in the earlier statement he
had reported specifically that the discovery was visualized. The
implication between the two statements is that mental imagery was
involved in the moment of discovery (illumination).
Hadamard's report that the image/solution appeared at the
moment of awakening suggests that it could be related to a
hypnopompic experience; or possibly it was the period of sleep that
provided an important function, such as relaxation or dreaming, that
helped to clear his mind of more mundane matters. His report that
the solution occurred "without the slightest instant of reflection on
65
66

my part," suggests that the realization of the solution, as well as the
perception of imagery were entirely spontaneous and unintentional.
He did not report to have manipulated the imagery in any way, nor
did he report to have had any other experiences involving imagery
of this sort. Hadamard's report that the solution appeared "without
reflection," and "suddenly on being very abruptly awakened"
suggests that it may have been the distance from the problem
provided by sleep that facilitated his recognition, or in this case
perhaps it is appropriate to say his visualization of the elements
already at his disposal.
4.3.8 Niko la Tesla
Soon after emigrating to the United Stated from Croatia, Niko la
Tesla began work as an assistant in Thomas Edison's laboratory, but
soon left to pursue his independent interests. Ironically, it was only
four years later, when Tesla was 31, that he invented the polyphase
alternating current power system, or AC generator, rapidly making
Edison's own direct current system obsolete (Tesla, 1919, p. 7). He
also invented fluorescent lighting, as well as dozens of other
electrical devices (Tesla, 1919; Shepard, 1978, p. 142). Tesla was
awarded, posthumously, with the patent for wireless transmission
that made radio possible (West, 1991, p. 142; see Tesla, 1919, p. 8).
Tesla wrote that one evening, while he was walkhig in a park
at sunset with a friend and reciting poetry, he ipvented the design
for the AC generator during an experience reportedly involving
mental imagery.
(The) idea came like a flash of lightning and in an instant
the truth was revealed. I drew with a stick in the sand the
diagrams shown six years later in my address before the
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, and my companion
understood them perfectly. The images I saw were
wonderfully sharp and clear and had the solidity of metal and
stone, so much so that I told him: "See my motor here, watch
me reverse it." I cannot begin to describe my emotions. . . For
66
67

a while I gave myself up entirely to the intense enjoyment of
picturing machines and devising new forms. It was a mental
state of happiness about as complete as I have ever known in
my life. Ideas came in an uninterrupted stream and the only
difficulty I had was to hold them fast. The pieces of apparatus
I conceived were to me absolutely real in every detail, even to
the most minute marks and signs of wear. I delighted in
imagining the motors constantly running, for in this way they
presented to the mind's eye a more fascinating sight (Tesla,
1956, p. 198; from Harman & Rheingold, 1984, p. 58; cf.
Shepard, 1978, p. 142; see Hunt & Draper, 1964, p. 34).
Tesla was taking an evening walk in the outdoors when this
experience reportedly occurred. Exercise, repetitive movement, the
change of scenery, the evening sky, even the fresh air could all have
contributed to his "flash" of insight. Furthermore, Tesla was with a
companion, and reciting poetry at the time; both factors could have
stimulated his cognitive processes.
Tesla's description that the idea "came in a flash ol lightning"
suggests that the idea was entirely spontaneous; however, he did not
specify that it was a mental image. Later on in the report Tesla
stated that, "Ideas came in an uninterrupted stream;" those ideas are
not specifically identified as images either. He described the
reported imagery specifically after the idea(s) had already occurred
to him, and after he reported to have drawn the diagrams in the
sand. He wrote that the diagram was so complete that his companion
apparently "understood them perfectly," and that they were the
same diagrams presented six years later at a formal presentation.
But there is no statement that those diagrams drawn in the sand
were first perceived as mental images. Rather, Tesla's reported
mental imagery seems to have been facilitated by those drawings;
but, perhaps the reported imagery was also a direct response to the
ideas themselves, which presumably were non-imagistic.
Tesla's report that he "saw" the images is a little misleading
because it would have been impossible for him to have wan those

Me
4
4
images with his eyes: they were reportedly being invented for the
first time at that moment. Furthermore, the images he proceeded to
describe seem to involve far more than could be expressed by
diagrams drawn in the sand with a stick. Apparently he was using
"to see" in a metaphoric sense, to indicate the perception of mental
imagery. His reference to seeing does suggest however that his
reported perceptions were in the visual mode.
Tesla's description that the images "were wonderfully sharp
and clear and had the solidity of metal and stone" suggests a
remarkable degree of vividness, and possibly an almost hallucinatory
quality. Although he seemed to have recognized the perceptions as
mental images, Tesla reported to have said to his companion, "See my
motor here, watch me reverse it." Was Tesla referring to his diagram
in the sand, or was the mental image he perceived so vivid that he
expected his friend to see it? His later statement that "the pieces of
apparatus I conceived were to me absolutely real" seems to suggest
not that he believed the imagery existed beyond himself, but that
the image accurately represented the operation of the motor,
reportedly "even to the most minute marks and signs of wear." His
report suggests specifically that he verified his invention (idea)
through his observation of mental imagery.
The imagery Tesla reported to experience was accompanied by
a blissful state, almost to the degree of a religious rapture, "It was a
mental state of happiness about as complete as I have ever known in
my life." This state could have resulted from his realization of the
significance of his invention, certainly it was that important. But, his
description suggests that his satisfaction was largely in the act of
experiencing the reported imagery itself. He wrote, "I gave myself
up entirely to the intense enjoyment of picturing machines and
devising new forms." This suggests that although the initial idea had
reportedly struck him like a flash of lightning while he was
otherwise pre-occupied, the act of sustaining the mental imagery
required his complete and undivided attention. There is also a sense
that he was relinquishing normal control in some way, like Kekule
68
60

0
(see above), and perhaps his willingness to give himself up to that
experience facilitated the "uninterrupted stream" of ideas.
Tesla's account suggests that the original idea occurred
spontaneously, but that the reported imagery was created
intentionally as a way to devise applications for possibly non-
imagistic ideas. Furthermore, the reported mental imagery was
involved in both the development of his idea as well as in the final
design. Several factors could have contributed to Tesla's reported
imagery, but according to his own account he had developed
remarkable skills involving mental imagery beginning at an early
age.
In my boyhood I suffered from a peculiar affliction due
to the appearance of images, often accompanied by strong
flashes of light, which marred the sight of real objects and
interfered with my thought and action. They were pictures of
things and scenes which I had really seen, never of those I
imagined. When a word was spoken to me the image of the
object it designated would present itself vividly to my vision
and sometimes I was quite unable to distinguish whether what
I saw was tangible or not. This caused me great discomfort and
anxiety. . . . They seem to be unique although I was probably
predisposed as I know that my brother experienced a similar
trouble. The theory that I have formulated is that the images
were the result of a reflex action from the brain on the retina
under great excitation. They certainly were not hallucinations
such as are produced in diseased and anguished minds, for in
other respects I was normal and composed. To give an idea of
my distress, suppose that I had witnessed a funeral or some
such nerve-racking spectacle. Then, inevitably, in the stillness
of the night, a vivid picture of the scene would thrust itself
before my eyes and persist despite all my efforts to banish it.
Sometimes it would remain fixed in space though I pushed my
hand through it.
To free myself of these tormenting appearances, I tried to
concentrate my mind on something else I had seen, and in this
way I would often obtain temporary relief; but in order to get
it I had to conjure continuously new images. It was not long
69
70

before I found that I had exhausted all of those at my
command; my "reel" had run out, as it were, because I had seen
little of the worldonly objects in my home and the immediate
surroundings. As I performed these mental operations for the
second or third time, in order to chase the appearances from
my vision, the remedy gradually lost all its force. Then I
instinctively commenced to make new excursions beyond the
limits of the small world of which I had knowledge, and I saw
new scenes. These were at first very blurred and indistinct,
and would flit away when I tried to concentrate my attention
upon them, but by and by I succeeded in fixing them; they
gained in strength and distinctness and finally assumed the
concreteness of real things. I soon discovered that my best
comfort was attained if I simply went on in my vision farther
and farther, getting new impressions all the time, and so I
began to travelof course, in my mind. Every night (and
sometimes during the day), when alone, I would start on my
journeyssee new places, cities and countries--live there, meet
people and make friendships and acquaintances and, however
unbelievable, it is a fact that they were just as dear to me as
those in actual life and not a bit less intense in their
manifestations.
This I did constantly untill was about seventeen when
my thoughts turned seriously to invention. Then I observed to
my delight that I could visualize with the greatest facility. I
needed no models, drawings or experiments. I could picture
them all as real in my mind. Thus I have been led
unconsciously to evolve what I consider a new method of
materializing inventive concepts and ideas, which is radically
opposite to the purely experimental and is in,mLopinion ever
so much more expeditious and efficient (Tesla, 1919, pp. 31-32;
see Hunt & Draper, 1964, p. 184; Harman & Rheingold, 1984, p.
55 ff.).
Tesla reported that he intentionally developed mental imagery
skills beginning at an early age in response to what he described as a
"peculiar affliction." Tesla suggests that the affliction, that resulted
in the symptomatic "appearance of images," was possibly genetically
carried because he reported that his brother suffered from similarly
traumatic experiences as well. Tesla described the images as
70
71

"pictures of things and scenes I had really seen, never of those I
imagined." The pictures Tesla described are pictorial mental images.
His statement that they were "never imagined" scenes indicates they
were representations of real events, and not purely based on fantasy.
Interestingly, Tesla also reported imagery in response to
spoken words, "the image of the object it designated would present
itself vividly to my vision," suggesting a synaesthesia experience
where auditory signals stimulated visual perceptions. Tesla's
statement that the reported imagery presented itself to his vision, is
again a little misleading because he seems to be referring to strictly
mental phenomena, but it does again suggests the visual modality of
the imagery.
Tesla's report that "sometimes I was quite unable to disthiguish
whether what I saw was tangible or not," suggests that there was a
hallucinatory quality. Tesla objected to this interpretation, writing
that: "They certainly were not hallucinations such as are produced in
diseased and anguished minds." Tesla may not have been diseased
or anguished, certainly he was a distinguished inventor. But he did
report confusion over whether the images were tangible or not,
causing "great discomfort and anxiety," and the images were "often
accompanied by strong flashes of light, which marred the sight of
real objects and interfered with my thought and action," he even
described them as "tormenting." The images may not have been the
type of hallucination that Tesla seemed to protest, but there were
hallucinatory features nonetheless.
Tesla reported that he developed an ability "to conjure" images,
as he described it, in response to the sudden appearance of
undesired images. He reported that by concentrating on images of
his own selection he "would often obtaii, temporary relief." He
reported that the tormenting images were so persistent that he soon
exhausted his "reel" of stored images, and "instinctively commenced,"
perhaps out of desperation, to reportedly create new images, of
places he had never seen and people he had never met. Tesla's
71

description of them as "not a bit less intense in their manifestations"
than real people and places again suggest a hallucinatory quality.
As a result of his reported practice of using select imagery as a
means to fend off other, undesirable images, Tesla reported that he
had developed an ability to "visualize with the greatest facility. This
statement suggests that the imagery he reported in conjunction with
the invention of the AC generator was not an unusual experience for
him, and possibly was the result of a disciplined process of invention.
Tesla may have been self taught in this regard, however, his
description of this method as "new" is largely overstated in light of
statements provided but other scientists and inventors, many of who
are represented in this study. His hubris was probably more of a
reflection of the self taught nature of his reported abilities than of
their originality as a scientific method.
Tesla described creating mental images as a "method of
materializing new concepts and ideas." Of course mental images are
not material, and his statement presumably refers to the process of
creation, as opposed to production; however his use of this term may
be the result of the vividness with which he reported to perceive
them. More importantly, the concepts and ideas were not specifically
described as images. The method of materializing may refer to the
reported ability to observe (perceive) mental images as if they were
real. The images were a medium for Tesla to translate his ideas
(theoretically) into operational inventions. Tesla maintains this
distinction throughout his reports.
Tesla wrote about his method of inventing that:
I do not rush into actual work. When I get an idea I start
at once building it up in my imagination. I change the
construction, make improvements and operate the device in
my mind. It is absolutely immaterial to me whether I run my
turbine in thought or test it in my shop. I even note if It is out
of balance. There is no difference whatever, the results are the
same. In this way I am able to rapidly develop and perfect a
72

conception without touching anything. When I have gone so
far as to embody in the invention every possible improvement
I can think of and see no fault anywhere, I put into concrete
form this final product of my brain. Invariably my device
works as I conceived that it should, and the experiment comes
out exactly as I planned it. In twenty years there has not been
a single exception (Tesla, 1919, P. 33).
Some of Tesla's self-proclaimed abilities are rather fantastic,
and in fact some writers have implied exaggeration on his part
(Shepard, 1978, p. 142); but reports from other inventors not nearly
as distinguished as Tesla (see Rossman, 1931; and Platt & Baker,
1931; cited under secondary data below) suggest his reported
abilities are more common among inventors than might be expected.
Again, Tesla seems to differentiate between ideas and images,
suggesting that the images were mental constructs or applications of
the ideas. This report is different from the previous statements
because in it Tesla suggests that "imagination," i.e. mental imagery
was not simply a way to test (verify) inventions, but also his primary
method for developing ideas (saturation).
Tesla reportedly developed, completed, and verified his
inventions through a process intentionally involving the use of
mental images. With the AC generator this process reportedly
occurred very rapidly, so that within the span of an evening walk the
design was completed.
43.9 Albert Einstein, part 1
Einstein was only twenty-one years old and working in a Swiss
patent office when, as he later reported, the theory of relativity first
occurred to him.
At that point there came to me the happiest thought of
my life, in the following form: Just as is the case with the
electric field produced by magneto electric induction, the
gravitational field has similarly only a relative existence. For if
one considers an observer In free fall, e.g. from the roof of a
73

house, there exists for him during his fall no gravitational field-
-at least in his immediate vicinity [Einstein's italics]. For if the
observer releases any objects they will remain relative to him
in a state of rest, or in a state of uniform motion, independent
of their particular chemical and physical nature. (In this
consideration one must naturally neglect air resistance.) The
observer therefore is justified to consider his state as one of
"rest" (Holton, 1978a, from French, 1979, p. 156; see Holton,
1978b; and Pais, 1982, p. 178; Rothenberg, 1979, p. 112 ff.; cf.
Brown, 1991, p. 17 ff.).
It is interesting to note that both Einstein and Tesla described
similar feelings of elation in association with their reported mental
imagery experiences. There is a possibility that the state of
happiness and well being is not simply the result of the recognition
of their achievement, but that Ln some way it is the cause of the
discovery, providing the necessary intrinsic motivation that enabled
them to reach the solution. Teresa Amabile has written,
People will be the most creative when they feel
motivated primarily by the interest, enjoyment, satisfaction,
and challenge of the work itselfnot by external pressures
(Hennessey & Amabile, 1988, p. 11).
What Einstein described as "the happiest thought of my life"
turned out to be the theory of relativity, which is expressed here in
terms of gravitational relativity: "the gravitational field has only a
relative existence." In this account Einstein did not refer to the
initial "thought" specifically as a mental image; however, there are
imagistic elements in the subsequent elaboration. It is unclear from
this account whether or not he considered that imagery to be part of
the initial thought, which seems to represent the moment of
illumination. Mental imagery is specifically indicated by "the
observer falling from the roof of a house," and by the movement of
"released objects" as perceived by that observer at "rest" or in
"uniform motion."
74

Einstein's account suggests a possibility that he may have
intentionally created the reported imagery subsequent to the
thought as a way to demonstrate it, though the report is somewhat
ambiguous on this point. Irrespective of the precise moment at
which the reported imagery occurred, it does constitute a convincing
(mental) demonstration of the theory and may have at least been a
way for Einstein to verify his discovery. This account suggests that
the reported imagery may have been more closely related to the
verification stage than to the moment of illumination, or to the
development of the idea. However, Einstein described a significantly
different emphasis in another account of the same incident.
I was sitting in a chair in the patent office at Bern when
all of a sudden a thought occurred to me: "If a person falls
freely he will not feel his own weight." I was startled. This
simple thought made a deep impression on me. It impelled me
toward a theory of gravitation (Pais, 1982, p. 179; see
Rothenberg, 1979, p. 112).
In this second account, Einstein described mental imagery more
specifically in conjunction with mental imagery. Unlike the earlier
statement that is ambiguous on this point, this second report
suggests that mental imagery was integral to the discovery. Einstein
described both the act of falling and the feeling of weight (gravity).
There may have been accompanying perceptions in the visual
modality involved, but tactile/kinesthetic imagery (sensations) are
indicated more specifically than visual. This second account suggests
that it was the perception of the kinesthetic element, the feeling of
weightlessness (during free-fall) that caused Einstein to first realize
his theory. Unlike the earlier statement where the visual features
were emphasized, here he described the kinesthetic modality.
Einstein's references to visual imagery in one account, and
kinesthetic in the other are slightly inconsistent, and may suggest
that the images were formulated subsequent to the (non-imagistic)
discovery, presumably as the need arose, and altered to fit his
specific need on each occasion. There is some difference in the
75
'76

content of the images he described in the two different accounts as
well. In the first account he uses the example of the motion of
objects relative to the observer in free fall; and in the second he
refers to the observer's sense of their own weight. Alternatively,
perhaps the reported hnages were less concrete than he described
them, possibly occurring across a range of visual and
tactile/kinesthetic modalities. Einstein could have been reporting
different features of the same imagery experience, suggesting that
the original thought perhaps involved more detailed or elaborate
observations (perceptions) than he suggested in either of the
statements in isolation. Possibly there was some basic visual and/or
kinesthetic image involved with the original thought, but the
inconsistencies suggest that the reported imagery was less
specifically imagistic than Einstein suggests, particularly in the
second account, or that they were embellished by subsequent
elaboration.
Einstein suggests that the discovery was made not as a result of
any specific problems on which he had been working at the time, but
as a spontaneous result of his intrinsic (and insatiable) curiosity.
There was seemingly nothing unusual about the circumstances
surrounding the moment of discovery, except for the occurrence of
the discovery itself. He reported that he was sitting in a chair in the
patent office where he worked. Presumably he was comfortable
because he was off his feet and he was in a familiar environment.
The nature of the work cannot have been overly taxing for someone
as intelligent as Einstein; it may have stimulated his thinking. But,
there is no mention of anything that might have particularly caught
his attention or facilitated his discovery. Perhaps, as in a Zen state, it
was the routine familiarity itself that precipitated his extraordinary
thought.
The reports suggest that this problem had not occurred to
Einstein before, and that he had, suddenly and apparently
spontaneously solved it in that same moment of recognizing the
problem for the first time. This suggests that the reported mental
76
7 7

imagery provided the first insight in the creative process. Einstein's
theory of gravitation involves more than is contained in these
simplistic images, but the imagery does itself provide convincing
evidence for the theory (see thought experiments below). Although
this experience reportedly represented the first insight for this
discovery, it also functioned as the illumination for the discovery, as
well as the verification. This seems to be an example where the
entire creative process was contained in a single moment.
4.3.10 Albert Einstein, part 2
Mental imagery was reportedly not unfamiliar to Einstein. He
described an earlier incident reportedly involving mental imagery
that occurred when he was only sixteen years old. Einstein regarded
this as his first important scientific observation.
If I pursue a beam of light with the velocity of light, I
should observe such a beam of light as a spatially oscillatory
field at rest. However, there seems to be no such thing,
whether on the basis of experience or according to Maxwell's
equations (Einstein, 1949, p. 53; see Holton, 1972, p. 98; 1978a;
French, 1979, p. 156; Brown, 1991, p. 15; cf. Shepard, 1978, p.
135-6).
The example of chasing a beam of light is similar to the
example of the observer in free fall in that both rely on observations
of hypothetical situations. But the reported imagery here specifically
involved the observation of "a spatially oscillatory field at rest." This
description seems to indicate an image, but it is somewhat
ambiguous and could suggest that either visual or kinesthetic
imagery were involved, or both. The imagery in this case is more
technically oriented, and not related to the observation of events that
are conceivable within the scope of normal experience but to
phenomena that are impossible to observe. Although the spatially
oscillatory field did not exist on the basis of Maxwell's equations,
Einstein theorized its existence on the basis of this reported mental
image, or "observation" as he referred to it. If it was the imagery
77
78

that provided verification for the theory of gravitational relativity,
then perhaps his report that this discovery occurred in conjunction
with mental imagery also explains his confidence in the findings
here. It is interesting to note Einstein's confidence of the results
although they were based solely on mental images of unobservable
phenomena. In this case, unlike the last, there is no indication of a
distinction between thought and imagery. The image of the
oscillatory field seems to have represented the moment of
illumination itself, and perhaps the verification as well.
In a letter to Jacques Hadamard (1945; see Hadamard above),
Einstein tried to describe his thinking process.
The words or the language, as they are written or spoken,
do not seem to play any role in my mechanism of thought. The
psychical entities which seem to serve as elements in thought
are certain signs and more or less clear images which can be
voluntarily reproduced and combined .. .
This combinatory play seems to be the essential feature
in productive thoughtbefore there is any connection with
logical construction in words or other kinds of signs which can
be communicated to others . . .
The above mentioned elements are, in my case, of visual
and some of muscular type. Conventional words or other signs
have to be sought for laboriously only in the second stage,
when the mentioned associative play is sufficiently established
and can be reproduced at will (Hadamard, 1945, pp. 142-3; see
Ghiselin, 1952, p. 43; Koestler, 1964, pp. 171-2; Arieti, 1976,
pp. 280-1; Simonton, 1988, pp. 25-6; cf. Wertheimer, 1945;
Miller, 1984, pp. 206-7).
Einstein reported that mental imagery was a familiar aspect of
his thinking process. This suggests that it may have been "the words
or the language" that developed secondarily to the imagery in the
discovery of relativity. Einstein's description of "muscular" types of
signs/images seems to be consistent with my characterization of the
tactile/kinesthetic modality, and there does not seem to be any
78
79

disagreement with his description of the visual modality either. The
word muscular implies the feel of straining muscles whereas the
imagery Einstein described relates more closely to kinesthetic
sensations, e.g. falling.
In 1905, when he was only twenty-six, Einstein published five
separate papers in the Anna len der Physik. "Three of them were
among the greatest in the history of physics" (Snow, 1979, P. 3; from
West, 1991, p. 197). One of these papers, the Special Theory of
Relativity, had already been rejected as a doctoral dissertation. C. P.
Snow reports that:
This last paper contains no references and quotes no
authority. All of them are written in a style unlike any other
theoretical physicist's. They contain very little mathematics.
There is a good deal of verbal commentary. The conclusions,
the bizarre conclusions, emerge as though he had reached the
conclusions by pure thought unaided, without listening to the
opinions of others. To a surprisingly large extent, that is
precisely what he has done (Snow, 1979, p. 3; from West, 1991,
p. 197).
When Einstein was requested to prepare a literature review of
this work for a journal two years later, he needed the editor's
assistance. "I should note that unfortunately I am not in a position to
know everything that has been published on this subject, because
the library is closed in my free time" (Pais, 1986, p. 164). Perhaps it
was his reportedly imagistic style of thinking that enabled him to
circumvent traditional approaches to physics.
4.3.11 Iohn Yellot
John Yellot was working as a research engineer at the
University of Chicago when he reported the following experience
involving mental imagery.
I had been working on a scientific problem in which the
essential feature was a glass plate subjected to severe
79
so

conditions of pressure by heat and steam . . . Plates were
expensive, hard to procure, and delay was costly.
I had thought a great deal about the solution of the
problem, but with no success. Moreover I had come to the
point where the breaking of glass had become a phobia, even
causing nightmares. (I remember two in particular in which
breaking glass was featured. Everything I heard of a similar
sound was immediately feared.) There was a great deal of
danger inasmuch as I had to look through the plate at a stream
of high pressure steam. My reputation as a scientist was built
upon thi; apparatus; failure seemed imminent.
I had been in New York to deliver a paper on the subject
of research. The paper was successful, but other personal
matters were disturbing me. I was riding on a crowded bus,
much absorbed in these matters so irrelevant to my scientific
work, when suddenly the solution of the problem came to me.
In a flash I visualized a drawing of the proper design of
the apparatus, immediately drew out a notebook, and, without
consciousness of my surroundings, wrote down the answer. I
knew it was right. I felt much relieved about this major issue,
and told my friends at once about it (from Hutchinson, 1949, p.
22).
Yellot reported that he "visualized a drawing of the proper
apparatus." His description that the reported experience was a
visualization is indicative of mental imagery, and also suggests the
reported imagery occurred in the visual mode. The description of
the image as a drawing further indicates the visual modality, and
more specifically the type of schematic image defined as a diagram
in this study. The report that Yellot subsequently "wrote down the
answer" suggests a possibility that he recorded the experience
through verbal means because writing is a verbal form of expression.
But his description of the reported imagery as a drawing (diagram)
suggests that perhaps he intended to use the word "to write" in a
more general way to indicate drawing, and not linguistic expression.
Nevertheless, his statement implies that a verbal component may
80
81

have been involved, if not in association with the initial visualization
(imagery), then possibly in the way he recorded it.
Ye llot reported that the solution came while riding on a
crowded bus. He did not say whether he was sitting or standing at
the time, but the motion of the bus or the steady hum of the engine
cuuld have contributed to a meditative state, as with the first report
involving Kekule (see above). However, unlike Kekule, Ye llot
suggests that he was fully awake at the time, and that the bus was
crowded. Presumably a crowd of people would offer greater
possibility for distractions than the more barren landscape Kekule
had described. But Ye llot seemed to be undisturbed by the crowd.
He also reported that he had just finished delivering a presentation
and that it was successful; perhaps this accomplishment provided
some sense of relief.
But the relief he experienced, if any, only served to allow him
to redirect his attention to "personal matters (that) were disturbing
me." Perhaps the completion of his presentation enabled him to
concentrate on those other personal matters that he was thinking
about when the imagery reportedly occurred. He reported that he
was "much absorbed in these matters," and that they were
"irrelevant to my scientific work." His report that these matters
were disturbing suggests an affective or emotional quality that adds
a dimension If intensity to his concentration.
He wrote specifically that the personal matters occupying his
attention were irrelevant to his scientific work. Why then would
that unrelated direction of thought create an auspicious occasion for
the solution to arise? Perhaps the answer is in the question itself,
and it was the divergent direction of his conscious thoughts that
helped him to realize the solution. His account suggests that being
absorbed in unrelated matters facilitated his sudden and unexpected
recognition of the solution he had been struggling with.
81
82

It was at that moment, on the crowded bus and much absorbed
in personal matters that Ye Hot reportedly experienced the moment
of illumination: "suddenly the solution of the problem came to me."
Furthermore, he reported that he instantly "knew (he) was right."
The sudden imagery experience reportedly represented the
verification as well as the illumination stages. Ye llot must have
possessed all the information he needed in order to solve the
problem well before he got onto that bus because there is no report
that the solution was developed in the reported mental imagery. The
imagery represented a diagram of the completed design, the final
solution, so he must have already prepared all the information he
needed. Nevertheless, Ye llot was only able to put it all together at a
point in time when he was specifically ngt thinking about the
problem. Apparently it took a certain distance from working on the
problem, or possibly a new perspective in order to find the solution.
The affective quality (disturbance) caused by personal matters
could have helped to precipitate a different point of view.
Furthermore, Ye llot reported that the dangers involved, as well as
the risk to his scientific reputation, resulted in phobias about
breaking glass arid nightmares. He did not describe the particular
details of the reported nightmares, but presumably they entailed
mental images, perhaps of braking glass. Ye llot clearly felt anxiety
as a result of having searched unsuccessfully for this solution.
Perhaps the anxiety that developed at not solving the problem as
quickly or easily as he had hoped inhibited him from solving the
problem directly, in his conscious attempts.
His report that the proper design came to him "in a flash"
suggests the discovery was an "all at once" type of experience, not
requiring further development or elaboration; and that the reported
mental imagery did indeed represent Ye llot's moment of
illumination. Although the word "flash" was presumably used
metaphorically for an instant in time, it also carries imagistic
connotations and could imply either a flash of light, or perhaps the
sudden perception of mental imagery in the visual mode. In addition

to occurring all at once, he reported that he immediately knew that
the design he had visualized was correct, even though he had only
imagined it. The reported mental imagery may have represented the
verification as well as the illumination. Perhaps the reportedly
imagistic quality of the discovery contributed to Ye llot's confidence
in the solution, even though it had only just occurred to him.
The solution was reportedly realized all at once, in.a visual
mental image, and while his conscious mind was otherwise
preoccupied. Perhaps, not thinking about the problem by
concentrating on unrelated matters facilitated his realization of the
solution.
4.3.12 Omar Snyder
Roger Shepard describes the case of Omar Snyder, a scientist
who had worked on the "Manhattan Project" to design the first
atomic weapon. During the course of that research, Snyder
discovered the solution to a problem that, according to the official
government report, "turned out to be one of the most difficult
problems encountered" (Smyth, 1945, p. 117; in Shepard, 1978, p.
145). The following account is taken from Shepard's report of a
personal conversation with Snyder.
One day, during lunch hour, Snyder achieved the solution
in a manner that was sudden, unexpected, and remains vividly
in his memory. He was walking down the hall of one of the
laboratories and, in his words, "I had gone one pace past the
water cooler when suddenly the entire process for the
manufacture of the three metal composite for the fuel elements
flashed in my mind instantaneously. I didn't need any
drawings; the whole plan was perfectly clear in my head." By
the end of the next day he had verified that the entire process
did indeed workjust as it had been revealed to him in that
brief moment of illumination (Shepard, 1978, p. 145).
Mental imagery is indicated by Snyder's report that, "I didn't
need any drawings; the whole plan was perfectly clear in my head."
83
64

His statement suggests that the reason he did not need drawings was
that he had already perceived those diagrams as mental images,
ostensibly in the visual modality. There is no indicat' 1- n that mental
imagery was involved in the development of his idea, or that the
plan required any further development once it had occurred to him.
The reported mental imagery experience carried the completed
solution (the illumhiation), and, like Yellot (see above), seems to have
also provided convincing verification of the solution as well, although
Ferguson's report does suggest that the functionality of Snyder's
invention was objectively tested and verified on the following day.
Snyder's statement that the reported imagery "flashed in my mind
instantaneously" suggests the illumination, and perhaps the
verification were both combined in an all at once experience, again
like Yellot's invention.
Nothing unusual is suggested by his report that he was walking
down the hallway outside his office at the time the reported imagery
occurred. Perhaps the act of walking or the slight change in his
surroundings could have distracted his attention away from the work
in which he was engaged. The report that it occurred durhig lunch
hour could also suggest he was taking a break from that work, which
may have helped to provide a little distance from the problem. His
attention to mundane details such as the water cooler and his precise
location "one pace past (it)" suggest that his attention was simply
directed towards the familiar environment around him when the
imagery reportedly was perceived. The reported imagery could have
been stimulated by the act of walking, or the change in scenery,
however mild, from his workspace to the hallway. Perhaps it was his
attention to nothing in particular but simply noticing the mundane
details around him facilitated his spontaneous recognition of the
solution.
Shepard, who recorded Snyder's report, pointed out that
although the solution reportedly occurred to Snyder instantaneously,
it involved a series of complex and lengthy processes drawn out over
time. This suggests that mental images can condense events that

take place over an extended period of time into an instant, adding an
interesting dimension to the potential of mental imagery that was
also reported by Mozart (see Mozart under secondary data below).
Shepard also points out this connection to Mozart's creative process:
That a process drawn out in time in this way should be
pictured, as Snyder emphasized, instantaneously.... reminds
one of the famous passage in a letter attributed to Mozart
(Shepard, 1978, p. 146; in Ghiselin, 1952, p. 45; see Mozart
under secondary data below).
In The Tao of Physics, Fritjof Capra wrote, "many Eastern
teachers emphasize that thought must take place in time, but that
vision can transcend it" (Capra, 1975, p. 186). Capra seems to use the
word vision to indicate imagination (mental imagery), and of course
imagination not necessarily limited to the visual modality. Time was
a crucial element in Einstein's imagery as well, but whereas Snyder
and Mozart condensed time into an instant, Einstein's imagery
worked in the opposite way to consider an image frozen in time.
4.3.13 Tames Watson
In his book The Double Helix, Watson reported experiences
involving mental imagery in conjunction with his discovery of the
structure of the DNA molecule. In an earlier chapter, Watson
described the unique character of the problem on which he was
working, and the strategy he devised (with Francis Crick) to search
for the solution.
The essential trick was to ask which atoms like to sit next
to each other. In place of pencil and paper, the main working
tools were a set of molecular models superficially resembling
the toys of preschool children . . . All we had to do was to
construct a set of molecular models and begin to play (Watson,
1968, p. 38).
Watson described using toy-like building blocks to develop a
physical model that would satisfy the necessary conditions to
85
86

me
U.
accurately represent the DNA structure. Fitting the blocks together
in the correct way required the analysis of spatial relationships
between the parts. Undoubtedly this process relied heavily on visual
skills, like looking at the blocks to determine which would fit
together, or "sit next to each other" as Watson wrote. Tactile
manipulation must also have been involved in arranging and
assembling the blocks. Watson did not report mental imagery at this
stage in his creative process, but the use of physical models may
have contributed to later experiences by actively involving visual as
well as tactile modalities in the problem solving process.
Watson reported that he was laying down after a day of work
during a crucial phase in the development of the theory when the
following experience reportedly occurred:
As the clock went past midnight I was becoming more
and more pleased. There had been far too many days when
Francis and I worried that the DNA structure might turn out to
be specifically very dull, suggesting nothing about either its
replication or its function in controlling cell biochemistry. But
now, to my delight and amazement, the answer was turning out
to be profoundly interesting. For over two hours I happily lay
awake with pairs of adenine residues whirling in front of my
closed eyes (Watson, 1968, p. 118; see Shepard, 1978, pp. 146).
By "pairs of adenine residues" Watson was presumably
referring to mental images of their molecular structure, perhaps in a
way that was related to the building block models of molecules they
were using for their research. The fact that adenine residues were
closely related to his research suggests that the reported imagery
was related to or possibly stimulated by his involvement in the
stage.
research. Watson's description suggests that the reported Imagery
could have been a product of his intense concentration, specifically
on the physical models they were building in the lab. The reported
mental imagery seems to have been part of a (passive) incubation
86
87

Watson reported that it was late ("past midnight") and that he
was laying down after working all day; but the report suggests that
he was awake at the time the imagery reportedly occurred. If
anything, he seemed to have been excited by his efforts. He reported
that "to my delight and amazement, the answer was turning out to be
profoundly interesting." But Watson had been working on this
problem for weeks if not months, and it was very late at the time the
mental imagery reportedly occurred. Furthermore he reported that
his eyes were closed. He may not have been actually asleep, but his
description of the circumstances, and of the reported imagery
suggests dream-like elements may have been involved. There is no
suggestion that Watson consciously created or directed the reported
mental images. His description of adenine residues "whirling" for
over two hours suggests that he was simply observing the reported
images, and not manipulating them in any way. Perhaps the
reported imagery represented a release of nervous tension over
having worked on the problem for so long without success; but these
elements of his description also suggests that perhaps the reported
imagery was in part induced by a hypnagogic state.
Watson's report that the image occurred "in front of my closed
eyes" seems to refer to the perception of mental imagery. He may
have intended to use the expression as a metaphor to generally
indicate the perception of mental imagery; but, there is also the
suggestion that the reported imagery was actually perceived to occur
at that specific location. Whether Watson believed the eyes were
actually involved in some way or not is unknown, but it is interesting
to note that the imagery was reported to have occurred specifically
at a spatial location in front of his eyes, and not at an abstract point
in thought.
The mental imagery reported in the statement above may have
contributed to the final discovery, but not in any obvious way,
suggesting they were part of a passive incubation process. The
actual moment of discovery (illumination) occurred several days
later, as he was working on the problem in the laboratory.
87
88

Suddenly I became aware that an adenine-thymine pair
held together by two hydrogen bonds was identical in shape to
a guanine-cytosine pair held together by at least two hydrogen
bonds . . . Conceptually, it was thus very easy to visualize how
a single chain could be the template for the synthesis of a chain
with the complementary sequence (Watson, 1968, P. 123-25;
see Shrady, 1972, p. 72 ff.; Shepard, 1978, pp. 146-7;
Rothenberg, 1979, pp. 108-9).
Watson's statement, "Suddenly I became aware," does not in
and of itself indicate mental imagery. It simply suggests the
spontaneous recognition of a discovery. However, his description of
that discovery, specifically that the two pairs would have an identical
shape, suggests that the comparison could have been made by means
of mental imagery in the visual mode. Watson made no mention of
looking at the models at that particular moment when he realized the
comparison, indicating an observation of
mental imagery could
have been involved, enabling him to determine tile similarity in their
shape. Watson may have made the visual comparison relying on
mental images and not on physical models. Nevertheless, the use of
physical models could have helped him to recognize the shapes of the
molecules because those models involved visual, as well as tactile
sensory modalities.
In addition to suggesting that mental imagery was involved in
the moment of discovery (illumination), Watson's description, again
like Yellot and Snyder, suggests that the reported imagery was part
of the verification process. His statement that, "it was thus very easy
to visualize," suggests that the reported imagery (visualization)
provided confirmation (verification) of the solution. Watson's
reported use of mental imagery to verify or evaluate ideas may not
be isolated to this incident. Watson's reference to this reported
visualization as "easy" suggests he may have had other visualization
(visual mental imagery) experiences with which to compare this
incident. Watson reported that the discovery began suddenly, but
88

0
0
0
there is nothing that would indicate he was specifically surprised by
the perception of mental imagery.
Watson reported to have experienced mental imagery
specifically on two different occasions during the search for the DNA
structure. The first reportedly occurred after midnight while he
laying down, and involved over two hours of whirling adenine pairs,
possibly related to a hypnagogic state. The reported image of the
whirling adenine pairs provided no specific contribution to the
solution, but it suggests that imagery was involved at an early stage
of the process. The report that those images occurred spontaneously
and without intentional direction suggests they were part of the
incubation stage. In the second incident, imagery was reported to
have occurred in conjunction with the realization of the solution (the
moment of Illumination); and there are indications that imagery was
involved intentionally as a way to verify the results. In both
incidents, the reported imagery may have been facilitated by the use
of physical models involving both visual and tactile modalities.
4.3.14 Richard Feynman
Richard Feynman invented a method of scientific analysis
called Feynman Diagrams that are useful for a range of problems in
quantum mechanics. Feynman Diagrams represent the motion of
subatomic particles according to directional vectors expressed as
lines and arrows on a chart. In an interview, Feynman attempted to
define his creative process:
Feynman: What I am really trying to do is bring birth to
clarity, which is really a half-assedly thought-out pictorial
semi-vision thing. I would see the jiggle-jiggle or the wiggle of
the path. Even now when I talk about the influence functional,
I see the coupling and I take this turnlike as if there was this
big bag of stuffand try to collect it away and to push it. It's
all visual, It's hard to explain.
Interviewer In some ways you see the answer-7
89
90

Feynman: the character of the answer, absolutely. An
inspired method of picturing, I guess. Ordinarily I try to get
the pictures clearer, but in the end the mathematics can take
over and be more efficient in communicating the idea of the
picture.
. 4)
In certain particular problems that I have done it was
necessary to continue the development of the picture as the
method before the mathematics could be really done. I see
some kind of vague, shadowy, wiggling lines . . . and perhaps
some of the lines have arrows on theman arrow here or there
which disappears when I look too closely . . . I have a terrible
confusion between the symbols I use to describe the objects
and the objects themselves (from Gleick, 1992, pp. 244-5).
In his typically colorful language, Feynman reported that
imagery was an essential feature of his own thought process.
Although his report is somewhat vague, the vagueness seems to
express the indistinct nature of the experiences themselves, and
possibly the inadequacy of the language to translate such reported
experiences into words (see literature review above).
The report does not sound very scientific; and Feynman did not
O
describe any specific discoveries or mental imagery experiences in
isolation. However, he clearly reported that the perception of mental
images was a familiar aspect, if not the defining feature of his
creative process. His description of a "pictorial semi-vision" in the
first sentence suggests that his creative process began with the
perception of mental images that may have been vague but seem to
have occurred in the visual mode. The reference to a semi-vision is
somewhat ambiguous. It may have been a way to acknowledge the
"vague, shadowy" quality of the images "which disappear when I
look too closely," as he described them later in the interview, or it
could have been used to distinguish his perceptions from the
seemingly almost tangible, sometimes hallucinatory mental imagery
reported by others (see Tesla above).
90
91

Feynman's description that he "would sgg the jiggle-jiggle or
the wiggle of the path" emphasizes the pictorial quality of the mental
images; but, presumably it does not suggest that he believed the
images were visible to the eye. Although Feynman said in no
uncertain terms that his thinking process was "all visual," his
description of the motion of the images wiggling, jiggling anC
coupling suggests that tactile/kinesthetic elements may have been
involved. This is also suggested by his description of collecting and
pushing "this big bag of stuff." Whatever the big bag of stuff may
have been, Watson's description of it suggests there was a
tactile/kinesthetic element involved in his perception.
Feynman did not say how frequently these reported images
occurred or how long they lasted, but he did describe them as if they
were a familiar part of his creative process. He said, "Ordinarily I try
to get the pictures clearer," suggesting that imagery was frequently
involved, and that it was a way to intentionally (actively) develop
ideas: representing the saturation stage. However, he acknowledged
that "in the end the mathematics can take over and be more
efficient." His comments leave open the possibility that the reported
imagery also provided a starting point (first insight) for his
investigations, but the testimony is inconclusive on this point.
His report suggests that he could intentionally cause the
imagery to occur, "Even now when I talk about (it) I see . . ."
However, he also reported that the imagery "disappears when I look
too closely." His description suggests that the perception of imagery
was easy to evoke, but that those perception were not sustainable
under closer examination. Perhaps the reason that he reported to
sometimes "continue the development of the pictures before
mathematics could really be done" was because the pictures were
vague and required clarification before he could communicate them
in mathematical terms.
Feynman reported to have perceived imagery spontaneously in
conjunction with certain ideas, and then to have intentionally used
91
9"

that imagery as a means to develop the ideas. Mental imagery was
reportedly the essential feature of his creative process, specifically
during the saturation stage. Feynman Diagrams employ a system of
lines and arrows that are closely related to the content in his
reported mental imagery; their invention may have been a natural
result of his unique (if peculiar) creative process. Feynman's
reported imagery provided a method for developing original
solutions to scientific problems. Freeman Dyson, a close friend and
colleague of Feynman's wrote:
0
The reason Dick's physics was so hard for ordinary people
to grasp was that he did not use equations. The usual way
theoretical physics was done since the time of Newton was to
begin by writing down some equations and then to work hard
calculating solutions of the equations. This was the way J.
Robert Oppenheimer and Julian Schwinger did physics. Dick
just wrote down the solutions out of his head without ever
writing down the equations. He had a physical picture of the
way things happen, and the picture gave him the solutions
directly with a minimum of calculation. It was no wonder that
people who had spent their lives solving equations were
baffled by him. Their minds were analytical; his was pictorial
(Dyson, 1979, p. 55-6).
Feynman's reported perception of mental imagery in
conjunction with the development of creative solutions is consistent
with Dyson's characterization of Feynman's "mind" (creative process)
as pictorial.
4.3.15 5twhen Hawking
Stephen Hawking is a theoretical physicist who holds the
position of Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at Cambridge
University, a chair once held by Isaac Newton. Hawking's research is
on the study of black holes and the origin of the universe,
indisputably non-observable phenomena. Hawking is now unable to
speak or write due to his affliction with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(AIS, or Lou Gehrig's disease). As a result he is unable to

communicate, except through the use of a computer voice synthesizer
designed specifically for him (although he regrets the American
accent). In an interview conducted with Hawking for the movie
about him titled "A Brief History of Time" (based on Hawking's book
of the same title), he says through the computer generated voice that
because of his impediment:
I tended to think in pictures and diagrams I could
visualize in my head (Hawking, 1992a).
"Pictures and diagrams" both are indicative of imagery in the
visual modality, and Hawking's report that he could visualize these
images "in my head" indicates that they were (reportedly) mental
images. Hawking's statement is notable because he reports to have
made a conscious choice both to actively use mental imagery as a
part of his problem solving process. The report also suggests that he
intentionally developed those skills in response to the limitations
imposed on him by the disease. Hawking's disease is a physical
impediment, but it is ng_t mentally debilitating; his mind is entirely
lucid. Mental imagery has reportedly provided him with a cognitive
method that enables him to continue research in spite of his
handicap. Perhaps his chosen methods have culminated in ideas that
Hawking might otherwise not have discovered.
Hawking's reported imagery was intentionally developed to
facilitate in his creative process. He suggests that mental imagery is
an integral part of his ongoing research. However, there is one
incident where Hawkhig reported that mental imagery was
specifically involved in what is probably his most significant
discovery.
One evening shortly after the birth of my daughter I
started to think about black holes as I was getting into bed.
My disability made this a rather slow process, so I had plenty
of time. Suddenly I realized that the area of the event horizon
always increases with time. I was so excited with my
discovery that I didn't get much sleep that night. The increase
93
94

in the area of the event horizon suggested that a black hole had
a quantity called entropy, which measured the amount of
disorder it contained; and if it had an entropy, it must have a
temperature. However, if you heat up a poker in the fire, it
glows red-hot and emits radiation. But a black hole cannot
emit radiation, because nothing can escape from a black hole
(Hawking, 1992b, p. 92).
Although most scientists at the time believed that "nothing can
escape from a black hole," Hawkhig theorized that some very small
particles up emitted from black holes, and it was the realization that
reportedly occurred in the account presented here that first
suggested this possibility to him. Hawking argued that, like the
heated poker, black holes must generate radiation, except that in a
black hole almost all of the radiation is swept back into the vortex.
The small amount of radiation that does escape has now been
verified and is called Hawking Radiation.
The "sudden realization," as he referred to it, that first
suggested the possibility of Hawkhig Radiation to him was that "the
area of the event horizon always increases with time." Hawking did
not report imagery in conjunction with this realization, but area is a
visual-spatial concept, and Hawking used a diagram in his book
(Hawking, 1988, p. 86) specifically to represent the area of the event
horizon.
Hawking's realization that the area of the event horizon always
increases implied that black holes would have a temperature, but a
temperature above absolute zero produces radiation in the form of
heat. Hawking used the image of the heated poker glowing red hot
to demonstrate the emission of radiation If luau could escape
from a black hole then no radiation, in the form of heat or otherwise
would be able to escape and there would be no heat loss, no
measurable increase in the event horizon; but Hawking's realization
predicted some very small particles would escape.

Although Hawking reported the image of the heated poker in
conjunction with his discovery, the image may have been part of his
explanation of the theory rather than a part of the discovery itself.
The image may have been developed subsequent to the discovery
(illumination) as a way to clarify and/or to express his idea. The
image of heating a poker in the fire seems unrelated to the event
horizon of a black hole; however, the image of the poker as glowing
red-hot and emitting radiation has a lot to do with the formation of
the ,:tars and the cosmos. Perhaps the image of a hot object glowing
with radiation emissions had something to do with the illumination
of the discovery, but the part about putting a poker in the fire may
have been a later elaboration that was developed in order to bring
the concept into the realm of everyday human experience. It is an
interesting feature of his report that Hawking employed common,
everyday type of knowledge to describe the behavior of the most
powerful and mysterious objects in the universe. Einstein's theory of
relativity was similarly founded on such basic precepts.
In some respects, pictures and diagrams were the logical
medium to demonstrate some of the properties that Hawking studies,
like event horizons; but there is also a possibility that his unique
method, developed out of necessity, itself provided the opportunity
for new ideas to arise.
4.4 Secondary data
This secondary group of data did not meet the requirements
for inclusion In the primary set. Several are from secondary sources
and not the subjects themselves; others are not connected with
specific products or results. The results of the secondary data were
calculated separately from the primary data, which consisted of
exclusively first person accounts of mental imagery involved in
scientific problem solving. Although the secondary data may have
compromised the integrity of the primary group, nevertheless they
represent reported imagery experiences that are worth considering
in the context of this study.
95
96

4.4.16 Thomas Blanchard
In 1822, Thomas Blanchard invented a lathe that could
reproduce identical copies of a gun stock (Porterfield, 1941, p. 103).
(One day,) while manifold schemes for this machine were
afloat just below the conscious level of his thought, he was
driving home through Brimfield. . . . In an instant there
emerged to his imagination a hinged carriage to hold a feeling
wheel, and beside it, a twin cutting and copying wheel. He
cried, "I have got it!" (Illes, 1912, p. 113; see Porterfield, 1941,
p. 103).
The description of the machine, and the report that it "emerged
to his imagination" suggest that imagery was involved, specifically in
the visual modality. The description of "manifold schemes afloat just
below the conscious level" is somewhat vague, but seems to suggest
at least that the machine was in the periphery of his thoughts at the
time, and possibly that he was in the incubation process when the
reported mental imagery occurred. The report suggests he was
vaguely aware of this process, but that it was not the focus of his
attention.
The report that the imagery occurred while driving
(presumably in a horse drawn carriage), suggests there may have
been something about the act of driving that helped to facilitate the
imagery. Perhaps (like the bus rides described by Kekule and
Yellot), the driving helped to induce a meditative state, allowing
thoughts and images to flow more easily; or possibly it occupied a
part of his mind that had inhibited him from findhig the solution
earlier. In either case, the moment of discovery (illumination) seems
to have happened all at once ("in an instant"), reportedly as a visual
mental image. His exclamation "I have got it," presumably a
reference to Archimedes' famous discovery, further suggests that the
reported mental imagery may have provided the verification as well
as the illumination.
96
97

4.4.17 Niels Bohr
While he was still a student of physics, Bohr was asleep one
night when he reportedly had a dream in which a model of the atom
was revealed. According to Krippner and Hughes:
(Bohr) saw himself on a sun composed of burning gas.
Planets whistled as they passed by him in their revolutions
around the sun, to which they were attached by thin filaments.
Suddenly the burning gas cooled and solidified; the suns and
planets crumbled away. When Bohr awakened he realized that
he had conceived the model of an atom. The sun was the fixed
center around which electrons revolved. Much of the basic
theory that forms the foundation for atomic physics came from
Bohr's dream (Krippner & Hughes, 1970, pp. 41-2; see Harman
& Rheingold, 1984, p. 36).
The description of planets revolving around a sun "to which
they were attached by thin filaments" suggests that Bohr perceived
those elements as mental images in the visual mode. Although it was
the reported visual imagery that seems to have been the most
prominent feature in Bohr's reported dream, there are indications
that he may have perceived mental imagery in other modalities as
well. The description of "a sun composed of burning gas" does
suggest visual imagery on the one hand, but on the other it may also
suggest there was a perceived temperature association that would
indicate the tactile/kinesthetic mode. The report that the burning
gas suddenly "cooled and solidified" may be a further indication that
the tactile modality was involved. Perhaps Bohr recognized that the
reported image of the sun had cooled only because it had changed
visually, possibly darkening or shifting toward cooler colors, like
blue. But there is an implication that the imagery may have included
a tactile component involving a perceived temperature change.
Perhaps the perception of the solidification of the gases was likewise
accompanied by a physical (tactile/kinesthetic) association. The
description of planets "whistling as they nassed by" further suggests
97
86

that perceptions of mental imagery in the auditory mode may have
been involved. It is not completely clear whether the report that he
"saw himself" on the sun refers to the perception of a mental image
representing his own body, or if it was used to indicate that his point
of perception seemed to emanate from a position on the sun. In
either case it again underscores the visual quality of the reported
mental imagery.
There is no indication that Bohr intentionally manipulated or
altered the imagery in any way. It seems clear in this case that the
reported imagery was a product of dream processes that unfolded as
he has sleeping. Bohr may have been in a particularly deep state of
sleep because the report suggests that he did not consciously realize
that the image represented a model for the atom until later when he
woke up. However, the report that the images stayed with him until
he awoke, and that they were remembered in such great detail
suggests that he recognized some special significance in this reported
dream either while it was happening or very soon thereafter, or it
may have been lost. The discovery of his model involved a
combination of the reported dream images and conscious reflection
on those images in a waking state of mind. Holton, who has written
extensively on Einstein (1972; 1978a; 1978b; see Einstein above),
wrote:
Bohr confessed that originally he had not worked out his
complex atomic models by classical mechanics; they had come
to him "intuitively.. . . as pictures," representing events within
the atom (from Edwards, 1986, p. 46).
Holton's description of Bohr's discovery having resulted from
the perception of "pictures" reiterates and affirms that mental
imagery, specifically in the visual modality was central to Bohr's
illumination. It also suggests the reported imagery was pictorial,
which is consistent with the description of the imagery in the first
report by Krippner and Hughes (above). However, Holton made no
comment as to other possibility of other modalities involved. The
98
9 9

structure of the model was represented by the visual elements in the
reported mental image; but there is still a possibility that perceptions
in other modalities could have helped this image to stand out and
create a more lasting impression. The possible perception of tactile
and auditory modalities may have caused him to notice this mental
image more closely than others.
Holton's report that the discovery was "not worked out" by
traditional means suggests that the saturation stage (the working out
process) had not occurred prior to the dream suggests that the
reported imagery represented both the saturation and incubation
stage. There is an implication that the reported mental imagery may
have contained the entire creative process even though this was a
single experience with a relatively short duration, limited to the time
span of the reported dream. Nevertheless there is no specific
confirmation that the first insight or the verification stages were
realized in conjunction with mental imagery.
The reported mental image represented the model for the
atom (itself an unobservable phenomenon), but the illumination
itself was not contahied completely within the moment of perceiving
the imagery. The reported mental imagery occurred while he was
asleep and apparently dreaming: The significance of the imagery
was recognized after waking up. There is no report that Bohr had
been -working on this specific problem before this experience
reportedly occurred, suggesting that the reported imagery may have
represented his first insight into the problem. But presumably there
was some form of saturation and/or incubation that occurred prior to
the discovery, suggesting the first insight had also occurred at an
earlier point in time. The report certainly suggests that imagery was
most closely related to the illumination process, though perhaps
representing (not the first insight but) a micro insight or realization
related exclusively to the ffiumination stage. Although imagery is
commonly associated with dreaming, this was apparently an isolated
incident for Bohr involving an important discovery reportedly
revealed through mental images in a dream.
99
100

4.4.18 lames Watt, part 2
Watt invented a new method for making lead shot during a
second incident reportedly involving mental imagery (see Watt
under primary data above). This second case reportedly involved a
dramatically different set of circumstances from the first incident
reported by Watt. Krippner and Hughes report that:
Watt had been working on lead shot for shotguns. The
standard process, a costly one, involved cutting or chopping
metal. About this time Watt had a recurring dream. He
seemed to be walking through a heavy storm; instead of rain,
he was showered with tiny lead pellets. The next morning he
interpreted his dream to mean that molten lead, falling through
air, would harden into small spheres. Watt melted several
pounds of lead and flung it from the bell tower of a church that
had a water filled moat a t its base. Hastening down the stairs,
he scooped tiny lead pellets from the bottom of the moat and
revolutionized the lead shot industry (Krippner & Hughes,
1970, p. 42).
Mental imagery is indicated by Watt's reported perception,
during a dream, of walking througha storm of "tiny lead pellets."
The report that he perceived himself to be walking suggests that
kinesthetic sensations were involved, and the shower of pellets
suggests that they may have been perceived in a tactile way.
Although there may have been a visual component involved in the
reported perception of the lead pellets, there is no reference to
specifically visual imagery, suggesting the reported imagery may
have been perceived primarily in the tactile/kinesthetic mode
(walking, and being showered with pellets).
The imagery reportedly occurred during a dream, ostensibly
while he was asleep. The description of the dream as "recurring" is
somewhat confusing because the report states that Watt realized the
discovery "the next morning." Did he make the discovery after the
first of these recurring dream images, or on a subsequent occasion?
100
101

If several repetitions were required, then what was different about
the final incident? Did repeated occurrences prepare him for the
final realization, or did the reported imagery change over time,
developing until the connection was apparent? The report seems to
imply that the dream image had recurred on more than a single
occasion before the discovery was made, and that the image did not
change or develop significantly with repeated occurrences. Perhaps,
like Kekule, Watt's "mind's eye was rendered more acute by repeated
visions of this kind."
The reported imagery seems to have been the basis for the
invention, but it did not in itself represent the completed invention.
The invention required an act of "interpretation" which Watt was
reportedly not able to perform until the following morning, after he
had waken up, like Bohr (see above). These reports are unlike
Mendeleev's report that indicates he awoke at once and wrote it
down (see above). There is no indication that either Watt or Bohr
recognized the significance of the reported mental image while they
were dreaming. Nevertheless, the report that they remembered the
dreams at all suggests the significance of the dreams was noticed on
some level, enough to create a lasting impression.
Because the invention required Watt's conscious interpretation
the following morning, the reported imagery did not represent the
completed illumination stage; but it does seem to be most closely
related to the illumination. Watt had been working on this problem
prior to the reported dream imagery, indicating that he was already
into the saturation and perhaps the incubation stage. The reported
mental imagery represented an unexpected scenario: lead pellets
falling through the air. It was that image that suggested to Watt the
solution to the problem. But the idea that perfect spheres could be
produced by dropping molten lead from a sufficient height into a
body of water to cool and harden the resulting pellets involved more
than is suggested by the reported dream alone. The reported mental
imagery was most closely related to the illumination stage, but did
not represent the completed solution. Again like Bohr (see above),
101
1 0 2

Watt's illumination began while he was asleep, and reportedly
dreaming. The illumination culminated with his conscious
interpretation the following morning after waking up.
4.4.19 Elias Howe
After years of struggling to invent a sewing machine, Elias
Howe reportedly discovered the solution during a dream.
Elias Howe had been frustrated for many years by his
failure to perfect the sewing machine. One night he dreamed
he had been captured by savages and dragged before their
King. The King issued a royal ultimatum. If Howe did not
produce a machine in 24 hours, he would die by the spear.
Howe failed to meet the deadline and saw the savages
approaching. The spears slowly rose and then started to
descend. Howe forgot his fear as he noticed that the spears all
had eye-shaped holes in their tips. He awakened and realized
that the eye of his sewing machine needle should be near the
point, not at the top or in the middle. Rushing to his
laboratory, he filed a needle to the proper size, drilled a hole
near its tip and inserted it in the machine. It worked well and
the problem was solved (Krippner & Hughes, 1970, p. 42; see
Shepard, 1978, p. 148; Starker, 1985, pp. 92-3).
The imagery Howe reportedly perceived occurred in the
context of a dream while he was asleep. The report that Howe was
"captured by savages and dragged before their King" in the dream
seems to suggest that imagery in the visual mode was involved. The
report that Howe "am the savages approaching," after failing to meet
the King's deadline, also indicates that the imagery was perceived as
visual. There is also a possibility that the perception of being
dragged could have involved the tactile/kinesthetic mode, but this
interpretation is speculative and unsubstantiated by the text. The
description of a "royal ultimatum" issued by the King suggests that
verbal communications were involved, possibly perceived to have
occurred in the auditory mode. The reported imagery in this case
102
103

involved a narrative story including visual, as well as auditory
(verbal) and possibly even tactile/kinesthetic perceptions.
The revelatory aspect of Howe's reported dream was the visual
image of the spears with "eye-shaped holes near their tips."
According to the report, Howe was being threatened by the spears in
the dream, but, he "forgot his fear" upon noticing those holes. There
is no explicit description as to why he forgot his fear, but the
implication is that even during the dream he was cognizant of the
connection between the uniquely shaped spears and the needle that
completed the design for the sewing machine. The suggestion that he
was in some way conscious of the significance of the image even
while he was asleep is supported by the implication that he did not
continue to sleep, but (like Mendeleev, see above) woke up
immediately subsequent to the revelation, and "realized that the eye
of his sewing machine needle should be near the point, not at the top
or in the middle."
The report that all he needed to do in order to verify his
invention was to drill a hole near the tip of a sewing needle and
insert it into the machine suggests that the construction of the
machine itself was entirely complete, with the exception of the
needle, before the mental image reportedly occurred. While the
image of the spear seems to have been a crucial element in the
solution, the invention was in large part completed independent of
and prior to the reported imagery experience. Like Watt and Bohr,
there was a conceptual leap from the reported imagery to the final
solution. Although Howe seemed to have recognized the significance
of the imagery while he was still sleeping and woke himself up to
test it, the imagery still did not encompass the entire illumination
stage, but again to have provided a micro insight, related not to the
first insight but to the illumination, which Howe seemed to have
realized immediately.
It is an interesting feature of Howe's reported imagery that the
solution to the very problem on which he had been working was
103
104

0
perceived in the dream to bear down on him in a somewhat
threatening or menacing way; although it reportedly carried the
insight for which he sought. Watt's perception of being showered by
lead pellets may have been related in a similar way to Howe's
experience. This factor could have facilitated their recognition in
each case respectively. Affective, or emotional qualities associated
with dream imagery is certainly not uncommon, but this special case
associated with mechanical invention recalls Evans' statement that
his reported imagery (that occurred in bed although he was not
sleeping) was accompanied by feelings of "much mental anxiety" (see
Evans above).
4.4.20 Michael Faraday
Several writers have reported that Faraday's process of
discovery involved mental imagery. Koestler wrote that:
Faraday was a "visionary" not in the metaphorical but in
the literal sense. He saw the stresses surrounding magnets and
electric currents as curves in space, for which he coined the
name "lines of force," and which, in his imagination, were as
real as if they consisted of solid matter. He visualized the
un'iverse patterned by these linesor rather by narrow tubes
through which all forms of "ray-vibrations" or energy-
radiations are propagated. The vision of curved tubes which
"rose up before him like things" proved of almost incredible
fertility: it gave birth to the dynamo and the electric motor; it
led Faraday to discard the ether, and to postulate that light was
electromagnetic radiation (Koestler, 1964, p. 170; cf. Goldberg,
1983, p. 76-77).
The description of Faraday's reported imagery suggests it was
exclusively visual, and especially vivid because Faraday himself
reported that the images "rose up before him ilk things."
Furthermore, the reported perception of mental imagery seems to
have been familiar to him. Although there is no indication of the
way this reported ability developed, Koestler's statement implies
that Faraday was able to call on it at will. The real world phenomena
104
1 0

represented by Faraday's reported image are impossible to see, and
yet they exist. The correspondence between the reported mental
images and the physical properties they represent suggests the
possibility that he may have actually perceived forces that are
beyond ordinary human perception. This interpretation is also
suggested by West:
Among his many achievements, his greatest was that he
originated the concept of subtle electromagnetic "lines of force,"
as well as the associated concept of the invisible
electromagnetic "field." (These are the same lines as those
produced by the effect of a strong magnet on iron filings
spread on a piece of paper.) So sensitive was Faraday to these
"lines of force" that for him they were as real as matter (West,
1991, p. 29).
West suggests that the reported perception of "lines of force"
may have resulted from a "sensitivity" to real phenomena, and not
solely a product of the imagination but his position is open to debate.
Nevertheless, Faraday's reported mental imagery experiences
provided him with unique insight to the function of certain natural
forces. The reported mental images seem to have represented his
creative method as well as his most significant discovery, seemingly
combining all the stages in his creative process.
Throughout each report there is reference to mental imagery in
the visual modality. The scientist James Clerk Maxwell, himself
represented by a case included in this study (see below), was a
friend and a colleague of Faraday's. Maxwell wrote:
Faraday, in his mind's eye, saw lines of force traversing
all space where the mathematicians saw centers of force
attracting at a distance: Faraday saw a medium where they
saw nothing but distance (Maxwell, 1891, pp. ix-x; West, 1991,
p. 31).
Maxwell states that the perception occurred "in (Faraday's)
Dania eye," clearly indicating that the content was imagistic. It is
105
1
t;

unclear whether Faraday's ideas originated as mental images, or vice
versa, but the two seem to be so closely related that they are
impossible to unravel. Faraday seems to have used mental imagery
to visualize real phenomena that he was unable to see with his eyes.
In his History of Physics, Isaac Asimov describes Faraday as,
Perhaps the greatest electrical innovator of all, he was
completely innocent of mathematics, and developed his notion
of lines of force in a remarkably unsophisticated way, picturing
them almost like rubber bands (from West, 1991, p. 29).
Koestler affirmed the fact that Faraday, although highly
talented, was not a traditional type of scientist.
Faraday lacked any mathematical education or gift
beyond the merest elements of arithmetic. Yet the invisible
"lines of force," which he visualized as narrow tubes curving in
the space around magnets and electric currents and, indeed,
pervading the universe, "rose up before him like things"
(Koestler, 1964, p. 170; Tyndall 1868; in Shepard, 1978, p.
137).
These descriptions of Faraday's process are reminiscent of
Bohr's (see above), who admitted that he had developed his model of
the atom without recourse to classical mechanics. In a memorial
lecture to Faraday, Helmholtz said,
It is in the highest degree astonishing to what a large
number of general theorems, the methodological reduction of
which requires the highest powers of mathematical analysis, he
found by a kind of intuition, with the security of instinct,
without the help of a single mathematical formula (Kendall,
1955; from Shepard, 1978, p. 137; see Koestler, 1964, p. 170).
Apparently, the intuition to which Helmholtz referred seems to
have been a form of visual mental imagery.
106
107

4.5 Thought Experiments
A thought experiment is a scientific experiment conducted
mentally (Miller, 1984, P. 76 ff.; Brown, 1991, P. 45). The scientist
Ernst Mach coined this form of discovery a Gedankenexperiment
(Sorensen, 1992, p. 51). The remarkable feature is that, in select
instances, this type of thinking, sometimes involving imagery, has
produced scientifically verifiable results. Galileo was probably the
first person to conduct such a feat (Bronowski, 1977, pp. 26-7; see
Galileo below). Brown wrote,
The burden of any constructive thought experiment
consists in establishing in the imagination the thought
experimental phenomenon. This phenomenon then acts as
fairly conclusive evidence for some theory (Brown, 1991, P.
45).
The thought experiments cited below involve the consideration
of mental imagery. The first incident involving Einstein (cited under
primary data above) constitutes a thought experiment. But, although
Einstein reported the incident to have happened in an entirely
spontaneous way, certainly it is background knowledge that creates
the appropriate conditions. John Norton wrote that:
Thought experiments in physics provide or purport to
provide us information about the physical world. Since they
are thought experiments rather than physical experiments, this
information does not come from the reporting of new empirical
data. Thus there is only one non-controversial source from
which this information can come: it is elicited from information
we already have by an identifiable argument, although that
argument might not be laid out in detail in the statement of the
thought experiment. The alternative view is to suppose that
thought experiments provide some new and even mysterious
route to knowledge of the physical world (in Brown, 1991, p.
47).
Although the route (to creative discovery) may sOmetimes
seem mysterious, Norton's analysis that background knowledge
107
108

provides the material from which new thoughts are constructed
provides a more positive model for the development of creative
behaviors.
4.5.21
Galileo Gali lei, part 1
Galileo's proof of this theory that is now referred to as Galilean
Relativity was described as a thought experiment involving mental
imagery.
Shut yourself up with some friend in the main cabin
below decks on some large ship, and have with you there some
flies, butterflies, and other small animals. Have a large bowl of
water with some fish in it, hang up a bottle that empties drop
by drop into a vessel beneath it. With the ship standing still,
observe carefully how the little animals fly with equal speed to
all sides of the cabin. The fish swim indifferently in all
directions; the drops fall into the vessel beneath; and, in
throwing something to your friend, you need throw it no more
strongly in one direction than another, the distances being
equal.; Jumping with your feet together, you pass equal spaces
in every direction. When you have observed all these things
carefully (though there is no doubt that when the ship is
standing still everything must happen this way), have the ship
proceed in any direction you like, so long as the motion is
uniform and not fluctuating this way and that. You will
discover not the least change in all the effects named, nor could
you tell from any of them whether the ship was moving or
standing still (Galileo, 1638b, p. 186 ff.; from Brown, 1991, p.
35)
In addition to being a way to express his idea, the mental
imagery Galileo described provided a general proof of the theory as
well, constituting a thought experiment. There is no report that
mental images were specifically involved in Galileo's initial moment
of discovery (the illumination); he may simply have used imagery
thereafter as a way to demonstrate his idea. Yet, Galileo himself
reported to have proven his theory without ever having physically.
108
109

conducted the experiments he described (see Brown, 1991, p. 36). In
the Dia logo, he included the following conversation:
So you have not made a hundred tests, or even one? And
yet you so freely declare it to be certain?
Without experiment, I am sure that the effect will
happen as I tell you, because it must happen that way (Galileo,
1638b, p. 145; from Brown, 1991, p. 2-3).
If Galileo did reach his conclusions from the proof provided by
the thought experiment alone, then perhaps it was the reported
imagery that convinced him of the results, even independent of
objective verification. Though it is not clear that imagery was
specifically perceived in conjunction with the moment of discovery,
Galileo's certainty may have derived in part from the pictorial nature
of his proof. Having observed the experiment through mental
imagery may have in itself been sufficient verification for Galileo.
His confidence in the results of imaginary experiments was later
echoed by Einstein (see Einstein, part 1 above).
4.5.22 G?lileo Galilei. part 2
Jacob Bronowski reported that mental imagery was involved in
a different but related discovery by Galileo.
The eye that Galileo used was the mind's eye. He did not
drop balls from the leaning Tower of Pisaand if he had, he
would have got a very doubtful answer. Instead, Galileo made
an imaginary experiment (or, as the Germans say, thought
experiment) in his head, which I will describe as he did years
later in the book he wrote after the Holy Office silenced him,
the Discourse into Two New Sciences, which was smuggled out
to be printed in the Netherlands in 1638.
Suppose, said Galileo, that you drop two unequal balls
from the tower at the same time. And suppose that Aristotle is
rightsuppose that the heavy ball falls faster, so that it
steadily gains on the light ball and hits the ground first. Very
109
110

well. Now imagine the same experiment done again, with only
one difference: this time the two unequal balls are joined by a
string between them. The heavy ball will again move ahead,
but now the light ball holds it back and acts as a drag or brake.
So the light ball will be speeded up and the heavy ball will be
slowed down; they must reach the ground together because
they are tied together, but they cannot reach the ground as
quickly as the heavy ball alone. Yet the string between them
has turned the two balls into a single mass which is heavier
that either balland surely (according to Aristotle) this mass
should therefore move faster than either ball? Galileo's
imaginary experiment has uncovered a contradiction; he says
trenchantly, "You see from your assumption that a heavier
body falls more rapidly than a lighter one, I infer that a (still)
heavier body falls more slowly." There is only one way out of
the contradiction: the heavy ball and the light ball must fall at
the same rate, so that they go on falling at the same rate when
they are tied together (Bronowski, 1977, p. 26-27; Galileo,
1638a; cf. Arieti, 1976, p. 276; Brown, 1991, pp. 1-2).
In this example, Bronowski's suggests that Galileo's final
discovery (illumination) was directly the result of reasoning based on
visual mental images. Bronowski emphasizes that Galileo never
actually performed the physical experiments. As with Galileo' first
example, this reported incident constitutes a thought experiment
because the proof of GaIlleo's theory is contained within the images
themselves; once they have been considered (visualized, by means of
mental imagery) their validity is apparent, as Galileo so stridently
stated: "because it must happen that way." According to Bronowski's
interpretation, mental images were the essential feature in Galileo's
realization of the discovery (the illumination).
4.5.23 Isaac Newton, part 1
In his Principia Mathematica, Isaac Newton described his
theory of gravitation with the aid of imagery.
(A) stone that is projected is by the pressure of its own
weight forced out of the rectilinear path, which by the initial
110

projection alone it should have pursued, and made to describe
a curved line in the air; and through that crooked way is at last
brought down to the ground; and the greater the velocity is
with which it is projected, the farther it goes before it falls
from the earth. We may therefore suppose the velocity to be
so increased, that it would describe an arc of 1, 2, 5, 10, 100,
1000 miles before it arrived at the earth, till at last, exceeding
the limits of the earth, it should pass into space without
touching it (Nfiwton, 1687, p. 551; see Brown, 1991, p. 7; cf.
Rugg, 1963, p. 8; Lowes, 1964, p. 433; Bronowski, 1977, p. 30).
Newton, like Galileo, Maxwell, and Poincare, did not record the
actual moment of discovery and may have developed the imagery
afterwards as a means of demonstration (Arieti, 1976, p. 271;
Bronowski, 1977, p. 30). However, the imagery is the essential
feature of the theory, as it was with Galileo and Poincare. It is
possible that Newton arrived at his idea (illumination) through
purely non-imagistic means, but his reliance on visual imagery to
express the content of the theory suggests that imagery may have
played a part in the development of the theory as well. Newton even
included diagrams in his Principia Mathematica to present this
theory (Newton, 1687, p. 551), suggesting that visual imagery was
central to his conception of the theory, and an aid in promoting its
understanding. Although Newton's use of imagery suggests a
thought experiment, in fact his conclusions depend on more than is
contained in his description alone (Bronowski, 1977, p. 30).
Presumably there were processes other than imagery involved
in Newton's discoveries; but it seems to have been the imagery that
provided the catalyst. There is little substantiation for the myth that
Newton's realization was inspired by a specific observation of an
apple falling out of a tree, but Bronowski does state that Newton was
in his mother's garden at the time of his epiphany (Bronowski, 1977,
p. 30). Perhaps the natural surroundings of the garden, or the
security represented by his mother's home facilitated imaginative
investigations.

"
4.5.24 Isaac Newton, part 2
r
After using imagination images to describe the possibility of
breaking free from the earth's gravitational pull, Newton again relied
on imagery to describe a second theory: that an object projected at
the proper velocity and angle would continue in orbit around the
earth.
If we now imagine bodies to be projected in lines parallel
to the horizon from greater heights, as of 5, 10, 100, 1000, or
more miles, or rather as many semidiameters of the earth,
those bodies, according to their different velocity, and the
differenv force of gravity in different heights, will describe arcs
either concentric with the earth, or variously eccentric, and go
on revolving through the heavens in those orbits just as the
planets do in their orbits (Newton, 1687, p. 552.; see Brown,
1991, p. 7; cf. Rugg, 1963, p. 8; Lowest 1964, p. 433; Bronowski,
1977, p. 30).
Like Galileo, Newton described two distinct theories that are
closely related. The first is that an object (a stone) projected fast
enough would escape the earth's gravitational field, or "pass into
space without touching it" as he so eloquently wrote. The second is
that an object projected fast enough and at the correct anele to the
horizon would continue in orbit around the earth, like the moon.
As with the last theory, specifically pictorial images are
intrinsic to the concept Newton proposed. There is no record of
imagery involved in the discovery process, but it seems likely to
suspect that it may have been involved in some way, if only because
these points are illustrated with diagrams in his the Principia
Mathernatica. The imagery may have provided a conceptual basis for
the theory, but, just as in Newton's first example, not the nuts and
bolts of the completed proof. Bronowski wrote:
This was how he came to conceive his brilliant image,
that the moon is like a ball which has been thrown so hard that
it falls exactly as fast as the horizon, all the way round the
112
113

earth. The image will do for any satellite, and Newton
modestly calculated how long therefore an astronaut would
take to fall round the earth once. He made it ninety minutes,
and we have all seen now that he was right; but Newton had no
way to check that. Instead he went on to calculate how long in
that case the distant moon would take to round the earth, if
indeed it behaved like a thrown ball that falls in the earth's
gravity, and if gravity obeyed the law of inverse squares. He
found that the answer would be twenty-eight days (Bronowski,
1977, p. 30).
Newton was able to compare his calculations with observations
of the Moon's period and found that his predictions were highly
accurate. Mathematical calculations, in addition to the conceptual
image of "a thrown ball that falls in the earth's gravity" were both
important aspects in the development of his theory. Perhaps the
imagery provided Newton with the initial insight to the problem and
the calculations provided the verification; however, Newton's
unproven insight that a projectile could hypothetically escape the
earth's gravitational field was itself an illumination that turned out
to be true, but only as recently as this century.
4.5.25 Tames Clerk Maxwell
0
Maxwell, who is mentioned in conjunction with Faraday above,
was reportedly a visual thinker himself. Beveridge reports that
"Maxwell developed the habit of making a mental picture of every
problem" (Beveridge, 1961, p. 76; cf. Shepard, 1978, p. 136). In a
famous example, called Maxwell's demon, he attempted to explain
the loss of energy due to entropy by creating a thought experiment
involving mental imagery.
The demon thought experiment was Maxwell's attempt to
make the possible decrease of entropy in his theory not seem
so obviously absurd. We are to imagine two gases (one hot and
the other cold) in separate chambers brought together; there is
a little door between the two containers and a little intelligent
being who controls the door. Even though the average
113
114

molecule in the hot gas is faster than the average in the cold,
there is a distribution of molecules at various speeds in each
chamber. The demon lets fast molecules from the cold gas into
the hot chamber and slow molecules from the hot gas into the
cold chamber.
The consequence of this is to increase the average speed
of the molecules in the hot chamber and to decrease the
average speed in the cold one. Of course, this just means
making the hot gas hotter and the cold gas colder, violating the
second law of classical thermodynamics (Brown, 1991, p. 37).
The imagery Maxwell described seems to have been the
product of intentienal thought processes: he created the images in
order to illustrate the intrinsic loss, called entropy, that occurs in the
exchange of energy. There is no indication that the concept was
initially realized in conjunction with any mental image. Brown refers
to Maxwell's demon as a thought experiment (1991, p. 36 ff.) only
because a proof is contained within the imagery described, and not
because the imagery was involved in the development of
illumination of the theory. The imagery in the demon experiment
may simply have been created as a persuasive way to demonstrate
non-imagistic ideas. However, Maxwell reportedly employed a range
of imagery techniques in his scientific method, some of which were
closely related to Faraday's (see above). According to Shepard,
At first, Maxwell visualized Faraday's lines of
electxostatic force as tubes in which electric flow was
represented by the flow of an incompressible fluid such as
water. Later he devised a more elaborate mechanical model to
account for magnetic attraction and electromagnetic induction
as well as the elecvostatic effects explahied by the earlier
hydrodynamic model. He now envisioned the lines of magnetic
force as parallel rotating cylinders separated by ball bearings
rotathig in the opposite direction (Shepard, 1978, p. 137).
Tricker, a science historian wrote that imagination was central
to both Maxwell and Faraday's problem solving method:
114
115

An important characteristic feature in their reasoning,
which Faraday and Maxwell shared, was the habit of thinking
in terms of physical pictures. Although an accomplished
mathematician, Maxwell, as has been remarked by many,
relied more on diagrams and geometrical notions than on
symbols (Tricker, 1966, p. 97; see West, 1991, p. 32).
West continued to write that, "This factor might also help to
explain the general incomprehensibility of their work to their
contemporaries, who presumably had less extensive visual-spatial
capacities" (West, 1991, P. 32). Compare this statement with Dyson's
remark about Feynman (above). For both Maxwell and Faraday (as
well as Feynman), mental imagery seems to have been a natural or
self taught form of problem solving that was integral to their
scientific method.
4.5.26 Henri Poincare
Poincare was a mathematician who was also devoted to
studying the process of mathematical discovery (Poincare, 1902;
1913; see literature review above). Poincare described the curved
geometry of space through an exercise in mental imagery:
Let us imagine ourselves in a world only peopled with
beings of no thickness, and suppose these "infinitely flat"
animals are all in one and the same plane, from which they
cannot emerge. Let us further admit that this world is
sufficiently distant from other worlds to be withdrawn from
their influence, and while we are making these hypotheses it
will not cost us much to endow these beings with reasoning
power, and to believe them capable of making a geometry. In
that case they will certainly attribute to space only two
dimensions. But now suppose that these imaginary animals,
while remaining without thickness, have the form of a
spherical, and not of a plane figure, and are all on the same
sphere, from which they cannot escape. What kind of
geometry will they construct? In the first place, it is clear that
they will attribute to space only two dimensions. The straight
line to them will be the shortest distance from one point on the
115
l
t;

sphere to anotherthat is to say, an arc of a great circle. In a
word, their geometry will be spherical geometry (from Brown,
1991, p. 11-2; Poincare, 1902, p. 37 ff.; cf. Abbott, 1952).
As with Galileo and Maxwell, the images constitute a thought
experiment because they demonstrate (prove) his hypothesis; but
there is no evidence to suggest that Poincare experienced mental
imagery in conjunction with his own illuminating experience. His
proof describes visual imagery, but there is a possibility that the
images may simply have been used as a demonstration model, like
Maxwell's Demon, to illustrate (non-imagistic) concepts. However,
the perception of geometric forms (shapes) and spatial relationships
(distances) are the essential feature of Poincare's conception; it seems
likely to suspect that mental images may have played some part in
his initial realization (of the illumination), though perhaps consisting
of nothing more than simple lines and shapes. Visual images express
the significance of Poincare's concept in a far more obvious way than
through purely arithmetic means, which are especially cumbersome
with respect to non-Euclidean geometry.
Beginning in childhood, Poincare reportedly developed unique
cognitive abilities. Like Tesla and Hawking (see primary data above),
these skills were developed largely in response to his own physical
limitations.
At the age of five Henri suffered a bad setback from
diphtheria which left him for nine months with a paralyzed
*larynx. This misfortune made him for long delicate and timid,
but it also turned him back on his own resources as he was
forced to shun the rougher games of children his own age. His
principle diversion was reading, where his unusual talents first
showed up. A book once readat incredible speedbecame a
permanent possession, and he could always state the page and
line where a particular thing occurred. He retained this
powerful memory all his life. This rare faculty might be called
visual or spatial memory. In temporal memorythe ability to
recall with uncanny precision a sequence of events long
passedhe was also unusually strong. His poor eyesight
116
117

perhaps contributed to a third peculiarity of his memory. The
majority of mathematicians appear to remember theorems and
formulas mostly by eye; with Poincare it was almost wholly by
ear. Unable to see the board distinctly when he became a
student of advanced mathematics, he sat back and listened,
following and remembering perfectly without taking notes--an
easy feat for him, but one incomprehensible to most
mathematicians. Yet he must have had a vivid memory for the
"inner eye" as well, for much of his work was of the kind that
goes with space-intuition and acute visualization (Bell, 1937,
pp. 532-33; in West, 1991, p. 135).
Bell's report that Poincare's work (research) involved "space-
intuition and acute visualization" supports my suggestion that mental
images may have contributed to his creative process during the
developmental stages in the experiment cited above. The description
of Poincare's reportedly "vivid memory for the inner eye" further
indicates that mental imagery was a characteristic ability of
Poincare's, and may also indicate mental images were involved in his
creative process. The report that he remembered theorems "by ear"
could be related to the report that he had memorized every book he
had ever read. His reported ability to state the position and page
number for any line of text suggests two possibilities. Either the
information was retained in a pictorial way (through mental images)
so that by visualizing the printed page on which the line occurred he
could read off the corresponding page number; or, he may have
retained the information through primarily verbal means, possibly
involving auditory images, although the way that page numbers
would be connected with text through auditory images is unclear.
Furthermore, the speed with which Poincare reportedly read and
instantly memorized entire novels suggests that the information was
digested in a visual way; sounding out every syllable would probably
have involved exponentially greater amounts time.
Poincare's physical limitations appear to have functioned as an
inspiration for his unique imagery abilities. The development of
Poincare's abilities in response to his affliction is reminiscent of Tesla
117
118

(see above). Bell reports that Poincare developed several
remarkable abilities to compensate for his condition. It is unclear
exactly which abilities are related to mental imagery, and which are
not. Although imagery was employed to demonstrate his ideas, there
is no report of any specific discoveries to have resulted from
experiences involving mental images. Nevertheless, the nature of his
flatland experiment based on shapes and distance suggests that
imagery may have been involved in its development and not only its
demonstration.
4.5.27 Albert Einstein, part 3
Einstein was famous for his thought experiments. In addition
to the two reported by Einstein himself (see above), Arieti describes
a third incident of Einstein's involving mental imagery. This one
constitutes a thought experiments like the first. They each provide a
unique contribution to his universal conception of relativity.
Einstein visualized himself as a passenger who rode on a
ray of light and held a mirror in front of him. Since the light
and the mirror were traveling at the same velocity and in the
same direction and since the mirror was a little ahead, the light
could never catch up to the mirror and reflect any image. Thus
Einstein could not see himself in the mirror (Arieti, 1976, p.
281; see Starker, 1985, p. 94).
The reported imagery involved visual observations based the
consideration of hypothetical situations, similar to Einstein's earlier
examples, as well as to Galileo's (see above). Although the conditions
involve traveling at the speed of light, there is no indication that
kinesthetic sensations were involved. The report focuses on the
visual content in the imagery, or rather the lack thereof because it
was the absence of his reflection in the mirror that he noticed. There
is no clear indication that Ehistein had originally conceived of this
theory in this way; it may have (again) been a later construction. But
Einstein own emphasis on the visual nature of his thinking processes

suggest that possibly these reported images were integral to the
discovery (illumination) as well as to their expression.
4.5.28 Albert Einstein, part 4
For Einstein, even time was conceived in a visual, or at least a
spatial way. Bronowski describes a final example of Einstein's
mastery of the thought experiment.
What would the world look like if I rode on a beam of
light? Suppose this tram were moving away from that clock on
the very beam with which we see what the clock says. Then, of
course, the clock would be frozen. I, the tram, this box riding
on the beam of light would be fixed in time. Time would have
stopped.
Suppose the clock behind me says "noon" when I leave. I
now travel 186,000 miles away from it at the speed of light;
that ought to take me one second. But the time on the clock, as
I see it, still says "noon," because it takes the beam of light
from the clock exactly as long as it has taken me. So far as the
clock as I see it, so far as the universe inside the tram is
concerned, in keeping up with the speed of light I have cut
myself off from the passage of time (Bronowski, 1973, p. 247-
48).
Like the previous example, this report involved the
observations of a hypothetical situation as a mental imagery. Again
the speed of light is involved, but not as a mental image so much as a
conceptual element in the experiment. In both cases relatively
simple and straightforward observations were required: the
observation of a mirror and of a clock. The condition of traveling at
the speed of light does not seem to have complicated Ehistein's
reported observation (of the visual mental imagery) in any
significant way, yet it profoundly altered the results. Einstein (like
Galileo, Hawking, and even Maxwell and Poincare) was aL ie to
describe elegantly simple experiments that carried remarkably far
reaching implications.
119
120

4.6 Inventors
The following reports include descriptions of mental imagery
and its use in the inventing process. The reports often describe
familiar methods without comiecting them to specific incidents. They
did not qualify for the primary data group because the resulting
inventions were either not reported or were relatively insignificam.
Nevertheless, the following reports emphasize the importance of
mental imagery in the process of inventing and they are worth
considering here.
Although the first two examples are from different sources, the
remainder were documented in Joseph Rossman's book, The
Psychology of the Inventor (1931). Having worked for many years
as the United States Patent Examiner, Rossman compiled a survey of
more than seven hundred inventors. Rossman used anecdotal self
reports from that survey to describe methods of invention that have
proved successfuL Rossman wrote:
A few of the typical replies of the inventors will now be
given in order to illustrate concretely the methods which they
follow in inventing. These statements embody the wisdom
gained through years of experience and the expenditure of vast
fortunes. Anyone interested in inventing will obtain by
carefully reading these remarks valuable information which-
has never been published before (Rossman, 1931, pp. 67-8).
Unfortunately, descriptions of the inventions that resulted from
the methods described were omitted from Rossman's data.
4.6.29 Walter Chrysler
In a report provided by Ferguson (who also provided the
reports of Evans and Nasmyth above), Chrysler described the
perception of imagery in association with an invention, albeit a minor
one.
120
121

Walter Chrysler, founder of the automobile company,
recounted in his autobiography how as an apprentice machinist
he had built, without drawings, a model locomotive that existed
"within my mind so real, so complete that it seemed to have
three dimensions there. . . . My fingers were an intake valve
through which my mental reservoir was being filled; and of
course, my eyes and ears were helping in the process, but what
I learned with my fingers and my eyes together I seem never
to forget (from Ferguson, 1992, pp. 49-50; Chrysler & Sparks,
1950, p. 43).
Chrysler's description of the model locomotive as "within my
mind so real, so complete that it seemed to have three dimensions
there" suggests that the imagery was specifically pictorial (as
opposed to diagrammatic), representing space in a photographic way,
unlike blueprints that are limited to contour (outline) drawings.
Ferguson's report suggests that it was the experience of mental
imagery that enabled Chrysler to complete the design for the
locomotive in his mind "without drawings," suggesting it functioned
as both the saturation and illumination, and possibly the verification
as well.
Chrysler's reference to his fingers adds another dimension to
his account. There is nothing in his description of the imagery to
suggest that tactile elements were involved. However, his
description of his fingers as a sensory "intake valve," suggests that
tactile impressions may have conixibuted to the vivid nature of the
reported imagery. Chrysler mentions that "ears were helping in the
process," but he specifically attributes greater significance to
perceptions including both tactile and visual modalities. James
Nasmyth, discussed above, expressed ideas closely related to
Chrysler's. Nasmyth wrote:
The eyes and fingersthe bare fingersare the two
principal inlets to trustworthy knowledge in all the materials
and operations, which the engineer has to deal with. . . . Hence,
I have no faith in young engineers who are addicted to wearing
121
122

gloves. Gloves, especially kid gloves, are perfect non-
conductors of technical knowledge (from Ferguson, 1992, p. 50;
Nasmyth, 1883, p. 97).
Not only is Chrysler's emphasis on the tactile modality echoed
in Nasmyth's statement, Nasmyth further emphasized this point
through his insistence on working with bare hands. Nasmyth may
have intended his condemnation of gloves in part as a metaphor for
direct experience, but he also clearly recommended it as a working
habit.
Ferguson also reports that Peter Cooper Hewitt, the inventor of
the mercury vapor lamp, relied on tactile manipulation. According to
a report by a scientist named Michael Pupin (and quoted by
Ferguson), "Those who knew (Hewitt), watching him at work, felt that
a part, at least, of Hewitt's thinking apparatus was in his hands,"
(from Ferguson, 1992, p. 50). These reports suggest that tactile
experiences with the bare hands are an important &tea of
mechanical engineering. Perhaps more significantly, they
demonstrate the benefit of learning across a range of cognitive and
sensory modalities.
4.6.30 Flinders Petrie
Galton reported that Flinders Petrie, an eminent British
Egyptologist, reportedly perceived mental imagery in association
with performing mathematical calculations.
Mr. Flinders Petrie, a contributor to Nature, informs me
that he habitually works out sums by aid of an imaginary
sliding rule, which he sets in a desired way and reads off
mentally. He does not usually visualize the whole rule, but
only that part of it with which he is at the moment concerned
(Galton, 1883, p. 66; see Hutchinson, 1949, P. 20; Shepard,
1978, p. 153).
122
123

There is no documentation of any specific discoveries resulting
from Petrie's reported mental imagery, but, according to Galion,
Petrie's "habitual" method for solving mathematical problems,
specifically addition, involved mental imagery. The description of an
"imaginary slide rule" suggests the reported imagery was perceived
in the visual modality. It is not clear whether the reported image
was perceived to resemble a real slide rule that Petrie may have
actually seen (with his eyes); but the report that he perceived "only
that part with which he was concerned" suggests that the imaginary
slide rule was not limited to the dimensions of a real one, but rather
that it was "infinitely" expandable and divisible. This is also
suggested by his reported ability to "set (the slide rule) in a desired
way." Perhaps, for that reason, the imagery represented more of a
diagrammatic version of an ideal slide rule than a pictorial
representation of a slide rule he had seen or used.
This type of imagery involving numerical calculations is related
to Galton's number forms category. Other related incidents are cited
in Galton (1883, pp. 79 ff.) and in Corliss (1976; 1982, pp. 319-44).
Presumably the slide rule followed a linear orientation that was
appropriate for addition, and possibly subtraction, but perhaps
inadequate for higher order mathematical functions. The description
of this reported behavior as "habitual" suggests that the perception
of mental imagery in this context was a regular practice of Petrie's.
There is no documentation from Petrie himself describing his
reported perception of imagery, but there is a statement from him
describing his creative process. Hutchinson quotes Petrie as saying:
I never try to settle a difficult matter off-hand. I first
assemble the material, state the problem as definitely as
possible, and, if no solution is evident, leave it alone. From
time to time I may look over it to refresh my memory, but
never to force a solution. After waiting days or years I
suddenly feel a wish to go over it again, and then everything
runs smoothly and I can write without effort. There is
unconscious growth of mind without perceptible effort in the
interval (from Hutchinson, 1949, p. 20).
123
124

0
This statement offers some insight into Petrie's process, but
there is no reference to mental imagery. In fact the process he
described is strikingly different from that reported in conjunction
with the imaginary slide rule. Galton described Petrie's method of
calculating in a way that suggests the solution was discovered
quickly and easily. Petrie's report of his own process suggests he
approached difficult problems directly at first, but, "If no solution is
evident," he elected to "leave it alone." Perhaps the mathematical
calculations he reportedly performed with the aid of an imaginary
slide rule were never so difficult as to ever involve this secondary
strategy that involved proceeding in an intentionally indirect manner
when no solution was immediately apparent.
Petrie suggests that it was his willingness "never to force a
solution" enabled him to solve problems "without perceptible effort."
He reported the effortlessness of the solution to result from
"unconscious growth of mind." His insistence op allowing difficult
solutions to develop spontaneously, seemingly without conscious
effort suggests that perhaps the reported imagery involving the slide
rule was an effortless process as well.
4.6.31 A. Y. Dodge
When working out a new device mental pictures present
themselves to my mind quite rapidly, more rapidly in fact than
I can record them on paper. Therefore, the first step seems to
be a process of eliminating the imaginary pictures to reduce
the group to those most feasible (A. Y. Dodge, in Rossman, 1931,
pp. 68-9).
Dodge's account that the reported images "present themselves"
suggests they occurred spontaneously, without his intending to
perceive them. However, he also described mental imagery as if it
were a famillar procedure in his working process. The description
suggests that the reported mental images occurred spontaneously
and without intentional direction: They occurred "more rapidly" than
124
1 2 5

he could "record them." Perhaps the reported mental imagery was
spontaneous, but, after repeated experiences he had learned to
anticipate and utilize this spontaneous imagery as a brainstorming
element in his inventing process. His comment that the "first step is
a process of eliminating imaginary pictures" seems to refer not to the
first insight but presumably to the first conscious or intentional step.
The report suggests that mental imagery was involved early in the
creative process, possibly in conjunction with the first insight or the
saturation stage. Dodge's report that his process involved the
reduction of images is unique among the examples included in this
study.
The description of recording the images "on paper" could
indicate that he wrote out verbal directions, but the description of
the imagery as pictures suggests that they were perceived in thee'
visual modality, and that he was recording drawings (diagrams) of
the "new devices." Although he did use the word "picture" to
describe the reported images, it is not entirely clear whether he
perceived the imagery more in a pictorial or in a diagrammatic way.
4.6.32 E. Thompson
The first step is to conceive a need or use, examining the
existing art or processes or to imagine (visualize) a desirable
something or process which might respond to or create a
demand. . . . Then follows the work of the imagination
(creative imagination) which involves the ability to picture in
one's mind the device or process as if it were already in
existence. In this mental picture the invention is embodied,
even tested, so to speak. . . . It is scarcely necessary to add that
I regard the imaginative faculty as chief in value to the
inventor, as it is to the work of the construction engineer, the
artist, the architect, the researcher, etc. I have never tried by
chance or numerous experiments to reach the goal, and
consequently have never begun a piece of work, invention
included, in which I could not in my mind follow the whole
thing through to an apparently satisfactory conclusion (E.
Thompson, in Rossman, 1931, p. 73).
125
12C

Thompson described the first step as a process that could
potentially involve mental imagery, but not necessarily involving
mental imagery, which is unlike Dodge's report (above). Thompson
described "the ability to picture the device in one's mind" as the
second stage in the inventing process. The picturing ability
Thompson referred to in his report seems to indicate mental imagery
in the visual mode. The use of the word "picture" may suggest the
reported mental imagery was perceived as pictorial, and not
diagrammatic. Though the statement is not completely clear on this
point, the reference to testing machines as mental images may also
suggests a pictorial quality.
Thompson's report suggests that mental imagery was involved
more frequently in the development of the device (the saturation
stage) than with any other stage in the creative process. Thompson
did not report any specific instances of illumination to have resulted
from his reported perceptions of mental imagery, however he did
indicate that his inventing process involved the development of "the
whole thing through to an apparently satisfactory conclusion." This
statement suggests that the illumination, as well as possibly some
degree of verification were also represented in mental images: "In
this mental picture the invention is embodied."
For Dodge the perception of imagery seemed to occur
spontaneously, but with Thompson there is a suggestion that the
images were created deliberately and functioned as the medium for
hhn to create new designs for inventions. There is no indication of
any specific causes that may have contributed to Thompson's
perception of imagery, but he suggests imagery was a familiar
practice that he was able to consciously direct. His comments,
especially with respect to mentally "testing" the inventions recalls
the reported perceptions of Tesla's (cited above).
126
127

4.6.33 F. F. Forshee
The actual inventing becomes more or less a problem in
mental mathematicsthe addition and subtraction of materials;
energy; motion . . . it is purely a mental picture which may
involve hours, days or years to complete, and it may never be
completed due to the fact, after the picture develops, that you
begin to see the shortcomings in the inventionor it may
develop into a thing of beauty that you can see will have an
appeal and will actually be of great service. This "mental
painting"as I call itdoes not have to be continued until the
job is finished. It can be taken up as you have time and
worked on until it develops into a complete picture. As you
take up the painting of this picture, you naturally go over it
from the beginning and survey it, and if you are satisfied with
what you have done so far, you go on building until it is
complete.
When this mental picture is complete, you then begin
putting your idea into practice, either by the construction of a
model or a drawing of a real picture. I do not believe that any
inventor has ever made a worth while invention without
having consciously or unconsciously painted a mental picture of
his idea; in the first placehe may have done some certain
amount of experimental work along with the painting. This
experimental work was only a process of "paint mbdng"trying
to obtain a "right color" for his "mental painting." During this
experimental or "paint mixing" process, he may have developed
a new "color" or idea which is an inspiration for his next work
(F. F. Forshee, in Rossman, 1931, pp. 77-8).
Similar to Thompson's report, Forshee describes his own
process of inventing as "purely a mental picture," which suggests
mental imagery in the visual modality. The description of "paint
mixing" is an intriguing metaphor for the manipulation of mental
imagery, and seems to reinforce his description of the visual
modality.
Unlike several reports presented in this study that indicate
inventions developed quite rapidly with the aid of mental imagery,
127
12S

Forshee indicates a range of durations from hours to years to
complete, if ever. His admission is reminiscent of the report from
Petrie (above) who insisted on never forcing the solution to a
problem, but allowing the process to unfold naturally. "There is
unconscious growth of mind without perceptible effort in the
intervaL"
Like Thompson, Forshee described mental imagery as the
medium with which he developed inventions, representing the
saturation stage. He further wrote that "so long as you are satisfied,
you go on building until it is complete," suggesting the illumination
could also occur in conjunction with mental imagery.
There is no indication that the reported imagery was
spontaneous. For Forshee, developing a design through imagery was
a familiar practice that involved a process of deliberate
experimentation, again like Thompson.
4.6.34 H. A. W. Wood
I have never put problems into words, but deal with
them mentally without being conscious of their being
expressed in languagewhen the solution comes in the form of
an invention, appearing as it often does in a variety of forms. I
analyze them without reducing them to paper and never sketch
them until my final choice has been made. Then, when my
thoughts stand out like clearly cut sculptures, I put them on
paper, firstly, as a matter of record, and secondly, as a means
of describing to my engineers the mechanism I wish
constructed for the purpose of putting the invention to work
Formerly I used to sketch out my inventions and clear them up
on paper, but I found this to be a slow and cumbersome
process and therefore abandoned it.
I am firm in my opinion that invention, if it be true
invention, is wholly a subconscious reaction to past experiences
culminating in the wish to satisfy a need (H. A. W. Wood, in
Rossman, 1931, p. 116).
128
129

Wood seems to describe the spontaneous and unintentional
perception of mental imagery in conjunction with the inventing
process, similar to Dodge's report that "mental images present
themselves to my mind." Again the report suggests that the imagery
was perceived in the visual modality. Wood's claim that "invention is
wholly a subconscious reaction to past experiences," seems to
emphasize the spontaneous nature of his reported imagery; but there
seem to have been more than just subconscious processes involved in
his "final choice" for the design of an invention.
Also like Dodge, Wood employed a process of eliminating
mental images "until my final choice has been made." This is a
different process from that described by Thompson and Tesla for
example, who reported building up a single mental image rather than
selecting from multiple alternatives.
Wood's report suggests that mental imagery was a way to both
develop his ideas, indicating the saturation stage, as well as a way to
realin the completed design, representing the illumination. His
report that his problem solving process is exclusively non-verbal
echoes Einstein's self-described mental processes (see Einstein under
primary data above), and implies that mental imagery may have
been the starting point or first insight for his inventing process as
well. There is no indication of specific causes for Wood's reported
perception of imagery, but (like Dodge, Thompson, and Forshee)
imagery seems to have been a fa minor practice that he could control
at will.
4.6.35 Seymour Crkv
Seymour Cray is responsible for the invention of the Cray super
computer, still the fastest computer in the world. According to an
article in Science
(Cray) proceeds by building a visual concept of the whole
machine in his head. There are no intermediate steps. He
129
130

simply conceives it and then draws it" (Metz, 1978, P. 406;
cited in Shepard, 1978, p. 141).
The report suggests that Cray consciously constructs mental
images as a method for designing machines. The statement that,
"There are no intermediate steps" seems to emphasize that the
concept was developed all the way to completion through the use of
imagery, so that the only thing left was to draw the plans. According
to the report, drawing the plans takes place only after the diagrams
are already complete as visual images in his mind. This suggests that
mental imagery was perceived throughout the creative process. In
particular, Cray's conscious direction of the reported mental imagery
in order to develop technical designs indicates the saturation stage;
and the report that the designs are fully completed as mental images
suggests that the illumination was conceived in conjunction with
mental imagery as well. There was no mention as to the possible
duration of this process, nor to any of the specific inventions said to
have resulted from it,..but the report does imply that this was not an
isolated experience.
4.7 Poets. painters and composers. etc.
As described in greater detail above (see data validation), these
incidents stemming from the arts and humanities are not included in
the primary data set because their products are culturally subjective
in a way that scientific discoveries are not. Nevertheless, these
incidents warrant consideration because they help to elucidate the
range of functions attributed to mental imagery. Although the
results are not objectively verifiable, they satisfy the data selection
criteria in most other ways.
4.7.36 Samuel Tkvlor Coleridge
Coleridge's account of the opium induced dream in which his
poem Kubla Kahn was created is one of the most famous and vivid
descriptions involving the reported use of mental imagery in creative
130
131

writing. Coleridge himself described the incident, referring to
himself in the third person.
In consequence of a slight indisposition, an anodyne had
been prescribed, from the effect of which he fell asleep in his
chair at the moment that he was reading the following
sentence, or words of the same substance, in Purchas's
Pilgrimage "Here the Khan Kubla commanded a palace to be
built, and a stately garden thereunto. And thus ten miles of
fertile ground were enclosed with a wall." The author
continued for about three hours in a profound sleep, at least of
the external senses, during which time he has the most vivid
confidence that he composed not less than two to three
hundred lines; if that indeed can be called composition in which
all the images rose up before him as things, with a parallel
production of the correspondent expressions, without any
sensation or consciousness of effort. On awakening he
appeared to himself to have a distinct recollection of the whole.
He instantly and eagerly wrote down the lines. At this moment
he was unfortunately called out by a person on business,
detained for over an hour, and on his return to his room found,
to his no small surprise and mortification, that though he still
retained some vague and dim recollection of the general
purport of the vision, with the exception of some eight or ten
scattered lines and images, all the rest had passed away (from
Ghiselin, 1952, p. 85; see Lowes, 1964, p. 324-5; Koestler, 1964,
pp. 166-7; Harman & Rheingold, 1984, pp. 35-6; cf. Hutchinson,
1949, pp. 94-5; Shepard, 1978, p. 149).
Coleridge wrote that it was the ingestion of what he called an
"anodyne" that caused him to fall asleep in his chair. We now know
this was a reference to opium, a profoundly narcotic drug. Although
he reported to have fallen asleep for "about three hours," his
subsequent qualification that he was "in a profound sleep, at least of
the external sensest" is somewhat ambiguous. It could refer to a
normal dream experience, or, it could refer to a narcotically induced
state that was not actually sleeping, yet caused him to feel as if his
external senses were asleep. Either interpretation underscores the
imagistic quality of the experience. Perhaps Coleridge's reported
experience was related to a hypnagogic state Kekule might have
131
132

described Coleridge's reported experience as a reverie, much like his
own (see Kekule above), although Kekule's report did not involve
artificially induced intoxication.
The description that "all the images rose up before him as
'kw, with a parallel production of the correspondent expressions,"
suggests that the reported images were perceived as visual, and that
there was a verbal component as well, though the way that the
verbal component manifested is not stated. Possibly auditory images
were involved, or perhaps visual images of the written words were
perceived. Coleridge's report that the poem was realized "without
any sensation or consciousness of effort" suggests that the imagery
was entirely spontaneous and not intentionally directed. Perhaps it
was a sense of disassociation from having realized the poem in an
entirely passive way that caused him to use the third person voice in
this report, though this is purely speculative. There are no other
reports of mental imagery involving Coleridge, but it is interesting to
note that, upon being interrupted, most of the dream and
consequently the poem had vanished. In most of the reports we
have encountered, the information was permanently committed to
memory after being perceived only once as a mental image. Perhaps
the opium interfered with his memory, or possibly the dreamed
poem, reportedly "two to three hundred lines long," was simply too
long to remember (except for a person like Poincare, who reportedly
could memorize books on the first reading; see above).
Coleridge's poem reportedly involved a type of dream-like
imagery; but, as Coleridge himself admitted, and lowes elaborated
(1964), the dream was strongly influenced by the book Purchas'
Pilgrimage, which Coleridge reported to be reading at exactly the
moment when the experience began. These are the lines from
Purchas's Pilgrimage that Coleridge was reading as he fell asleep:
In Xanadu did Cublai Can build a stately palace,
encompassing sixteen miles of plain ground with a wall,
wherein are fertile meadows, pleasant springs, delightful
132
133

streams, and all sorts of beasts of chase and game, and in the
middle thereof a sumptuous house of pleasure (Purchas, 1625;
from Lowes, 1964, P. 326).
Compare the original text Coleridge had been reading to the
opening of his poem:
In Xanadu, did Kubla Khan
A stately pleasure-dome decree:
Where Alph, the sacred river, ran
Through caverns measureless to man
Down to a sunless sea.
So twice five miles of fertile ground
With walls and towers were girdled round:
And there were gardens bright with sinuous rills,
Where blossomed many an incense-bearing tree;
And here were forests ancient in the hills,
Enfolding sunny spots of greenery.
(Lowes, 1964, p. 327).
Certahily Coleridge's poem displays an artistry unrivaled by
the earlier prose. However, comparing them side by side it is
apparent that the inception of Coleridge's poem is directly related to
those lines (cited above) from Purchas' Pilgrimage. The similarities
are so striking that Coleridge's memory of the lines he had been
reading must have influenced the creation of his own poem. The
most important feature for the concern here is that Coleridge, in the
narcotically induced state, reported to experience mental imagery
occurring spontaneously, as in a dream, and that reported imagery
carried the completed lines (the illumination) for a new poem.
The lines reportedly needed no alteration but only to be
written out on paper to record them permanently; however, an
untimely interruption reportedly caused his memory of the imagery
to fail, and he was consequently able to remember no more than
"some eight or ten scattered lines and images." In this particular
case the imagery seems to have been a response to specifically what
133
134

0
he had been reading at the moment when the reported experience
began. (Be careful what you read. . .)
4.7.37 Joan Didion
Joan Didion wrote: "I have begun each of my novels with no
notion of character or plot or even incident, (but instead, certain)
pictures in my mind" (from Shepard, 1978, p. 150). There is not a lot
of data in this case on which to elaborate, but it is clear from the
report that mental imagery, specifically in the visual modality
formed the basis for her character developments. Her report to
"have begun each of (her) novels" with pictures (visual mental
images) indicates images are involved early in her creative process,
suggesting they were perceived in conjunction with both the first
insight and the saturation stage.
Didion did not state the degree to which the images with which
she began to write were intentionally created, but mental imagery
was reportedly a familiar practice. Although writers are presumably
most adept at verbal means of communication, it is interesting to
note that sometimes they also use visual mental imagery as a
technique in the writing process (as Coleridge seemed to have done,
albeit unintentionally).
4.7.38 Leonardo da Vinci
The case of Leonardo involved no specific products or
discoveries resulting from mental imagery, but nevertheless
describes a type of imagery experience. Leonardo wrote:
It is not to be despised, in my opinion, if, after gazing
fixedly at the spot on the wall, the coals in the gate, the clouds,
the flowing stream, if one remembers some of their aspects;
and if you look at them carefully you will discover some quite
admirable inventions. Of these the genius of the painter may
take full advantage, to compose battles of animals and men, of
landscapes or monsters, of devils and other fantastic things
134
135

which bring you honor. In these confused things the genius
becomes aware of new inventions, but it is necessary to know
well (how to draw) all the parts that one ignores, such as the
parts of animals and the aspects of landscape, rocks, and
vegetation (from Chipp, 1968, p. 428).
Although none of his surviving works seemed to employ this
technique in any apparent way, Leonardo was the first artist we
know of to have recognized and documented this phenomenon. The
experience he described may possibly be related to pareidolia, which
is elaborated in the discussion of Kekule under primary data above.
The type of imagery described by Leonardo clearly occurred in the
visual modality. Leonardo described the process for inducing such
imagery as simply "gazing fixedly" in a single direction. During this
century related techniques have been associated with several art
movements, notably Surrealism (including Max Ernst, see below),
Automatism (a subgroup of Surrealism) and Abstract Expressionism.
4.7.39 Max Ernst
Max Ernst was one of the Surrealist artists from this century to
employ the pareidolia type imagery described by Leonardo during
the High Renaissance. He wrote:
It started with my recalling an incident of my childhood
when the sight of an imitation mahogany panel opposite my
bed had induced one of those dreams between sleeping and
waking. Happening to be at a seaside inn in wet weather, I was
struck by the way the floor, its grain accentuated by a
thousand scrubbings, obsessed my nervously excited gaze. I
decided to investigate the symbolism of this obsession and, in
order to aid my meditative and hallucinatory faculties, I made
from the boards a series of drawings by placing on them at
random, sheets of paper which I undertook to rub with black
lead. In gazing attentively at the drawings thus obtained I was
surprised by the sudden intensification of my visionary
capacities and by the hallucinatory succession of contradictory
images superimposed, one upon the other (from Ernst, 1948,
135
136

pp. 7-11; see Ghiselin, 1952, p. 64; Chipp, 1968, p. 429; cf.
Simonton, 1988, p. 39).
Unlike Leonardo who made no mention of altered states of
consciousness, Ernst stated that the images originated in "dreams
between sleeping and waking." The transition state from sleeping to
waking is termed hypnopompic (by Myers, see literature review
above); however, from his description it seems clear that Ernst was
in a state of falling asleep as opposed to waking up, and should be
considered a hypnagogic experience. The distinction matters little
since both typically involve the perception of dream-like mental
imagery.
Ernst reported that the experience was triggered by the
memory of a reportedly similar experience from his childhood, but
the aspects of the dream that Ernst described as "visionary" and
"hallucinatory" refer specifically to the visual effects produced by
staring at drawings made from rubbings of the floorboards. He
recognized Leonardo's earlier documentation of this phenomenon,
specifically citing Leonardo's comment in his own writing (Ernst,
1948).
4.7.40 Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart
In his short yet busy life, Mozart was perhaps the most
productive composer ever to have lived. Mozart himself attributed
his generous productivity, in part, to his capacity for mental imagery.
In a letter to a friend, he wrote:
When I am, as it were, completely myself, entirely alone
and of good cheersay, traveling in a carriage, or walkhig after
a good meal, or during the night when I cannot sleep; it is on
such occasions that my ideas flow best and most abundantly.
Whence and how they come, I know not; nor can I force them.
Those ideas that please me I retain in memory, and am
accustomed, as I have been told, to hum them to myself. If I
continue in this way, it soon occurs to me how I may turn this
136
137

or that morsel to account, so as to make a good dish of it, that is
to say, agreeably to the rules of counterpoint, to the
peculiarities of the various instruments, etc.
All this fires my soul, and, provided I am not disturbed,
my subject enlarges itself, becomes methodized and defined,
and the whole, though it be long, stands almost complete and
finished in my mind so that I can survey it, like a picture or a
beautiful statue, at a glance. Nor do I hear in my imagination
the parts successively, but I hear them, as it were, all at once.
What a delight this is I cannot tell! All this inventing, this
producing, takes place in a pleasing lively dream. Still the
actual hearing of the tout ensemble is after all the best. What
has been thus produced I do not easily forget, it rarely differs
on paper from what was in my imagination, and this is perhaps
the best gift I have my divine Maker to thank for (from
Harman & Rheingold, 1984, p. 33; see Hadamard, 1945, p. 16-
17; cf. Tyrrell, 1946, p. 35; Hutchinson, 1949, p. 15; Ghiselin,
1952, p. 44-45; Vernon, 1970; Gowan, 1977, p. 78; Rothenberg,
1979, p 184; cf. Krippner & Hughes, 1970, p. 42).
Although Mozart described the imagery using a visual simile, "I
can survey it la& a picture or a beautiful statue," this seems to be a
reference to the imagistic quality of the reported experience and not
an indication of the visual modality. The imagery was reportedly
auditory, not visual. Mozart wrote, "Nor do I hear in my imagination
the parts successively, but I hear, them, as it were, all at once." The
report that Mozart perceived the parts of the composition all at once
is intriguing considering the duration of real time that a musical
composition represents. It may have been for that reason that
Mozart elected to use the visual simile: because the reported
auditory imagery was perceived all at once in the way that visual
information is usually perceived, "at a glance." It may seem unusual
to "hear" an entire musical composition in an instant, but Mozart was
certainly not the usual sort of person. In a completely separate but
related example, the scientist Omar Snyder reported an experience
involving a similar chronological condensation of time (see Snyder
under primary data above).
137
138

Mozart wrote that his "ideas flow best and most abundantly" on
any of several occasions, but specifically at times when he reported
to have been happy, alone, and seemingly relaxed or at least
undisturbed. He mentions riding in a carriage, walking, and "during
the night when I cannot sleep," all of which have elsewhere been
cited here in connection with reported mental imagery experiences.
Mozart conspicuously excludes times when he was asleep, but he did
write that "All this takes place in a pleasing lively dream." This
reference to a "dream" is not entirely clear, but possibly indicates a
waking dream, like a daydream; at the very least it suggests an
imagery experience. Mozart's report that the experiences were
accompanied by an affective state, in this case a positive one
(exceeding delight) may further suggest a dream-like experience,
and that they was strong intrinsic motivation for this behavior (see
Einstein, part 1 under primary data above).
The statement that, "Whence and how they come, I know not,"
suggests that Mozart had no control over the conception of these new
ideas, like Dodge (see above). He also wrote that the ideas can never
be forced, echoing Petrie's comment (see above), even though they
were working on vastly different goals. However, once new ideas
had occurred, Mozart described great facility with developing them
into compositions. His statement that "What has thus been produced
I do not easily forget," suggests that it was the (reported) perception
of mental imagery that caused more lasting impressions to form.
Possibly this was the result of havhig perceived the compositions as
images, specifically in the auditory modality although possessing
certain characteristics usually associated with the visual mode.
Though Mozart did not say specifically that the initial ideas
which seemed to represent the first insight stage were imagistic, but
there is a silent implication in his report that they were. Mozart's
report that, "it rarely differs on paper from what was in my
imagination," suggests that the perceptions of mental imagery
represented both the development (saturation) and the completed
compositions (or illumination). The report also suggests that he
138
139

experienced no difficulties whatsoever translating his reported
perception on paper. What Coleridge would have given for that
ability!
4.7.41 Richard Wagner
The prelude to Das Rheingold reportedly occurred to Wagner in
conjunction with a mental image.
After a night spent in fever and sleeplessness I forced
myself to take a long walk through the country. It looked
dreary and desolate. Upon my return I lay down on a hard
couch. Sleep would not come, but I sank into a kind of
somnolence, in which I suddenly felt as though I were sinking
in swiftly flowing water. The rushing noise formed itself into a
musical sound, the chord of E flat major, whence developed
melodic passages of increasing motion. I awoke in sudden
terror, recognizing that the orchestral prelude to DasRheingold,
which must have been long lain latent within me, had at last
been revealed to me (from Harman & Rheingold, 1984, p. 32; cf.
Hutchinson, 1949, p. 30; Starker, 1985, p. 95).
Wagner reported that the imagery occurred while he was
laying "down on a hard couch." Clearly he was exhausted and trying
to get to sleep. Possibly it was the hardness of the couch that
prevented him from falling asleep, like Kekule's experience that
reportedly occurred while he was sitting in a chair (see primary data
above). Perhaps, as Mozart described (above), not being able to sleep
facilitated the flow of ideas, although the report that he "sank into a
kind of somnolence" suggests he may have been closer to sleeping
than Mozart suggested, possibly indicating a hypnagogic experience.
Wagner's description of "the rushing noise" developing into
"melodic passages" clearly indicates perceptions in the auditory
modality. There is no reference to visual imagery; however, Wagner
described that he "suddenly felt as though (he) were sinking in
swiftly flowing water," ostensibly indicating tactile/kinesthetic
imagery. These reported sensations seem to further indicate a
139
140

hypnagogic experience, perhaps similar to that reported by Kekule
(see primary data above).
Wagner's report that he "awoke in sudden terror" could be a
reference to being wakened out of the reported imagery experience,
or may suggest that he had actually fallen asleep, perhaps indicating
he had experienced a sleeping dream. The interpretation of this
reported experience as a dream is not inconsistent with the nature of
the imagery he described. Furthermore, the negative affective
quality ("terror") that he reported seems unrelated and may relate to
the dream quality. In either case it emphasizes that Wagner was not
in an ordinary waking state of consciousness when the reported
imagery occurred. The reported imagery seemed to have occurred
spontaneously, and developed without apparent effort or conscious
direction. He made no indication that he had caused or altered the
melody in any deliberate way.
Like Coleridge's poem, Wagner's prelude was realized in its
completed form in the reported mental imagery. Wagner reported
that it "must have been long latent within me" suggests he had
worked on composing the prelude previously, and that the first
insight, as well as the saturation and incubation had already been
achieved. The reported imagery seems to have been involved
exclusively in the moment of illumination.
4.7.42 Guiseppe Tartini
Guiseppe Tartini, the famous composer and also the inventor of
the violin bow, reportedly had a dream that provided the immediate
inspiration his most famous composition. In the dream:
Tarthii sold his soul to the Devil, and it occurred to him in
his dream to hand his fiddle to the devil to see what he could
do with it. "But how great was my astonishment when I heard
him play with consummate skill a sonata of such exquisite
beauty as surpassed the boldest flights of my imagination. I
felt enraptured, transported, enchanted; my breath was taken
140
141

away, and I awoke. Seizing my violin I tried to retain the
sounds I had heard. But it was in vain. The piece I then
composed, the Devil's Sonata, was the best I ever wrote, but
how far below the one I had heard in my dream!" (from Ellis,
1915, p. 276-7; see Porterfield, 1941, p. 91; MacKenzie, 1965.
p. 126; Harman & Rheingold, 1984, pp. 36-7; cf. Starker, 1985,
p. 94).
Like Wagner, this was an entirely isolated incident for Tartini,
who reported that he was completely asleep at the time when the
reported imagery occurred. Tartini described mental imagery in
both the auditory and the visual modalities, the auditory images (not
surprisingly) providing the prelude itself, which Tartini reported to
have "heard."
As with Mendeleev and Hilprecht (see above), Tartini
recognized the significance of the imagery immediately even though
he was asleep at the time, and woke himself up immediately to
reproduce the sounds (auditory images in the dream). Ironically and
perhaps tragically, Tartini described the composition he wrote upon
awakening as his best, but "far below the one I had heard in my
dream," suggesting that the auditory images were not the same as
the final composition. Although mental imagery reportedly provided
the inspiration, there were changes that occurred in the translation
from the imagery to the sonata. The imagery seems to have
functioned as the first insight for Tartini's composition, but the
remainder was worked out subsequent to this reported experience
and there is no further report of mental imagery involved. The
report that he "felt enraptured, transported, and enchanted" suggests
a compelling positive affective quality was involved.
4.7.43 Hector Berlioz
One night while he was sleeping, Berlioz reportedly had the
inspiration for a new symphony. He got up and began to write it
down, but his desperate financial situation caused him to reconsider.
Berlioz wrote:
141
142

If I begin this bit, I shall have to write the whole
symphony. It will be a big thing, and I shall have to spend
three or four months over it. That means that I shall write no
more articles and earn no more money, and when the
symphony is finished, I shall not be able to resist the
temptation to have it copied (which entails further expense),
and then of having it played. I shall have a concert, and the
receipts will barely cover the cost. I shall lose what I have not
got. The poor invalid will lack necessities, and I shall be able to
pay neither my personal expenses nor my son's fees when he
goes on board ship. These thoughts made me shudder, and I
threw down my pen saying: "Bah, tomorrow I shall have
forgotten the symphony." But the next night I heard the
allegro clearly and seemed to see it written down. I was filled
with feverish agitation. I sang the theme. I was going to get
up, but the recollections of the day before restrained me. I
steeled myself against the temptation and clung to the thoughts
of forgetting it. At last I went to sleep, and the next day upon
awakening all remembrance of it had indeed gone forever
(from Hutchinson, 1949, p. 65).
Berlioz reported to have experienced the dream on two
successive nights while he was asleep. He reported both to have
"heard the allegro clearly, and seemed to see it written down,"
indicating both auditory and visual imagery. The report that Berlioz
"sang the theme" may be misleading. He was apparently still lying
down at the time: He wrote, "I was going to get up, but . . ." Lying
down is not conducive to singing. He may in fact still have been
sleeping, and the act of singing being part of the dream. This would
suggest that tactile/kinesthetic imagery was involved. If he had still
been sleeping, that would also help to explain why (with some
insistence) the theme was forgotten so quickly and thoroughly, never
to return; though as a tragic irony he remembered having had the
dream!
Although in the end he reportedly elected not to record the
musical imagery he had perceived, his statement that he recognized
a completed composition during his dream and (initially) caused
142
143

himself to get up and write it down is similar to the incidents
reported by Mendeleev, Hilprecht, and Tartini (see above).
The mental image of singing is qualitatively different from that
of holing, and indicates the involvement of a kinesthetic component.
Perhaps the interaction of three different modalities: auditory,
visual, and kinesthetic, all expressing different aspects of the same
music contributed to the experience of the symphony as it occurred,
but it does not seem to have helped Berlioz to record it or to
maintain the image for very long. At last the images were dictated
by his overriding financial preoccupation. Possibly his financial
burden was the cause of his "feverish agitation," but this negative
affective factor could have been related to the dream itself. He
reported no other incidents involving mental imagery.
The report suggests that his reasoning processes were active:
They were active enough for him to talk himself out of recording the
music. How tragic, when he had reportedly seen the score written as
a visual image in his imagination, and could have (ostensibly)
transposed the notes directly onto paper without apparent difficulty
and thereby have created a lasting record (document). The dream
reportedly carried the inspiration (first insight) for a new symphony,
Berlioz recognized even at the time that the whole symphony would
have required much greater effort to develop. This case does not
actually represent a creative production, but rather a failed
opportunity. Nevertheless, it is included as a reminder of the
potential fragility of creative behaviors.
4.7.44 The Eskimo
The report of the man referred to as simply "the Eskimo" does
not involve a significant creative product either, but it does suggest a
remarkable case of mental imagery abilities. Galton reported:
Other living races have the gift of drawing, but none
more so than the Eskimo. The Eskimos are geographers by
143
144

instinct, and appear to see vast tracts of country mapped out in
their heads. From the multitude of illustrations of their map
drawing powers, I mention one included in the journals of
Captain Hall, published in 1879 by the United States
Government. It is the facsimile of a chart drawn by an Eskimo
who spoke no language besides his own uncouth tongue, was
wholly uneducated according to our modern ideals, and lived in
a savage fashion. This man drew from memory a chart of the
region over which he had at one time or another gone in his
canoe. It extended from Pond's Bay to Fort Churchill over a
distance of 1,100 miles, the coast being so indented by arms of
the sea that its length is six times as great. On comparing this
rough Eskimo outline with the Admiralty chart of 1870, their
accordance is remarkable. I have seen many route maps made
by travelers and I can confidently say that I have never known
of any traveler, white or brown, civilized or uncivilized, in
Africa, Asia, or Australia, who, without surveying instruments,
and trusting to memory alone, had produced a chart
comparable in extent and accuracy to that of this Eskimo
(Galton, 1883, p. 72).
In spite of several inaccurate and sometimes offensive
references about this man's character and his ethnic culture, Galton
manages to portray a truly remarkable individual. The Eskimo's
physical endeavor is gargantuan, having reportedly traveled, by
canoe, "a distance of 1,100 miles, the coast being so indented by arms
of the sea that its length is six times as great." Being without maps,
or compass, their navigational skills must have been largely
determined by their memory of the coastal geography. This man's
memory reportedly coincided with the extent of the coastline he had
traveled. The report that he drew a chart of this entire region from
memory suggests the geographic information was stored iconically as
an image in the visual modality. Although Galton neglected to
specify, the report that the Eskimo's drawing represented a chart
presumably indicates that it depicted an overhead view. It is an
intriguing tangent to the study of mental Imagery that diverse
peoples have independently developed aerial perspective as a map
making device beginning well before flying machines were ever
144
145

imagined. This early mental map-making ability seems to be a
function of visual imagery.
Although even in Galton's report it is obvious that the man did
speak and had his own language, there is no indication as to what
role language may have played in the development of his mental
imagery ability. Navigational skills may have been passed from one
generation to the next, possibly through verbal means; but it is
difficult if not impossible to construct a map of natural geographic
formations from words. Furthermore, this man's ability was
reportedly unique, even among the Eskimo navigators that the
Americans explorers had encountered, suggesting his skills had
independently developed beyond average levels. The fact that
navigational skills were required for the survival of the entire
community suggests that the ability to recall visual information may
have developed largely out of necessity.
Chapter 5
5.1 Results of analysis
This study revealed a total of 44 incidents involving the
reported perception of mental imagery in conjunction with creative
problem solving (i.e. discoveries, inventions, etc.). The primary data,
representing scientific discoveries reported by the subjects
themselves, include 15 incidents from 14 different scientists and
inventors. There were twenty-nine additional incidents that were
either reported by second person accounts, or they were not related
to specific scientific discoveries or inventions. The secondary data
include 29 incidents involving 27 different subjects; 18 were
reported by the subjects themselves, and 11 by biographers or
historians. Eight incidents from the arts were also revealed.
In addition to the narrative analysis, following each factor
there is a numerical analysis for faster reference. The numbers
summarize the results according to: a) the number of incidents from
145
146

the primary data (first person reports), b) the combined number of
incidents from the primary and secondary data, and c) incidents that
are possible examples but are less clearly established than those
represented Ln the combined set (b). The numbers are arranged
according to the following form: (a;b+c). Incidents not included in
the calculations that are presented in the discussion as related but
tangential references are set off by parentheses.
1. P
1
_
z
f m nt
imagery. Several factors were reported that may have contributed
to the reported perception of mental imagery in certain cases.
Walking (3;3+1). Watt, Tesla, and Snyder all reported to be
walking at the moment when the mental imagery reportedly
occurred. Watt and Tesla were both outdoors, but Snyder was
walking down the hallway at work. Watt was alone, while Tesla was
with a friend.
Watt, Tesla, and Snyder all reported mental imagery in
conjunction with the solution to mechanical engineering problems.
Furthermore, the reported imagery in all three incidents occurred
suddenly and carried the solution (illumination). Snyder and Tesla
reported that the inventions were instantly complete, apparently
with little or no conscious effort or direction, although Tesla also
reported to have frequently developed inventions as mental images.
Watt described his conscious development of the invention as a
mental image. The illuminating moment had reportedly occurred by
the time each of them had finished their walk.
Mozart reported that "walkhig after a good meal" was one of
three ways he stimulated his flow of ideas (see also riding in a
carriage and insomnia below), however his report did not include
reference to any specific incidents.
(The poet A. E. Housman reported that walking facilitated his
creative process.
146
147

Having drunk a pint of beer at lunchbeer is a sedative
to the brain, and my afternoons are the least intellectual
portion of my lifeI would go out for a walk of two or three
hours. As I went along, thinking of nothing in particular, only
looking at things around me and following the progress of the
seasons, there would flow into my mind, with sudden and
unaccountable emotion, sometimes a line or two of verse,
sometimes a whole stanza at once, accompanied, not preceded,
by a vague notion of the poem which they were destined to
form part (Housman, 1933; from Ghiselin, 1952, p. 91; Rugg,
1963, p. 5; cf. Sinnott, 1959, p. 23-4).
Like Mozart, Housman described the practice specifically after
a meal, however Housman also made a point to include the additional
pint of beer. Housman's report is also interesting to this study
because of his reportedly sudden recognition's of "whole stanza(s) at
once," a process that may be related to the condensation of entire
compositions into an instant reported by Mozart, or the drawn out
process that was reportedly perceived by Snyder in an instant (see
condensation of time below). There is no specific indication that
Housman perceived the lines of verse in conjunction with mental
imagery, but presumably either auditory and/or the visual imagery
could have been involved.)
Riding in a bus or carriage (2,31). Kekule, Yellot, and
Blanchard were each riding in a bus or carriage at the time the
imagery reportedly occurred. Blanchard was driving a carriage,
apparently alone. Kekule and Yellot were each on a bus. Kekule
reported that it was late and the streets were empty so presumably
there were very few people on the bus, if any. Yellot reported that
his bus was crowded. Presumably they were each sitting down at
the time (see sitting below), though perhaps Yellot was forced to
stand because of the crowd. In all three reports the subjects were on
their way home when the imagery reportedly occurred.
147

Ye llot and Blanchard reported discoveries involving mechanical
inventions. They reported to have realized the completed solution in
a direct way, and immediately recognized their solutions were
correct. The incidents were apparently isolated with no further
reports of mental imagery from either person. Kekule on the other
hand reported not an invention but a discovery in the field of
molecular chemistry. With Kekule's discovery the solution emerged
slowly and involved repeated imagery experiences, always
representing the abstract dancing atoms. Two of Kekule's reports are
included in the primary data above: the one involving the bus home
ride through deserted streets, and the other about sitting in front of
a fire (see Kekule under sitthig, hypnagogic experiences, and
pareidolia below). Mozart wrote that riding in a carriage was one of
three places that reportedly facilitated his creative process, however
he provided no specific examples (see Mozart under walking above
and insomnia below).
Si= (2;2+4). Kekule and Einstein (part 1) both reported
mental imagery experiences to have occurred while they were sitting
down. Einstein was sitting in a chair at work. Kekule was sitting in a
chair at home in front of a fireplace. Both cases involved discoveries
about the natural world: physics for Einstein, and chemistry for
Kekule.
Einstein and Kekule both reported multiple mental imagery
experiences related to scientific discovery. Kekule reported multiple
occurrences, all leading to a single discovery. There are reports of
mental imagery related to several (4) different discoveries by
Einstein, but only one where he reported that he was sitting down at
the time. Kekule also reported imagery to have occurred in another
incident while he was riding on a bus, and presumably sitting down
(the bus could not have been very crowded because the streets were
empty).
Yellot reported to have experienced mental imagery while he
was riding in a bus, possibly sitting down (though the bus was
148

crowded and he may have been forced to stand). Blanchard reported
mental imagery to have occurred while he driving home, probably on
a carriage, which would indicate he was sitting also. Coleridge was in
a chair when he reported mental imagery to have occurred. Mozart's
report that riding in a carriage was one of his (3) preferred places to
stimulate his ideas/images presumably suggests he was sitting in the
carriage (see Mozart also under walking and riding in a bus or
carriage above, and insomnia below).
Lying down (2;3+9). Evans, Watson, and Wagner all wrote that
they had reportedly experienced mental imagery while they were
lying down. They were each at home during these incidents. Evans
and Watson were lying in their beds.
There are indications that hypnagogic experiences may have
been involved in each incident (see hypnagogic experiences below).
Evans reported that the experience was accompanied by "much
mental anxiety," presumably indicative of a negative or unpleasant
(disquieting) affective state, perhaps suggesthig a hypnagogic
experience. Watson reported that the experience began after
midnight and lasted for over two hours but describes a state of
happiness and pleasure qualitatively different from Evans' reported
state of anxiety. Nevertheless, the seemingly undirected quality of
the reported mental images "whirling in front of (his) closed eyes"
suggests a hypnagogic experience may have been involved. Wagner
reported specifically that he was unable to sleep, took "a long walk
through the country," and returned home where he laid down on
hard couch. Wagner's entire description suggests he experienced a
negative affective state, possibly like Evans, that was unconnected
(disassociated) with any apparent cause. Although Wagner reported
that he was not asleep, there is a dream-like quality to the imagery
he described that may indicate a hypnagogic experience was
involved here as well.
Mendeleev, Hilprecht, Bohr, Watt (part 2), Howe, Tartini, and
Berlioz were all reportedly sleeping and were most likely lying down.
149
150

Mozart reported that ideas/images "flow best and most abundantly"
on three occasions including "during the night when I cannot sleep,"
suggesting that he may have been lying down at the time. Hawking
reported that he was getting into bed but not specifically lying down
when he experienced an illumination.
Hypnagogic experiences (1;3+2). Kekule, Coleridge, and Wagner
described hypnagogic experiences. Kekule described two related
hypnagogic experiences. One occurred while he was riding home on
a bus (see riding in a bus or carriage above), and the other occurTed
while sitting at home in front of a fire (see sitting above). Kekule
described both incidents as "reverie" experiences, seemingly
consistent with the interpretation of hypnagogic experiences as used
by this study. The first incident on the bus was reportedly an
improvement on earlier related perceptions, causing renewed effort
in his work but not resulting in any specific progress toward a
solution. During the second experience, sitting in front of the fire he
reported to have experienced the illumination of the discovery. Both
incidents involved basically similar images of dancing atoms. The
second incident reportedly represented not significantly different
images but improved observational abilities, enabling him to
perceive more than on previous occasions.
Coleridge reported a dream-like sleep of the senses that is
also considered below under intodcants because it was artificially
induced; nevertheless, his report is consistent with those of
hypnagogic experiences. Wagner also reported that he experienced
imagery that was fantastic in nature while he was lying down.
Although Wagner reported that he was unable to sleep (see insomnia
below), he was very tired and the report suggests that he may have
fallen into a light sleep or some other sort of hypnagogic state when
the imagery occurred.
Hypnagogic experiences may have been involved in the
incidents cited by Evans and Watson who reported that they were
150
151

awake, but they were also lying down at the time and described
affective states in conjunction with mental imagery experiences.
(Edison reportedly used hypnagogic experiences as an
intentional way to facilitate his process of invention. According to
one of his research assistants:
When stumped by something, (Edison) would stretch out
in his Menlo workshop and, half-dozing, have the idea come
from his dream mind to help him around the difficulty (from
Porterfield, 1941, p. 94).
Hadamard reported he had only just woken up, possibly
indicating a hypnopompic experience, but there is nothing in his
description to suggest the fantastic sort of imagery, often
accompanied by an affective quality that was associated with the
hypnagogic examples.)
Sleeping (2;7+4). Mendeleev, Hilprecht, Bohr, Watt (part 2),
Howe, Tartini, and Berlioz all reported that illuminating experiences
occurred spontaneously while they were asleep. In each case some
part of the solution was specifically represented in a dream image.
Mendeleev and Bohr reported to have perceived mental imagery that
represented unobservable natural phenomena. Watt, Howe, and
Hilprecht had each been struggling with their respective problems
prior to the reported incidents. Mendeleev reported that he went to
bed exhausted after struggling with the problem he was working on
(see exhaustion below). There is no indication that Bohr had
previously attempted to solve that particular problem, although
presumably it was not entirely unfamiliar. The reports about Tartini
and Berlioz suggest they had perceived the music for the first time as
it occurred in their dreams, although with Berlioz the same image
reportedly reappeared during the consecutive night. Watt
reportedly experienced mental imagery in a second incident,
although that incident reportedly occurring while he was talking a
151
152

walk (see walking above) and involved an entirely different set of
circumstances.
Hadamard reported having experienced an illumination "at the
very moment of sudden awakening." Coleridge, Kekule, and Wagner
described dream-like images that suggests they could have fallen
asleep as well.
Exhaustion (2;3+0). Mendeleev, Hilprecht, and Wagner each
reported the were tired to the point of exhaustion when the reported
imagery occurred. Mendeleev and Hilprecht reported they were
exhausted and had fallen asleep, the imagery having occurred in the
dreams that ensued (see sleeping above). Wagner was lying down
and trying to get to sleep (see insomnia above).
(Watson reported that he was awake while laying in bed "for
over two hours past midnight," although he reportedly was content
and did not report to be specifically tired.)
Getting into bed (1;1+0). Hawking reported he was getting into
bed, and that in the process he "started to think about black holes."
His disability caused the act of getting into bed to be "a rather slow
process," but the discovery seemed to have occurred before he was
able to lie down.
O
Outdoors (2;2+1). Watt and Tesla were both outdoors when
they reported to have experienced mental imagery. Both described
walking through a park like setting (see walking above), though Watt
was alone (see alone below) and Tesla was with a friend (see
accompanied below). The result of their reported experiences in
each case was the production of designs for a revolutionary
mechanical invention.
The report that Newton was in his mother's garden when he
conceived his theory of gravitation indicates that he was also
152
153

outdoors, but there is no specific description of Newton having
perceived mental imagery while he was outdoors.
At work (3;3+0). Einstein (part 1), Snyder, and Watson were all
at work when they reportedly experienced moments of illumination.
Einstein and Snyder both suggested that they were not thinking
about the problem at the time the solution occurred: Einstein was
sitting in a chair, and Snyder was walking down the hall. Watson
was in his lab and working with models, suggesting he was thinking
about the problem (see below) when he realized the solution.
Intentionally developed skill (2;3+0). Tesla, Hawking, and
Poincare all reported having intentionally developed mental imagery
skills and specifically in response to physical or psychological
impediments. Tesla developed his abilities to compensate for the
sudden appearance of images that tormented him from childhood
(see Tesla under hallucinations above). Hawking turned to relying on
mental imagery because physical handicaps prevented him from
writing or even talking. Poincare reported developed several
unusual abilities in response to handicaps caused by a case of
childhood diphtheria.
Hereditary/Genetic (1;1+1). Tesla reported that his brother
suffered from the appearance of tormenting images similar to his
own. There is no report of Tesla's brother having developed mental
imagery abilities to compensate for this affliction, but the report that
they both experienced spontaneous mental imagery suggests it may
have been the result of traits that were passed genetically.
Galton's report that "The Eskimos are geographers by instinct"
suggests their ability may also have been passed genetically. The
integral role of navigation to their survival suggests a possibility that
mental imagery skills related to navigation were either passed
genetically, or taught from one generation to the next. Either case
poses fascinating possibilities.
153
154

One time experiences (5;11+0). Specifically one time isolated
experiences of mental imagery were reported by Mendeleev,
Hilprecht, Hadamard, Ye llot, Snyder, Blanchard, Bohr, Howe, Ernst,
Wagner, and Tartini. Ail of them reported the mental imagery to
have occurred in an entirely spontaneous and unintentional way.
Mendeleev, Hilprecht, Hadamard, Ye llot, Snyder, Blanchard, Howe,
and Wagner had each been working specifically on the problems that
were reportedly revealed through mental imagery prior to those
experiences. Ernst and Tartini reported specifically new ideas
resulting from their experiences. Bohr made no reference to having
worked on solving the structure of the atom prior to his discovery,
reportedly in a dream.
Multiple imagery experiences (4;18+4). There are reports of
multiple incidents of mental imagery involving Kekule, Einstein,
Tesla, Feynman, Watt, Faraday, Cray, Galileo, Newton, Petrie, Dodge,
Thompson, Forshee, Wood, Didion, Da Vinci, Mozart, and Berlioz.
There are specifically two incidents reported by Kekule and Berlioz
each, and two incidents reported about Watt, Galileo, and Newton.
The others reported about themselves that mental imagery was a
familiar aspect of their creative process, presumably having occurred
three or more times. There are four separate incidents reported
about Einstein alone, two by Einstein himself.
There is also a possibility that the mental imagth3cexperiences
reported by Evans, Nasmyth, Watson, and Chrysler were not isolated
events. Evans, Nasmyth, and Chrysler leave open the possibility that
they had considered the reported imagery in conjunction with their
discoveries more than once or twice. Watson's analysis by use of
models and visual forms also suggests he may have been developing
models as mental images throughout his creative process.
Alone (4;8+1). Watt, Kekule, Watson, Hawking, Blanchard,
Coleridge, Mozart and Wagner were each alone when they reported
an imagery to have occurred. Kekule was sitting alone in front of the
fire. Watt was walking alone when he reportedly redesigned the
154

steam engine in a mental image. Mozart reported specifically that he
preferred to be alone when he was creating. Coleridge reported that
the distraction of a person calling for him was enough for him to
forever forget the majority of the poem contained within his
reported mental imagery experience. Blanchard was driving alone in
a carriage. Watson and Wagner were each lying down, and Hawking
was getting into bed; all were apparently alone.
The report of Newton's discovery while in his mother's garden
may indicate that he was alone as well.
(Presumably the subjects in several other incidents reported
here were alone as well, especially some of the reports where the
person was sleeping at the time, but there is no clear indication in
the reports that this was the case.)
Accompanied (1;1+0). Only Tesla reported that he was
accompanied by a friend when an invention occurred to him as a
mental image. They were walkhig in a park and reciting poetry.
Thinking about the problem when the solution occurred
(2;2+3). Watt and Watson were both specifically thinking about their
respective investigations at the time when the mental imagery
reportedly occurred. Watt reported a high degree of control over the
images whereas Watson's whirling adenine residues seemed
undirected.
Mendeleev and Hilprecht were asleep when the imagery
reportedly occurred (see sleeping above), but they were reportedly
working on their discoveries immediately prior to going to sleep on
those nights. Furthermore, they both were reportedly exhausted.
Coleridge also reported that he was focused on reading lines that
were closely related to his poem at the moment when his dream-like
imagery reportedly occurred.
155
156

Not thinking about the problem when the solution occurred
(6;7+4). Kekule, Hadamard, Tesla, Einstein (part 1), Ye llot, Snyder,
and Wagner were all preoccupied and not thinking about their
respective problems when the solution reportedly occurred. Kekule
reported falling into a reverie, once on a bus and once in front of a
fire (see hypnagogic experiences, ridhig in a bus or carriage, sitting,
and pareidolia above). Wagner was exhausted and trying to fall
asleep. Hadarnard's solution occurred upon suddenly being
awakened from sleep. Like Kekule, Ye llot reported his experience to
have occurred on a bus, but the bus was crowded unlike Kekule's
which was deserted. Einstein and Snyder were both at work:
Einstein was sitting down, whereas Snyder was walking down the
hall. Tesla and Snyder were each walking (see walking above). Tesla
was with a friend (see accompanied above).
Bohr, Tartini, and Berlioz were asleep when the reported
experiences occurred. Tartini and Berlioz both indicated that their
dreams represented entirely new musical compositions, suggesting
that they had not previously worked on them, and could not have
been thinking about them (unlike Mendeleev and Hilprecht who had
been working on their problems right up until the moment they
went to bed on those nights). Bohr also made no mention of thinking
about his problem prior to his reported dream image.
Howe and Watt (part 2) were both sleeping when inventions
were reported to have occurred, but they had previously worked on
those problems prior to their reported dream experiences. Perhaps
prior consideration did contribute to their reported mental imagery
experiences, but there is nothing to specifically suggest that they had
been thinking about those problems immediately before going to
sleep on the nights when the reported imagery occurred (as
Mendeleev and Hilprecht described); it is possible that they were not.
Kekule and Mozart may also have been otherwise distracted at
the times when they reported mental imagery to have occurred.
Each reported that these were not single, isolated experiences either.
156
157

Kekule reported two specific incidents involving hypnagogic
experiences (see above), while Mozart indicated that his process
involved several possible circumstances, none of which suggests they
involved directly thinking about the problem (see walking, riding in
a bus or carriage and insomnia above).
fansciously directed (4;9+6). The reports of Evans, Nasmyth,
Watt, Tesla, Petrie, Thompson, Cray, Mozart, and the Eskimo suggest
they were able to consciously direct or construct the reported mental
imagery. Mozart reported that there were only certain situations
that were conducive to this process, but the accounts of all the rest
suggest they were able to methodically construct the reported
perceptions at will. There was a second incident involving Watt (part
2) where he invented the new method for making lead shot,
reportedly as the result of a mental image in a dream (see not
consciously directed below).
The reports of Einstein, Hawking, Galileo, Newton, Maxwell, and
Poincare may also describe consciously directed imagery. Each
seemed to use imagery in a purposeful way to describe their
theories, suggesting the images had been intentionally developed.
Although Einstein (part 1) also described the sudden and
spontaneous occurrence of mental imagery, there are thought
experiments he described involving scenarios that seem to be more
consciously orchestrated, perhaps as in traveler on a beam of light
looking into a mirror (part 3), or the tram traveling at the speed of
light away from a clock (part 4).
Not consciously directed (6;13+1). Mendeleev, Hilprecht,
Kekule, Hadamard, Yellot, Watson, Bohr, Watt (part 2), Howe,
Coleridge, Wagner, Tartini, and Berlioz reported to have experienced
mental imagery that occurred spontaneously, and though it was not
consciously directed the imagery was reported to have facilitated the
discovery process. Bohr, Howe, Watt (part 2), Hilprecht, Mendeleev,
Wagner, Tartini, and Berlioz were all reported to be sleeping when
the imagery occurred in a dream. Hadamard was woken up
157
156

suddenly. Kekule, Watson, and Coleridge were in a dream-like
hypnagogic state. Ye llot was riding on a bus.
Dodge reported that "When working out a new device mental
pictures present themselves to my mind more rapidly that I can
record them on paper. The rapid stream of consciousness process
Dodge described suggests they also were beyond his ability to
contol, or he would presumably have slowed them down, perhaps in
the way that Petrie was reported to have "visualized only that part
of the slide rule with which he is at the moment concerned."
Positive affective qualiv (3;5+0). Tesla, Einstein (part 1),
Watson, Mozart, and Tartini all described positive affective qualities
associated with reported mental imagery experiences. Tesla wrote
that the reported experience represented "a mental state of
happiness as complete as I have ever known." Einstein described his
experience (part 1) as "the happiest though in my life." Watson
reported mental imagery to have occurred as he "happily lay awake."
Mozart wrote about his reported experiences that "What a delight
this is I cannot tell!" Tartini wrote that he "felt enraptured,
transported, and enchanted."
Negative affective quality (4;7+0). Evans, Kekule, Tesla, Ye llot,
Howe, Wagner, and Berlioz all described negative affective qualities
associated with reported mental imagery experiences. Evans
reported to have experienced "much mental anxiety" associated with
his reported mental imagery. Kekule reported that "the image
whirled scornfultv before my eyes." In addition to Tesla's reference
to his reported imagery experience involving the AC generator as the
happiest state he had ever known (see positive affective quality
above), he described being tormented by the sudden and
uncontrollable appearance of images during his childhood. Ye llot
reported his invention to have occurred while he was thinking about
other matters that were "disturbing" him. In Howe's dream he was
menaced by savages who threatened him with spears. Wagner
158
159

reported that he "awoke in sudden terror." Berlioz reported that he
was "filled with feverish agitation."
Insomnia (0;2+0). Mozart and Wagner both reported mental
imagery associated with incidents of insomnia. Wagner reported
imagery to have occurred as after a long night of sleeplessness. He
was lying down (see above) after being unable to fall asleep the
entire night. Although the report suggests that he may have drifted
into sleep or at least a hypnagogic state at some point, this occurred
only after many hours of restless insomnia during which he
reportedly could not sleep. Mozart provided no specific examples
but reported that sleeplessness stimulated his ideas/images. Wagner
and Mozart's reports indicate that the auditory imagery had
performed the critical function in their discovery process.
(Watson and Kekule both reported to have worked late into the
night, though reported no specific trouble with falling asleep.
Poincare, who was presented in the secondary data above reported
to have found a major discovery one night when he could not fall
asleep
One night I took some black coffee, contrary to my
custom, and was unable sleep. A host of ideas kept surging in
my head; I could almost feel them jostling one another, until
two of them coalesced, so to speak, to form a stable
combination. When morning came I had established the
existence of one class of Fuchsian functions. I had only to
verify the results, which only took a few hours (Poincare, 1913;
from Taton, 1962, p. 21; see Montmasson, 1932, p. 79 ff.;
Hadamard, 1945, p. 13; Ghiselin, 1952, p. 36; cf. Sinnott, 1959,
p. 23; Rugg, 1963, p. 4; Koestler, 1964, pp. 115-6; May, 1975, p.
63; Arieti, 1976, p. 268; Shepard, 1978, p. 139).
Although he was reportedly awake, Poincare's description of
ideas surging and jostling suggests that they were not consciously
(Erected. Poincare did report that he was not used to drinking coffee
159
160

at night, and perhaps that had some effect on the experience.
Caffeine is classified as a stimulant, but there is evidence that
sthnulants like cocaine or metha-amphetamines for example can
result in hallucinations. On the other hand, he may at some point
have briefly fallen asleep or slipped into a hypnagogic state.
Although Poincare's testimony above did not suggest imagery was
involved, it has a quality that is reminiscent of Kekule's gamboling
atoms, and may also be related to Watson's whirling adenine pairs.
Henry Wordsworth Longfellow reported the creation of a poem
to have occurred during a sleepless night.
Last evening . . . I sat till twelve o'clock by my fire,
smoking, when suddenly it came into my mind to write the
"Ballad of the Schooner Hesperus," which I accordingly did.
Then I went to bed, but could not sleep. New thoughts were
running in my mind, and I got up to add them to the ballad. I
felt pleased with the ballad. It hardly cost me any effort. It
did not come into my mind by lines, but by stanzas (from
Harman & Rheingold, 1984, p. 35).
In addition to the reported insomnia, Longfellow's report that
he was sitting, that he was by the fire (pareidolia), and that he was
smoking may each have contributed to his reported experience. The
description of lines coming not "by lines but by stanzas" suggests a
condensation of information similar to the experience reported by
Mozart.)
Inicodcation (0;1+0). Coleridge reported having taken opium
immediately prior to his dream-like experience. Opium is not
considered a hallucinogenic but is a profound narcotic and was
probably responsible for his state of mind at the time: "a sleep of the
senses." Perhaps he had fallen asleep or into a hypnagogic state.
Gazing fixedly (0;0+2). Although there were no reports of
specific discoveries resulting from "gazing fixedly" as Leonardo
160
161

wrote, both he and Ernst reported they had experienced mental
imagery to have occurred as a result of this behavior. (This
experience may be related to pareidolia, suggesting a connection to
Kekule staring into the fire; see below.)
Pareidolia (0;0+1). Although Kekule reported that he was
staring into a fire when the second mental imagery incident
occurred, the imagery was seemingly similar to the earlier incident
that occurred while he was on the bus. Perhaps pareidolia was not
involved; or possibly there is a connection between pareidolia and
gazing fixedly such that staring out the window of the bus was
capable of stimulating mental imagery experiences similar to staring
into a fire. (That may imply that Leonardo and Ernst's reports were
related to Kekule's as well.)
2. What perceptual modalities were involved in the reported
mental imagery?
Visual (13;37+0). Evans, Nasmyth, Watt, Mendeleev, Hilprecht,
Kekule, Hadamard, Tesla, Ye llot, Snyder, Watson, Feynman, Hawking,
Blanchard, Bohr, Howe, Faraday, Chrysler, Coleridge, Tartini, and
Berlioz were all reported to have perceived visual mental imagery in
conjunction with specific discoveries or inventions. Petrie, Dodge,
Thompson, Forshee, Wood, Cray, Didion, da Vinci, and Ernst reported
to have used visual imagery to facilitate creativity, however
descriptions of specific imagery experiences were unfortunately
omitted. The report of the Eskimo's abilities suggest that he also
perceived mental imagery in the visual mode. Galileo, Newton,
Maxwell, Poincare, and Einstein (parts 3 & 4) used visual mental
images to describe concepts but did not specifically report to have
conceived those concepts as mental images.
Tactile/Kinesthetic (1;2+8). Einstein (part 1) and Wagner both
reported to have experienced tactile/kinesthetic sensations
associated with mental imagery. Einstein's first thought experiment
(part 1) involved two elements: falling through the air, and (not)
161
162

feeling the weight of his own body. Einstein did not specifically
describe the mental imagery modality through which his discovery
was made, but the imagery he described suggests he may have
perceived images like the feel of air resistance (whid) against his
skin, or perhaps the feeling in the pit of your stomach that
accompanies falls of a certain magnitude. The way that he would
have perceived weightlessness as a mental image is not entirely
clear, but the report suggests that tactile and/or kinesthetic
sensations were involved. Elsewhere Einstein stated definitively that
his thinking was sometimes of a muscular type, perhaps indicating
the tactile/kinesthetic modality as in the case considered here
(Einstein, part 1).
While Einstein described a scientific thought experiment that
occurred to him as he was sitting in the office where he was
employed, Wagner reported to have perceived an auditory mental
image one night when he was unable to fall asleep, from which a
musical composition developed. In addition to the auditory imagery,
Wagner also reported the sensation of "sinking in swiftly flowing
water." This tactile/kinesthetic component did not represent the
music itself, but was reportedly perceived to have initiated the
auditory image (E flat major) from which the music ensued. Both
incidents reportedly involved the feeling of weightlessness.
Several other incidents may have involved tactile/kinesthetic
imagery as well. Kekule described falling into a state of reverie. His
description may simply have been a figure of speech, but it may also
indicate that a kinesthetic sensation was involved, possibly more
closely related to Wagner's experience than to Einstein's.
Watt (part 2) reportedly perceived in a dream to be walking
through a shower of lead pellets. Watt's reported imagery may have
been primarily visual, but the description suggests he may also have
perceived the feeling of betrig struck by the "heavy rain," indicating
the possibility that a tactile component was involved. Similarly,
Howe described being draaged by savages in his dream, which could
162
163

indicate he experienced tactile/kinesthetic sensations, although if he
did they were unrelated to the discovery that enabled him to
complete his invention. Berlioz reported that he "sang" the theme he
had heard in his dream. Perhaps he perceived his voice strictly
through auditory mental images, but there may have been a
kinesthetic component involved in his perception of singing the
notes.
Chrysler and Nasmyth both described tactile sensations as
playing a key role in their inventing processes. Although their
reports of the inventions included in this study rely heavily on visual
mental imagery, they both also acknowledged the significance of the
tactile modality. Chrysler wrote, "what I learned through my fingers
and my eyes together I never seem to forget." Nasmyth also
emphasized the same combination of sensory modalities, "The eyes
and the fingersthe bare fingersare the two principal inlets to
trustworthy knowledge" (see discussion of Nasmyth's statement
under Chrysler in secondary data above, and also the discussion of
Peter Cooper Hewitt in the same location who was known for his
capacity with his hands). Watson's use of building blocks to
construct models for the DNA structure involved visual and tactile
learning processes, possibly contributed to his discovery as well.
Feynman stated that his reported imagery experiences were
"all visual," but his description of "this stuff that he tries to collect
and to push" (to paraphrase) suggests there may have been a
tactile/kinesthetic element involved. His description suggests the
perception of a bodily involvement that was not strictly visually
oriented.
Auditory (1;5+3). Hilprecht, Mozart, Wagner, Tartini, and
Berlioz are reported to have perceived mental imagery in the
auditory modality in conjunction with creative accomplishments.
Hilprecht, Tartini, and Berlioz each reported that the experiences
occurred while they were asleep and dreaming. Wagner was
exhausted and trying to get to sleep but seemed to have been
163
164

suffering from a case of insomnia (see above). Mozart also reported
to have experienced auditory imagery when he could not sleep, and
while traveling in a carriage or "walking after a good meal." Mozart,
Wagner, and Berlioz reported auditory mental images representing
musical compositions. Tartini reported musical content to his
perceptions but suggested there may also have been a verbal
component. Hilprecht reported that the content of his auditory
perceptions was exclusively verbal.
Howe, Bohr, and Coleridge imply that they may have
experienced auditory mental imagery, but they made no clear
statement about this possibility. Howe and Bohr were both asleep
when the perceptions occurred; Coleridge's report of a dream-like
state suggests he may have been near to sleep as well. If auditory
imagery was involved, the reports suggest that Howe and Coleridge
perceived verbal imagery, while Bohr's auditory perceptions were
related to "planets whistling as they passed."
Verbal (1;3+2). Hilprecht, Howe, and Coleridge each described
verbal content involved in their reported mental imagery
experiences. Hilprecht reported specifically auditory perceptions
carrying the verbal content. Howe and Coleridge did not specify the
modality in which their reported verbal perceptions occurred, and
may have been either auditory or visual, or perhaps both.
Tartini may have experienced some verbal exchange in his
dream about dealing with the Devil. Berlioz reported to see the
music written down, though presumably in a form of musical
notation. While musical notation is not a part of language, there are
significant similarities between the two: both involve an act
described as "reading," and they share formal conventions such as
entry and exit points.
Thne condensation (1;2+2). Snyder and Mozart both reported
to perceive lengthy solutions in an instant of time. Snyder reported
to have instantaneously recognized a process that was "drawn out in
165
164

time," (as his interviewer Shepard described it). Mozart reported to
hear the parts to a composition "not successively but all at once."
Hawking and Einstein's investigations sometimes involve the
concept of time as a physical property that can be isolated and even
frozen. Einstein theorized that at the speed of light time would
appear to have stopped; and Hawking proposes that falling into a
black hole would produce the same effect.
3. The stage in the creative process at which imagery was
reportedly involved.
First insight (1;5+7). Einstein, Didion, Mozart, Tartini, and
Berlioz all reported that mental imagery had been involved
specifically in the earliest stage in their creative processes, also
called the insight or first insight stage. Tartini and Berlioz reported
to have heard finished compositions that had never occurred to them
before, although Tartini was later unable to match the beauty of the
music he had heard, and Berlioz was unwilling to try. Didion and
Mozart reported to be able to develop their literary and musical
compositions (respectively) as mental images (see intentional control
below). Mozart reported that he was often to complete finished
scores in this way, writing that "it rarely differs on paper from what
was in my imagination." Einstein reported that not only the initial
problem but also the final solution and even verification was
contained within that moment of first insight.
Possible incidents involving first insights are as follows:
Feynman suggested that his creative process began with vague
mental images, but did not describe any specific examples. The
reports about Faraday's ability to "see" lines of force suggest that
perceptions of mental imagery may have served as a first insight
similar to Feynman's report. Dodge, Thompson, and Wood all
reported mental imagery in conjunction with the first step in their
respective creative processes. The report about Cray suggests he
begins with a mental image as well. Coleridge made no indication
165
166

that he had ever considered writing a poem about Kubla Khan until
he perceived it in a dream, reportedly in a completed state though he
was unable to record more than a fraction of it on paper after being
disturbed from his dream-like opium induced state.
Saturation (3;10+2). Tesla, Feynman, Hawking, Chrysler,
Thompson, Forshee, Wood, Cray, Didion, and Mozarz all reported
having developed their inventions as mental images. Reportedly at
times they were able to use this method to develop their inventions
all the way to the completed design state. Feynman alone among this
group admitted that "in the end mathematics can take over and be
more efficient." Hawking's research was most closely related to
Feynman's, but Hawking made no such comment. Tesla, Chrysler,
Thompson, Forshee, Wood, and Cray were all inventors. Didion and
Mozart were artists.
Nasmyth's report of mentally observing mechanical structures
in operation suggests they may have played a part in the
development (saturation) of his invention. He did not report to have
altered or manipulated the reported imagery, but his description of
"building it up in the mind" suggests an active involvement more
closely associated with the saturation than the incubation stage.
Dodge also seemed to suggest his inventions were developed through
mental images, specifically through the elimination of images. But
his reference to that process as the first step creates some ambiguity
on this point. Saturation represents the second stage.
Incubation (2;2+0). Kekule and Watson reported to have
perceived mental imagery at a point in their research after they had
already entered (or perhaps even completed) the saturation stage,
but the imagery was perceived as a peripheral byproduct of their
investigations and did not serve to further the development of their
ideas in any direct or obvious way. Kekule and Watson's reported
both suggest that mental imagery was involved in their illumination
experiences, but they also reported separate, earlier mental imagery
experiences that did not precipitate the solution.
166
16'7

Illumination (11;22+6). Watt, Mendeleev, Hilprecht, Kekule,
Hadamard, Tesla, Einstein, Ye llot, Snyder, Watson, Hawking,
Blanchard, Bohr, Howe, Chrysler, Thompson, Forshee, Wood, Cray,
Coleridge, Mozart, and Wagner all reported illuminating experiences
to have occurred in conjunction with mental imagery. Mendeleev,
Hadamard, Bohr, Howe, and Hilprecht were reportedly asleep at the
time. Kekule, Coleridge, and Wagner reported dream-like
experiences, possibly hypnagogic states. Watt also reported a
dream-like mental imagery experience, but at an earlier point in his
discovery not directly associated with the illumination. Hawking was
getting into bed. Blanchard was driving home and Ye llot was riding
on a bus. Kekule also reported a mental imagery experience to have
occurred while riding on a bus, but that experience was related to
the incubation stage of his discovery and not the illumination.
Watson was in his laboratory. Einstein and Snyder were both at
work, though were not specifically working on their discoveries at
the moment when the illumination was reported to have occurred.
For Watson, Chrysler, Thompson, Forshee, Wood, and Cray the
application of mental imagery in the problem solving process was
seemingly an intentional strategy they had chosen to pursue. The
reports of Mendeleev, Hilprecht, Kekule, Hadamard, Tesla, Einstein,
Yellot, Snyder, Blanchard, Bohr, Howe, Coleridge, and Wagner suggest
that mental imagery was a spontaneous occurrence that was not
intentionally directed. Watt reported to have intentionally directed
mental imagery in one instance (part 1), but in the other report (part
2) he was asleep and the imagery occurred spontaneously in a
(recurring) dream. Tesla reported the design for the AC generator to
have occurred spontaneously, but elsewhere described mental
imagery as a familiar and intentional aspect of his inventing process.
Mozart reported to invent new compositions through an integration
of spontaneously occurring mental imag
(auditory) that he
proceeded to "methodize and define" by intentionally developing the
composition as a mental image.
167
168

0
Feynman, Faraday, Galileo, Newton, Maxwell, and Poincare did
not report the details regarding their illumination experiences and
consequently it is unclear that mental imagery was involved
specifically at that moment. Galileo, Newton, Maxwell, and Poincare's
use of imagery in the expression of their ideas suggests that imagery
may also have been involved in the illumination. Feynman and
Faraday did not link mental imagery with particular discoveries, but
Feynman Diagrams and Faraday's lines of force represent two of
their most significant. Because visual-spatial forms of analysis are
integral to their discoveries, it seems likely to suspect that imagery
may have been a part of the illumination experience.
(Tartini and Berlioz each reported to have heard complete and
original musical compositions in a dream. However, Tartini could not
later reproduce the music to his satisfaction and settled for results
that were admittedly his best, but far below the one he had heard in
his dream. And Berlioz never recorded the music he heard so it is
impossible the verify that an illumination had actually occurred.)
Verification (5;7+6). Evans, Watt, Tesla, Einstein, Ye liot,
Blanchard, and Galileo all reported complete confidence in their
discoveries based on the mental images they had reportedly
perceived and without the need for objective verification. The
verification process, or some subjective equivalent to it was
integrated into the reported imagery experience. Evans, Watt, Tesla,
Ye llot, and Blanchard invented designs for new machines. Einstein
and Galileo made discoveries a physical law: gravitation.
In addition to those cited above, the reports about Nasmyth,
Snyder, Watson, Blanchard, Faraday, and Galileo suggest that mental
imagery may have provided some verification in their discoveries or
inventions as well. Nasmyth, Snyder, and Blanchard invented
designs for machines or mechanical processes. Watson, Faraday, and
Galileo discovered physical properties: Faraday and Galileo about
physics, and Watson about biological genetics.
168
169

(Mozart's report that the music "rarely differed on paper from
what was in my imagination" suggests that he also believed it had
been verified, though the verification for a work of art is based on
different criteria than in the sciences.)
5.2 Distribution of results
Number of reported incidents:
Primary data
(15)
Secondary data
(29)
Combined
(44)
Number of individuals represented:
Primary data
(14)
Secondary data
(27)
Combined
(41)
Number of authors in the secondary data:
Subject's self report
Biographers or historians
1. Possible causes:
(18)
(11)
Walking
(3;3+1)
Riding hi a bus or carriage
(2;3+1)
Sitting
(2;2+4)
Lying down
(2;3+9)
Hypnagogic experiences
(1;3+2)
Sleeping
(2;7+4)
Exhaustion
(2;3+0)
Getting into bed
(1;1+0)
Outdoors
(2;2+1)
At work
(3;3+0)
169
170

Intentionally developed skills
(2;3+0)
Hereditary/Genetic
(1;1+1)
One time experiences
(5;11+0)
Multiple experiences
(4;18+4)
Alone
(4;8+1)
Accompanied
(1;1+0)
Thinking about the problem
(2;2+3)
Not thinking about the problem
(6;7+4)
Consciously directed
(4;9+6)
Not consciously directed
(6;13+1)
Positive affective quality
(3;5-0)
Negative affective quality
(4;7+0)
Insomnia
(0;2+0)
Intoxication
(0;1+0)
Gazing fixedly
(09+2)
Pareidolia
(09+1)
Number of different factors indicated under possible causes:
Primary data
(22)
Secondary data
(16)
Combined
(24)
2. Perceptual modalities:
Visual
(13;37+0)
Tactile/Kinesthetic
(1;2+8)
Auditory
(1;5+3)
Verbal
(1;3+2)
Time condensation
(1;2+2)
3. The stage in the creative process at which imagery was
reportedly involved:
First insight
(1;5+7)
Saturation
(3;10+2)
170
171

Incubation
(2;2+0)
Illumination
(11;22+6)
Verification
(5;7+6)
5.3 Conclusions
5.3.1 Possible causes.
0
Primary data:
There were twenty-two different factors reported in the
primary data that may possibly have facilitated the perception of
mental imagery. There were also sixteen reported in the secondary
data, representing a combined total of twenty-four. There were two
additional factors that were suggested, "gazing fixedly" and
"pareidolia," but they were less clearly established than the others.
For the primary data, the distribution of reports according to
the number of occurrences per factor ranged from one to six out of
fifteen. Factors that were reported in only one incident are
nevertheless considered significant because they each represent
aspects of the human potential. There were two factors that each
were reported in six cases and represent 40% of the total number of
incidents in the primary data, and 43% of the individuals involved.
Those factors were: not thinking about the problem at the time the
reported imagery occurred, and not having consciously directed the
reported imagery. These factors are closely related. Not thinking
about the problem refers to the subjects conscious thoughts leading
immediately up to the reported imagery experience, while not
having consciously directed the imagery refers to the level of
conscious control over the imagery. The results indicate that these
two factors were the most significant causes for the reported
perception of mental imagery in conjunction with creative problem
solving in the scipnees. There were three subjects who were
represented in both factors, but between the two they comprise a
171
172

total of nine different subjects, representing 60% of the incidents and
64% of the individuals in the primary data.
There was a corresponding balance in the results from the
factors representing propositions that were the inverse of those that
were the most significant. Thinking about the problem was
described in two cases, and consciously directed imagery was
described in four cases. One case occurred in both factors (Watt, part
1), making the combined total 5, and representing 33% of the cases
and 36% of the individuals in the primary data.
Appradmately two-thirds of the reported incidents in the
primary data include references to not thinking about the Problem
when the imagery occurred or not conscioustv directing the imagery
as it occurred. A corresponding one-third reported the inverse
propositions and were thinking about the problem when the
reported imagery occurred, or consciously directed the mental
images as they occurred.
One time isolated mental imagery experiences were the third
most significant factor after not thinking about the problem and not
consciously directing. One time experiences were reported by five
different people, representing 36% or slightly over one-third of the
individuals in the primary data.
The most significant factors revealed by the results from the
primary data were "not thinking" and "not directed" with six
incidents of each, and "one time experience" with five. These results
suggest that mental imagery in conjunction with scientific discovery
can occur spontaneously, that it is often not subject to conscious
control, and that they are frequently unique and isolated one time
experiences. Unfortunately, there are no concrete strategies for the
intentional development or facilitation of mental imagery suggested
by these factors.
172
173

Following one time experiences (with five) are four different
factors each described in four separate reports from the primary
data. Multiple experiences, being alone, consciously directed
imagery, and negative affective qualities each represent 27% of the
incidents and 29% of the individuals, or nearly one-third of the
primary data each. There is no obvious relationship among these
factors, however they provide more concrete possibilities for the
development of mental imagery experiences. The most obvious is
being alone. Although there was an account from one person in the
primary data who was accompanied (Tesla), almost one-third (29%)
of the people were alone when the imagery reportedly occurred. An
equal number, close to another one-third reportedly were able to
consciously direct the reported imagery. Although it is not indicated
as strongly as not consciously directing (with six), consciously
directed imagery was reported by four out of fourteen subjects (29%)
in the primary data. This finding indicate that mental imagery was
equally effective as a problem solving technique regardless of the
level of perceived control over the images.
The reports of multiple mental imagery experiences suggests
that once the faculty has developed it is subject to recurrence.
Certahily this 1::, true for those scientists who described intentionally
developing their mental imagery skills. These findings are at odds
with the slightly more significant results about one time experiences.
Except for those few who intentionally developed imagery skills or
were naturally inclined toward visual thinking (Einstein, Feynman),
the evidence from the primary data suggest that recurrent mental
imagery experiences are unpredictable and perhaps infrequent.
Nevertheless, the reports that certain people have succeeded in
developing these skills suggests it is with the realm of human
possibility. Galton (1883) and Sebeok (1993) have suggested this
may be a hereditary/genetic phenomenon. Tesla reported that his
brother suffered from a similar affliction regarding the appearance
of tormenting images suggesting there may have been a hereditary
component. However, Tesla was the only person in the primary data
to make such a claim.
173
174

0
175
The reports of the perception of a negative affective quality in
conjunction with mental imagery are not surprising considering the
number of dream and dream-like, or hypnagogic experiences that
are represented in the data. However, of the four people who
reported to have experienced negative affective qualities, only
Kekule's reverie was dream-like. Kekule's report was also the least
emphatic description of negative affective qualities. The rest were
reportedly fully conscious and awake at the time the reported
imagery occurred. With the exception of Yellot was bothered by
personal matters when the imagery reportedly occurred, there was
no apparent cause for the negative affective states reported by the
other three. Perhaps there is some connection between mental
imagery processes and emotional responses.
There were three factors with three incidents each. Walking, at
work, and vositive affective qualities were each reported by one-
fifth (21%) of the people. Although this is slightly less than that the
report of negative affective qualities reported by 29%, the two
factors are closely related and represent not divergent tendencies
but perhaps different manifestations of the same tendency. While
positive affective qualities may reflect the recognition of having
made a significant discovery, as in Archimedes Eureka! parable,
negative affective qualities may relate more closely to the struggle
inherent in the creative problem solving process. These two factors
that seem to express the same basic tendency to experience mental
imagery in association with an emotional response. Their combined
number of incidence equals seven, making it the single most
significant tendency revealed, representing half (50%) of the
individuals and almost one-half (47%) of the incidents in the primary
data. There were no indications that the reported affective qualities
were subject to intentional control, although Tesla did report to have
developed alternate imagery strategies to cope with sudden
appearance of tormenting images during childhood.
174

Three people reported they were at work when the mental
imagery occurred, but of the three only Watson was specifically
working on the problem when the imagery occurred. For Einstein,
who was sitting in a chair, and Snyder, who was walking down the
hall, there did not seem to be anything about the work environment
that facilitated the solution to their problems since they were
reportedly not thinking about the problem at the time. Perhaps the
familiarity of the surroundings created a sense of comfort or
reassurance.
Snyder is also represented in the group of three people,
including Watt and Tesla who were walking at the time when their
mental imagery experiences reportedly occurred. Perhaps there was
something about the act of walking itself that facilitated a state of
mind conducive to mental imagery and/or creative problem solving.
Walking is often considered a way to release stress and anxiety. Any
form of physical activity can be an effective way to release stress
and anxiety. Perhaps walking provided a balance between helping to
promote a relaxed state of mind and yet not requiring so much
attention so that they were unable to concentrate (as with
competitive sports).
Watt and Tesla were walking outdoors when their reported
imagery occurred, perhaps indicating that a change in scenery had
facilitated a change in thhikhig processes as well. This contradicts
the familiarity theory about imagery occurring at work and suggests
there is no expectable place for imagery to occur. The place where
imagery seems most likely to occur is lying down, in bed or
wherever they happened to be where they were able to relam Two
people were sleeping, two more were lying down, two were
exhausted, one was getting into bed, and one reported a hypnagogic
experience. In addition, there were nine other cases in the combined
primary and secondary data where it was possible they were lying
down at the time, though no specific details were provided.
Hadamard, for example reported to have suddenly woken up.
Furthermore, two people reported they were each riding on a bus,
175
176

and two people were sitting down at the time when the imagery
reportedly occurred. These factors, as well as walking may also have
helped to promote a relaxed state of mind though they did not
hivolve laying down or falling asleep.
Secondary data:
With the inclusion of the secondary data there were several
significant developments in the results of the possible causes for the
perception of mental imagery, the most dramatic of which was the
rise in repors of multiple imagery experiences from four,
representing 27% of the incidents in the primary data, to eighteen
incidents in the combined primary and secondary data. Although
there was a correspondent rise in the total number of incidents from
the primary to the combined data which rose to forty-four, including
forty-one different people, the eighteen reports of recurring imagery
experiences represent 41% of the incidents and 44% of the people.
This increase shows the most significant change in percentage for a
single causal factor, representing a 14% difference, or slightly more
than a 50% increase over the percentage in the primary data alone.
Ironically, one of the next most significant changes was in the
factor of one time experiences, which rose from five to eleven.
Although the five incidents represent 33% of the primary data, the
eleven incidents in the combined total represent a relative decrease
in percentage to one fourth (25%) as a result of increase in the
number of combined incidents. Nevertheless, this adjusted number
may represent a more accurate representation because of the
increase in group size. Unlike the results in the primary data,
multiple imagery experiences in the combined results were indicated
more frequently than one time experiences. However, the relative
frequency of one time versus multiple imagery experiences only
serves to establish that both are possible, though sometimes
unpredictable.
176
177

There was an interesting rise in the combined data for two
pairs of inversely related propositions. One pair, consciously directed
and not consciously directed imagery experiences showed a more
dramatic change, rising from four to nine for consciously directed,
and from six to thirteen for not consciously directed. Nevertheless,
the increase in total group size lowers the percentage of the results
in the combined data. Consciously directed imagery represents 27%
of the results in the primary data, while only 20% in the combined
data, though the number of incidence more than doubled. Not
consciously directed imagery dropped from 40% in the primary data
to 30% in the combined, though again the number of incidence more
than doubled. Although the combined data describe a relative drop
in the frequency of these factors, the larger group size may help to
improve the accuracy of the findings. As with the results of these
two factors in the primary data, they are both indicated as possible
perceptions associated with mental imagery experiences. The results
are not as high in the combined results, but they may be more
accurate due to the larger group size.
Both positive and negative affective qualities showed an
increase in the number of incidents, although the larger group size
served to diminish the percentage dramatically. Positive affective
quality rose from three in the primary data representing 20%, to five
in the combined representing 11% of the reported incidents; and
negative aff :dye qualities dropped from four in the primary
representinL, 27%, to seven in the combined representing 16%.
Although positive and negative affective qualities are inversely
related propositions, they represent the same tendency to experience
emotional responses in conjunction with mental imagery, as
mentioned above. Considered together as a single tendency, these
two factors reflect a relative decrease in percentage from 47% of the
incidents in the primary data to 27% in the combined, even though
the number of incidents rose from seven to twelve. Although these
numbers reflect a substantial decrease in frequency, the larger group
177
178

size provided 71% more incidents of this phenomenon, adding
credibility to the results.
The incidence of sleeping in the combined data rose from two
in the primary data to seven, with a corresponding percentage
increase from 13% to 16%, a relatively small increase in percentage
but nevertheless a 350% increase over the results from the primary
data alone. The combined data representing a significantly larger
group size helps to validate the findings. The close match between
the frequency results of sleeping in the primary data and the
combined data helps to verify the accuracy of those results.
There were small increases in several other areas, but the
increase in group size served to greatly diminish the significance of
these findings. Riding in a bus or carriage, lying down, exhaustion,
intentionally developed skill, and not thinking about the problem
each rose from two incidents to three with the combined results,
representing a drop from a frequency of 13% to 7% (although the
number of reports involving sleep rose by 50%). The incidence of
hypnagogic experiences rose from one to three, a 300% increase in
number of occurrences but representing almost exactly the same
frequency (7%) in both the primary and combined data.
With the exception of cases where no reference to the
circumstances surrounding the moment of discovery were provided,
in almost every case there were reports of everyday behaviors
involved, such as walking, sitting, riding, being alone, exhausted,
lying down, and of course sleeping, all of which tend to promote
relaxation as well as perhaps i distracted state of awareness. This
correlation between commonplace behaviors and mental imagery in
creative discovery suggests that a certain degree of indirect attention
is actually necessary in creative problem solving, especially in the
later stages perhaps (see stage in the creative process below). These
result should not surprise anyone who has experienced the
frustration of not being able to remember some bit of information
178
172

through the direct approach; however, it was not an anticipated
result of this study.
In many cases the moment of discovery was reported to arrive
in its final stage in an entirely effortless manner, without the least
bit of struggle or even conscious direction. The causes for this
phenomenon were not revealed by this study and remain unclear,
but perhaps it is related to the state of relaxation or indirect
attention facilitated by the commonplace behaviors cited above.
Several writers have echoed these reports about the role of the
unconscious in the creative process. Researchers over the years have
suggested several different but related theories to account for this
elusive nature of creativity. These theories include: the
antechamber of consciousness (Galton, 1883); fringe consciousness
(Wallas, 1926); unconscious (Montmasson, 1932); preconscious
(Kubie, 1959); chance (Taton, 1962); bisociation (Koestler, 1964);
vestibule of consciousness (Coleridge; see Lowes, 1964); latzral
thinking (De Bono, 1970); Janusian thinking (Rothenberg, 1979).
Ribot wrote, "It is the unconscious which produces what is
vulgarly called inspiration" (from Myers, 1920, p. 58).
Coleridge (see secondary data above) poetically captured this
experience:
Ideas and images eidst in the twilight realms of
consciousness, that shadowy half-being, that state of nascent
existence in the twilight of imagination and just on the
vestibule of consciousness (Gerard, 1946; from Ghiselin, 1952,
p. 228).
Although the role of the unconscious, like mental imagery is
often more closely associated with creativity in the arts than in the
sciences, several scientists and mathematicians have attested to its
significance as well. Kekule wrote, "Let us learn to dream . . ."
(Findlay, 1948, p. 38, see primary data).
179
180

Tyndall wrote, "With accurate experiment and observation to
work upon, imagination becomes the architect of physical theory"
(from Beveridge, 1961, P. 72).
Bertrand Russell wrote:
In all creative work that I have done, what has come first
is a problem, a puzzle involving discomfort. Then comes the
concentrated voluntary application entailing great effort. After
this, a period without conscious thought, and finally a solution
bringing with it the complete plan of a book. This last stage is
usually sudden and seems to be the important moment for
subsequent achievement (from Hutchinson, 1949, pp. 19-20).
Russell's statement suggests that the illumination and perhaps
the incubation were both carried out through unconscious processes.
Brewster Ghiselin, author of The Creative Process (1952)
carried the argument so far as to write that, "Production by a process
of purely conscious calculation seems never to occur" (1952, p. 8; see
Rugg, 1963, p. 7).
Poincare (see secondary data above) was far more exacting in
his approach to characterizing the role of the unconscious.
The role of the unconscious in mathematical invention
appears to me incontestable . . . (however9) it is possible and of
certain it is only fruitful, if it is on the one hand preceded and
on the other hand followed by a period of conscious work
(Poincare, 1913; in Montmasson, 1932, p. 80; Hadamard, 1945,
p. 14; Ghiselin, 1952, p. 38; cf. May, 1975, p. 65).
Poincare continued by describing the specific functions
performed by both conscious and unconscious processes.
What is the role of preliminary conscious work? It is
evidently to mobilize certain of these atoms, to unhook them
180
181

from the wall and put them in swing. We think we have done
no good, because we have moved these elements a thousand
different ways in seeking to assemble them, and have found no
satisfactory aggregate. But, after this shaking up imposed upon
them by our will, these atoms do not return to their primitive
rest. They freely continue to dance (Poincare, 1913, pp. 393-
94; in Montmasson, 1932, P. 81; Ghiselin, 1952, p. 41; Simonton,
1988, p. 31; cf. May, 1975, pp. 67-8).
Poincare speculated that it was the conditions of civilized life
that impeded the creative process (however this fails to explain why
no tribal cultures have developed higher mathematics). Poincare
wrote:
In the waking moments of our complex civilized life we
are ever in a state of suspense which makes all great
conclusions impossible; the multiplicity of the facts of life,
always present to consciousness, restrains the free play of logic
(except for that happy dreamer, the mathematician). In our
dreams the fetters of civilization are loosened (Ellis, 1915, p.
279).
Poincare's account is echoed by Einstein, who wrote that "All
our thinking is of this nature of the free play of concepts" (Holton,
1978a; from French, 1979, p. 157; see Holton, 1979b; see primary
data).
Arthur Koestler, author of The Act of Creation (1964)
considered conscious thought itself to be an impediment to creativity.
Koestler wrote:
(The) temporary relinquishing of conscious controls
liberates the mind from certain constraints which are
'necessary to maintain the disciplined routhie of thoughts but
may become an impediment to the creative leap; at the same
time other types of ideation on more primitive levels of mentai
organization are brought into activity (Koestler, 1964, p. 169;
see Budzynski, 1976, p. 363).
181
182

If Koestler associates unconscious processes with the process to
facilitate creative leaps, which presumably represent our greatest
accomplishments, then it is unclear why he would refer to them as
more primitive levels of mental organization. Nevertheless, his
description is exemplified in several reports included here.
Magoun characterized several of the reports involving
spontaneous and undirected mental images by writing that:
(Vigilant) attention may impede the free-flowing
retrieval of previously stored material leading to innovative
associations. The most significantly productive of creative
ideas, relating disparate information and providing a new
insight or synthesis, have often been reported to be generated
not in the intensity of strained focused concentration upon the
subject or problem, but rather durhig a contrasting state of
mind, as when performing a stereotyped activity, or gazing
hypnotically into a glowing fireplace, or even during sleep
itself, in dreams (from Budzynski, 1976, p. 363).
These theories have been provocatively demonstrated by
several reports presented here. Furthermore, the results indicate
that mental imagery occurred most frequently while not thinking
about the problem or not consciously directing the imagery. In
several cases the subjects reported they were consciously thinking
about the problem when the imagery occurred, or that they had
consciously directed the reported imagery, but that does not exclude
the possibility that unconscious processes were involved, possibly at
some point in the creative process not connected with the reported
mental imagery.
5.3.2 Perceptual modalities
The visual, auditory, and tactile/kinesthetic modalities were all
represented in both the primary and the secondary data; however,
the auditory and tactile/kinesthetic modes were clearly evidenced
by only one incident each in the primary data. This is in contrast to
182
183

the visual modality which was clearly described in thirteen cases in
the primary data, representing 87% of the incidents and 93% of the
individuals, as well as 81% of the incidents in the combined data. In
the primary data, only Einstein did not clearly describe imagery in
the visual mode, which is ironic because both reports about Einstein
in the secondary data clearly describe visual imagery, and he himself
stressed the primacy of visual thinking in his own thought process.
Howard Gardner, best known for his theory of multiple
intelligences, suggests that this tendency toward the primacy of the
visual modality may have a biological factor. Gardner wrote:
My own view is that each form of intelligence has a
natural life course; while logical-mathematical thought proves
fragile later in life, across all individuals, and bodily-
kinesthetic intelligence is also at risk, at least certain aspects of
visual and spatial knowledge prove robust, especially in
individuals who have practiced them regularly throughout
their lives. There is a sense of the whole, a "gestalt" sensitivity,
which is central in spatial intelligence, and which seems to be a
reward for aginga continuing or perhaps even an enhanced
capacity to appreciate the whole, to discern patterns even
when certain details or fine points may be lost. Perhaps
wisdom draws on this sensitivity to patterns, forms, and whole
(Gardner, 1983, p. 204; see West, 1991, p. 39).
Another reason visual imagery may have been reported most
frequently is the nature of the problems themselves. Most of the
reports cited in the data involve discoveries in physics and
mechanical engineerhig inventions, both of which are inherently
visually oriented disciplines. The implication is that mental imagery
occurs most frequently in those areas that are best adapted to
imagistic translation. This is evidenced both by those examples
corresponding to visual imagery, as well as to the composers who all
reported auditory imagery, sometimes in addition to visual (and
even verbal perhaps).
183
184

There were also two additional factors found that are
categorized under perceptual modalities because they are more
closely related to specialized modes of perception than to causes for
the perception of imagery. These are verbal communication and
time condensation, each with one report in the primary data. With
the inclusion of the secondary data, verbal communication raises to
three, and time condensation raises to two, but there is little
significance to these numbers except to establish the possibility that
these type of experiences have occurred.
With the combined results, tactile/kinesthetic rose from one to
two, again representing a small drop in frequency that is perhaps
insignificant with such low numbers of incidence. Auditory rose
from one to five, representing a jump from 7% to 11%. Both of these
findings were still however dwarfed by the reports of mental
imagery in the visual modality, which more that doubled from
thirteen to thirty-seven incidents, and reprrsenting a slight relative
drop in frequency from 87% in the primary data o 84% in the
combined. The preponderance of mental imagery experiences in
creative problem solving may indeed occur in the visual modality,
but there may simply be a lack of documentation to describe the
occurrence of such non-visual modalities. Perhaps this is the result
not so much of the rarity of these experiences but of the difficult
with describing them through language, in comparison with the
relative ability the describe visual imagery in linguistic terms (see
describing mental images in chapter 2 above).
5.3.3 Stages in the creative problem solving process
There were incidents in the primary data to represent every
stage in the creative process (as defined under stages in the creative
process in chapter 3 above). The most significant of these results
was illumination experiences which were reported in eleven cases
representing 73% of the incidents in the primary data. With the
combined results the number doubled to twenty-two, with a
corresponding drop to 50% of the cases reported but still
184
185

representing the greatest number of reports for any of the stages.
Verification was reported in five incidents in the primary data (33%),
and seven in the combined (16%). Saturation was reported in three
incidents from the primary data (20%), and ten from the combined
(23%). First insight was reported in only one incident in the primary
data (7%), but five in the combined (1.1%). And incubation was
reported in two incidents in the primary data (13%).
Apart from simply establishing that each of these stages has
been described in association with mental imagery, the results
suggest that mental imagery has been perceived most frequently in
conjunction with the illumination stage (the moment of discovery).
The illuminating experience was reportedly carried in a mental
image in almost three-quarters (73%) of the primary data and
exactly one-half of the combined number (50%). These numbers
may be misleading, however, because the primary data represent
only those mental imagery experiences that culminated in creative
productions (discoveries or inventions), indicating that an
illumination experience had occurred.
In the primary data, verification was the second most frequent
with five reports or 33% of the data. Verification connotes objective
verification, however, these reports represent entirely subjective
experiences. The incidents where I have proposed that a verification
experience occurred do not represent the verification of solutions in
the traditional sense, but to the subjects themselves, their reported
imagery experiences also provided sufficient verification. The
content of the reported imagery did prove to be accurate, and in
certain cases the objective consideration ofthe images themselves
provides conclusive evidence for the theory, such as Einstein's
example of the falling person not being able to feel the weight of
their own body, or Galileo's argument about the rate at which objects
of different weight will fall (see also Maxwell and Poincare). Because
works of art are subject to a different sort of verification from
scientific discoveries or inventions, they were not calculated into
these results, even though there were reports of completed
185
18C

compositions occurring through mental imagery (see Mozart, Wagner;
also Tartini and Berlioz).
By combining the results from the secondary data, verification
raises slightly to seven (with a corresponding drop in percentage to
16%). Saturation rose from third place in the primary data with
three (20%), to second place in the combined prhnary and secondary
data with ten (23%). The consistency between the frequency of
saturation between the primary and combined results is notable
considering the analyses are subject to innumerable vagaries
between the reports.
First insight was reported in only one incident in the primary
data (7%), but by a total of five in the combined results (11%).
Incubation was reported in two incidents (13%) in the primary data
with no additional reports in the secondary (and a correspondent
drop in the combined results to below 5%).
Presumably mental imagery may have occurred in association
with the preliminary stages in the creative process, like saturation or
incubation, yet perhaps not contributing directly to any specific
results (illuminations). Several scientists and inventors reported that
mental imagery, especially visual, functioned as the crucial mode of
operation in the early stages of their creative process without
specifying the direct results, however expressing prcven confidence
in the success of this method (see Dodge, Thompson, Forshee, Wood;
see also Einstein, Feynman, Faraday, and Poincare).
Not surprisingly, comparison of the reports suggests they were
not written following a uniform conception of the stages in the
creative process; indeed, creativity may not be a uniform process.
The conception of creativity as a five step process was used in order
to help determine the points at which mental imagery has been
reported with the most frequency. Although the stage theory can be
useful, many of the reports resisted the interpretations imposed by
that conception. These differences may be purely semantic, but may
186
187

188
also suggest that the stage theory represents an insufficient model of
the way discoveries are made.
A final feature of moments of discovery is that many were
reported to arrive in an all at once way, whereby the completed
solution to the problem arrives seemingly instantaneously. I has
been well documented that the perception of time seems to tand
still during moments of creative behavior (Csikszentmihalyi, 1991).
This is one possible explanation, but there is also the possibility that
moments of discovery sometimes do occur in an instantaneous way.
Some reports included here suggest that the discoveries occurred
seemingly instantaneously; others indicate that they transpired over
remarkably short periods of time, possibly occupying the span of a
few mhiutes or an hour. The results of this study offer no conclusive
explanation for this phenomenon, however, the results suggest that
mental images are capable of carrying substantial amounts of
information over highly attenuated time intervals (see time
condensation).
5.3 Summary
Fifteen reported incidents were found to meet the standards of
the primary data, and forty-four for the combined primary and
secondary. The single most frequently reported factor was imagery
that occurred in the visual modality, though imagery in the auditory
and tactile/kinesthetic modalities were also reported. The frequency
of reported imagery experiences in the visual mode may reflect the
types of investigations represented. Physics and mechanical
engineering both tend to rely on pictures (diagrams), suggesting that
relevant imagery was more likely to have been perceived in the
visual mode. All four composers included in the secondary data
reported to have perceived auditory (musical) imagery.
There were twenty-two different factors found that may have
contributed to the imagery experiences reported in the primary data,
and twenty-four in the combined results. The individual factors
187

measured relatively low frequencies, however, several factors seem
to indicate a similar trend toward a range of activities involving
common everyday behaviors. Results of this study indicate that
mental images occurred more often in a spontaneous, unexpected
way while the subjects were relaxing or otherwise preoccupied with
routine behaviors. Specific behaviors include walking, sitting, riding
in a bus or carriage, lying down, and sleeping. These behaviors may
have provided a certain degree of distraction perhaps, but were not
so demandhig that they required complete and undivided attention.
Not thinking about the problem when the solution occurred, and not
consciously directing the imagery were two of the most frequent
factors; they may also be related to the same trend.
The results suggest that mental imagery more often occurs in
conjunction with routine behaviors while the subject may not be
aware that they were thinking about a specific problem at the time.
This study suggests that mental imagery is often the result of
indirect causes, though a few people reported to have perceived
them at will. The data suggest that mental imagery has occurred
across the range of stages in the creative process, but mental
imagery was reported to occur more frequently during the later
stages (illumination, verification). Several imagery experiences were
reportedly accompanied by affective qualities; in some instances the
affective qualities were perceived as positive, in others they were
perceived as negative.
Mental imagery has been reported in conjunction with a range
of creative behaviors from fiction to physics. Although mental
imagery is more often associated with fiction, this study helps to
establish the significance of mental imagery within the scope of
scientific reasoning. One of the remarkable aspects of mental
imagery is its application to scientific observation and
experimentation. In several cases scientifically verifiable results
have been reported from experiments conducted exclusively within
an individuaPs mind.
188
189

0
Dream-like imagery such as sleeping dreams and hypnagogic
experiences were reported with surprising frequency in conjunction
with scientific discoveries, confirming the theories of several writers
that conscious thought processes are sometimes an impediment to
creativity, not only in the arts but in the sciences as well.
Though there were cases where mental imagery skills were
reportedly developed through practice and exercise, these reports
were rare, reportedly occurring in only two cases in the primary
data, and a total of three in the combined. In cases where mental
imagery was not a customary part of the thinking process, it was
reported to occur more often by not thinking about the problem than
by thinking about it. As Kekule wrote, "Let us learn to dream . . ."
References
Abbott, E. A. (1952). Flatland. NY: Dover.
Amabile, T. A. (1983). The social psychology of creativity. NY:
Springer-Verlag.
Anderson, H. (Ed). (1959). Creativity and its cultivation. NY: Harper
& Brothers.
Arieti, S. (1976). Creativity, the magic synthesis. NY: Basic Books.
Aristotle. (1986). De Anhna. NY: Penguin Books.
Amheim, R. (1954). Art and visual perception. Berkeley, CA: UC
Press.
Arnheim, R. (1962). The genesis of a painting: Picasso's Guernica.
Berkeley, CA: UC Press.
Arnheim, R. (1966). Toward a psychology of art. Berkeley, CA: UC
Press.
Arnheim, R. (1969). Visual thinking. Berkeley, CA: IX Press.
Arnheim, R. (1971). Entropy and art. Berkeley, CA: UC Press.
189
190

Arnheim, R. (1971). Entropy and art. Berkeley, CA: UC Press.
Arnheim, R. (1974). The aesthetic approach. In Rosner & Abt, 1974.
Arnheim, R. (1986). New essays on the psychology of art. Berkeley,
CA: UC Press.
Arnheim, R. (1992). To the rescue of art Berkeley, CA: UC Press.
Ashvaghosha. (1900). The awakening of faith. Chicago: Open Court.
Barron, F. (1958). The psychology of imagination. Scientific
American, September 1958, 199, 3, 151-66.
Bell, E. T. (1986, orig. pub. 1937). Men of mathematics: the lives
and aril levements of the great mathematicians from Zeno to
Poincare. NY: Simon & Schuster.
Beveridge, W. I. B. (1961). The art of scientific investigation. NY:
Vintage.
Beveridge, W. I. B. (1980). Seeds of discovery. NY: Norton.
Binet, A. (1903). L'etude experimentale de l'intelligence. From
Mandler & Mandler, 1964, pp. 134.
Block, N. (Ed). (1981). Imagery. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bloomberg, M. (Ed). (1973). Creativity: theory and research. New
Haven, CT: College & University Press.
Boltzman, L (1897). Lectures on mechanics. In Miller, 1984, p. 48.
Bower, G. H. (1972). Mental imagery and associative learning. In
Gregg, 1972.
Brockman, J. B. (Ed). (1993). Creativity. NY: Simon & Schuster.
Brodlie, K. W. (Ed). (1992). Scientific visualization. NY: Springer-
Verlag.
Bronowski, J. (1956). Science and human values. NY: Harper &
Row.
Bronowski, J. (1958a). The identity of man. Garden City, NY:
Natural History Press.
Bronowski, J. (1958b). The creative process. In Scientific American,
199, 3, September 1958.
Bronowsld, J. (1973). The ascent of man. Boston: Little, Brown.
Bronowski, J. (1977). A sense of the future Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Bronowski, J. (1978a). The origins of knowledge and imagination.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
190
191

192
Bronowski, J. (1978b). The visionary eye. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Brown, J. R. (1991). The laboratory of the minck thought
experiments in the natural sciences. London: Rout ledge.
Budzynski, T. H. (1976). Biofeedback and the twilight states of
consciousness. In Schwartz & Shapiro, 1976.
Burnshaw, S. (1970). The seamless web. NY: George Brazil lier.
Cannon, W. B. (1945). The way of an investigator. NY: Norton.
Cajori, F. (1932). Newton's Principia: vol. a the system of the
world. Berkeley, CA: UC Press.
Capra, F. (1975). The Tao of physics. Boulder, CO: Shambhala.
Chandrasekhar, S. (1987). Truth and beauty. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Chase, W. G. (Ed). (1973). Visual information processing. NY:
Academic Press.
Chipp, H. B. (1968). Theories of Modern Art. Berkeley, CA: UC
Press.
Chipp, H. B. (1988). Picasso's Guernica. Berkeley, CA: UC Press.
Chrysler, W. P. & Sparks, B. (1950). Life of an American workman.
NY: Chrysler.
Clark, R. W. (1971). Einstein: the life and times. NY: World.
Clouzot, H. G. (released 1982). The mystery of Picasso. Samuel
Goldwyn Entertainment. (Film, available on video).
Corbin, C. (1972). Mental Practice In Morgan, 1972.
Cooper, L A. & Shepard, R. N. (1973). Chronometric studies of the
rotation of mental images. In Chase, 1973.
Corliss, W. R. (1976). Strange midds. Glen Arm, MD: The
Sourcebook Project.
Corliss, W. R. (1982). The unfathomed mind: a handbook of unusual
mental phenomena Glen Arm, MD: The Sourcebook Project.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1991). Flow. NY: Harper Coffins.
Cytowic, R. E. (1989). Synesthesia: a union of the senses. NY:
Springer-Verlag.
Cytowic, R. E. (1993). The man who tasted shapes. NY: Warner
Books.
191

0
Dacey, J. (1989). Fundamentals of creative thinking. MA: Lexington
Books.
De Bono, E. (1970). Lateral thinking: creativity step by step. NY:
Harper & Row.
Dennett, D. C. (1979). Brainstorm& Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dennett, D. C. (1981). The nature of images. In Block, 1981, pp. 51-
61.
Dijksterhuis, E. J. (1938). Archimedes. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Dreistadt, R. (1974). The psychology of creativity: how Einstein
discovered the Theory of Relativity. Psychology, 1974, 1 1, 15-
25.
Dyson, F. (1980). Disturbing the universe. NY: Harper & Row.
Edwards, B. (1979). Drawing on the right side of the brain. Los
Angeles: Tarcher.
Edwards, B. (1986). Drawing on the artist within. NY: Simon &
Schuster.
Einstein, A. (1922). The meaning of relativity. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Einstein, A. (1954). Ideas and opinions. NY: Crown.
Einstein, A. & Infeld, L (1938). The evolution of physics. NY: Simon
& Schuster.
Eliade, M. (1958). Yoga: immortality and freedom. NY: Pantheon.
Ellis, H. (1915). The world of dreams. London: Constable &
Company.
Ernst, M. (1948). Beyond pahning. NY: Wittenborn, Schultz.
Faraday, A. (1972). Dream power. NY: Coward, McCann &
Geoghegan-
Feldman, D. H. (1980). Beyond universals in cognitive development.
NJ: Ablex.
Feldman, D. H. (Ed). (1982). Developmental approaches to giftedness
and creativity. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Ferguson, E. S. (1977). The mind's eye: nonverbal thought in
technology. Science, August 26, 1977, 197, 4306, 827-36.
Ferguson, E. S. (1992). Engineering and the mind's eye. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
192
193

Feynman, IL P., (1985). Surely you're joking Mr. Feynman. NY:
Norton.
Findlay, A. (1948). A hundred years of chemistry. London:
Duckworth.
Finke, R. A. (1989). Principles of mental imagery. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Finke, R. A., Ward, T. B. & Smith, S. M. (1992). Creative cognition:
theory, research, and applications. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Foisha, B. L (1983). Relationship between creativity and mental
imagery: a question of cognitive styles? In Sheikh, 1983.
French, A. P. (Ed). (1979). Einstein: a centenary volume.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Freud, S. (1960, orig. pub. 1901). 'The interpretation of dreams. NY:
Basic Books.
Friedrichs, K. 0. (1965). From Pythagoras to Einstein. NY: Random
House
Galileo, G. (1638a). Discourse into two new sciences. Netherlands:
Leyden.
Galileo, G. (1638b). Dialogo. Netherlands: Leyden.
Galton, F. (1870). Hereditary genius: an inquiry into its laws and
consequences. NY: D. Appleton.
Galton, F. (1907, orig. pub. 1883). Inquiries into human faculty and
its development. NY: Dutton.
Gardner, H. (1973). The arts and human development. NY: Wiley.
Gardner, H. (1975). The shattered mind. NY: Knopf.
Gardner, H. (1980). Artful scribbles. NY: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1982). Art, mind and brain. NY: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of mind. NY: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1985). The mind's new science NY: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1989). To open minds. NY: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1991). The unschooled mind. NY: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1993a). Multiple intelligences. NY: Basic Books..
Gardner, H. (1993b). Creating minds. NY: Basic Books.
Gawain, S. (1978). Creative visualization. NY: Bantam.
Gerard, R. W. (1946). The biological basis of imagination. Scientific
Monthly, June 1946. In Ghiselin, 19c2, pp. 226-51.
193
194

Gaze Is, J. W. (1980). "The psychology of creativity." Carnegie
Symposium on Creativity, Nov. 19-20, 1980.
Ghiselin, B. (Ed). (1952). The creative process. Berkeley, CA: UC
Press.
Gillispie, C. C. (1960). The edge of objectivity: an essay in the
history of scientific ideas. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Gleick, J. (1992). Genius. NY: Pantheon.
Goldberg, P. (1983). The intuitive edge Los Angeles: Tarcher.
Goldsmith, J. (1957). The art of spiritual healing. NY: Harper &
Row.
Goleman, D. & Davidson, R. J. (Eds). (1979). Consciousness: the brain,
states of awareness, and alternate realities. NY: Irvington
Publishers.
Goleman, D., Kaufman, P. & Ray, M. (1992). The creative spirit. NY:
Dutton.
Gould, P. & White, R. (1974). Mental maps. NY: Penguin.
Gould, S. J. (1981). The mismeasure of man. NY: Norton.
Govinda, L A. (1974). The foundations of Tibetan mysticism. NY:
Samuel Weiser.
Gowan, J. C. (1972). Development of the creative individual. San
Diego, CA: Knapp.
Gowan, J. C. (1975). Trance, art and creativity. San Diego, CA:
Knapp.
Gowan, J. C. (1977). Some new thoughts on the development of
creativity. Journal of Creative Behavior, 1977, 11, no. 2, pp.
77-90.
Gregg, L (Ed). (1972). Cognition in learning and memory. NY:
Wiley.
Gregory, R. L (1990, orig. pub. 1966). Eye and brain: the
psychology of seeing. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Gregory, R. L (1981). Mind in science Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Gruber, H. E. (1981). Darwin on man: a psychological study of
scientific creativity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
194
195

Grudin, R. (1990). The grace of great things: creativity and
innovation. NY: Ticknor & Fields.
Guilford, J. P. (1967). The nature of human intelligence. NY:
McGraw-Hill.
Hadamard, J. (1945). The psychology of invention in the
mathematical field. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
-1 Haldane, J. B. S. (1928). Possible worlds. NY: Harper & Brothers.
Hannay, A. (1971). Mental images: a defense. NY: Humanities
Press.
Harman, W. & Rheingold, H. (1984). Higher creativity. Los Angeles:
Tarcher.
Harris, H. (Ed). (1976). Astride the two cultures: Arthur Koestler at
seventy. NY: Random House.
Hartmann, F. (1973). Paracelsus: life and prophecies. Blauvelt, NY:
Rudolph Steiner Publications.
Hawking, S. W. (1988). A brief histaty of time. NY: Bantam Books.
Hawking, S. W. (1992a). A brief history of time Gordon Freedman
Productions. (Film, available on video).
Hawking, S. W. (1992b). A brief history of time: a reader's
companion. NY: Bantam Books.
Hawking, S. W. (1993). Black holes and baby universes. NY:
Bantam Books.
Hawking, S. W. & Ellis, G. F. R. (1973). The large scale structure of
space-time Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Heisenberg, W. (1958). Physics and philosophy. NY: Harper.
Helmholtz H. V. (1894). The origin and correct interpretation of our
sense impressions. In Warren & Warren, 1968; pp. 252-54;
Miller, 1984, p. 49.
Helmholtz H. V. (1962, orig. pub 1896a). Helmholtz's treatise on
physiological optics. NY: Dover.
Helmholtz H. V. (1962, orig. pub 1896b). Popular scientific lectures.
NY: Dover.
Hennessey, B. A. & Amabile, T. M. (1988). The conditions of
creativity. In Sternberg, 1988, pp. 11-42.
Henning, E. B. (1987). Creativity in art and science Cleveland, OH:
Cleveland Art Museum.
195
196

0
Herschel, J. (1867, orig. pub. 1816). Familiar lectures on scientific
subjects. London: Strahan. In Myers, 1920, p. 56.
Hoffman, B. (1972). Albert Einstein, creator and rebel. NY: Viking
Press.
Holton, G. (1972). On trying to understand scientific genius.
American Scholar, 1972, 41, 95-110.
Holton, G. (1978a). What, precisely, is "thinking?" Einstein's answer.
In French, 1979; Holton, 1978b)
Holton, G. (1978b). The scientific imagination: case studies.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Horowitz, M. J. (1978). Image formation and cognition. NY:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Housman, A. E. (1933). The name and nature of poetry. NY:
Macmillan.
Hume, D. (1739). A treatise of human nature From Mandler &
Mandler, 1964, p. 53.
Hume, D. (1907, orig. pub. 1748). An inquiry concerning human
understanding. Chicago: Open Court.
Hunt, I. & Draper, W. W. (1964). Lightning in his hand: the life
story of Nikola Tesla. Denver, CO: Sage.
Hunt, M. (1982). The universe within. NY: Simon & Schuster.
Hutchinson, E. D. (1949). How to think creatively. NY: Abingdon-
Cokesbury Press.
Huxley, A. (1954). The doors of perception. NY: Harper & Row.
Huxley, T. (1869). Nature, November 4, 1869, 1, 1. Huxley was the
founder and editor of this journal (see Robin, 1992, p. 228).
Illes, G. (1912). Leading American inventors. In Porterfield, 1941.
Infeld, L (1950). Albert Einstein: his work and its influence on our
world. NY: Charles Scribner's Sons.
Jaensch, E. R. (1930, orig. pub. 1923). Eidetic imagery and
typological methods of investigation. London: Kegan, Paul.
John-Steiner, V. (1985). Notebooks of the mind: explorations of
thinking. Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press.
Kagan, J. & Havemann, E. (1972). Psychology: An introduction. NY:
Harcourt.
196
197

Kendall, J. (1955). Michael Faraday, man of simplicity. London:
Faber & Faber.
Kluver, H. (1966). Mescal and mechanisms of hallucination. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Kneller, G. F. (1965). The art and science of creativity. NY: Holt,
Rinehart & Winston.
Koestler, A. (1949). Insight and outlook Lincoln, NE: University of
Nebraska Press.
Koestler, A. (1959). The sleepwalkers. NY: Grosset & Dunlap.
Koestler, A. (1964). The act of creation. NY: Macmillan.
Koestler, A. (1967a). The ghost in the machine NY: Macmillan.
Koestler, A. (1967b). The heel of Achilles. NY: Random House.
Koestler, A. (1971). The case of the midwife toad. NY: Macmillan.
Kohler, W. (1925). The mentality of apes. London: Paul Trench.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1980). Image and mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Kosslyn, S. M. & Koenig, 0. (1992). Wet mind. NY: Macmillan.
Kragh, H. (1990). Dirac: a scientific biography. Cambridge, UR
Cambridge University Press.
Krippner, S. (1972). The creative person and non-ordinary reality.
The Gifted Child Quarterly, 1972, 16, pp. 203-28.
Krippner, S. & Hughes, W. (1970). Genius at work zzz. Psychology
Today, June, 1970, pp. 40-43.
Kubie, L S. (1958). Neurotic distortion of the creative process. NY:
Noonday Press.
Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The essential tension. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Langer, S. K. (1967). Mind: an essay on human feeling. Baltimore,
MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Lewin, L (1964). Phantistica: narcotic and stimulating drugs, their
use and abuse NY: Dutton.
Lombroso, C. (1901). The man of genius. NY: Scribner's.
Lowenfeld, V. (1952, orig. pub. 1939). The nature of creativity
activity. London, Routledge & Kegan Paul.
197
198

Lowenfeld, V. & Brittain, W. L (1987, orig. pub. 1951). Creative and
mental growth. NY: Macmillan.
Lowes, J. L (1964). The road to Xanadu: a study in the ways of
imagination. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Luckiesh, M. (1965). Visual illusions. NY: Dover.
Luria, A. R. (1968). The mind of a mnemonist. NY: Basic Books.
Luthe, W. (1969). Autogenic therapy. NY: Grune & Stratton.
MacKenzie, N. (1965). Dreams and dreaming. London: Aldus Books.
Mandler, J. M. & Mandler, G. (1964). Thinking: from association to
gestalt. NY: Wiley.
Mavromatis, A. (1987). Hypnagogia. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
Maxwell, J. C. (1954, orig. pub. 1891). A treatise on electricity and
magnetism, vol. 1. NY: Dover.
May, R. (1975). The courage to create. NY: Norton.
Mayer, A. & Orth, J. (1901). Zur qualitativen untersuchung der
association. From Mandler & Mandler, 1964.
McConnell, R. A. (Ed). (1982). Encounters with parapsychology.
Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh.
McKellar, P. (1972). Imagery from the standpoint of introspection.
In Sheehan, 1972.
McKim, It H. (1978). The Imaginarium: an environment and
program for opening the mind's eye. In Randhawa & Coffman,
1978.
McKim, R. H. (1980). Experiences in visual thinking. Monterey, CA:
Brooks/Cole Publishing.
McLuhan, M. (1964). Understanding media. NY: Signet.
McLuhan, M. (1965). The Gutenberg galaxy. Toronto, Canada:
University of Toronto Press.
McLuhan, M. (1967). The medium is the massage. NY: Simon &
Schuster.
Metz, W. D. (1978). Midwest computer architect struggles with
speed of light. Science, 1978, 99, 404-409.
Michaux, H. (1963). Miserable miracle San Francisco: City Lights
Books.
198
199

Miller, A. I. (1984). Imagery in scientific thought creating 20th-
century physics. Boston: Birkhauser.
Montmasson, J. M. (1932). Invention and the unconscious. NY:
Harcourt, Brace.
Mooney, R. L. & Razik, T. A. (Eds). (1967). Explorations in creativity.
NY: Harper & Row.
Morgan, W. (Ed). (1972). Ergogenic aids and muscular performance.
NY: Academic Press.
Morris, P. E. & Hampson, P. J. (1983). Imagery and consciousness.
NY: Academic Press.
Moyers, B. (1993). Healing and the mind. NY: Doubleday.
Murphy, G. (1947). Personality. NY: Harper & Row.
Myers, F. W. H. (1892). The subliminal consciousness. Proceedings
of the Society for Psychical Research, 1892, 8, 333-411.
Myers, F. W. H. (1920). Human personality, and its survival of
bodily death. London: Longmans, Green & Co.
National Research Council. (1989). Eveybody counts: a report to
the nation on the future of mathematics education.
Washington, DC: National Academy.
Nasmyth, J. (1883). Autobiography. London: Samuel Smiles.
Newton, I. (1687). Principia mathematica. In Cajori, 1932.
Ochse, R. (1990). Before the gates of excellence. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
O'Neill, J. J. (1944). Prodigal Genius: the life of Nikola Tesla. NY:
Ives Washburn.
Oppler, E C. (Ed). (1988). Picasso's Guernica. NY: Norton.
Ornstein, R. (1991). Theevolution of consciousness. NY: Prentice
Hall Press.
Ornstein, R. & Swencionis, C. (Eds). (1990). The healing brain: a
scientific reader. NY: Guilford Press.
Osborn, A. (1953). Applied imagination. NY: Scribner's.
Oxendine, J. (1968). Psychology of motor learning. NY: Meredith.
Pagels, H. (1982). The cosmic code. NY: Simon & Schuster.
Pais, A. (1982). Subtle is the lord: the life and science of Albert
Einstein. NY: Oxford University Press.
199
200

Paivio, A. (1971). Imagery and verbal processes. NY: Holt, Rinehart
& Winston.
Penrose, R. (1989). The emperor's new mind. NY: Penguin.
Perkins, D. N. (1981). The mind's best work. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Perkins, D. N. (1994). The intelligent eye. Los Angeles: Getty Trust.
Piaget, J. (1929). The child's conception of the world NY: Harcourt,
Brace.
Piaget, J. (1953). The origins of intelligence in children. NY:
International Universities.
Pinker, S. & Kosslyn, S. M. (1983). Theories of mental imagery. In
Sheikh, 1983.
Platt, W. & Baker, R. A. (1931). The relationship of the scientific
"hunch" to research. Journal of Chemical Education, 1931, 8,
pp. 1969-2002.
Poincare, H. (1952, orig. pub. 1902). Science and hypothesis. NY:
Dover Publications.
Poincare, H. (1913). The foundations of science. NY: Science Press.
Polland, M. J. (1994). Evaluation of creative behaviors. Urbana, IL:
University of Illinois, ERIC/EECE.
Porterfield, A. L (1941). Creative factors in scientific research.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Purchas,
(1625). Purchas's Pilgrimage. London: Wm. Stansby.
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1973). What the mind's eye tells the mind's brain:
a critique of mental imagery. Psychological Bulletin, 1973, 8 0,
1-24.
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1979). Imagery theory: not mysteriousjust
wrong. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1979, 2, 535-81.
Randhawa, B. S. & Coffman, W. E. (Eds). (1978). Visual learning,
thinking, and communication. NY: Academic Press.
Reed, G. (1988). The psychology of anomalous experience a
cognitive approach. Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books.
Ribot, T. A. (1926). L'evolution des idees generale& Paris: Alcan.
Richardson, A. (1967a). Mental practice: a review and discussion.
Part I. Research Quarterly, 1967, 3 8, 95-107.
200
201

0
0
Richardson, A. (1967b). Mental practice: a review and discussion.
Part II. Research Quarterly, 1967, 3 8, 95-107.
Richardson, A. (1969). Mental Imagery. NY: Springer Publishing.
Richardson, A. (1983). Imagery: definition and types. In Sheikh,
1983.
Rieser, D. (1972). Art and science. London: Studio Vista.
Robin, H. (1992). The scientific image: from cave to computer. NY:
Abrams.
Rosner, S. & Abt, L E. (Eds.) (1974). Essays in creativity. NY: North
River Press.
Rossman, J. (1931). The psychology of the inventor: a study of the
patentee Washington, DC: The Inventors Publishing.
Rothenberg, A. (1979). The emerging goddess: the creative process
in art, science, and other fields. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Rothenberg, A. & Hausman, C. (1976). The creativity question. NC:
Duke University.
Rugg. H. (1963). Imagination. NY: Harper & Row.
Russell, F. D. (1980). Picasso's Guernica. Montclair, NJ: Allanheld &
Schram.
Sacks, 0. (1973). Migraine the evolution of a common disorder.
Berkeley, CA: UC Press.
Sacks, 0. (1985). The man who mistook his wife for a hat. NY:
Summit Books.
Samuels, M. & Samuels, N. (1975). Seeing with the mind's eye: the
history, techniques and uses of visHalization. NY: Random
House.
Scheibel, M. E. & Scheibel, A. B. (1962). Hallucination and the brain
stem reticular core. In West, 1962, pp. 15-35.
Schlipp, P. A. (Ed). (1949). Albert Einstein: philosopher-scientist.
Evanston, IL: Library of Living Philosophers.
Schlipp, P. A. (Ed). (1979). Albert Einstein: autobiographical notes.
Chicago: Open Court Publishing.
Schwartz, G. E. & Shapiro, D. (Eds). (1976). Consciousness and self-
regulation. NY: Plenum Press.

0
0
203
Segal, S. J. (Ed). (1971). Imagery: current cognitive approaches. NY:
Academic Press.
Sheehan, P. W. (Ed.) (1972). The function and nature ofimagery.
NY: Academic Press.
Sheikh, A. A. (Ed.) (1983). Imagery. current theory, research and
application. NY: Wiley.
Shepard, R. N. (1978). Externalization of mental images and the act
of creation. In Randhawa & Coffman, 1978.
Shepard, R. N. & Cooper, L A. (1982). Mental images and their
transformations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Shepard, IL N. & Metzler, J. (1971). Mental rotation of three
dimensional objects. Science, 1971, 171, 701-703.
Shrady, M. (1972). Moments of insight the emergence of great
ideas in the lives of creative men. NY: Harper & Row.
Simonton, D. K. (1988). Scientific genius: a psychologyof science.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Sinnott, E W. (1959). The creativeness of life In Anderson, 1959
pp. 12-29.
Smyth, H. D. (1945) Atomic energyfor military purposes: the
official report on the development on the development of the
atomic bomb. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Cited
in Shepard, 1978, p. 145.
Snow, C. P. (1979). AlbertEinstein, 1879-1955. In French, 1979.
Sorensen, R. A. (1992). Thought experiments. NY: Oxford
University Press.
Starker, S. (1985). F-states: the power of fantasy in human
creativity. N. Hollywood, CA: Newcastle Publishing.
Stein, M. & Heinze, S. (1960). Creativity and the individual. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Sternberg, IL J. (Ed). (1988). The nature of creativity. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Sternberg, IL J. & Wagner, R. K. (1986). Practical intelligence.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Suinn, R. M. (1983). Imagery and sports. In Sheikh, 1983.
Synge, J. L (1960). Relativity, the general theory. NY: Interscience.
202

0
204
Taton, R. (1962). Reason and chance in scientific discovery. NY:
Science Editions.
Taylor, C. W. & Barron, F. (1963). Scientific creativity: its
recognition and development. NY: Wiley.
Taylor, I. A. & Getzels, J. W. (Eds). (1975). Perspectives in creativity.
Chicago: Aldine.
Tesla, N. (1982, orig. pub. 1919). My Inventions: the autobiography
of Nikola Tesla. Williston, VT: Hart Brothers.
Tesla, N. (1956). Nikola Tesla: lectures, patents, articles. Beograd,
Yugoslavia: Nikola Tesla Museum.
Thurston, R. H. (1878). A history of the growth of the steam engine.
NY: Appleton.
Titchener, E. B. (1926, orig. pub. 1909). Lectures on the
experimental psychology of the thought-process. NY:
Macmillan.
Torrance, E. P. (1963). Education and the creative potential.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Torrance, E. P. (1965). Rewarding creative behavior. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-HalL
Torrance, E P. (1975). Issues and advances in educational
psychology. Chicago: Peacock.
Torrance, E. P. (1976). Guiding creative talent. NY: Krieger.
Tricker, R. A. R. (1966). The contributions of Faraday and Maxwell
to electrical science Oxford: Pergamon
Trowbridge, N. (1967). Creativity in children in the field of art:
criterion development study. Studies in Art Education, Fall
1967.
Tweney, R. D., Doherty, M. E. & Mynatt, C. R. (1981). On scientific
thinking. NY: Columbia University.
Tyndall, J. (1868). Faraday as a discoverer. London: Longmans,
Green.
Tyrrell, G. N. M. (1946). The personality of man. NY: Penguin
Books.
Vernon, P. E. (1970). Creativity. Baltimore, MD: Penguin Books.
Vygotsky, L S. (1962, orig. pub. 1934). Thought and language
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
203

0
Walkup, L E. (1967). Creativity in science through visualization.
Journal of Creative Behavior, 1967, 1, 283-90.
Wallas, G. (1926). The art of thought. NY: Harcourt, Brace & Co.
Warren, R. M. & Warren, R. P. (1968). Helmholtz on perception: its
physiology and development. NY: Wiley.
Watson, J. D. (1968). The double helix. NY: Penguin.
Wechsler, J. (Ed). (1981). On aesthetics h2 science. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Weinberg, S. (1992). Dreams of a final theory. NY: Random House.
Wenders, W. (1992). Until the end of the world. Warner Bros.
release. (Film, available on video).
Wertheimer, M. (1945). Productive thinking. NY: Harper &
Brothers.
West, L J. (Ed.) (1962). Hallucinations. NY: Grune & Stratton.
West, T. G. (1991). In the minds eye. Buffalo, NY: Prometheus
Books.
Weyl, H. (1952). Symmetry. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Whorf, B. L (1956). Language, thought, and reality. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Wilson, R. (1986). Experiencing creativity. NJ: Transaction.
Zee, A. (1986). The search for beauty in modem physics. NY:
Macmillan.
Webster's unabridged dictionary of the English language. (1989).
NY: Portland House.
204
205

