ELECTRONIC DEVICES & CIRCUITS 
II B.TECH I SEMESTER 
(COMMON FOR ECE/EEE/CSE/IT) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS & COMMUNICATION ENGINEERING 
MALLA REDDY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING & TECHNOLOGY 
Autonomous Institution – UGC, Govt. of India 
(Affiliated to JNTU, Hyderabad, Approved by AICTE - Accredited by NBA & NAAC – ‘A’ Grade - ISO 9001:2008 Certified) 
Maisammaguda, Dhulapally (Post Via Hakimpet), Secunderabad – 500100 
PREPARED BY 
Dr.S.SRINIVASA RAO, Mr K.MALLIKARJUNA LINGAM, Mr R.CHINNA RAO, Mr E.MAHENDAR REDDY  
Mr V SHIVA RAJKUMAR, MR KLN PRASAD, MR M ANANTHA GUPTHA, 

(R15A0401) ELECTRONIC DEVICES AND CIRCUITS 
OBJECTIVES  
This is a fundamental course, basic knowledge of which is required by all the circuit branch engineers 
.this course focuses: 
1. To familiarize the student with the principal of operation, analysis and design of junction 
diode .BJT and FET transistors and amplifier circuits. 
2. To understand diode as a rectifier. 
3. To study basic principal of filter of circuits and various types 
UNIT-I 
P-N Junction diode: Qualitative Theory of P-N Junction, P-N Junction as a diode , diode equation , volt-
amper characteristics temperature dependence of V-I characteristic , ideal versus practical –resistance  
levels( static and dynamic), transition and diffusion capacitances, diode equivalent circuits, load line 
analysis ,breakdown mechanisms in semiconductor diodes , zener diode characteristics.  
Special purpose electronic devices: Principal of operation and Characteristics of Tunnel Diode with the 
help of energy band diagrams, Varactar Diode, SCR and photo diode 
UNIT-II 
RECTIFIERS, FILTERS:  P-N Junction as a rectifier ,Half wave rectifier, , full wave rectifier, Bridge rectifier 
, Harmonic components in a rectifier circuit, Inductor filter, Capacitor filter, L- section filter, - section 
filter and comparison of various filter circuits,  Voltage regulation using zener diode. 
UNIT-III 
BIPOLAR JUNCTION TRANSISTOR:  The Junction transistor, Transistor current components, Transistor 
as an amplifier, Transistor construction, Input and Output characteristics of transistor in Common Base, 
Common Emitter, and Common collector configurations. α and β Parameters and the relation between 
them, BJT Specifications. BJT Hybrid Model, h-parameter representation of a transistor, Analysis of 
single stage transistor amplifier using h-parameters: voltage gain, current gain, Input impedance and 
Output impedance. Comparison of transistor configurations in terms of Ai, Ri ,Av,and Ro, 
UNIT-IV 
TRANSISTOR BIASING AND STABILISATION: Operating point , the D.C and A.C  Load lines, Need for 
biasing , criteria for fixing, operating point, B.J.T biasing,  Fixed bias, Collector to base bias ,Self bias 
techniques for stabilization, Stabilization factors, (s, sI, sII), Bias Compensation using diode and 
transistor , (Compensation against variation in VBE, ICO,) Thermal run away, Condition for  Thermal 
stability. 
UNIT-V 
FIELD EFFECT TRANSISTOR AND FET AMPLIFIER 
JFET (Construction, principal of Operation and Volt –Ampere characteristics). Pinch- off voltage-Small      
signal model of JFET. FET as Voltage variable resistor, Comparison of BJT and FET.  MOSFET 
(Construction, principal of Operation and symbol), MOSFET characteristics in Enhancement and 
Depletion modes. FET Amplifiers: FET Common source Amplifier, Common Drain Amplifier, 
Generalized FET Amplifier,  FET biasing. 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1. Integrated Electronics Analog Digital Circuits, Jacob Millman and D. Halkias, McGraw Hill. 
2. Electronic Devices and Circuits Theory, Boylsted, Prentice Hall Publications. 
3. Electronic Devices and Circuits, S.Salivahanan,N.Suresh kumar, McGraw Hill. 
4. Electronic Devices and Circuits,Balbir kumar ,shail b.jain, PHI Privated Limted, Delhi. 

 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1. Electronic Devices and Circuits,K.Lal Kishore B.S Publications 
2. Electronic Devices and Circuits, G.S.N. Raju, I.K. International Publications, New Delhi, 2006. 
3. Electronic Devices and Circuits,A.P Godse, U.A Bakshi , Technical Publications 
4. Electronic Devices and Circuits K.S. Srinivasan Anurdha Agencies 
 
OUTCOMES: 
At the end of the course, the student will be able to: 
1. Understand and Analyse the different types of diodes, operation and its characteristics 
2. Design and analyse the DC bias circuitry of BJT and FET 
3. Design biasing circuits using diodes and transistors. 
4. To analyze and design diode application circuits, amplifier circuits and oscillators employing BJT, 
FET devices. 
 

UNIT-I 
PN JUNCTION DIODE 
1.0 INTRODUCTON 
1.0.1. Based on the electrical conductivity all the materials in nature are classified as insulators, 
semiconductors, and conductors. 
                          
 
Insulator: An insulator is a material that offers a very low level  (or negligible) of conductivity when 
voltage is applied. Eg: Paper, Mica, glass, quartz. Typical resistivity level of an insulator is of the order 
of 1010 to 1012 Ω-cm. The energy band structure of an insulator is shown in the fig.1.1. Band structure 
of a material defines the band of energy levels that an electron can occupy. Valance band is the range 
of electron energy where the electron remain bended too the atom and do not contribute to the 
electric current. Conduction bend is the range of electron energies higher than valance band where 
electrons are free to accelerate under the influence of external voltage source resulting in the flow of 
charge. 
 
The energy band between the valance band and conduction band is called as forbidden band 
gap. It is the energy required by an electron to move from balance band to conduction band i.e. the 
energy required for a valance electron to become a free electron. 
1 eV = 1.6 x  10-19 J 
For an insulator, as shown in the fig.1.1 there is a large forbidden band gap of greater than 5Ev. 
Because of this large gap there a very few electrons in the CB and hence the conductivity of insulator is 
poor. Even an increase in temperature or applied electric field is insufficient to transfer electrons from 
VB to CB. 
 
 
 
 
o 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insulator 
 
    Semiconductor 
 
Conductor 
FiG:1.1 Energy band diagrams insulator, semiconductor and conductor 
Forbidden band 
gap     Eo ≈6eV 
CB 
CB 
Eo  =≈6eV 
VB 
VB 
VB 
CB 

Conductors: A conductor is a material which supports a generous flow of charge when a voltage is 
applied across its terminals. i.e. it has very high conductivity. Eg: Copper, Aluminum, Silver, Gold.  The 
resistivity of a conductor is in the order of 10-4 and 10-6 Ω-cm.  The Valance and conduction bands 
overlap (fig1.1) and there is no energy gap for the electrons to move from valance band to conduction 
band. This implies that there are free electrons in CB even at absolute zero temperature (0K). 
Therefore at room temperature when electric field is applied large current flows through the 
conductor.  
Semiconductor: A semiconductor is a material that has its conductivity somewhere between the 
insulator and conductor. The resistivity level is in the range of 10 and 104 Ω-cm. Two of the most 
commonly used are Silicon (Si=14 atomic no.) and germanium (Ge=32 atomic no.). Both have 4 valance 
electrons. The forbidden band gap is in the order of 1eV. For eg., the band gap energy for Si, Ge and 
GaAs is 1.21, 0.785 and 1.42 eV, respectively at absolute zero temperature (0K). At 0K and at low 
temperatures, the valance band electrons do not have sufficient energy to move from V to CB. Thus 
semiconductors act a insulators at 0K. as the temperature increases, a large number of valance 
electrons acquire sufficient energy to leave the VB, cross the forbidden bandgap and reach CB. These 
are now free electrons as they can move freely under the influence of electric field. At room 
temperature there are sufficient electrons in the CB and hence the semiconductor is capable of 
conducting some current at room temperature. 
 
Inversely related to the conductivity of a material is its resistance to the flow of charge or 
current. Typical resistivity values for various materials’ are given as follows. 
 
Insulator 
Semiconductor 
Conductor 
10-6 Ω-cm (Cu) 
 
50Ω-cm (Ge) 
1012 Ω-cm 
(mica) 
 
 
50x103 Ω-cm (Si) 
 
 
Typical resistivity values 
 
1.0.1 Semiconductor Types 
 
 
  
 
 
 
A pure form of semiconductors is called as intrinsic semiconductor. Conduction in 
intrinsic sc is either due to thermal excitation or crystal defects. Si and Ge are the two most important 
semiconductors used. Other examples include Gallium arsenide GaAs, Indium Antimonide (InSb) etc. 

 
Let us consider the structure of Si. A Si atomic no. is 14 and it has 4 valance electrons. These 4 
electrons are shared by four neighboring atoms in the crystal structure by means of covalent bond. Fig. 
1.2a shows the crystal structure of Si at absolute zero temperature (0K). Hence a pure SC acts has poor 
conductivity (due to lack of free electrons) at low or absolute zero temperature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
At room temperature some of the covalent bonds break up to thermal energy as shown in fig 
1.2b. The valance electrons that jump into conduction band are called as free electrons that are 
available for conduction. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Covalent bond 
Valence electron 
Fig. 1.2a crystal structure of Si at 0K 
 
Fig. 1.2b crystal structure of Si at room 
temperature0K 
Free electron 
hole 
Valance  electron 

 
The absence of electrons in covalent bond is represented by a small circle usually referred to as 
hole which is of positive charge. Even a hole serves as carrier of electricity in a manner similar to that 
of free electron. 
 
The mechanism by which a hole contributes to conductivity is explained as follows: 
 
When a bond is in complete so that a hole exists, it is relatively easy for a valance electron in 
the neighboring atom to leave its covalent bond to fill this hole. An electron moving from a bond to fill 
a hole moves in a direction opposite to that of the electron. This hole, in its new position may now be 
filled by an electron from another covalent bond and the hole will correspondingly move one more 
step in the direction opposite to the motion of electron. Here we have a mechanism for conduction of 
electricity which does not involve free electrons. This phenomenon is illustrated in fig1.3 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.3a 
 
Fig. 1.3b  
 
Fig. 1.3c 
Electron movement 
Hole movement 

 
 Fig 1.3a show that there is a hole at ion 6.Imagine that an electron from ion 5 moves into the 
hole at ion 6 so that the configuration of 1.3b results. If we compare both fig1.3a &fig 1.3b, it appears 
as if the hole has moved towards the left from ion6 to ion 5. Further if we compare fig 1.3b and fig 
1.3c, the hole moves from ion5 to ion 4.  This discussion indicates the motion of hole is in a direction 
opposite to that of motion of electron. Hence we consider holes as physical entities whose movement 
constitutes flow of current. 
 
In a pure semiconductor, the number of holes is equal to the number of free electrons. 
1.0.2 EXTRINSIC SEMICONDUCTOR 
 
Intrinsic semiconductor has very limited applications as they conduct very small amounts of 
current at room temperature. The current conduction capability of intrinsic semiconductor can be 
increased significantly by adding a small amounts impurity to the intrinsic semiconductor. By adding 
impurities it becomes impure or extrinsic semiconductor. This process of adding impurities is called as 
doping. The amount of impurity added is 1 part in 106 atoms.  
N type semiconductor: If the added impurity is a pentavalent atom then the resultant semiconductor 
is called N-type semiconductor. Examples of pentavalent impurities are Phosphorus, Arsenic, Bismuth, 
Antimony etc. 
 
A pentavalent impurity has five valance electrons. Fig 1.4a shows the crystal structure of N-type 
semiconductor material where four out of five valance electrons of the impurity atom(antimony) forms 
covalent bond with the four  intrinsic semiconductor  atoms. The fifth electron is loosely bound to the 
impurity atom. This loosely bound electron can be easily  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.4a crystal structure of N type SC 
Fifth valance electron of SB 
Fig. 1.4bEnergy band diagram of N type 
CB 
VB 
Ec 
Ed 
Ev 
Donor energy level 

 
Excited from the valance band to the conduction band by the application of electric field or increasing 
the thermal energy. The energy required to detach the fifth electron form the impurity atom is very 
small of the order of 0.01ev for Ge and 0.05 eV for Si. 
 
The effect of doping creates a discrete energy level called donor energy level in the forbidden band 
gap with energy level Ed slightly less than the conduction band (fig 1.4b). The difference between the 
energy levels of the conducting band and the donor energy level is the energy required to free the fifth 
valance electron (0.01 eV for Ge and 0.05 eV for Si). At room temperature almost all the fifth electrons 
from the donor impurity atom are raised to conduction band and hence the number of electrons in the 
conduction band increases significantly. Thus every antimony atom contributes to one conduction 
electron without creating a hole. 
 
In the N-type sc the no. of electrons increases and the no. of holes decreases compared to those 
available in an intrinsic sc. The reason for decrease in the no. of holes is that the larger no. of electrons 
present increases the recombination of electrons with holes. Thus current in N type sc is dominated by 
electrons which are referred to as majority carriers. Holes are the minority carriers in N type sc 
P type semiconductor: If the added impurity is a trivalent atom then the resultant semiconductor is 
called P-type semiconductor. Examples of trivalent impurities are Boron, Gallium , indium etc. 
 
The crystal structure of   p type sc is shown in the fig1.5a. The three valance electrons of the 
impurity (boon) forms three covalent bonds with the neighboring atoms and a vacancy exists in the 
fourth bond giving rise to the holes. The hole is ready to accept an electron from the neighboring 
atoms. Each trivalent atom contributes to one hole generation and thus introduces a large no. of holes 
in the valance band. At the same time the no. electrons are decreased compared to those available in 
intrinsic sc because of increased recombination due to creation of additional holes. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.5a crystal structure of P type sc 
hole 

 
Thus in P type sc , holes are majority carriers and electrons are minority carriers. Since each 
trivalent impurity atoms are capable accepting an electron, these are called as acceptor atoms. The 
following fig 1.5b shows the pictorial representation of P type sc  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The conductivity of N type sc is greater than that of P type sc as the mobility of electron is 
greater than that of hole. 
 For the same level of doping in N type sc and P type sc, the conductivity of an Ntype sc is 
around twice that of a P type sc 
1.0.3 CONDUCTIVITY OF SEMICONDUCTOR 
 
In a pure sc, the no. of holes is equal to the no. of electrons. Thermal agitation continue to 
produce new electron- hole pairs and the electron hole pairs disappear because of recombination. with 
each electron hole pair created , two charge carrying particles are formed . One is negative which is a 
free electron with mobility  µn . The other is a positive i.e., hole with mobility µp . The electrons and 
hole move in opppsitte direction in a an electric field E, but since they are of opposite sign, the current 
due to each is in the same direction. Hence the total current density J within the intrinsic sc is given by 
J = Jn + Jp 
  =q n µn E  + q p µp E 
  = (n µn + p µp)qE 
  =ς E 
Where n=no. of electrons / unit volume i.e., concentration of free electrons 
 
P= no. of holes / unit volume i.e., concentration of holes 
 
E=applied electric field strength, V/m 
 
q= charge of electron or hole I n Coulombs 
 
Fig. 1.5b crystal structure of P type sc 
Acceptor atoms 
Electron (minority carrier) 
hole (majority carrier) 

 
Hence, ς is the conductivity of sc which is equal to (n µn + p µp)q. he resistivity of sc is reciprocal 
of conductivity. 
Ρ = 1/ ς 
 
It is evident from the above equation that current density with in a sc is directly proportional to 
applied electric field E. 
For pure sc, n=p= ni where ni = intrinsic concentration. The value of ni  is given by  
ni
2=AT3 exp (-EGO/KT) 
therefore,    J= ni ( µn +  µp) q E 
Hence conductivity in intrinsic sc is   ςi= ni ( µn +  µp) q 
Intrinsic conductivity increases at the rate of 5% per o C for Ge and 7% per o C for Si. 
Conductivity in extrinsic sc (N Type  and P Type): 
 
The conductivity of intrinsic sc is given by ςi= ni ( µn +  µp) q = (n µn + p µp)q 
For N type , n>>p 
Therefore ς= q n µn  
For P type ,p>>n 
Therefore ς= q p µp 
1.0.4  CHARGE DENSITIES IN P TYPE AND N TYPE  SEMICONDUCTOR: 
Mass Action Law: 
 
Under thermal equilibrium for any semiconductor, the product of the no. of holes and the 
concentration of electrons is constant and is independent of amount of donor and acceptor impurity 
doping. 
n.p= ni
2 
where n= eleetron concentration 
 
p = hole concentration 
 
ni
2= intrinsic concentration 

Hence in N type sc , as the no. of electrons increase the no. of holes decreases. Similarly in P 
type as the no. of holes increases the no. of electrons decreases. Thus the product is constant and is 
equal to ni
2 in case of intrinsic as well as extrinsic sc. 
The law of mass action has given the relationship between free electrons concentration and 
hole concentration. These concentrations are further related by the law of electrical neutrality as 
explained below. 
Law of electrical neutrality: 
Sc materials are electrically neutral. According to the law of electrical neutrality, in an 
electrically neutral material, the magnitude of positive charge concentration is equal to tat of negative 
charge concentration. Let us consider a sc that has ND donor atoms per cubic centimeter and NA 
acceptor atoms per cubic centimeter i.e., the concentration of donor and acceptor atoms are ND and 
NA respectively. Therefore ND positively charged ions per cubic centimeter are contributed by donor 
atoms and NA negatively charged ions per cubic centimeter are contributed by the acceptor atoms. Let 
n, p is concentration of free electrons and holes respectively. Then according to the law of neutrality 
ND + p =NA + n  
 
 
 
 
             …………………………………eq 1.1 
For N type sc, NA =0 and n>>p. Therefore ND ≈ n          
 
………………………………….eq 1.2 
Hence for N type sc the free electron concentration is approximately equal to the concentration 
of donor atoms. In later applications since some confusion may arise as to which type of sc is under 
consideration a the given moment, the subscript n or p  is added for Ntype or P type respectively. 
Hence eq1.2 becomes ND ≈ nn  
Therefore current density in N type sc is J = ND µn q E 
And conductivity ς= ND µn q 
For P type sc, ND = 0 and p>>n. Therefore NA ≈ p          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Or NA ≈ pp         
Hence for P type sc the hole concentration is approximately equal to the concentration of 
acceptor atoms. 
 
Therefore current density in N type sc is J = NA µp q E 
And conductivity ς= NA µp q 
Mass action law for N type, nn pn= ni
2 
 
 
 
 
pn= ni
2/ ND     since (nn≈ ND) 

Mass action law for P type, np pp= ni
2 
 
 
 
 
np= ni
2/ NA   since (pp≈ NA) 
1.1 QUANTITATIVE THEORY OF PN JUNCTION DIODE 
1.1.1 PN JUNCTION WITH NO APPLIED VOLTAGE OR OPEN CIRCUIT CONDITION: 
 
In a piece of sc, if one half is doped by p type impurity and the other half is doped by n type 
impurity, a PN junction is formed. The plane dividing the two halves or zones is called PN junction. As 
shown in the fig the n type material has high concentration of free electrons, while p type material has 
high concentration of holes. Therefore at the junction there is a tendency of free electrons to diffuse 
over to the P side and the holes to the N side. This process is called diffusion. As the free electrons 
move across the junction from N type to P type, the donor atoms become positively charged. Hence a 
positive charge is built on the N-side of the junction. The free electrons that cross the junction uncover 
the negative acceptor ions by filing the holes. Therefore a negative charge is developed on the p –side 
of the junction..This net negative charge on the p side prevents further diffusion of electrons into the p 
side. Similarly the net positive charge on the N side repels the hole crossing from p side to N side. Thus 
a barrier sis set up near the junction which prevents the further movement of charge carriers i.e. 
electrons and holes. As a consequence of induced electric field across the depletion layer, an 
electrostatic potential difference is established between P and N regions, which are called the potential 
barrier, junction barrier, diffusion potential or contact potential, Vo. The magnitude of the contact 
potential Vo varies with doping levels and temperature. Vo is 0.3V for Ge and 0.72 V for Si. 
 
Fig 1.6: Symbol of PN Junction Diode 
 
The electrostatic field across the junction caused by the positively charged N-Type region tends 
to drive the holes away from the junction and negatively charged p type regions tend to drive the 
electrons away from the junction. The majority holes diffusing out of the P region leave behind 
negatively charged acceptor atoms bound to the lattice, thus exposing a negatives pace charge in a 
previously neutral region. Similarly electrons diffusing from the N region expose positively ionized 
donor atoms and a double space charge builds up at the junction as shown in the fig. 1.7a 
 
  

 
Fig 1.7a 
It is noticed that the space charge layers are of opposite sign to the majority carriers diffusing 
into them, which tends to reduce the diffusion rate. Thus the double space of the layer causes an 
electric field to be set up across the junction directed from N to P regions, which is in such a direction 
to inhibit the diffusion of majority electrons and holes as illustrated in fig 1.7b. The shape of the charge 
density, ρ, depends upon how diode id doped. Thus the junction region is depleted of mobile charge 
carriers. Hence it is called depletion layer, space region, and transition region. The depletion region is 
of the order of 0.5µm thick. There are no mobile carriers in this narrow depletion region. Hence no 
current flows across the junction and the system is in equilibrium. To the left of this depletion layer, 
the carrier concentration is p= NA and to its right it is n= ND. 

 
Fig 1.7b 
 
1.1.2 FORWARD BIASED JUNCTION DIODE 
When a diode is connected in a Forward Bias condition, a negative voltage is applied to the N-
type material and a positive voltage is applied to the P-type material. If this external voltage becomes 
greater than the value of the potential barrier, approx. 0.7 volts for silicon and 0.3 volts for germanium, 
the potential barriers opposition will be overcome and current will start to flow. This is because the 
negative voltage pushes or repels electrons towards the junction giving them the energy to cross over 
and combine with the holes being pushed in the opposite direction towards the junction by the 
positive voltage. This results in a characteristics curve of zero current flowing up to this voltage point, 

called the "knee" on the static curves and then a high current flow through the diode with little 
increase in the external voltage as shown below. 
Forward Characteristics Curve for a Junction Diode 
Fig 1.8a: Diode Forward Characteristics 
The application of a forward biasing voltage on the junction diode results in the depletion layer 
becoming very thin and narrow which represents a low impedance path through the junction thereby 
allowing high currents to flow. The point at which this sudden increase in current takes place is 
represented on the static I-V characteristics curve above as the "knee" point. 
Forward Biased Junction Diode showing a Reduction in the Depletion Layer 
Fig 1.8b: Diode Forward Bias 

This condition represents the low resistance path through the PN junction allowing very large currents 
to flow through the diode with only a small increase in bias voltage. The actual potential difference 
across the junction or diode is kept constant by the action of the depletion layer at approximately 0.3v 
for germanium and approximately 0.7v for silicon junction diodes. Since the diode can conduct 
"infinite" current above this knee point as it effectively becomes a short circuit, therefore resistors are 
used in series with the diode to limit its current flow. Exceeding its maximum forward current 
specification causes the device to dissipate more power in the form of heat than it was designed for 
resulting in a very quick failure of the device. 
1.1.2 PN JUNCTION UNDER REVERSE BIAS CONDITION: 
Reverse Biased Junction Diode 
When a diode is connected in a Reverse Bias condition, a positive voltage is applied to the N-type 
material and a negative voltage is applied to the P-type material. The positive voltage applied to the N-
type material attracts electrons towards the positive electrode and away from the junction, while the 
holes in the P-type end are also attracted away from the junction towards the negative electrode. The 
net result is that the depletion layer grows wider due to a lack of electrons and holes and presents a 
high impedance path, almost an insulator. The result is that a high potential barrier is created thus 
preventing current from flowing through the semiconductor material. 
Reverse Biased Junction Diode showing an Increase in the Depletion 
Fig 1.9a: Diode Reverse Bias 
This condition represents a high resistance value to the PN junction and practically zero current flows 
through the junction diode with an increase in bias voltage. However, a very small leakage current 
does flow through the junction which can be measured in microamperes, (μA). One final point, if the 
reverse bias voltage Vr applied to the diode is increased to a sufficiently high enough value, it will 

cause the PN junction to overheat and fail due to the avalanche effect around the junction. This may 
cause the diode to become shorted and will result in the flow of maximum circuit current, and this 
shown as a step downward slope in the reverse static characteristics curve below. 
Reverse Characteristics Curve for a Junction Diode 
Fig 1.9b: Diode Reverse Characteristics 
Sometimes this avalanche effect has practical applications in voltage stabilizing circuits where a series 
limiting resistor is used with the diode to limit this reverse breakdown current to a preset maximum 
value thereby producing a fixed voltage output across the diode. These types of diodes are commonly 
known as Zener Diodes  
1.2 VI CHARACTERISTICS AND THEIR TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE 
 Diode terminal characteristics equation for diode junction current: 
)
1
(
0


T
v
v
D
e
I
I

 
Where VT = KT/q;  
VD_ diode terminal voltage, Volts 
Io _ temperature-dependent saturation current, µA 
T _ absolute temperature of p-n junction, K 
K _ Boltzmann’s constant 1.38x 10 -23J/K) 
q _ electron charge 1.6x10-19 C 

 = empirical constant, 1 for Ge and 2 for Si 
 
Fig 1.10: Diode Characteristics 
Temperature Effects on Diode 
Temperature can have a marked effect on the characteristics of a silicon semiconductor diode 
as shown in Fig. 11 It has been found experimentally that the reverse saturation current Io will just 
about double in magnitude for every 10°C increase in temperature. 
 
Fig 1.11 Variation in Diode Characteristics with temperature change 

 
It is not uncommon for a germanium diode with an Io in the order of 1 or 2 A at 25°C to have a leakage 
current of 100 A - 0.1 mA at a temperature of 100°C. Typical values of Io for silicon are much lower than 
that of germanium for similar power and current levels. The result is that even at high temperatures 
the levels of Io for silicon diodes do not reach the same high levels obtained. For germanium—a very 
important reason that silicon devices enjoy a significantly higher level of development and utilization in 
design. Fundamentally, the open-circuit equivalent in the reverse bias region is better realized at any 
temperature with silicon than with germanium. The increasing levels of Io with temperature account 
for the lower levels of threshold voltage, as shown in Fig. 1.11. Simply increase the level of Io in and not 
rise in diode current. Of course, the level of TK also will be increase, but the increasing level of Io will 
overpower the smaller percent change in TK. As the temperature increases the forward characteristics 
are actually becoming more “ideal,” 
1.3 IDEAL VERSUS PRACTICAL RESISTANCE LEVELS 
DC or Static Resistance 
The application of a dc voltage to a circuit containing a semiconductor diode will result in an 
operating point on the characteristic curve that will not change with time. The resistance of the diode 
at the operating point can be found simply by finding the corresponding levels of VD and ID as shown 
in Fig. 1.12 and applying the following Equation:   
 
 
The dc resistance levels at the knee and below will be greater than the resistance levels obtained for 
the vertical rise section of the characteristics. The resistance levels in the reverse-bias region will 
naturally be quite high. Since ohmmeters typically employ a relatively constant-current source, the 
resistance determined will be at a preset current level (typically, a few mill amperes). 
 

 
Fig 1.12 Determining the dc resistance of a diode at a particular operating point. 
 
AC or Dynamic Resistance 
It is obvious from Eq. 1.3 that the dc resistance of a diode is independent of the shape of the 
characteristic in the region surrounding the point of interest. If a sinusoidal rather than dc input is 
applied, the situation will change completely. The varying input will move the instantaneous operating 
point up and down a region of the characteristics and thus defines a specific change in current and 
voltage as shown in Fig. 1.13. With no applied varying signal, the point of operation would be the Q-
point appearing on Fig. 1.13 determined by the applied dc levels. The designation Q-point is derived 
from the word quiescent, which means “still or unvarying.”  A straight-line drawn tangent to the curve 
through the Q-point as shown in Fig. 1.13 will define a particular change in voltage and current that can 
be used to determine the ac or dynamic resistance for this region of the diode characteristics. In 
equation form, 
 
Where Δ Signifies a finite change in the quantity 
 
Fig 1.13: Determining the ac resistance of a diode at a particular operating point. 
 
 

1.4 DIODE EQUIVALENT CIRCUITS 
An equivalent circuit is a combination of elements properly chosen to best represent the actual 
terminal characteristics of a device, system, or such in a particular operating region. In other words, 
once the equivalent circuit is defined, the device symbol can be removed from a schematic and the 
equivalent circuit inserted in its place without severely affecting the actual behavior of the system. The 
result is often a network that can be solved using traditional circuit analysis techniques. 
 
Piecewise-Linear Equivalent Circuit 
One technique for obtaining an equivalent circuit for a diode is to approximate the 
characteristics of the device by straight-line segments, as shown in Fig. 1.31. The resulting equivalent 
circuit is naturally called the piecewise-linear equivalent circuit. It should be obvious from Fig. 1.31 that 
the straight-line segments do not result in an exact duplication of the actual characteristics, especially 
in the knee region. However, the resulting segments are sufficiently close to the actual curve to 
establish an equivalent circuit that will provide an excellent first approximation to the actual behaviour 
of the device. The ideal diode is included to establish that there is only one direction of conduction 
through the device, and a reverse-bias condition will result in the open- circuit state for the device. 
Since a silicon semiconductor, diode does not reach the conduction state until VD reaches 0.7 V with a 
forward bias (as shown in Fig. 1.14a), a battery VT opposing the conduction direction must appear in 
the equivalent circuit as shown in Fig. 1.14b. The battery simply specifies that the voltage across the 
device must be greater than the threshold battery voltage before conduction through the device in the 
direction dictated by the ideal diode can be established. When conduction is established, the 
resistance of the diode will be the specified value of rav. 
 
Fig: 1.14aDiode piecewise-linear model characteristics 
 

 
Fig: 1.14b Diode piecewise-linear model equivalent circuit 
The approximate level of rav can usually be determined from a specified operating point on the 
specification sheet. For instance, for a silicon semiconductor diode, if IF _ 10 mA (a forward conduction 
current for the diode) at VD _ 0.8 V, we know for silicon that a shift of 0.7 V is required before the 
characteristics rise. 
 
 
 
Fig 1.15 Ideal Diode and its characteristics  
  
Fig 1.16: Diode equivalent circuits(models) 

1.5 TRANSITION AND DIFFUSION CAPACITANCE  
Electronic devices are inherently sensitive to very high frequencies. Most shunt capacitive 
effects that can be ignored at lower frequencies because the reactance XC=1/2πfC is very large (open-
circuit equivalent). This, however, cannot be ignored at very high frequencies. XC will become 
sufficiently small due to the high value of f to introduce a low-reactance “shorting” path. In the p-n 
semiconductor diode, there are two capacitive effects to be considered. In the reverse-bias region we 
have the transition- or depletion region capacitance (CT), while in the forward-bias region we have the 
diffusion (CD) or storage capacitance. Recall that the basic equation for the capacitance of a parallel-
plate capacitor is defined by C=€A/d, where € is the permittivity of the dielectric (insulator) between 
the plates of area A separated by a distance d. In the reverse-, bias region there is a depletion region 
(free of carriers) that behaves essentially like an insulator between the layers of opposite charge. Since 
the depletion width (d) will increase with increased reverse-bias potential, the resulting transition 
capacitance will decrease. The fact that the capacitance is dependent on the applied reverse-bias 
potential has application in a number of electronic systems. Although the effect described above will 
also be present in the forward-bias region, it is over shadowed by a capacitance effect directly 
dependent on the rate at which charge is injected into the regions just outside the depletion region. 
The capacitive effects described above are represented by a capacitor in parallel with the ideal diode, 
as shown in Fig. 1.38. For low- or mid-frequency applications (except in the power area), however, the 
capacitor is normally not included in the diode symbol. 
 
Fig 1.17: Including the effect of the transition or diffusion capacitance on the semiconductor diode 
Diode capacitances: The diode exhibits two types of capacitances transition capacitance and diffusion 
capacitance. 
 Transition capacitance: The capacitance which appears between positive ion layer in n-region 
and negative ion layer in p-region.  
 Diffusion capacitance: This capacitance originates due to diffusion of charge carriers in the 
opposite regions.  
 The transition capacitance is very small as compared to the diffusion capacitance.  
In reverse bias transition, the capacitance is the dominant and is given by:  

 
where CT  - transition capacitance 
          A - diode cross sectional area 
          W - depletion region width 
In forward bias, the diffusion capacitance is the dominant and is given by: 
 
where CD  - diffusion capacitance 
               dQ  - change in charge stored in depletion region 
                V  - change in applied voltage 
    - time interval for change in voltage 
                 g  - diode conductance 
                 r  - diode resistance 
 The diffusion capacitance at low frequencies is given by the formula:  
 
The diffusion capacitance at high frequencies is inversely proportional to the frequency and is given by 
the formula:   
 
Note: The variation of diffusion capacitance with applied voltage is used in the design of varactor. 
1.6 BREAK DOWN MECHANISMS 
When an ordinary P-N junction diode is reverse biased, normally only very small reverse 
saturation current flows. This current is due to movement of minority carriers. It is almost independent 
of the voltage applied. However, if the reverse bias is increased, a point is reached when the junction 
breaks down and the reverse current increases abruptly. This current could be large enough to destroy 
the junction. If the reverse current is limited by means of a suitable series resistor, the power 
dissipation at the junction will not be excessive, and the device may be operated continuously in its 

breakdown region to its normal (reverse saturation) level. It is found that for a suitably designed diode, 
the breakdown voltage is very stable over a wide range of reverse currents. This quality gives the 
breakdown diode many useful applications as a voltage reference source. 
The critical value of the voltage, at which the breakdown of a P-N junction diode occurs, is called the 
breakdown voltage. The breakdown voltage depends on the width of the depletion region, which, in 
turn, depends on the doping level. The junction offers almost zero resistance at the breakdown point. 
There are two mechanisms by which breakdown can occur at a reverse biased P-N junction: 
1. avalanche breakdown and  
2. Zener breakdown. 
Avalanche breakdown  
The minority carriers, under reverse biased conditions, flowing through the junction acquire a 
kinetic energy which increases with the increase in reverse voltage. At a sufficiently high reverse 
voltage (say 5 V or more), the kinetic energy of minority carriers becomes so large that they knock out 
electrons from the covalent bonds of the semiconductor material. As a result of collision, the liberated 
electrons in turn liberate more electrons and the current becomes very large leading to the breakdown 
of the crystal structure itself. This phenomenon is called the avalanche breakdown. The breakdown 
region is the knee of the characteristic curve. Now the current is not controlled by the junction voltage 
but rather by the external circuit. 
Zener breakdown  
Under a very high reverse voltage, the depletion region expands and the potential barrier 
increases leading to a very high electric field across the junction. The electric field will break some of 
the covalent bonds of the semiconductor atoms leading to a large number of free minority carriers, 
which suddenly increase the reverse current. This is called the Zener effect. The breakdown occurs at a 
particular and constant value of reverse voltage called the breakdown voltage, it is found that Zener 
breakdown occurs at electric field intensity of about 3 x 107 V/m. 

 
Fig 1.18: Diode characteristics with breakdown 
Either of the two (Zener breakdown or avalanche breakdown) may occur independently, or 
both of these may occur simultaneously. Diode junctions that breakdown below 5 V are caused by 
Zener effect. Junctions that experience breakdown above 5 V are caused by avalanche effect. Junctions 
that breakdown around 5 V are usually caused by combination of two effects. The Zener breakdown 
occurs in heavily doped junctions (P-type semiconductor moderately doped and N-type heavily doped), 
which produce narrow depletion layers. The avalanche breakdown occurs in lightly doped junctions, 
which produce wide depletion layers. With the increase in junction temperature Zener breakdown 
voltage is reduced while the avalanche breakdown voltage increases. The Zener diodes have a negative 
temperature coefficient while avalanche diodes have a positive temperature coefficient. Diodes that 
have breakdown voltages around 5 V have zero temperature coefficient. The breakdown phenomenon 
is reversible and harmless so long as the safe operating temperature is maintained. 
1.7 ZENER DIODES 
The Zener diode is like a general-purpose signal diode consisting of a silicon PN junction. When biased 
in the forward direction it behaves just like a normal signal diode passing the rated current, but as soon 
as a reverse voltage applied across the zener diode exceeds the rated voltage of the device, the diodes 
breakdown voltage VB is reached at which point a process called Avalanche Breakdown occurs in the 
semiconductor depletion layer and a current starts to flow through the diode to limit this increase in 
voltage. 
The current now flowing through the zener diode increases dramatically to the maximum circuit value 
(which is usually limited by a series resistor) and once achieved this reverse saturation current remains 
fairly constant over a wide range of applied voltages. This breakdown voltage point, VB is called the 
"zener voltage" for zener diodes and can range from less than one volt to hundreds of volts. 

The point at which the zener voltage triggers the current to flow through the diode can be very 
accurately controlled (to less than 1% tolerance) in the doping stage of the diodes semiconductor 
construction giving the diode a specific zener breakdown voltage, (Vz) for example, 4.3V or 7.5V. This 
zener breakdown voltage on the I-V curve is almost a vertical straight line. 
Zener Diode I-V Characteristics 
 
 
Fig 1.19 : Zener diode characteristics 
The Zener Diode is used in its "reverse bias" or reverse breakdown mode, i.e. the diodes anode 
connects to the negative supply. From the I-V characteristics curve above, we can see that the zener 
diode has a region in its reverse bias characteristics of almost a constant negative voltage regardless of 
the value of the current flowing through the diode and remains nearly constant even with large 
changes in current as long as the zener diodes current remains between the breakdown current IZ(min) 
and the maximum current rating IZ(max). 
This ability to control itself can be used to great effect to regulate or stabilize a voltage source against 
supply or load variations. The fact that the voltage across the diode in the breakdown region is almost 
constant turns out to be an important application of the zener diode as a voltage regulator. The 
function of a regulator is to provide a constant output voltage to a load connected in parallel with it in 
spite of the ripples in the supply voltage or the variation in the load current and the zener diode will 

continue to regulate the voltage until the diodes current falls below the minimum IZ(min) value in the 
reverse breakdown region. 
SPECIAL PURPOSE ELECTRONIC DEVICES 
1.8 
PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION AND CHARACTERISTICS OF TUNNEL DIODE 
 
A tunnel diode or Esaki diode is a type of semiconductor diode which is capable of very fast operation, 
well into the microwave frequency region, by using quantum mechanical effects. 
It was invented in August 1957 by Leo Esaki when he was with Tokyo Tsushin Kogyo, now known as 
Sony. In 1973 he received the Nobel Prize in Physics, jointly with Brian Josephson, for discovering the 
electron tunneling effect used in these diodes. Robert Noyce independently came up with the idea of a 
tunnel diode while working for William Shockley, but was discouraged from pursuing it. 
 
Fig 1.19: Tunnel diode schematic symbol 
These diodes have a heavily doped p–n junction only some 10 nm (100 Å) wide. The heavy doping 
results in a broken bandgap, where conduction band electron states on the n-side are more or less 
aligned with valence band hole states on the p-side. Tunnel diodes were manufactured by Sony for the 
first time in 1957 followed by General Electric and other companies from about 1960, and are still 
made in low volume today. Tunnel diodes are usually made from germanium, but can also be made in 
gallium arsenide and silicon materials. They can be used as oscillators, amplifiers, frequency converters 
and detectors.Tunnelling Phenomenon: 
In a conventional semiconductor diode, conduction takes place while the p–n junction is forward 
biased and blocks current flow when the junction is reverse biased. This occurs up to a point known as 
the “reverse breakdown voltage” when conduction begins (often accompanied by destruction of the 
device). In the tunnel diode, the dopant concentration in the p and n layers are increased to the point 
where the reverse breakdown voltage becomes zero and the diode conducts in the reverse direction. 
However, when forward-biased, an odd effect occurs called “quantum mechanical tunnelling” which 
gives rise to a region where an increase in forward voltage is accompanied by a decrease in forward 
current. This negative resistance region can be exploited in a solid state version of the dynatron 
oscillator which normally uses a tetrode thermionic valve (or tube). 
Forward bias operation 
Under normal forward bias operation, as voltage begins to increase, electrons at first tunnel through 
the very narrow p–n junction barrier because filled electron states in the conduction band on the n-

side become aligned with empty valence band hole states on the p-side of the p-n junction. As voltage 
increases further these states become more misaligned and the current drops – this is called negative 
resistance because current decreases with increasing voltage. As voltage increases yet further, the 
diode begins to operate as a normal diode, where electrons travel by conduction across the p–n 
junction, and no longer by tunneling through the p–n junction barrier. Thus the most important 
operating region for a tunnel diode is the negative resistance region. 
Reverse bias operation 
When used in the reverse direction they are called back diodes and can act as fast rectifiers with zero 
offset voltage and extreme linearity for power signals (they have an accurate square law characteristic 
in the reverse direction). 
Under reverse bias filled states on the p-side become increasingly aligned with empty states on the n-
side and electrons now tunnel through the pn junction barrier in reverse direction – this is the Zener 
effect that also occurs in zener diodes. 
Technical comparisons 
 
Fig 1.20a: current-voltage characteristic of tunnel diode 
A rough approximation of the VI curve for a tunnel diode, showing the negative differential resistance 
region. The Japanese physicist Leo Esaki invented the tunnel diode in 1958.It consists of a p-n junction 
with highly doped regions. Because of the thinness of the junction, the electrons can pass through the 
potential barrier of the dam layer at a suitable polarization, reaching the energy states on the other 
sides of the junction. The current-voltage characteristic of the diode is represented in Figure 1.20a. In 
this sketch i p and Up are the peak, and iv and Uv are the valley values for the current and voltage 

respectively. The form of this dependence can be qualitatively explained by considering the tunneling 
processes that take place in a thin p-n junction.  
Energy band structure of tunnel diode: 
 
 
 
Fig 1.20b Energy band structure of tunnel diode 
For the degenerated semiconductors, the energy band diagram at thermal equilibrium is presented in 
Figure 1.20b. 
 
In Figure 1.20c the tunneling processes in different points of the current voltage characteristic for the 
tunnel diode are presented. 
 
 
 

Advantages of tunnel diodes: 
 Environmental immunity i.e. peak point is not a function of temperature. 
 Low cost. 
 Low noise. 
 Low power consumption. 
 High speed i.e. tunneling takes place very fast at the speed of light in the order of nanoseconds 
 Simplicity i.e. a tunnel diode can be used along with a d.c supply and a few passive elements to 
obtain various application circuits. 
Applications for tunnel diodes: 
 local oscillators for UHF television tuners 
 Trigger circuits in oscilloscopes 
 High speed counter circuits and very fast-rise time pulse generator circuits 
 The tunnel diode can also be used as low-noise microwave amplifier. 
1.9 
VARACTOR DIODE  
     Varactor diode is a special type of diode which uses transition capacitance property i.e voltage variable 
capacitance .These are also called as varicap,VVC(voltage variable capacitance) or tuning diodes. 
     The varactor diode symbol is shown below with a diagram representation.  
                                                  
 
       Fig 1.21a:symbol of varactor diode 
     When a reverse voltage is applied to a PN junction, the holes in the p-region are attracted to the anode 
terminal and electrons in the n-region are attracted to the cathode terminal creating a region where 
there is little current. This region ,the depletion region, is essentially devoid of carriers and behaves as 
the dielectric of a capacitor. 
     The depletion region increases as reverse voltage across it increases; and since capacitance varies 
inversely as dielectric thickness, the junction capacitance will decrease as the voltage across the PN 
junction increases. So by varying the reverse voltage across a PN junction the junction capacitance can 
be varied .This is shown in the typical varactor voltage-capacitance curve below. 

 
Fig 1.21b:voltage- capacitance  curve 
  Notice the nonlinear increase in capacitance as the reverse voltage is decreased. This nonlinearity allows 
the varactor to be used also as a harmonic generator. 
Major varactor considerations are: 
(a) Capacitance value 
(b) Voltage 
(c) Variation in capacitance with voltage. 
(d) Maximum working voltage 
(e) Leakage current  
    Applications: 
 Tuned circuits. 
 FM modulators 
 Automatic frequency control devices 
 Adjustable bandpass filters 
 Parametric amplifiers 
 Television receivers. 
1.10 PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION OF SCR 
A silicon-controlled rectifier (or semiconductor-controlled rectifier) is a four-layer solid state device 
that controls current. The name "silicon controlled rectifier" or SCR is General Electric's trade name for 
a type of thyristor. The SCR was developed by a team of power engineers led by Gordon Hall and 
commercialized by Frank W. "Bill" Gutzwiller in 1957.symbol of SCR is given below: 

 
Fig 1.22: symbol of SCR 
Construction of SCR 
An SCR consists of four layers of alternating P and N type semiconductor materials. Silicon is used as 
the intrinsic semiconductor, to which the proper dopants are added. The junctions are either diffused 
or alloyed. The planar construction is used for low power SCRs (and all the junctions are diffused). The 
mesa type construction is used for high power SCRs. In this case, junction J2 is obtained by the 
diffusion method and then the outer two layers are alloyed to it, since the PNPN pellet is required to 
handle large currents. It is properly braced with tungsten or molybdenum plates to provide greater 
mechanical strength. One of these plates is hard soldered to a copper stud, which is threaded for 
attachment of heat sink. The doping of PNPN will depend on the application of SCR, since its 
characteristics are similar to those of the thyratron. Today, the term thyristor applies to the larger 
family of multilayer devices that exhibit bistable state-change behaviour, that is, switching either ON or 
OFF. 
The operation of a SCR and other thyristors can be understood in terms of a pair of tightly coupled 
bipolar junction transistors, arranged to cause the self-latching action.The following figures are 
construction of SCR,its two transistor model and symbol respectively   
 
 
 
Fig 1.23: Construction, Two transistor model of SCR and symbol of SCR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 SCR Working Principle 
 
Fig 1.24: Current flow and voltage bias in an SCR 
The SCR is a four-layer, three-junction and a three-terminal device and is shown in fig.1.24. The end P-
region is the anode, the end N-region is the cathode and the inner P-region is the gate. The anode to 
cathode is connected in series with the load circuit. Essentially the device is a switch. Ideally it remains 
off (voltage blocking state), or appears to have an infinite impedance until both the anode and gate 
terminals have suitable positive voltages with respect to the cathode terminal. The thyristor then 
switches on and current flows and continues to conduct without further gate signals. Ideally the 
thyristor has zero impedance in conduction state. For switching off or reverting to the blocking state, 
there must be no gate signal and the anode current must be reduced to zero. Current can flow only in 
one direction. 
In absence of external bias voltages, the majority carrier in each layer diffuses until there is a built-in 
voltage that retards further diffusion. Some majority carriers have enough energy to cross the barrier 
caused by the retarding electric field at each junction. These carriers then become minority carriers 
and can recombine with majority carriers. Minority carriers in each layer can be accelerated across 
each junction by the fixed field, but because of absence of external circuit in this case the sum of 
majority and minority carrier currents must be zero. 
A voltage bias, as shown in figure, and an external circuit to carry current allow internal currents which 
include the following terms: 
The current Ix is due to 
 
Majority carriers (holes) crossing junction J1 
 
Minority carriers crossing junction J1 
 
Holes injected at junction J2 diffusing through the N-region and crossing junction J1 and 
 
Minority carriers from junction J2 diffusing through the N-region and crossing junction J1. 
 
 
 
 

V I characteristics of SCR: 
 
Fig 1.25: V-I characteristics of SCR 
As already mentioned, the SCR is a four-layer device with three terminals, namely, the anode, the 
cathode and the gate. When the anode is made positive with respect to the cathode, junctions J1 and J3 
are forward biased and junction J2 is reverse-biased and only the leakage current will flow through the 
device. The SCR is then said to be in the forward blocking state or in the forward mode or off state. But 
when the cathode is made positive with respect to the anode, junctions J1 and J3 are reverse-biased, a 
small reverse leakage current will flow through the SCR and the SGR is said to be in the reverse 
blocking state or in reverse mode. 
When the anode is positive with respect to cathode i.e. when the SCR is in forward mode, the SCR does 
not conduct unless the forward voltage exceeds certain value, called the forward breakover voltage, 
VFB0. In non-conducting state, the current through the SCR is the leakage current which is very small 
and is negligible. If a positive gate current is supplied, the SCR can become conducting at a voltage 
much lesser than forward break-over voltage. The larger the gate current, lower the break-over 
voltage. With sufficiently large gate current, the SCR behaves identical to PN rectifier. Once the SCR is 
switched on, the forward voltage drop across it is suddenly reduced to very small value, say about 1 
volt. In the conducting or on-state, the current through the SCR is limited by the external impedance. 

When the anode is negative with respect to cathode, that is when the SCR is in reverse mode or in 
blocking state no current flows through the SCR except very small leakage current of the order of few 
micro-amperes. But if the reverse voltage is increased beyond a certain value, called the reverse break-
over voltage, VRB0 avalanche break down takes place. Forward break-over voltage VFB0 is usually higher 
than reverse breakover voltage,VRBO. 
From the foregoing discussion, it can be seen that the SCR has two stable and reversible operating 
states. The change over from off-state to on-state, called turn-on, can be achieved by increasing the 
forward voltage beyond VFB0. A more convenient and useful method of turn-on the device employs the 
gate drive. If the forward voltage is less than the forward break-over voltage, VFB0, it can be turned-on 
by applying a positive voltage between the gate and the cathode. This method is called the gate 
control. Another very important feature of the gate is that once the SCR is triggered to on-state the 
gate loses its control. 
The switching action of gate takes place only when 
(i)  SCR is forward biased i.e. anode is positive with respect to cathode, and 
(ii) Suitable positive voltage is applied between the gate and the cathode. 
Once the SCR has been switched on, it has no control on the amount of current flowing through it. The 
current through the SCR is entirely controlled by the external impedance connected in the circuit and 
the applied voltage. There is, however, a very small, about 1 V, potential drop across the SCR. The 
forward current through the SCR can be reduced by reducing the applied voltage or by increasing the 
circuit impedance. There is, however, a minimum forward current that must be maintained to keep the 
SCR in conducting state. This is called the holding current rating of SCR. If the current through the SCR 
is reduced below the level of holding current, the device returns to off-state or blocking state. 
The SCR can be switched off by reducing the forward current below the level of holding current which 
may be done either by reducing the applied voltage or by increasing the circuit impedance. 
Note : The gate can only trigger or switch-on the SCR, it cannot switch off. 
Alternatively the SCR can be switched off by applying negative voltage to the anode (reverse mode), 
the SCR naturally will be switched off. 
Here one point is worth mentioning, the SCR takes certain time to switch off. The time, called the turn-
off time, must be allowed before forward voltage may be applied again otherwise the device will 
switch-on with forward voltage without any gate pulse. The turn-off time is about 15 micro-seconds, 
which is immaterial when dealing with power frequency, but this becomes important in the inverter 
circuits, which are to operate at high frequency. 
 
 
 

Merits of SCR 
 
1.Very small amount of gate drive is required. 
2.SCRs with high voltage and current ratings are available. 
3.On state losses of SCR are less. 
 
 
Demerits of SCR 
 
1.Gate has no control,once SCR is turned on. 
2.External circuits are required for turning it off. 
3.Operationg frequencies are low. 
4.Additional protection  circuits are required. 
 
Application of SCRs 
SCRs are mainly used in devices where the control of high power, possibly coupled with high voltage, is 
demanded. Their operation makes them suitable for use in medium to high-voltage AC power control 
applications, such as lamp dimming, regulators and motor control. 
SCRs and similar devices are used for rectification of high power AC in high-voltage direct     current 
power transmission 
 
1.11 PHOTO DIODE 
 
The photo diode is a semiconductor p-n junction device whose region of operation is limited to the 
reverse biased region.The figure below shows the symbol of photodiode 
 
 
        Fig 1.26:Symbol of photodiode. 
 
Principle of operation: 
A photodiode is a type of photo detector capable of converting light into either current or voltage, 
depending upon the mode of operation. The common, traditional solar cell used to generate electric 
solar power is a large area photodiode. A photodiode is designed to operate in reverse bias. The 
deletion region width is large. Under normal conditions it carries small reverse current due to minority 
charge carriers. When light is incident  through glass window on the p-n junction, photons in the light 
bombard the p-n junction and some energy s imparted to the valence electrons. So valence electrons 

break covalent bonds and become free electrons. Thus more  electron-hole pairs are generated. Thus 
total number of minority charge carriers increases and hence reverse current increases.This is the basic 
principle of operation of photo diode.  
 
Fig 1.27: Basic Biasing Arrangement and construction of photodiode and symbols 
Characteristics of photodiode: 
When the P-N junction is reverse-biased, a reverse saturation current flows due to thermally generated 
holes and electrons being swept across the junction as the minority carriers. With the increase in 
temperature of the junction more and more hole-electron pairs are created and so the reverse 
saturation current I0 increases. The same effect can be had by illuminating the junction. When light en-
ergy bombards a P-N junction, it dislodges valence electrons. The more light striking the junction the 
larger the reverse current in a diode. It is due to generation of more and more charge carriers with the 
increase in level of illumination. This is clearly shown in ‘ figure for different intensity levels. The dark 
current is the current that exists when no light is incident. It is to be noted here that current becomes 
zero only with a positive applied bias equals to VQ. The almost equal spacing between the curves for 
the same increment in luminous flux reveals that the reverse saturation current I0 increases linearly 
with the luminous flux as shown in figure. Increase in reverse voltage does not increase the reverse 
current significantly, because all available charge carriers are already being swept across the junction. 
For reducing the reverse saturation current I0 to zero, it is necessary to forward bias the junction by an 
amount equal to barrier potential. Thus the photodiode can be used as a photoconductive device. 

 
Fig 1.28: characteristics of photodiode 
On removal of reverse bias applied across the photodiode, minority charge carriers continue to be 
swept across the junction while the diode is illuminated. This has the effect of increasing the 
concentration of holes in the P-side and that of electrons in the N-side But the barrier potential is 
negative on the P-side and positive on the N-side, and was created by holes flowing from P to N-side 
and electrons from N to P-side during fabrication of junction. Thus the flow of minority carriers tends 
to reduce the barrier potential. 
When an external circuit is connected across the diode terminals, the minority carrier; return to the 
original side via the external circuit. The electrons which crossed the junction from P to N-side now 
flow out through the N-terminal and into the P-terminal This means that the device is behaving as a 
voltage cell with the N-side being the negative terminal and the P-side the positive terminal. Thus, the 
photodiode is & photovoltaic device as well as photoconductive device. 
 
Advantages: 
The advantages of photodiode are: 
1.It can be used as variable resistance device. 
2.Highly sensitive to the light. 
3.The speed of operation is very high. 
 
Disadvantages: 
1.Temperature dependent dark current. 
2.poor temperature stability. 
3.Current needs amplification for driving other circuits. 
 
Applications: 
 
1.Alarm system. 
2.counting system. 

UNIT II 
RECTIFIERS & FILTERS 
 
2.0 INTRODUCTION 
        
For the operation of most of the electronics devices and circuits, a d.c. source is required. So it is 
advantageous to convert domestic a.c. supply into d.c.voltages. The process of converting a.c. voltage 
into d.c. voltage is called as rectification. This is achieved with i) Step-down Transformer, ii) Rectifier, 
iii) Filter and iv) Voltage regulator circuits. 
       These elements constitute d.c. regulated power supply shown in the fig 1 below. 
 
Fig 2.1: Block Diagram of  regulated D.C Power Supply 
 
 Transformer – steps down 230V AC mains to low voltage AC. 
 Rectifier – converts AC to DC, but the DC output is varying. 
  Smoothing – smooth the DC from varying greatly to a small ripple. 
 Regulator – eliminates ripple by setting DC output to a fixed voltage. 
 
         The block diagram of a regulated D.C. power supply consists of step-down transformer, rectifier, 
filter, voltage regulator and load. An ideal regulated power supply is an electronics circuit designed to 
provide a predetermined d.c. voltage Vo which is independent of the load current and variations in the 
input voltage ad temperature. If the output of a regulator circuit is a AC voltage then it is termed as 
voltage stabilizer, whereas if the output is a DC voltage then it is termed as voltage regulator.  
2.1 RECTIFIER 
Any electrical device which offers a low resistance to the current in one direction but a high resistance 
to the current in the opposite direction is called rectifier. Such a device is capable of converting a 
sinusoidal input waveform, whose average value is zero, into a unidirectional Waveform, with a non-
zero average component. A rectifier is a device, which converts a.c. voltage (bi-directional) to pulsating 

d.c. voltage (Unidirectional). 
Characteristics of a Rectifier Circuit:  
Any electrical device which offers a low resistance to the current in one direction but a high resistance 
to the current in the opposite direction is called rectifier. Such a device is capable of converting a 
sinusoidal input waveform, whose average value is zero, into a unidirectional waveform, with a non-
zero average component. 
A rectifier is a device, which converts a.c. voltage (bi-directional) to pulsating d.c..Load currents: They 
are two types of output current. They are average or d.c. current and RMS currents. 
 Average or DC current: The average current of a periodic function is defined as the area of one cycle of 
the curve divided by the base. 
   It is expressed mathematically as 
i) 
Average value/dc value/mean value=
period
time
Total
period
one
over
 
Area
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ii)  Effective (or) R.M.S current:  
 
The effective (or) R.M.S. current squared ofa periodic function of time is given by the area of one cycle 
of the curve, which represents the square of the function divided by the base. 
 
 
 
                             
iii) Peak factor: 
    It is the ratio of peak value to Rms value 
 
 
 
 
 


T
rms
wt
d
V
T
V
0
2
)
(
1
 
Peak factor = rmsvalue
peakvalue  
)
(
1
0
wt
d
V
T
V
T
dc



iv) Form factor: 
             It is the ratio of Rms value to average value 
 
    
 
v) Ripple Factor () : 
 It is defined as ration of R.M.S. value of a.c. component to the d.c. component in the output is known 
as “Ripple Factor”. 
                                    
dc
ac
V
V


 
                                  
2
2
dc
rms
ac
V
V
V


 
vi)  Efficiency (): 
It is the ratio of d.c output power to the a.c. input power. It signifies, how efficiently the rectifier circuit 
converts a.c. power into d.c. power. 
 
     
 
  vii) Peak Inverse Voltage (PIV):  
            It is defined as the maximum reverse voltage that a diode can withstand without destroying   
           the junction. 
 
viii) Transformer Utilization Factor (UTF): 
 
The d.c. power to be delivered to the load in a rectifier circuit decides the rating of the 
Transformer used in the circuit. So, transformer utilization factor is defined as 
 
                            
)
(rated
ac
dc
p
P
TUF 
 
 
Form factor=
ue
averageval
Rmsvalue
 
power
p
i
power
p
o
 
/
 
/


 

 
ix) % Regulation: 
 
 The variation of the d.c. output voltage as a function of d.c. load current is called regulation. The 
percentage regulation is defined as 
 
 
 
For an ideal power supply, % Regulation is zero. 
 
2.2 CLASSIFICATION OF RECTIFIERS 
Using one or more diodes in the circuit, following rectifier circuits can be designed. 
1) Half - Wave Rectifier 
2) Full – Wave Rectifier 
3) Bridge Rectifier 
2.2.1 HALF-WAVE RECTIFIER: 
A Half – wave rectifier as shown in fig 1.2 is one, which converts a.c. voltage into a pulsating voltage 
using only one half cycle of the applied a.c. voltage. 
 
 
Fig 1.2: Basic structure of Half-Wave Rectifier 
The a.c. voltage is applied to the rectifier circuit using step-down transformer-rectifying element i.e., p-
n junction diode and the source of a.c. voltage, all connected is series. The a.c. voltage is applied to the 
rectifier circuit using step-down transformer 
 
100
*
Re
%
FL
FL
NL
V
V
V
gulation



 
 
 
V=Vm sin (wt) 
The input to the rectifier circuit, Where Vm is the peak value of secondary a.c. voltage. 
 
Operation: 
For the positive half-cycle of input a.c. voltage, the diode D is forward biased and hence it conducts. 
Now a current flows in the circuit and there is a voltage drop across RL. The waveform of the diode 
current (or) load current is shown in fig 3. 
For the negative half-cycle of input, the diode D is reverse biased and hence it does not 
Conduct. Now no current flows in the circuit i.e., i=0 and Vo=0. Thus for the negative half- cycle no 
power is delivered to the load. 
 
Analysis: 
 
In the analysis of a HWR, the following parameters are to be analyzed. 
 
1. DC output current  
2. DC Output voltage 
3. R.M.S. Current  
4. R.M.S. voltage 
5. Rectifier Efficiency (η )  
6. Ripple factor (γ ) 

7. Peak Factor  
8. % Regulation  
9. Transformer Utilization Factor (TUF)  
10. form factor 
11. o/p frequency 
  
Let a sinusoidal voltage Vi be applied to the input of the rectifier. 
Then V=Vm sin (wt) Where Vm is the maximum value of the secondary voltage. Let the diode be 
idealized to piece-wise linear approximation with resistance Rf in the forward direction i.e., in the ON 
state and Rr (=∞) in the reverse direction i.e., in the OFF state. Now the current ‘i’ in the diode (or) in 
the load resistance RL is given by    V=Vm sin (wt) 
 
i) AVERAGE VOLTAGE 
 
       
 
                                           













m
dc
m
dc
dc
dc
V
V
wt
V
V
d
V
V
d
V
T
V
0
2
2
0
)
sin(
2
1
)
(
2
1
)
(
1




         
ii).AVERAGE CURRENT: 
                                                


m
dc
I
I
 
 
)
(
1
0
wt
d
V
T
V
T
dc



iii) RMS VOLTAGE: 
                                   


T
rms
wt
d
V
T
V
0
2
)
(
1
 
                               




2
0
2
)
(
))
(
(
2
1
wt
d
wt
sim
V
V
m
rms
 
                          
2
m
rms
V
V

 
                              
IV) RMS CURRENT   
 
V)  PEAK FACTOR 
Peak factor = rmsvalue
peakvalue  
Peak Factor =
)
2
/
(
m
m
V
V
 
Peak Factor =2 
vi)   FORM FACTOR 
Form factor=
ue
averageval
Rmsvalue
 
Form factor= 

/
)
2
/
(
m
m
V
V
 
Form Factor =1.57 
  


m
rms
I
I
 

 
vii) Ripple Factor: 
 
 
dc
ac
V
V


 
2
2
dc
rms
ac
V
V
V


 
ac
dc
rms
V
V
V
2
2 


 
1
2
2



dc
rms
V
V
 
21
.1


 
 
viii) Efficiency (): 
 
ppower
i
ppower
o
/
/


*100 
=
dc
ac
P
p
*100 
                                                                     =40.8 
 
 ix) Transformer Utilization Factor (TUF): 
The d.c. power to be delivered to the load in a rectifier circuit decides the rating of the transformer 
used in the circuit. Therefore, transformer utilization factor is defined as 
)
(rated
ac
dc
P
p
TUF 
 
                                                                    TUF =0.286. 
The value of TUF is low which shows that in half-wave circuit, the transformer is not fully utilized. 
If the transformer rating is 1 KVA (1000VA) then the half-wave rectifier can deliver                            
           1000 X 0.287 = 287 watts to resistance load. 

x) Peak Inverse Voltage (PIV): 
 
It is defined as the maximum reverse voltage that a diode can withstand without destroying the 
junction. The peak inverse voltage across a diode is the peak of the negative half- cycle. For half-wave 
rectifier, PIV is Vm. 
 
DISADVANTAGES OF HALF-WAVE RECTIFIER: 
 
1. The ripple factor is high. 
 2. The efficiency is low.  
3. The Transformer Utilization factor is low. 
      Because of all these disadvantages, the half-wave rectifier circuit is normally not used as a       
      power rectifier circuit. 
 
2.2.2) FULL WAVE RECTIFIER: 
A full-wave rectifier converts an ac voltage into a pulsating dc voltage using both half cycles of the 
applied ac voltage. In order to rectify both the half cycles of ac input, two diodes are used in this 
circuit. The diodes feed a common load RL with the help of a center-tap transformer. A center-tap 
transformer is the one, which produces two sinusoidal waveforms of same magnitude and frequency 
but out of phase with respect to the ground in the secondary winding of the transformer. The full wave 
rectifier is shown in the fig 4 below 
 
 

 
Fig. 5 shows the input and output wave forms of the ckt. 
During positive half of the input signal, anode of diode D1 becomes positive and at the 
same time the anode of diode D2 becomes negative. Hence D1 conducts and D2 does not 
conduct. The load current flows through D1 and the voltage drop across RL will be equal to the input 
voltage. 
During the negative half cycle of the input, the anode of D1 becomes negative and the anode of 
D2 becomes positive. Hence, D1 does not conduct and D2 conducts. The load current flows through D2 
and the voltage drop across RL will be equal to the input voltage. It is noted that the load current flows 
in the both the half cycles of ac voltage and in the same direction through the load resistance. 
 
i) AVERAGEVOLTAGE
 
 
ii)   AVERAGE CURRENT 
 

 
iii)      RMS VOLTAGE: 
                                   


T
rms
wt
d
V
T
V
0
2
)
(
1
 
                               




2
0
2
)
(
))
(
(
2
1
wt
d
wt
sim
V
V
m
rms
 
 
                              
IV) RMS CURRENT   
 
 
 
V)  PEAK FACTOR 
Peak factor = rmsvalue
peakvalue  
  


m
rms
I
I
2
 

Peak Factor =
)
2
/
(
m
m
V
V
 
Peak Factor =2 
vi)   FORM FACTOR 
Form factor=
value
average
value
Rms
 
 
 
Form factor= 

/
2
)
2
/
(
m
m
V
V
 
Form Factor =1.11 
vii) Ripple Factor: 
 
viii) Efficiency (): 
 
         
ppower
i
ppower
o
/
/


*100 

 
 
ix) Transformer Utilization Factor (TUF): 
 
The d.c. power to be delivered to the load in a rectifier circuit decides the rating of the transformer 
used in the circuit. So, transformer utilization factor is defined as 
)
(rated
ac
dc
P
p
TUF 
                          
                          
 
x) Peak Inverse Voltage (PIV): 
It is defined as the maximum reverse voltage that a diode can withstand without destroying the 
junction. The peak inverse voltage across a diode is the peak of the negative half- cycle. For half- wave 
rectifier, PIV is 2Vm 

 
xi) % Regulation 
.
 
Advantages 
 
1) Ripple factor = 0.482 (against 1.21 for HWR) 
2) Rectification efficiency is 0.812 (against 0.405 for HWR) 
3) Better TUF (secondary) is 0.574 (0.287 for HWR) 
4) No core saturation problem 
Disadvantages: 
1) Requires center tapped transformer. 
 
2.2.3) BRIDGE RECTIFIER. 
Another type of circuit that produces the same output waveform as the full wave rectifier circuit 
above, is that of the Full Wave Bridge Rectifier. This type of single phase rectifier uses four individual 
rectifying diodes connected in a closed loop "bridge" configuration to produce the desired output. The 
main advantage of this bridge circuit is that it does not require a special centre tapped transformer, 
thereby reducing its size and cost. The single secondary winding is connected to one side of the diode 
bridge network and the load to the other side as shown below. 
The Diode Bridge Rectifier 
 

The four diodes labelled D1 to D4 are arranged in "series pairs" with only two diodes conducting current 
during each half cycle. During the positive half cycle of the supply, diodes D1 and D2 conduct in series 
while diodes D3 and D4 are reverse biased and the current flows through the load as shown below (fig 
7). 
The Positive Half-cycle 
 
 
The Negative Half-cycle 
During the negative half cycle of the supply, diodes D3 and D4 conduct in series (fig 8), but diodes D1 
and D2 switch "OFF" as they are now reverse biased. The current flowing through the load is the same 
direction as before. 
 
 
As the current flowing through the load is unidirectional, so the voltage developed across the load is 
also unidirectional the same as for the previous two diode full-wave rectifier, therefore the average DC 

voltage across the load is 0.637Vmax. However in reality, during each half cycle the current flows 
through two diodes instead of just one so the amplitude of the output voltage is two voltage drops ( 2 
x 0.7 = 1.4V ) less than the input VMAX amplitude. The ripple frequency is now twice the supply 
frequency (e.g. 100Hz for a 50Hz supply) 
                                     
 
 
 
2.3 FILTERS 
The output of a rectifier contains dc component as well as ac component. Filters are used to minimize 
the undesirable ac i.e., ripple leaving only the dc component to appear at the output. 

Some important filters are: 
1. Inductor filter 
2. Capacitor filter 
3. LC or L section filter 
4. CLC or Π-type filter 
 
2.3.1 CAPACITOR FILTER 
This is the most simple form of the filter circuit and in this arrangement a high value capacitor C is 
placed directly across the output terminals, as shown in figure. During the conduction period it gets 
charged and stores up energy to it during non-conduction period. Through this process, the time 
duration during which Ft is to be noted here that the capacitor C gets charged to the peak because 
there is no resistance (except the negligible forward resistance of diode) in the charging path. But the 
discharging time is quite large (roughly 100 times more than the charging time depending upon the 
value of RL) because it discharges through load resistance RL. 
The function of the capacitor filter may be viewed in terms of impedances. The large value capacitor C 
offers a low impedance shunt path to the ac components or ripples but offers high impedance to the 
dc component. Thus ripples get bypassed through capacitor C and only dc component flows through 
the load resistance RL 
Capacitor filter is very popular because of its low cost, small size, light weight and good 
characteristics. 

 

 
CAPACITOR FILTER WITH HWR 
 
 
 
CAPACITOR FILTER WITH FWR 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
The worthnoting points about shunt capacitor filter are: 
1.For a fixed-value filter capacitance larger the load resistance RL larger will be the discharge time 
constant CRL and therefore, lower the ripples and more the output voltage. On the other hand lower 
the load resistance (or more the load current), lower will be the output voltage. 
2.Similarly smaller the filter capacitor, the less charge it can hold and more it will discharge. Thus the 
peak-to-peak value of the ripple will increase, and the average dc level will decrease. Larger the filter 
capacitor, the more charge it can hold and the less it will discharge. Hence the peak-to-peak value of 
the ripple will be less, and the average dc level will increase. But, the maximum value of the 
capacitance that can be employed is limited by another factor. The larger the capacitance value, the 
greater is the current required to charge the capacitor to a given voltage. The maximum current that 
can be handled by a diode is limited by the figure quoted by the manufacturer. Thus the maximum 
value of the capacitance, that can be used in the shunt filter capacitor is limited. 
2.3.2 Series Inductor Filter. 
 
In this arrangement a high value inductor or choke L is connected in series with the rectifier element 
and the load, as illustrated in figure. The filtering action of an inductor filter depends upon its property 
of opposing any change in the current flowing through it. When the output current of the rectifier 

increases above a certain value, energy is stored in it in the form of magnetic field and this energy is 
given up when the output current falls below the average value. Thus by placing a choke coil in series 
with the rectifier output and load, any sudden change in current that might have occurred in the circuit 
without an inductor is smoothed out by the presence of the inductor L. 
The function of the inductor filter may be viewed in terms of impedances. The choke offers high 
impedance to the ac components but offers almost zero resistance to the desired dc components. Thus 
ripples are removed to a large extent. Nature of the output voltage without filter and with choke filter 
is shown in figure. 
For dc (zero frequency), the choke resistance Rc in series with the load resistance RL forms a voltage 
divider and dc voltage across the load is given as 
where Vdc is dc voltage output from a full-wave rectifier. Usually choke coil resistance Rc, is much small 
than RL and, therefore, almost entire of the dc voltage is available across the load resistance RL. 
Since the reactance of inductor increases with the increase in frequency, better filtering of the higher 
harmonic components takes place, so effect of third and higher harmonic voltages can be neglected. 
As obvious from equation , if choke coil resistance Rc is negligible in comparison to load resistance RL, 
then the entire dc component of rectifier output is available across 2 RL and is equal to — VL max. The ac 
voltage partly drops across XL and partly over RL. 
2.3.3 L-SECTION FILTER: 
A simple series inductor reduces both the peakand effective values of the output current and output 
voltage. On the other hand a simple shunt capacitor filter reduces the ripple voltage but increases the 
diode current. The diode may get damaged due to large current and at the same time it causes greater 
heating of supply transformer resulting in reduced efficiency. 
In an inductor filter, ripple factor increases with the increase in load resistance RL while in a capacitor 
filter it varies inversely with load resistance RL. 
From economical point of view also, neither series inductor nor shunt capacitor type filters are 
suitable. 
Practical filter-circuits are derived by combining the voltage stabilizing action of shunt capacitor with 
the current smoothing action of series choke coil. By using combination of inductor and capacitor 
ripple factor can be lowered, diode current can be restricted and simultaneously ripple factor can be 
made almost independent of load resistance (or load current). Two types of most commonly used 
combinations are choke-input or L-section filter-and capacitor-input or Pi-Filter. 

 
 
Choke-input filter is explained below: 
Choke-input filter consists of a choke L connected in series with the rectifier and a capacitor C 
connected across the load . This is also sometimes called the L-section filter because in this 
arrangement inductor and capacitor are connected, as an inverted L. ln figure only one filter section is 
shown. But several identical sections are often employed to improve the smoothing action. (The choke 
L on the input side of the filter readily allows dc to pass but opposes the flow of ac components 
because its dc resistance is negligibly small but ac impedance is large. Any fluctuation that remains in 
the current even after passing through the choke are largely by-passed around the load by the shunt 
capacitor because Xc is much smaller than RL. Ripples can be reduced effectively by making XL greater 
than Xc at ripple frequency. However, a small ripple still remains in the filtered output and this is 
considered negligible if it than l%. The rectified and filtered output voltage waveforms from a full-wave 
re with choke-input filter are shown in figure. 
 
 
 

2.3.4 Π-SECTION FILTER: 
 
Capacitor-Input or Pi-Filter. 
Such a filter consists of a shunt capacitor C1 at the input followed by an L-section filter formed by 
series inductor L and shunt capacitor C2. This is also called the n-filter because the shape of the circuit 
diagram for this filter appears like Greek letter n (pi). Since the rectifier feeds directly into the capacitor 
so it is also called capacitor input filter. 
As the rectified output is fed directly into a capacitor C1. Such a filter can be used with a half-wave 
rectifier (series inductor and L-section filters cannot be used with half-wave rectifiers). Usually 
electrolytic capacitors are used even though their capacitances are large but they occupy minimum 
space. Usually both capacitors C1 and C2 are enclosed in one metal container. The metal container 
serves as, the common ground for the two capacitors. 
A capacitor-input or pi- filter is characterized by a high voltage output at low current drains. Such a 
filter is used, if, for a given transformer, higher voltage than that can be obtained from an L-section 
filter is required and if low ripple than that can be obtained from a shunt capacitor filter or L-section 
filter is desired. In this filter, the input capacitor C1 is selected to offer very low reactance to the ripple 
frequency. Hence major part of filtering is accomplished by the input capacitor C1. Most of the 
remaining ripple is removed by the L-section filter consisting of a choke L and capacitor C2.) 

The action of this filter can best be understood by considering the action of L-section filter, formed by L 
and C2, upon the triangular output voltage wave from the input capacitor C1 The charging and 
discharging action of input capacitor C1 has already been discussed. The output voltage is roughly the 
same as across input capacitor C1 less the dc voltage drop in inductor. The ripples contained in this 
output are reduced further by L-section filter. The output voltage of pi-filter falls off rapidly with the 
increase in load-current and, therefore, the voltage regulation with this filter is very poor. 
SALIENT FEATURES OF L-SECTION AND PI-FILTERS.  
1. In pi-filter the dc output voltage is much larger than that can be had from an L-section filter with the 
same input voltage. 
2.In pi-filter ripples are less in comparison to those in shunt capacitor or L-section filter. So smaller 
valued choke is required in a pi-filter in comparison to that required in L-section filter. 
3.In pi-filter, the capacitor is to be charged to the peak value hence the rms current in supply 
transformer is larger as compared in case of L-section filter. 
4.Voltage regulation in case of pi-filter is very poor, as already mentioned. So n-filters are suitable for 
fixed loads whereas L-section filters can work satisfactorily with varying loads provided a minimum 
current is maintained.  
5.In case of a pi-filter PIV is larger than that in case of an L-section filter. 
 
COMPARISON OF FILTERS 
1) A capacitor filter provides Vm volts at less load current. But regulation is poor. 
2) An Inductor filter gives high ripple voltage for low load currents. It is used for 
high load currents 
3) L – Section filter gives a ripple factor independent of load current. Voltage 
Regulation can be improved by use of bleeder resistance 
4) Multiple L – Section filter or π filters give much less ripple than the single L – 
  Section Filter. 
 
 
 
 
 

UNIT III 
BIPOLAR JUNCTION TRANSISTOR 
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
A bipolar junction transistor (BJT) is a three terminal device in which operation depends on the 
interaction of both majority and minority carriers and hence the name bipolar.  The BJT is analogues to 
vacuum triode and is comparatively smaller in size. It is used as amplifier and oscillator circuits, and as 
a switch in digital circuits. It has wide applications in computers, satellites and other modern 
communication systems. 
3.2 CONSTRUCTION OF BJT AND ITS SYMBOLS 
The Bipolar Transistor basic construction consists of two PN-junctions producing three connecting 
terminals with each terminal being given a name to identify it from the other two. These three 
terminals are known and labelled as the Emitter ( E ), the Base ( B ) and the Collector ( C ) respectively. 
There are two basic types of bipolar transistor construction, PNP and NPN, which basically describes 
the physical arrangement of the P-type and N-type semiconductor materials from which they are 
made. 
Transistors are three terminal active devices made from different semiconductor materials that can act 
as either an insulator or a conductor by the application of a small signal voltage. The transistor's ability 
to change between these two states enables it to have two basic functions: "switching" (digital 
electronics) or "amplification" (analogue electronics). Then bipolar transistors have the ability to 
operate within three different regions: 
 
1. Active Region - the transistor operates as an amplifier and Ic = β.Ib 
 
2. Saturation - the transistor is "fully-ON" operating as a switch and Ic = I(saturation) 
 
3. Cut-off - the transistor is "fully-OFF" operating as a switch and Ic = 0 
Bipolar Transistors are current regulating devices that control the amount of current flowing through 
them in proportion to the amount of biasing voltage applied to their base terminal acting like a 
current-controlled switch. The principle of operation of the two transistor types PNP and NPN, is 
exactly the same the only difference being in their biasing and the polarity of the power supply for 
each type(fig 1). 
 
 

Bipolar Transistor Construction 
Fig 3.1 Bipolar Junction Transistor Symbol 
 
The construction and circuit symbols for both the PNP and NPN bipolar transistor are given 
above with the arrow in the circuit symbol always showing the direction of "conventional 
current flow" between the base terminal and its emitter terminal. The direction of the arrow 
always points from the positive P-type region to the negative N-type region for both transistor 
types, exactly the same as for the standard diode symbol. 
 
 
 
 

 
3.3 TRANSISTOR CURRENT COMPONENTS: 
 
 
Fig 3.2  Bipolar Junction Transistor Current Components 
The above fig 3.2 shows the various current components, which flow across the forward biased emitter 
junction and reverse- biased collector junction. The emitter current IE consists of hole current IPE (holes 
crossing from emitter into base) and electron current InE (electrons crossing from base into 
emitter).The ratio of hole to electron currents, IpE / InE   , crossing the emitter junction is proportional to 
the  ratio of the conductivity of the p material to that of the n material. In a transistor, the doping of 
that of the emitter is made much larger than the doping of the base. This feature ensures (in p-n-p 
transistor) that the emitter current consists an almost entirely of holes. Such a situation is desired since 
the current which results from electrons crossing the emitter junction from base to emitter do not 
contribute carriers, which can reach the collector. 
Not all the holes crossing the emitter junction JE reach the the collector junction JC   
Because some of them combine with the electrons in n-type base. If IpC   is hole current at junction JC 
there must be a bulk recombination current ( IPE- IpC ) leaving the base. 
 

Actually, electrons enter the base region through the base lead to supply those charges, which have 
been lost by recombination with the holes injected in to the base across JE. If the emitter were open 
circuited so that IE=0 then IpC   would be zero. Under these circumstances, the base and collector 
current IC would equal the reverse saturation current ICO. If IE≠0 then  
IC= ICO- IpC 
For a p-n-p transistor, ICO consists of holes moving across JC from left to right (base to collector) and 
electrons crossing JC   in opposite direction. Assumed referenced direction for ICO i.e. from right to left, 
then for a p-n-p transistor, ICO is negative. For an  n-p-n transistor, ICO  is positive.The basic operation will 
be described using the pnp transistor. The operation of the pnp transistor is exactly the same if the 
roles played by the electron and hole are interchanged. 
One p-n junction of a transistor is reverse-biased, whereas the other is forward-biased. 
 
3.3a Forward-biased junction of a pnp transistor 
 
3.3b Reverse-biased junction of a pnp transistor 

 
3.3c Both biasing potentials have been applied to a pnp transistor and resulting majority and 
minority carrier flows indicated. 
Majority carriers (+) will diffuse across the forward-biased p-n junction into the n-type material. 
A very small number of carriers (+) will through n-type material to the base terminal. Resulting IB is 
typically in order of microamperes. 
The large number of majority carriers will diffuse across the reverse-biased junction into the p-type 
material connected to the collector terminal 
Applying KCL to the transistor : 
IE = IC + IB 
The comprises of two components – the majority and minority carriers 
IC = ICmajority + ICOminority  
ICO – IC current with emitter terminal open and is called leakage current 
Various parameters which relate the current components is given below 
Emitter efficiency: 
    
ercurrent
totalemitt
riersatJ
njectedcar
currentofi
E


 
       
nE
pE
nE
pE
PE
I
I
I
I
I




 

Transport Factor: 
nE
pC
E
C
I
I
entatJ
rrierncurr
injectedca
J
ntreaching
rriercurre
injectedca


*
*


 
Large signal current gain: 
The ratio of the negative of collector current increment to the  emitter current change from zero (cut-
off)to IE   the large signal current gain of a common base transistor. 
E
CO
C
I
I
I
)
(




  
Since IC and IE have opposite signs, then α, as defined, is always positive. Typically numerical values of 
α lies in the range of 0.90 to 0.995 
 
E
pE
nE
pC
E
pC
I
I
I
I
I
I
*



 



*

 
The transistor alpha is the product of the transport factor and the emitter efficiency. This 
statement assumes that the collector multiplication ratio 
*
is unity. 
*
is the ratio of total current 
crossing JC to hole arriving at the junction. 
3.4 Bipolar Transistor Configurations 
As the Bipolar Transistor is a three terminal device, there are basically three possible ways to connect 
it within an electronic circuit with one terminal being common to both the input and output. Each 
method of connection responding differently to its input signal within a circuit as the static 
characteristics of the transistor vary with each circuit arrangement. 
 
1. Common Base Configuration - has Voltage Gain but no Current Gain. 
 
2 Common Emitter Configuration - has both Current and Voltage Gain. 
 
3. Common Collector Configuration - has Current Gain but no Voltage Gain. 
 

3.5 COMMON-BASE CONFIGURATION 
Common-base terminology is derived from the fact that the : base is common to both input and output 
of t configuration. base is usually the terminal closest to or at ground potential. Majority carriers can 
cross the reverse-biased junction because the injected majority carriers will appear as minority carriers 
in the n-type material. All current directions will refer to conventional (hole) flow and the arrows in all 
electronic symbols have a direction defined by this convention. 
Note that the applied biasing (voltage sources) are such as to establish current in the direction 
indicated for each branch. 
 
Fig 3.4 CB Configuration 
To describe the behavior of common-base amplifiers requires two set of characteristics: 
1. Input or driving point characteristics. 
2. Output or collector characteristics 
The output characteristics has 3 basic regions: 
 Active region –defined by the biasing arrangements 
 Cutoff region – region where the collector current is 0A 

 Saturation region- region of the characteristics to the left of VCB = 0V 
 
Fig 3.5 CB Input-Output Characteristics 
 
The curves (output characteristics) clearly indicate that a first approximation to the relationship 
between IE and IC in the active region is given by 
IC ≈IE 
Once a transistor is in the ‘on’ state, the base-emitter voltage will be assumed to beVBE = 0.7V 

 
In the dc mode the level of IC  and IE due to the majority carriers are related by a quantity called alpha 
= αdc 
IC = IE + ICBO 
It can then be summarize to IC = IE (ignore ICBO due to small value) 
For ac situations where the point of operation moves on the characteristics curve, an ac alpha defined 
by αac 
Alpha a common base current gain factor that shows the efficiency by calculating the current percent 
from current flow from emitter to collector. The value of  is typical from 0.9 ~ 0.998. 
Biasing:Proper biasing CB configuration in active region by  approximation IC  IE (IB  0 uA) 
 
Fig 3.6 CE Configuration 

 
3.6 TRANSISTOR AS AN AMPLIFIER 
 
Fig 3.7 Basic Transistor Amplifier Circuit 
Common-Emitter Configuration 
It is called common-emitter configuration since : emitter is common or reference to both input and 
output terminals.emitter is usually the terminal closest to or at ground potential. 
Almost amplifier design is using connection of CE due to the high gain for current and voltage. 
Two set of characteristics are necessary to describe the behavior for CE ;input (base terminal) and 
output (collector terminal) parameters. 
Proper Biasing common-emitter configuration in active region 
 
Fig 3.8 CE Configuration 

IB is microamperes compared to miliamperes of IC. 
 IB will flow when VBE > 0.7V for silicon and 0.3V for germanium 
Before this value IB is very small and no IB. 
 Base-emitter junction is forward bias  Increasing VCE will reduce IB for different values. 
 
 
 
Fig  3.9a Input characteristics for common-emitter npn transistor 
 
 
    Fig  3.9b Output characteristics for common-emitter npn transistor 

For small VCE (VCE < VCESAT, IC increase linearly with increasing of VCE  
 VCE > VCESAT IC not totally depends on VCE  constant IC  
 IB(uA) is very small compare to IC (mA). Small increase in IB cause big increase in IC  
 IB=0 A  ICEO occur. 
Noticing the value when IC=0A. There is still some value of current flows. 
 
 
 
 
Beta () or amplification factor 
The ratio of dc collector current (IC) to the dc base current (IB) is dc beta (dc ) which is dc current 
gain where IC and IB are determined at a particular operating point, Q-point (quiescent point).  It’s 
define by the following equation: 
30 <  dc < 300  2N3904 
On data sheet, dc=hfe with h is derived from ac hybrid equivalent cct. FE are derived from forward-
current amplification and common-emitter configuration respectively. 

 
For ac conditions, an ac beta has been defined as the changes of collector current (IC) compared to 
the changes of base current (IB) where IC and IB are determined at operating point. On data sheet, 
ac=hfe  It can defined by the following equation: 
 
From output characteristics of commonemitter configuration, find ac and dc with an 
Operating point at IB=25 A and VCE =7.5V 
 

 
Relationship analysis between α and β 
 
3.7 COMMON – COLLECTOR CONFIGURATION 
Also called emitter-follower (EF). It is called common-emitter configuration since both the signal 
source and the load share the collector terminal as a common connection point.The output voltage 
is obtained at emitter terminal. The input characteristic of common-collector configuration is 

similar with common-emitter. configuration.Common-collector circuit configuration is provided 
with the load resistor connected from emitter to ground. It is used primarily for impedance-
matching purpose since it has high input impedance and low output impedance. 
 
Fig 3.10 CC Configuration 
For the common-collector configuration, the output characteristics are a plot of IE vs VCE for a range 
of values of IB.
 
Fig 3.11 Output Characteristics of CC Configuration for npn Transistor 

Limits of opearation 
Many BJT transistor used as an amplifier. Thus it is important to notice the limits of operations.At 
least 3 maximum values is mentioned in data sheet.  
There are: 
a) Maximum power dissipation at collector: PCmax or PD 
b) Maximum collector-emitter voltage: VCEmax sometimes named as VBR(CEO) or VCEO. 
c) Maximum collector current: ICmax  
There are few rules that need to be followed for BJT transistor used as an amplifier. The rules are: 
transistor need to be operate in active region! 
IC < ICmax  
PC < PCmax  
 
 
Note:   
VCE is at maximum and IC is at minimum (ICMAX=ICEO) in the  cutoff region. IC is at 
maximum and VCE is at minimum (VCE max = Vcesat = VCEO) in the saturation region. The transistor 
 
operates in the active region between saturation and cutoff. 

 
 
Refer to the fig. Example; A derating factor of 2mW/°C indicates the power dissipation is reduced 
2mW each degree centigrade increase of temperature.    
Step1: 
The maximum collector power dissipation,  
PD=ICMAX x VCEmax= 18m x 20 = 360 mW  
Step 2: 
At any point on the characteristics the product of and must be equal to 360 mW. 
Ex. 1. If choose ICmax= 5 mA, substitute into the (1), we get 
VCEmaxICmax= 360 mW  
VCEmax(5 m)=360/5=7.2 V 

Ex.2. If choose VCEmax=18 V, substitute into (1), we get 
VCEmaxICmax= 360 mW  
(10) ICMAX=360m/18=20 mA  
Derating PDmax 
PDMAX is usually specified at 25°C. 
The higher temperature goes, the less is PDMAX 
Example;A derating factor of 2mW/°C indicates the power dissipation is reduced 2mW each degree 
centigrade increase of temperature. 
BJT HYBRID MODEL 
Small signal low frequency transistor Models:  
All the transistor amplifiers are two port networks having two voltages and two currents. The positive 
directions of voltages and currents are shown in fig. 1. 
 
Fig. 1  
A two-port network is represented by four external variables: voltage V1 and current  I1 at the input port, 
and voltage V2 and current  I2 at the output port, so that the two-port network can be treated as a black 
box modeled by the relationships between the four variables,V1,V2, I1,I2 . Out of four variables two can 
be selected as are independent variables and two are dependent variables.The dependent variables can 
be expressed interns of independent variables. This leads to various two port parameters out of which 
the following three are important: 
1. Impedance parameters (z-parameters) 
2. Admittance parameters (y-parameters) 
3. Hybrid parameters (h-parameters) 

z-parameters 
A two-port network can be described by z-parameters as 
 
 
In matrix form, the above equation can be rewritten as 
 
Where 
 
            Input impedance with output port open circuited 
 
            Reverse transfer impedance with input port open circuited 
 
            Forward transfer impedance with output port open circuited 
 
           Output impedance with input port open circuited 
Y-parameters 
A two-port network can be described by Y-parameters as 
 
 
In matrix form, the above equation can be rewritten as 

 
 
            Input admittance with output port short circuited 
 
            Reverse transfer admittance with input port short circuited 
 
            Forward transfer admittance with output port short circuited 
 
           Output admittance with input port short circuited 
Hybrid parameters (h-parameters) 
    If the input current I1 and output voltage V2 are taken as independent variables, the dependent 
variables V1 and I2 can be written as 
 
Where h11, h12, h21, h22 are called as hybrid parameters. 
    
            Input impedence with o/p port short circuited 

 
       Reverse voltage transfer ratio with i/p port open circuited        
 
Forward voltage transfer ratio with o/p port short circuited 
       
 
      output impedence with i/p port open circuited 
THE HYBRID MODEL FOR TWO PORT NETWORK: 
Based on the definition of hybrid parameters the mathematical model for two pert networks known as 
h-parameter model can be developed. The hybrid equations can be written as: 
 
 
(The following convenient alternative subscript notation is recommended 
by the IEEE Standards: 
i=11= input                      o = 22 = output 
f =21 = forward transfer r = 12 = reverse transfer) 
We may now use the four h parameters to construct a mathematical model of the device of Fig.(1). The 
hybrid circuit for any device indicated in Fig.(2). We can verify that the model of Fig.(2) satisfies above 
equations by writing Kirchhoff'svoltage and current laws for input and output ports. 

 
If these parameters are specified for a particular configuration, then suffixes e,b or c are also included, 
e.g. hfe ,h ib are h parameters of common emitter and common collector amplifiers  
Using two equations the generalized model of the amplifier can be drawn as shown in fig. 2. 
 
Fig. 2 
TRANSISTOR HYBRID MODEL: 
The hybrid model for a transistor amplifier can be derived as follow: 
Let us consider CE configuration as show in fig. 3. The variables, iB, iC ,vC, and vB represent total 
instantaneous currents and voltages iB and vC can be taken as independent variables and vB, IC as 
dependent variables.  

 
Fig. 3 
VB = f1 (iB ,vC )  
IC = f2 (iB ,vC).  
Using Taylor 's series expression, and neglecting higher order terms we obtain.  
 
The partial derivatives are taken keeping the collector voltage or base current constant. The Δ vB, Δ vC, Δ 
iB, Δ iC represent the small signal (incremental) base and collector current and voltage and can be 
represented as vB, iC, iB ,vC 
 
The model for CE configuration is shown in fig. 4. 

 
Fig. 4 
To determine the four h-parameters of transistor amplifier, input and output characteristic are used. 
Input characteristic depicts the relationship between input voltage and input current with output 
voltage as parameter. The output characteristic depicts the relationship between output voltage and 
output current with input current as parameter. Fig. 5, shows the output characteristics of CE 
amplifier.  
 
 
Fig. 5  
The current increments are taken around the quiescent point Q which corresponds to iB = IB and to the 
collector voltage VCE = VC  
 
The value of hoe at the quiescent operating point is given by the slope of the output characteristic at 
the operating point (i.e. slope of tangent AB). 
 

hie is the slope of the appropriate input on fig. 6, at the operating point (slope of tangent EF at Q).  
 
 
Fig. 6  
A vertical line on the input characteristic represents constant base current. The parameter hre can be 
obtained from the ratio (VB2– V B1 ) and (VC2– V C1 ) for at Q.  
Typical CE h-parametersof transistor 2N1573 are given below:  
hie = 1000 ohm. 
hre = 2.5 * 10 –4 
hfe = 50 
hoe = 25 
A / V  
 
ANALYSIS OF A TRANSISTOR AMPLIFIER USING H-PARAMETERS:  
To form a transistor amplifier it is only necessary to connect an external load and signal source as 
indicated in fig. 1 and to bias the transistor properly. 
 

Fig. 1 
Consider the two-port network of CE amplifier. RS is the source resistance and ZL is the load impedence 
h-parameters are assumed to be constant over the operating range. The ac equivalent circuit is shown 
in fig. 2. (Phasor notations are used assuming sinusoidal voltage input). The quantities of interest are 
the current gain, input impedence, voltage gain, and output impedence.  
 
Current gain:  
For the transistor amplifier stage, Ai is defined as the ratio of output to input currents.  
 
Input impedence: 
The impedence looking into the amplifier input terminals ( 1,1' ) is the input impedance Zi 
 

Voltage gain:  
The ratio of output voltage to input voltage gives the gain of the transistors.  
 
Output Admittance:  
It is defined as 
 
Av is the voltage gain for an ideal voltage source (Rv = 0).  
Consider input source to be a current source IS in parallel with a resistance RS as shown in fig. 3. 
 Fig. 3 
In this case, overall current gain AIS is defined as  

h-parameters 
To analyze multistage amplifier the h-parameters of the transistor used are obtained from manufacture 
data sheet. The manufacture data sheet usually provides h-parameter in CE configuration. These 
parameters may be converted into CC and CB values. For example fig. 4 hrc in terms of CE parameter 
can be obtained as follows.  
 
Fig. 4  
For CE transistor configuaration  
Vbe = hie Ib + hre Vce  
Ic = h fe Ib + hoe Vce  
The circuit can be redrawn like CC transistor configuration as shown in fig. 5.  
Vbc = hie Ib + hrc Vec  
Ic = hfe Ib + hoe Vec  
 
  
 
hybrid model for transistor in three different configurations 

 
 
 
Typical h-parameter values for a transistor 
Parameter 
CE 
CC 
CB 
  hi 
1100 Ω 
1100 Ω 
22 Ω 
  hr 
2.5 × 10-4 
1 
3 × 10-4 
  hf 
50 
-51 
-0.98 
  ho 
25 µA/V 
25 µA/V 
0.49 µA/V 
 
Analysis of a Transistor amplifier circuit using h-parameters 
A transistor amplifier can be constructed by connecting an external load and signal source and 
biasing the transistor properly. 
 

 
 
 
Fig.1.4  Basic Amplifier Circuit 
 
The two port network of Fig. 1.4  represents a transistor in any one of its configuration. It is 
assumed that h-parameters remain constant over the operating range.The input is sinusoidal and I1,V-
1,I2 and V2 are phase quantities 
 
 
 
 
    Fig. 1.5  Transistor replaced by its Hybrid Model 
Current Gain or Current Amplification (Ai) 
For transistor amplifier the current gain Ai is defined as the ratio of output current to input 
current,i.e, 
Ai =IL /I1 = -I2 / I1 
From the circuit of Fig   
I2= hf I1 + hoV2 
Substituting V2 = ILZL =  -I2ZL 
 
I2= hf I1- I2ZL ho 

 
I2 + I2ZL ho = hf I1 
 
I2( 1+ ZL ho) = hf I1 
 
Ai =  -I2 / I1 = - hf / ( 1+ ZL ho) 
 
Therefore, 
 
Ai = - hf / ( 1+ ZL ho) 
Input Impedence (Zi) 
In the circuit of Fig     , RS is the signal source resistance .The impedence seen when looking into the 
amplifier terminals (1,1’) is the amplifier input impedence  Zi, 
Zi = V1 / I1 
From the input circuit of Fig   V1 = hi I1 + hrV2 
Zi = ( hi I1 + hrV2) / I1 
     = hi + hr V2 / I1 
Substituting 
V2 = -I2 ZL = A1I1ZL 
 Zi = hi + hr A1I1ZL / I1 
     = hi + hr A1ZL 
Substituting for Ai 
Zi = hi - hf hr ZL / (1+ hoZL) 
    = hi - hf hr ZL / ZL(1/ZL+ ho) 
Taking the Load admittance as YL =1/ ZL 
Zi  = hi - hf hr  / (YL + ho) 

Voltage Gain or Voltage Gain Amplification Factor(Av) 
The ratio of output voltage V2 to input voltage V1 give the voltage gain of the transistor i.e, 
Av = V2 / V1 
Substituting  
 
V2 = -I2 ZL = A1I1ZL 
 
Av = A1I1ZL / V1 =  AiZL / Zi 
Output Admittance (Yo) 
Yo is obtained by setting VS to zero, ZL to infinity and by driving the output terminals from a generator 
V2. If the current V2 is I2 then Yo= I2/V2 with VS=0 and RL= ∞. 
From the circuit of fig   
I2= hf I1 + hoV2 
Dividing by V2, 
I2 / V2 = hf I1/V2 + ho 
With V2= 0, by KVL in input circuit, 
RSI1 + hi I1 + hrV2 = 0 
(RS + hi) I1 + hrV2 = 0 
Hence,     I2 / V2 = -hr / (RS + hi) 
 
 
    = hf (-hr/( RS + hi)+ho 
Yo= ho- hf hr/( RS + hi) 
The output admittance is a function of source resistance. If the source impedence is resistive then Yo is 
real. 
Voltage Amplification Factor(Avs) taking into account the resistance (Rs) of the source 

 
Fig. 5.6 Thevenin’s Equivalent Input Circuit 
This overall voltage gain Avs is given by  
 
Avs = V2 / VS = V2V1 / V1VS = Av V1/ VS 
From the equivalent input circuit using Thevenin’s equivalent for the source shown in Fig. 5.6 
V1 = VS Zi / (Zi + RS) 
V1 / VS = Zi / ( Zi + RS) 
Then,  
Avs =  Av Zi / ( Zi + RS) 
Substituting  Av = AiZL / Zi 
 
 
Avs =  AiZL / ( Zi + RS) 
 
 
Avs = AiZL RS / ( Zi + RS) RS 
      
 
Avs = AisZL /  RS 
Current Amplification (Ais) taking into account the sourse Resistance(RS) 
 
Fig. 1.7  Norton’s Equivalent Input Circuit  

The modified input circuit using Norton’s equivalent circuit for the calculation of Ais is shown in Fig. 1.7  
Overall Current Gain, Ais = -I2 / IS = - I2I1 /I1 IS = Ai I1/IS 
From Fig. 1.7        
 
I1= IS RS / (RS + Zi) 
 
 
 
I1 / IS = RS / (RS + Zi) 
and hence, 
 
Ais = Ai RS / (RS + Zi) 
 
Operating Power Gain (AP) 
The operating power gain AP of the transistor is defined as  
AP = P2 / P1 = -V2 I2 / V1 I1 = AvAi = Ai AiZL/ Zi 
AP = Ai
2(ZL/ Zi) 
 
Small Signal analysis of a transistor amplifier 
Ai = - hf / ( 1+ ZL ho) 
 
Av = AiZL / Zi 
Zi = hi + hr A1ZL = hi - hf hr  / (YL + ho) 
 
Avs =  Av Zi / ( Zi + RS) =  AiZL / ( Zi + RS) 
= AisZL / RS 
 
Yo= ho- hf hr/( RS + hi) = 1/ Zo 
 
Ais = Ai RS / (RS + Zi) = Avs = Ais RS/ ZL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

UNIT-IV  
TRANSISTOR BIASING AND STABILIZATION 
 
4.1 NEED FOR TRANSISTOR BIASING 
 
If the o/p signal must be a faithful reproduction of the i/p signal, the transistor must be 
operated in active region. That means an operating point has to be established in this region . To 
establish an operating point (proper values of collector current Ic and collector to emitter voltage VCE) 
appropriate supply voltages and resistances must be suitably chosen in the ckt. This process of 
selecting proper supply voltages and resistance for obtaining desired operating point or Q point is 
called as biasing and the ckt used for transistor biasing is called as biasing ckt. 
 
There are four conditions to be met by a transistor so that it acts as a faithful ampr: 
1) Emitter base junction must be forward biased (VBE=0.7Vfor Si, 0.2V for Ge) and collector base 
junction must be reverse biased for all levels of i/p signal. 
2) Vce voltage  should not fall below VCE (sat) (0.3V for Si, 0.1V for Ge) for any part of the i/p signal. 
For VCE less than VCE (sat) the collector base junction is not probably reverse biased. 
3) The value of the signal Ic when no signal is applied should be at least equal to the max. collector 
current t due to signal alone. 
4) Max. rating of the transistor Ic(max), VCE (max) and PD(max) should not be exceeded at any value of 
i/p signal. 
Consider the fig shown in fig1. If operating point is selected at A, A represents a condition when no 
bias is applied to the transistor i.e, Ic=0, VCE =0. It does not satisfy the above said conditions necessary 
for faithful amplification. 
Point C is too close to PD(max) curve of the transistor. Therefore  the o/p voltage swing in the positive 
direction is limited. 
Point B is located in the middle of active region .It will allow both positive and negative  half cycles 
in the o/p signal. It also provides linear gain and larger possible o/p voltages and currents  
Hence operating point for a transistor amplifier is selected to be in the middle of active region. 
 

  
Fig 4.1CE Output Characteristics 
4.2 DC LOAD LINE 
Referring to the biasing circuit of fig 4.2a, the values of VCC and RC are fixed and Ic and VCE are 
dependent on RB. 
Applying Kirchhoff’s voltage law to the collector circuit in fig. 4.2a, we get    
 
         
 
Fig 4.2a CE Amplifier circuit    (b) Load line  
PD(max) 
Vce(sat) 
IC(max) 

The straight line represented by AB in fig4.2b is called the dc load line. The coordinates of the end 
point A are obtained by substituting VCE =0 in the above equation. Then 
. Therefore The 
coordinates of A are  VCE =0 and 
. 
The coordinates of B are obtained by substituting Ic=0 in the above equation. Then Vce = Vcc. 
Therefore the coordinates of B are VCE =Vcc and Ic=0. Thus the dc load line AB can be drawn if the 
values of Rc and Vcc are known.  
As shown in the fig4.2b, the optimum POINT IS LOCATED AT THE MID POINT OF THE MIDWAY 
BETWEEN a AND b. In order to get faithful amplification, the Q point must be well within the active 
region of the transistor. 
Even though the Q point is fixed properly, it is very important to ensure that the operating point 
remains stable where it is originally fixed. If the Q point shifts nearer to either A or B, the output 
voltage and current get clipped, thereby o/p signal is distorted. 
In practice, the Q-point tends to shift its position due to any or all of the following three main 
factors. 
1) Reverse saturation current, Ico, which doubles for every 10oC raise in temperature  
2) Base emitter Voltage ,VBE, which decreases by 2.5 mV per oC 
3) Transistor current gain, hFE or β which increases with temperature. 
If base current IB is kept constant since IB is approximately equal to Vcc/RB. If the transistor is 
replaced by another one of the same type, one cannot ensure that the new transistor will have 
identical parameters as that of the first one. Parameters such as β vary over a range. This results in the 
variation of collector current Ic for a given IB. Hence , in the o/p characteristics, the spacing between 
the curves might increase or decrease which leads to the shifting of the Q-point to a location which 
might be completely unsatisfactory. 
4.3 AC LOAD LINE 
 
After drawing the dc load line, the operating point Q is properly located at the center of the dc 
load line. This operating point is chosen under zero input signal condition of the circuit. Hence the ac 
load line should also pas through the operating point Q. The effective ac load resistance Rac, is a 
combination of RC parallel to RL i.e. 
||
. So the slope of the ac load line CQD will be 
. 
To draw the ac load line, two end points, I.e. VCE(max) and IC(max)  when the signal is applied are required. 
 , which locates point D on the Vce axis. 
, which locates the point C  on the IC axis. 

By joining points c and D, ac load line CD is constructed. As RC > Rac, The dc load line is less steep than 
ac load line. 
4.4 STABILITY FACTOR (S): 
 
The rise of temperature results in increase in the value of transistor gain β and the leakage 
current Ico. So, IC also increases which results in a shift in operating point. Therefore, The biasing 
network should be provided with thermal stability. Maintenance of the operating point is specified by 
S, which indicates the degree of change in operating point due to change in temperature.  
The extent to which IC is stabilized with varying IC is measured by a stability factor S 
  
 ,
 
       For CE configuration 
 
Differentiate the above equation w.r.t IC , We get 
 
 
 
S should be small to have better thermal stability. 
Stability factor S’ and S’’: 
S’ is defined as the rate of change of   IC with VBE, keeping IC and VBE constant. 
 
S’’ is defined as the rate of change of   IC with β, keeping ICO and VBE constant. 
 
 
 

 
 
4.5 METHODS OF TRANSISTOR BIASING 
1) Fixed bias (base bias) 
 
Fig 4.3 Fixed Biasing Circuit  
This form of biasing is also called base bias. In the fig 4.3 shown, the single power source (for example, a
battery) is used for both collector and base of a transistor, although separate batteries can also be used. 
In the given circuit, 
Vcc = IBRB + Vbe 
Therefore,  IB = (Vcc - Vbe)/RB 
Since the equation is independent of current ICR, dIB//dICR =0  and the stability factor is given by the 
equation….. reduces to  
 
 
 
 
S=1+β 
Since β is a large quantity, this is very poor biasing circuit. Therefore in practice the circuit is not used fo
biasing. 
For a given transistor, Vbe does not vary significantly during use. As Vcc is of fixed value, on selection of R
the base current IB is fixed. Therefore this type is called fixed bias type of circuit. 
Also for given circuit, Vcc = ICRC + Vce 

Therefore, Vce = Vcc - ICRC 
Merits: 
 
It is simple to shift the operating point anywhere in the active region by merely changing 
the base resistor (RB).  
 
A very small number of components are required.  
Demerits: 
 
The collector current does not remain constant with variation in temperature or power 
supply voltage. Therefore the operating point is unstable.  
 
Changes in Vbe will change IB and thus cause RE to change. This in turn will alter the gain 
of the stage.  
 
When the transistor is replaced with another one, considerable change in the value of β 
can be expected. Due to this change the operating point will shift.  
2) EMITTER-FEEDBACK BIAS: 
The emitter feedback bias circuit is shown in the fig 4.4. The fixed bias circuit is modified by 
attaching an external resistor to the emitter. This resistor introduces negative feedback that stabilizes 
the Q-point. From Kirchhoff's voltage law, the voltage across the base resistor is 
VRb = VCC - IeRe - Vbe. 
 
Fig 4.4 Self Biasing Circuit  
From Ohm's law, the base current is 

Ib = VRb / Rb. 
The way feedback controls the bias point is as follows. If Vbe is held constant and temperature 
increases, emitter current increases. However, a larger Ie increases the emitter voltage Ve = IeRe, which 
in turn reduces the voltage VRb across the base resistor. A lower base-resistor voltage drop reduces the 
base current, which results in less collector current because Ic = ß IB. Collector current and emitter 
current are related by Ic = α Ie with α ≈ 1, so increase in emitter current with temperature is opposed, 
and operating point is kept stable. 
Similarly, if the transistor is replaced by another, there may be a change in IC (corresponding to 
change in β-value, for example). By similar process as above, the change is negated and operating 
point kept stable. 
For the given circuit, 
IB = (VCC - Vbe)/(RB + (β+1)RE). 
Merits: 
The circuit has the tendency to stabilize operating point against changes in temperature and β-
value. 
Demerits: 
 
In this circuit, to keep IC independent of β the following condition must be met:  
 
which is approximately the case if ( β + 1 )RE >> RB.  
 
As β-value is fixed for a given transistor, this relation can be satisfied either by keeping 
RE very large, or making RB very low.  
 
If RE is of large value, high VCC is necessary. This increases cost as well as precautions 
necessary while handling.  
 
If RB is low, a separate low voltage supply should be used in the base circuit. Using two 
supplies of different voltages is impractical.  
 
In addition to the above, RE causes ac feedback which reduces the voltage gain of 
the amplifier. 
3)COLLECTOR TO BASE BIAS  OR COLLECTOR FEED-BACK BIAS: 

  
Fig 4.5 Collector to Base Biasing Circuit  
This configuration shown in fig 4.5 employs negative feedback to prevent thermal runaway and 
stabilize the operating point. In this form of biasing, the base resistor RB is connected to the collector 
instead of connecting it to the DC source Vcc. So any thermal runaway will induce a voltage drop across 
the RC resistor that will throttle the transistor's base current. 
From Kirchhoff's voltage law, the voltage 
across the base resistor Rb is 
 
By the Ebers–Moll model, Ic = βIb, and so 
 
From Ohm's law, the base current 
, and so 
 
Hence, the base current Ib is 
 
If Vbe is held constant and temperature increases, then the collector current Ic increases. 
However, a larger Ic causes the voltage drop across resistor Rc to increase, which in turn reduces the 

voltage 
across the base resistor Rb. A lower base-resistor voltage drop reduces the base current Ib, 
which results in less collector current Ic. Because an increase in collector current with temperature is 
opposed, the operating point is kept stable. 
Merits: 
 
Circuit stabilizes the operating point against variations in temperature and β (i.e. 
replacement of transistor)  
Demerits: 
 
In this circuit, to keep Ic independent of β, the following condition must be met:  
 
which is the case when 
 
 
As β-value is fixed (and generally unknown) for a given transistor, this relation can be 
satisfied either by keeping Rc fairly large or making Rb very low.  
 
If Rc is large, a high Vcc is necessary, which increases cost as well as precautions 
necessary while handling.  
 
If Rb is low, the reverse bias of the collector–base region is small, which limits the range 
of collector voltage swing that leaves the transistor in active mode.  
 
The resistor Rb causes an AC feedback, reducing the voltage gain of the amplifier. This 
undesirable effect is a trade-off for greater Q-point stability.  
Usage: The feedback also decreases the input impedance of the amplifier as seen from the 
base, which can be advantageous. Due to the gain reduction from feedback, this biasing form is used 
only when the trade-off for stability is warranted. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
4)COLLECTOR –EMITTER FEEDBACK BIAS: 
 
Fig 4.6 Collector-Emitter Biasing Circuit  
The above fig4.6 shows the collector –emitter feedback bias circuit that can be obtained by 
applying both the collector feedback and emitter feedback. Here the collector feedback is provided by 
connecting a resistance RB from the collector to the base and emitter feedback is provided by 
connecting an emitter Re from emitter to ground. Both feed backs are used  to control collector 
current  and base current IB in the opposite direction to increase the stability as compared to the 
previous biasing circuits.  
5)VOLTAGE DIVIDER BIAS OR SELF BIAS OR EMITTER BIAS 
The voltage divider as shown in the fig 4.7 is formed using external resistors R1 and R2. The 
voltage across R2 forward biases the emitter junction. By proper selection of resistors R1 and R2, the 
operating point of the transistor can be made independent of β. In this circuit, the voltage divider holds 
the base voltage fixed independent of base current provided the divider current is large compared to 
the base current. However, even with a fixed base voltage, collector current varies with temperature 
(for example) so an emitter resistor is added to stabilize the Q-point, similar to the above circuits with 
emitter resistor. 

 
Fig 4.7 Voltage Divider Biasing Circuit  
In this circuit the base voltage is given by: 
voltage across 
 
provided 
.  
Also 
 
For the given circuit, 
 
Let the current in resistor R1 is I1 and this is divided into two parts – current through base and 
resistor R2. Since the base current is very small so for all practical purpose it is assumed that I1 also 
flows through R2, so we have 
 
 
Applying KVL in the circuit, we have 
 
 

 
 
 
It is apparent from above expression that the collector current is independent of ? thus the 
stability is excellent. In all practical cases the value of VBE is quite small in comparison to the V2, so it 
can be ignored in the above expression so the collector current is almost independent of the transistor 
parameters thus this arrangement provides excellent stability. 
Again applying KVL in collector circuit, we have 
 
 
 
 
The resistor RE provides stability to the circuit. If the current through the collector rises, the 
voltage across the resistor RE also rises. This will cause VCE to increase as the voltage V2 is 
independent of collector current. This decreases the base current, thus collector current increases to 
its former value. 
Stability factor for such circuit arrangement is given by 
 
 
 
If Req/RE is very small compared to 1, it can be ignored in the above expression thus we have 
 
Which is excellent since it is the smallest possible value for the stability. In actual practice the 
value of stability factor is around 8-10, since Req/RE cannot be ignored as compared to 1. 
Merits: 
 
Unlike above circuits, only one dc supply is necessary.  
 
Operating point is almost independent of β variation.  
 
Operating point stabilized against shift in temperature.  

Demerits: 
 
In this circuit, to keep IC independent of β the following condition must be met:  
 
which is approximately the case if 
 
where R1 || R2 denotes the equivalent resistance of R1 and R2 connected in parallel. 
 
As β-value is fixed for a given transistor, this relation can be satisfied either by keeping 
RE fairly large, or making R1||R2 very low.  
 
If RE is of large value, high VCC is necessary. This increases cost as well as precautions 
necessary while handling.  
 
If R1 || R2 is low, either R1 is low, or R2 is low, or both are low. A low R1 raises VB closer 
to VC, reducing the available swing in collector voltage, and limiting how large RC can be made without 
driving the transistor out of active mode. A low R2 lowers Vbe, reducing the allowed collector current. 
Lowering both resistor values draws more current from the power supply and lowers the input 
resistance of the amplifier as seen from the base.  
 
AC as well as DC feedback is caused by RE, which reduces the AC voltage gain of the 
amplifier. A method to avoid AC feedback while retaining DC feedback is discussed below.  
Usage: The circuit's stability and merits as above make it widely used for linear circuits. 
4.6 BIAS COMPENSATION USING DIODE AND TRANSISTOR 
The various biasing circuits considered use some type of negative feedback to stabilize the 
operation point. Also, diodes, thermistors and sensistors can be used to compensate for variations in 
current. 
DIODE COMPENSATION: 

 
The following fig4.8 shows a transistor amplifier with a diode D connected across the base-
emitter junction for compensation of change in collector saturation current ICO. The diode is of the 
same material as the transistor and it is reverse biased by e the emitter-base junction voltage VBE, 
allowing the diode reverse saturation current IO to flow through diode D. The base current IB=I-IO. 
As long as temperature is constant, diode D operates as a resistor. As the temperature 
increases, ICO of the transistor increases. Hence, to compensate for this, the base current IB should be 
decreased. 
The increase in temperature will also cause the leakage current IO through D to increase and 
thereby decrease the base current IB. This is the required action to keep Ic constant. 
This type of bias compensation does not need a change in Ic to effect the change in IC, as both 
IO and ICO can track almost equally according to the change in temperature. 
 
THERMISTOR COMPENSATION: 
The following fig4.9 a thermistor RT, having a negative temperature coefficient is connected in 
parallel with R2. The resistance of thermistor decreases exponentially with increase of temperature. An 
increase of temperature will decrease the base voltage VBE, reducing IB and IC. 

 
Fig 4.9 Thermistor Compensation 
SENSISTOR COMPENSATION: 
In the following fig4.10 shown a sensistor Rs having a positive temperature coefficient is 
connected across R1 or RE. Rs increases with temperature. As the temperature increases, the 
equivalent resistance of the parallel combination of R1 and Rs also increases and hence VBE decreases, 
reducing IB and Ic. This reduced Ic compensates for increased Ic caused by the increase in VBE, ICO and β 
due to temperature. 
 

Fig 4.10 Sensistor Compensation 
4.7 THERMAL RUNAWAY AND THERMAL STABILITY 
THERMAL RUNAWAY: 
 
The collector current for the CE circuit is given by 
 The three variables 
in the equation, β, 
, and 
 increases with rise in temperature. In particular, the reverse saturation 
current or leakage current 
 changes greatly with temperature. Specifically it doubles for every 10oC 
rise in temperature. The collector current 
causes the collector base junction temperature to rise 
which in turn, increase  
 , as a result 
 will increase still further, which will further rise the 
temperature at the collector base junction. This process will become cumulative leading at the 
collector base junction. This process will become cumulative leading to “thermal runaway”.  
Consequently, the ratings of the transistor are exceeded which may destroy the transistor itself. 
 
The collector is made larger in size than the emitter in order to help the heat developed at the 
collector junction. However if the circuit is designed such that the base current 
 is made to decrease 
automatically with rise in temperature, then the decrease in 
 will compensate for increase in the 
 , keeping  
 almost constant. 
 
 
THERMAL RESISTANCE 
 
Consider transistor used in a circuit where the ambient temperature of the air around the 
transistor is TA
oC and the temperature of the collector-base junction of the transistor is TJ
oC. 
Due to heating within the transistor TJ is higher than TA. As the temperature difference TJ- TA is greater, 
the power dissipated in the transistor, PD will be greater, i.e, TJ- TA
 PD  
 
The equation can be written as TJ- TA   PD. , where  is the constant of proportionality and is 
called the Thermal resistance. Rearranging the above equation  = TJ- TA /PD. Hence  is measured in 
oC/W which may be as small as 0.2 oC/W for a high power transistor that has an efficient heat sink or 
up to 1000oC/W for small signal, low power transistor which have no cooling provision. 
 
As Θ represents total thermal resistance from a transistor junction to the ambient temperature, 
it is referred to as ΘJ-A.  However, for power transistors, thermal resistance is given form junction to 
case, ΘJ-C. 
 
The amount resistance from junction to ambience is considered to consist of 2 parts. 

ΘJ-A = ΘJ-C - ΘC-A. 
Which indicates the heat dissipated in the junction must make its way to the surrounding air through 
two series paths from junction to case and from case to air. Hence the power dissipated.  
PD = (TJ- TA
Θ 
J-A  
=(TJ- TA
Θ 
J-C + Θ 
C-A) 
ΘJ-C is determined by the type of manufacture of the transistor and how it is located I the case, but ΘC-A 
is determined by the surface area of the case or flange and its contact with air. If the effective surface 
area of the transistor case could be increased, the resistance to heat flows, or could be increased ΘC-A, 
could be decreased. This can be achieved by the use of a heat sink. 
 
The heat sink is a relatively large, finned, usually black metallic heat conducting device in close 
contact with transistor case or flange. Many versions of heat sink exist depending upon the shape and 
size of the transistor. Larger the heat sink smaller is the thermal resistance ΘHS-A. 
This thermal resistance is not added to ΘC-A in series, but is instead in parallel with it and if  
ΘHS-A is much less than ΘC-A, then ΘC-A will be reduced significantly, thereby improving the dissipation 
capability of the transistor. Thus 
Θ 
J-A =Θ 
J-C + Θ 
C-A|| ΘHS-A. 
 
4.8 CONDITION FOR THERMAL STABILITY 
 
For preventing thermal runaway, the required condition I the rate at which the heat is released 
at the collector junction should not exceed the rate at which the heat can be dissipated under steady 
state condition. Hence the condition to be satisfied to avoid thermal runaway is given by  
 
If the circuit is properly designed, then the transistor cannot runaway below a specified ambient 
temperature  or even under any conditions. 
 
In the self biased circuit the transistor is biased in the active region. The power generated at the 
junction without any signal is  
 
Let us assume that the quiescent collector and the emitter currents are equal. Then 

………………….(1) 
The condition to prevent thermal runaway can be written as 
 
As Θ and 
 are positive, 
should be negative in order to satisfy the above condition. 
Differentiating  equation  (1) w.r.t   we get 
 
Hence to avoid thermal runaway it is necessary that 
 
SinceVCE=VCC-IC(RE+RC) then eq(4) implies that VCE<VCC/2. IF the inequality of eq(4) is not satisfied  
and VCE<VCC/2, then from eq(3), 
 is positive., and the corresponding eq(2) should be satisfied. 
Otherwise thermal runaway will occur. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

UNIT 5  
FIELD EFFECT TRANSISTOR 
5.1 INTRODUCTION 
1. The Field effect transistor is abbreviated as FET , it is an another semiconductor device like a 
BJT  which can be used as an amplifier or  switch. 
2. The Field effect transistor is a voltage operated device. Whereas Bipolar junction transistor is a 
current controlled device. Unlike BJT a FET requires virtually no input current. 
3. This gives it an extremely high input resistance , which is its most important advantage over a 
bipolar transistor. 
4. FET is also a three terminal device, labeled  as source, drain and gate. 
5. The source can be viewed as BJT’s emitter, the drain as collector, and the gate as the counter 
part of the base. 
6. The material that connects the source to drain is referred to as the channel.  
 
7. FET operation depends only on the flow of majority carriers ,therefore they are called uni polar  
devices. BJT operation depends on both minority and majority carriers. 
8. As FET has conduction through only majority carriers it is less noisy than BJT. 
9. FETs are much easier to fabricate and are particularly suitable for ICs because they occupy less 
space than BJTs. 
10. FET amplifiers have low gain bandwidth product due to the junction capacitive effects and 
produce more signal distortion except for small signal operation. 
11. The performance of FET is relatively unaffected by ambient temperature changes. As it has  a 
negative temperature coefficient at high current levels, it prevents the FET from thermal 
breakdown. The BJT has a positive temperature coefficient at high current levels which leads to 
thermal breakdown. 
5.2 CLASSIFICATION OF FET: 
There are two major categories of field effect transistors: 
1. Junction Field Effect Transistors 
2. MOSFETs 
These are further sub divided in to P- channel and N-channel devices. 
MOSFETs are further classified  in to two types Depletion MOSFETs  and Enhancement . MOSFETs  

When the channel is of N-type the JFET is referred to as an N-channel JFET ,when the channel is of 
P-type the JFET is referred to as P-channel JFET. 
  The schematic symbols for the P-channel and N-channel JFETs are shown in the figure.  
                                  
 
Fig 5.1 schematic symbols for the P-channel and N-channel JFET 
5.3 CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION OF N- CHANNEL FET 
If the gate is an N-type material, the channel must be a P-type material. 
CONSTRUCTION OF N-CHANNEL JFET 
 
 
 
Fig 5.2 Construction of N-Channel JFET 
  
A piece of N- type material, referred to as channel has two smaller pieces of P-type material 
attached to its sides, forming PN junctions. The channel ends are designated as the drain and 
source. And the two pieces of P-type material are connected together and their terminal is called 
the gate. Since this channel is in the N-type bar, the FET is known as N-channel JFET. 
 
 

OPERATION OF N-CHANNEL JFET:-   
The overall operation of the JFET is based on varying the width of the channel to control the drain 
current.  
 
 
 A piece of N type material referred to as the channel, has two smaller pieces of P type 
material attached to its sites, farming PN –Junctions. The channel’s ends are designated the drain and 
the source. And the two pieces of P type material are connected together and their terminal is called 
the gate. With the gate terminal not connected and the potential applied positive at the drain negative 
at the source a drain current Id flows. When the gate is biased negative with respective to the source 
the PN junctions are reverse biased and depletion regions are formed. The channel is more lightly 
doped than the P type gate blocks, so the depletion regions penetrate deeply into the channel. Since 
depletion region is a region depleted of charge carriers it behaves as an Insulator. The result is that the 
channel is narrowed. Its resistance is increased and Id is reduced. When the negative gate bias voltage 
is further increased, the depletion regions meet at the center and Id is cut off completely. 
There are two ways to control the channel width 
1. By varying the value of Vgs  
2. And by Varying the value of Vds  holding Vgs constant 
1 By varying the value of Vgs :-   
 
  
 
We can vary the width of the channel and in turn vary the amount of drain 
current. This can be done by varying the value of Vgs. This point is illustrated in the fig  below. Here 
we are dealing with N channel FET. So channel is of N type and gate is of P type that constitutes a 
PN junction. This PN junction is always reverse biased in JFET operation .The reverse bias is applied 
by a battery voltage Vgs connected between the gate and the source terminal i.e positive terminal 
of the battery is connected to the source and negative terminal to gate. 
 

1) When a PN junction is reverse biased the electrons and holes diffuse across junction by leaving 
immobile ions on the N and P sides , the region containing these immobile ions  is known as 
depletion regions. 
2) If both P and N regions are heavily doped then the depletion region extends symmetrically on 
both sides.  
3) But in N channel FET P region is heavily doped than N type thus depletion region extends more 
in N region than P region. 
4) So when no Vds is applied the depletion region is symmetrical and the conductivity becomes 
Zero. Since there are no mobile carriers in the junction. 
5) As the reverse bias voltage is increases the thickness of the depletion region also increases.  i.e. 
the effective channel width decreases . 
6) By varying the value of Vgs we can vary the width of the channel. 
 
2 Varying the value of Vds  holding Vgs constant :- 
1) When no voltage is applied to the gate i.e. Vgs=0 , Vds is applied between source and drain the 
electrons will flow from source to drain through the channel constituting drain current Id . 
2) With Vgs= 0 for Id= 0 the channel between the gate junctions is entirely open .In response to a 
small applied voltage Vds , the entire bar acts as a simple semi conductor resistor and the 
current Id increases linearly with Vds . 
3) The channel resistances are represented as rd and rs as shown in the fig. 
 
  
 
 
4) This increasing drain current Id produces a voltage drop across rd which reverse biases the gate 
to source junction,(rd> rs) .Thus the depletion region is formed which is not symmetrical . 

5) The depletion region i.e. developed penetrates deeper in to the channel near drain and less 
towards source because Vrd >> Vrs. So reverse bias is higher near drain than at source. 
6) As a result growing depletion region reduces the effective width of the channel. Eventually a 
voltage Vds is reached at which the channel is pinched off. This is the voltage where the current 
Id begins to level off and approach a constant value. 
7) 
 So, by varying the value of Vds we can vary the width of the channel holding Vgs constant. 
 
When both Vgs and Vds is applied:- 
 
          It is of course in principle not possible for the channel to close Completely and there by reduce 
the current Id to Zero for,  if such indeed, could be the case the gate voltage Vgs is applied in the 
direction to provide additional reverse bias  
1) When voltage is applied between the drain and source with a battery Vdd, the electrons flow 
from source to drain through the narrow channel existing between the depletion regions. This 
constitutes the drain current Id, its conventional direction is from drain to source. 
2) The value of drain current is maximum  when no external voltage is applied between gate and 
source and is designated by Idss. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
3) When Vgs is increased beyond Zero the depletion regions are widened. This reduces the 
effective width of the channel and therefore controls the flow of drain current through the 
channel. 
4) When Vgs is further increased a stage is reached at which to depletion regions touch each 
other that means the entire channel is closed with depletion region. This reduces the drain 
current to Zero.  
 
5.4 CHARACTERISTICS OF N-CHANNEL JFET 
 The family of curves that shows the relation between current and voltage are known as 
characteristic curves. 
 There are two important characteristics of a JFET. 
1) Drain or VI Characteristics 
2) Transfer characteristics 
1. Drain Characteristics:-  
2.    
 
Drain characteristics shows the relation between the drain to source voltage Vds 
and drain current Id. In order to explain typical drain characteristics let us  consider the curve 
with Vgs= 0.V. 
1) When Vds is applied and it is increasing the drain current ID also increases linearly up to knee 
point. 
2) This shows that FET behaves like an ordinary resistor.This region is called as ohmic region. 
3) ID increases with increase in drain to source voltage. Here the drain current is increased 
slowly as compared to ohmic region. 
 

 
 
 
4)  
5)  
6)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4) It is because of the fact that there is an increase in VDS .This in turn increases the reverse bias 
voltage across the gate source junction .As a result of this depletion region grows in size thereby 
reducing the effective width of the channel. 
 
5) All the drain to source voltage corresponding to point the channel width is reduced to a 
minimum value  and is known as pinch off. 
 
5) The drain to source voltage at which channel pinch off occurs is called pinch off voltage(Vp). 
PINCH OFF Region:- 
1) This is the region shown by the curve  as saturation region. 
2) It is also called as saturation region or constant current region. Because of the channel is 
occupied with depletion region , the depletion region is more towards the drain and less 
towards the source, so the channel is limited, with this only limited number of carriers are 
only allowed to cross this channel from source drain causing a current that is constant in 
this region. To use FET as an amplifier it is operated in this saturation region. 
3) In this drain current remains constant at its maximum value IDSS. 
 
4) 
The drain current in the pinch off region depends upon the gate to source voltage and is 
given by the relation 
                                 Id =Idss [1-Vgs/Vp]2 
 
 
This is known as shokley’s relation. 
BREAKDOWN REGION:- 
1) The region is shown by the curve .In this region, the drain current increases rapidly as the 
drain to source voltage is increased. 
2) It is because of the gate to source junction due to avalanche effect. 

3) The avalanche break down occurs at progressively lower value of VDS because the reverse 
bias gate voltage adds to the drain voltage thereby increasing effective voltage across the 
gate junction 
        This causes  
1. The maximum saturation drain current is smaller 
2. The ohmic region portion decreased. 
4) 
It is important to note that the maximum voltage VDS which can be applied to FET is the 
lowest voltage which causes available break down. 
3.  TRANSFER CHARACTERISTICS:- 
                      These curves shows the relationship between drain current ID  and gate to source voltage 
VGS   for different values of VDS. 
 
1) First adjust the drain to source voltage to some suitable value , then increase the gate to 
source voltage in small suitable value. 
2) Plot the graph between gate to source voltage along the horizontal axis and current ID on 
the vertical axis. We shall obtain a curve like this. 
 
 
 
 
3) As we know that if Vgs  is more negative curves drain current to reduce . where Vgs is made 
sufficiently negative, Id is reduced to zero. This is caused by the widening of the depletion 
region to a point where it is completely closes the channel. The value of Vgs at the cutoff 
point is designed as Vgsoff 
 

4) The upper end of the curve as shown by the drain current value is equal to Idss that is when 
Vgs = 0 the drain current is maximum. 
 
5) While the lower end is indicated by a voltage equal to Vgsoff  
6) If Vgs continuously increasing , the channel width is reduced , then Id =0 
7) It may be noted that curve is part of the parabola; it may be expressed as  
Id=Idss[1-Vgs/Vgsoff]2 
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN Vp AND Vgsoff – 
  Vp is the value of Vgs that causes the JFET to become constant current component, It is 
measured at Vgs =0V and has a constant drain current of Id =Idss .Where Vgsoff is the value of Vgs that 
reduces  Id to approximately zero.  
Why the gate to source junction of a JFET be always reverse biased ? 
                     The gate to source junction of a JFET is never allowed to become forward biased because 
the gate material is not designed to handle any significant amount of current. If the junction is allowed 
to become forward biased, current is generated through the gate material. This current may destroy 
the component. 
 
 
      There is one more important characteristic of JFET reverse biasing i.e. J FET ‘s have 
extremely high characteristic gate input impedance. This impedance is typically in the high mega ohm 
range. With the advantage of extremely high input impedance it draws no current from the source. The 
high input impedance of the JFET has led to its extensive use in integrated circuits. The low current 
requirements of the component makes it perfect for use in ICs. Where thousands of transistors must 
be etched on to a single piece of silicon. The low current draw helps the IC to remain relatively cool, 
thus allowing more components to be placed in a smaller physical area. 
5.5 JFET PARAMETERS 
The electrical behavior of JFET may be described in terms of certain parameters. Such parameters are 
obtained from the characteristic curves. 
A C Drain resistance(rd): 
It is also called dynamic drain resistance and is the a.c.resistance between the drain and source 
terminal,when the JFET is operating in the pinch off or saturation region.It is given by the ratio of small 
change in drain to source voltage  ∆Vds to  the  corresponding change in drain current   ∆Id for a 
constant gate to source voltage Vgs. 
Mathematically it is expressed as rd=∆Vds/ ∆Id where Vgs is held constant. 
TRANCE CONDUCTANCE (gm): 

It is also called forward transconductance  . It is given by the ratio of small change in drain current (∆Id) 
to the corresponding change in gate to source voltage (∆Vds) 
Mathematically  the transconductance can be written as 
                       gm=∆Id/∆Vds 
AMPLIFICATION FACTOR (µ) 
It is given by the ratio of small change in drain to source voltage (∆Vds) to the corresponding change in 
gate to source voltage (∆Vgs)for a constant drain current (Id). 
Thus    µ=∆Vds/∆Vgs   when Id held constant 
The amplification factor µ may be expressed as a product of transconductance (gm)and ac drain 
resistance (rd)  
µ=∆Vds/∆Vgs=gm rd 
5.5 THE FET SMALL SIGNAL MODEL   
The linear small signal equivalent circuit for the FET can be obtained in a manner similar to 
that used to derive the corresponding model for a transistor. 
We can express the drain current iD as a function f of the gate voltage and drain voltage Vds. 
Id =f(Vgs,Vds)------------------(1) 
The transconductance gm and drain resistance rd:- 
If both gate voltage and drain voltage are varied, the change in the drain current is 
approximated by using taylors series considering only the first two terms in the expansion 
∆id=
|vds=constant .∆vgs
|vgs=constant∆vds 
we can write ∆id=id 
∆vgs=vgs 
∆vds=vds 
Id=gm v
   Vds→(1) 
Where gm=
|Vds  
  
|Vds  

               gm=
|Vds 
 Is the mutual  conductance or transconductance .It is also called as gfs or yfs common source forward 
conductance . 
The second parameter rd  is the drain resistance or output resistance is defined as  
rd=
|Vgs 
|Vgs=
|Vgs     
rd=
|Vgs 
The reciprocal of the rd is the drain conductance gd .It is also designated by Yos and Gos and 
called the common source output conductance . So the small signal equivalent circuit for FET  can be 
drawn in two different ways. 
1.small signal current –source model  
2.small signal voltage-source model. 
A small signal current –source model for FET in common  source configuration can be drawn 
satisfying  Eq→(1) as shown in the figure(a) 
This low frequency model for FET has a Norton’s output circuit with a dependent current 
generator whose magnitude is proportional to the gate-to –source voltage. The proportionality factor 
is the transconductance ‘gm’. The output resistance is ‘rd’. The input resistance between the gate and 
source is infinite, since it is assumed that the reverse biased gate draws no current. For the same 
reason the resistance between gate and drain is assumed to be infinite. 
The small signal voltage-source model is shown in the figure(b). 
This can be derived by finding the Thevenin’s equivalent for the output part of fig(a) . 
These small signal models for FET can be used for analyzing the three basic FET amplifier 
configurations: 
1.common source (CS)  2.common drain (CD) or source follower  
 3. common gate(CG). 

(a)Small Signal  Current source model for FET            (b)Small Signal voltage source model for FET 
Here the input circuit is kept open because of having high input impedance and the output 
circuit satisfies the equation for ID  
5.7 MOSFET 
     We now turn our attention to the insulated gate FET or metal oxide semi conductor FET which is 
having the greater commercial importance than the junction FET. 
Most MOSFETS however are triodes, with the substrate  internally connected to the source. The circuit 
symbols used by several manufacturers are indicated in the Fig below. 
 
 
                       
 
(a) Depletion type MOSFET                                 (b) Enhancement type MOSFET 
                                         Both of them are P- channel 
   Here are two basic types of MOSFETS  
(1) Depletion type           (2) Enhancement type MOSFET. 
D-MOSFETS can be operated in both the depletion mode and the enhancement mode. E MOSFETS 
are restricted to operate in enhancement mode. The primary difference between them is their physical 
construction. 

The construction difference between the two is shown in the fig given below. 
 
 
 
 
           As we can see the D MOSFET have physical channel between the source and drain 
terminals(Shaded area) 
 
 
 
          The E MOSFET on the other hand has no such channel physically. It depends on the gate voltage 
to form a channel between the source and the drain terminals. 
 
Both MOSFETS have an insulating layer between the gate and the rest of the component. This 
insulating layer is made up of SIO2 a glass like insulating material. The gate material is made up of 

metal conductor .Thus going from gate to substrate, we can have metal oxide semi conductor which is 
where the term MOSFET comes from. 
 
 
Since the gate is insulated from the rest of the component, the MOSFET is sometimes 
referred to as an insulated gate FET or IGFET. 
The foundation of the MOSFET is called the substrate. This material is represented in the schematic 
symbol by the center line that is connected to the source. 
In the symbol for the MOSFET, the arrow is placed on the substrate. As with JFET an arrow pointing in 
represents an N-channel device, while an arrow pointing out represents p-channel device. 
 
CONSTRUCTION OF AN N-CHANNEL MOSFET:- 
        The N- channel MOSFET consists of a lightly doped p type substance into which two heavily doped 
n+ regions are diffused as shown in the Fig. These n+ sections , which will act as source and drain.
 
A thin layer of insulation silicon dioxide (SIO2) is grown over the surface of the structure, and 
holes are cut into oxide layer, allowing contact with the source and drain. Then the gate metal area is 
overlaid on the oxide, covering the entire channel region.Metal contacts are made to drain and source 
and the contact to the metal over the channel area is the gate terminal.The metal area of the gate, in 
conjunction with the insulating dielectric oxide layer and the semiconductor channel, forms a parallel 
plate capacitor. The insulating layer of sio2 
Is the reason why this device is called the insulated gate field effect transistor. This layer results in an 
extremely high input resistance (10 10 to 10power 15ohms) for MOSFET. 
5.7.1 DEPLETION MOSFET 
      The basic structure of D –MOSFET is shown in the fig. An N-channel is diffused between source and 
drain with the device an appreciable drain current IDSS flows foe zero gate to source voltage, Vgs=0. 
 
 
Depletion mode operation:- 

1) The above fig shows the D-MOSFET operating conditions with gate and source terminals shorted 
together(VGS=0V) 
 
2) At this stage ID= IDSS where VGS=0V, with this voltage VDS, an appreciable drain current IDSS 
flows. 
 
3) If the gate to source voltage is made negative  i.e. VGs is negative .Positive charges are induced in 
the channel through the SIO2 of the gate capacitor. 
 
4) Since the current in a FET is due to majority carriers(electrons for an N-type material) , the 
induced positive charges make the channel less conductive and the drain current drops as Vgs is 
made more negative. 
 
5) The re distribution of charge in the channel causes an effective depletion of majority carriers , 
which accounts for the designation depletion MOSFET. 
 
6) That means biasing voltage Vgs depletes the channel of free carriers This effectively reduces the 
width of the channel , increasing its resistance. 
 
7) Note that negative Vgs has the same effect on the MOSFET as it has on the JFET. 
 
 
 
8) As shown in the fig above, the depletion layer generated by Vgs (represented by the white space 
between the insulating material and the channel) cuts into the channel, reducing its width. As a 
result ,Id<Idss.The actual value of ID depends on the value of Idss,Vgs(off) and Vgs. 
 
Enhancement mode operation of the D-MOSFET:- 
1) This operating mode is a result of applying a positive gate to source voltage Vgs to the device. 
2) When Vgs is positive the channel is effectively widened.  This reduces the resistance of the 
channel allowing ID to exceed the value of IDSS 
3) When Vgs is given positive the majority carriers in the p-type are holes. The holes in the p type 
substrate are repelled by the +ve gate voltage. 

4) At the same time, the conduction band electrons (minority carriers) in the p type material are 
attracted towards the channel by the +gate voltage. 
5) With the build up of electrons near the channel , the area to the right of the physical channel 
effectively becomes an N type material. 
6) The extended n type channel now allows more current, Id> Idss 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Characteristics of Depletion MOSFET:- 
 The fig. shows the drain characteristics for the N channel depletion type MOSFET 
1) The curves are plotted for both Vgs positive and Vgs negative voltages 
. 
2) When Vgs=0 and negative the MOSFET operates in depletion mode when Vgs is positive ,the 
MOSFET operates in the enhancement mode. 
3) The difference between JFET and D MOSFET is that JFET does not operate for positive values of 
Vgs. 
 
4) When Vds=0, there is no conduction takes place between source to drain, if Vgs<0 and Vds>0 
then Id increases linearly. 
 
5) But as Vgs,0 induces positive charges holes in the channel, and controls the channel width. Thus 
the conduction between source to drain is maintained as constant, i.e. Id is constant. 
 
6) If Vgs>0 the gate induces more electrons in channel side, it is added with the free electrons 
generated by source. again the potential applied to gate determines the channel width and 
maintains constant current flow through it as shown in Fig 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TRANSFER CHARACTERISTICS:- 
   The combination of 3 operating states i.e. Vgs=0V, VGs<0V, Vgs>0V is represented by the D 
MOSFET transconductance curve shown in Fig. 
 
1) Here in this curve it may be noted that the region AB of the characteristics similar to that of 
JFET. 
 
2) This curve extends for the positive values of Vgs 

 
3) Note that Id=Idss for Vgs=0V when Vgs is negative,Id< Idss when Vgs= Vgs(off) ,Id is reduced to 
approximately omA.Where Vgs is positive Id>Idss.So obviously Idss is not the maximum possible 
value of Id for a MOSFET. 
 
4) The curves are similar to JFET so thet the D MOSFET have the same transconductance equation. 
 
5.7.2 E-MOSFETS 
The E MOSFET is capable of operating only in the enhancement mode.The gate potential must be 
positive w.r.t to source. 
 
 
1) when the value of Vgs=0V, there is no channel connecting the source and drain materials. 
 
2) As aresult , there can be no significant amount of drain current. 
 
3) When Vgs=0, the Vdd supply tries to force free electrons from source to drain but the presence 
of p-region does not permit the electrons to pass through it. Thus there is no drain current at 
Vgs=0, 
 
4) If Vgs is  positive, it induces a negative charge in the p type substrate just adjacent to the SIO2 
layer. 
 
5) As the holes are repelled by the positive gate voltage, the minority carrier electrons attracted 
toward this voltage. This forms an effective N type bridge between source and drain providing a 
path for drain current. 
 
6) This +ve gate voltage forma a channel between the source and drain. 
 
7) This produces a thin layer of N type channel in the P type substarate.This layer of free electrons 
is called N type inversion layer. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
8)  The minimum Vgs which produces this inversion layer is called threshold voltage and is 
designated by Vgs(th).This is the point at which the device turns on is called the threshold 
voltage Vgs(th) 
9)  When the voltage Vgs is <Vgs (th) no current flows from drain to source. 
 
10) How ever when the voltage Vgs > Vgs (th) the inversion layer connects the drain to source and 
we get significant values of current. 
 
 
CHARACTERISTICS OF E MOSFET:-    
1. DRAIN CHARACTERISTICS 
The volt ampere drain characteristics of an N-channel enhancement mode MOSFET are given in the 
fig.
 

 
 
2. TRANSFER CHARACTERISTICS:- 
1) The current Idss at Vgs≤ 0 is very small beinf of the order of a few nano amps. 
2) As Vgs is made +ve , the current Id increases slowly at forst, and then much more rapidly with 
an increase in Vgs. 
3) The standard transconductance formula will not work for the E MOSFET. 
4) To determine the value of ID at a given value of VGs we must use the following relation 
Id =K[Vgs-Vgs(Th)]2 
Where K is constant for the MOSFET . found as 
                            K=
 
From the data specification sheets, the 2N7000 has the following ratings. 
Id(on)= 75mA(minimum). 
And     Vgs(th)=0.8(minimum) 
 
5.8 APPLICATION OF MOSFET 
One of the primary contributions to electronics made by  MOSFETs  can be found in the area of 
digital (computer electronics). The signals in digital circuits are made up of rapidly switching dc 
levels. This signal is called as a rectangular wave ,made up of two dc levels (or logic levels). These 
logic levels are 0V and +5V. 

   A group of circuits with similar circuitry and operating characteristics is referred to as a logic 
family. All the circuits in a given logic family respond to the same logic levels, have similar speed 
and power-handling capabilities  , and can be directly connected together. One such logic family is 
complementary MOS (or CMOS)  logic. This logic family is made up entirely of  MOSFETs.  
5.9 BIASING FET:- 
                         For the proper functioning of a linear FET amplifier, it is necessary to maintain the 
operating point Q stable in the central portion of the pinch off region The Q point should be 
independent of device parameter variations and ambient temperature variations 
This can be achieved by suitably selecting the gate to source voltage VGS and drain current ID 
which is referred to as biasing 
 
 
JFET biasing circuits are very similar to BJT biasing circuitsThe main difference between 
JFET circuits and BJT circuits is the operation of the active components themselves 
 
 
There are mainly two types of Biasing circuits 
1) Self bias 
2) Voltage divider bias. 
 
 
5.9.1 SELF BIAS 
Self bias is a JFET biasing circuit that uses a source resistor to help reverse bias the JFET gate. A  self 
bias circuit is shown in the fig. Self bias is the most common type of JFET bias. This JFET must be 
operated such that gate source junction is always reverse biased. This condition requires a negative 
VGS for an N channel JFET and a positive VGS for P channel JFET. This can be achieved using the self 
bias arrangement as shown in Fig. The gate resistor RG doesn’t affect the bias because it has essentially 
no voltage drop across it, and : the gate remains at 0V .RG is necessary only to isolate an ac signal from 
ground in amplifier applications. The voltage drop across resistor RS makes gate source junction 
reverse biased. 
 

For the dc analysis coupling capacitors are open circuits. 
For the N channel FET in Fig (a) 
IS produces a voltage drop across RS and makes the source positive  w.r.t ground. In any JFET circuit all 
the source current passes through the device to the drain circuit .This is due to the fact that there is no 
significant gate current. 
We can define source current as  IS = ID 
(VG =0 because there is no gate current flowing in RG So VG across RG is zero) 
VG =0 then VS= ISRS =ID RS 
VGS = VG-VS =0-ID RS=- ID RS 
DC analysis of self Bias:- 
In the following DC analysis, the N channel J FET shown in the fig. is used for illustration. 
For DC analysis we can replace coupling capacitors by open circuits and we can also replace the resistor 
RG by a short circuit equivalent.:. IG = 0.The relation between ID and VGS is given by 
             Id=Idss[1-
]2                                   
 
VGS for N channel JFET is =-id Rs 
Substuting  this value in the above equation  
          Id=Idss[1-
]2 
         Id=Idss[1+
]2 
For the N-chanel FET in the above figure  

Is produces a voltage drop across Rs and makes the source positive w.r.t ground in any JFET circuit 
all the source current passes through the device to drain circuit this is due to the fact that there is no 
significant gate current. Therefore we can define source current as Is=Id and Vg=0 then  
Vs= Is Rs =IdRs 
Vgs=Vg-Vs=0-IdRs=-IdRs 
Drawing the self bias line:- 
Typical transfer characteristics for a self biased JFET are shown in the fig. 
The maximum drain current is 5mA and the gate source cut off voltage is -3V. This means the gate 
voltage has to be between 0 and -3V. 
 
 
 
Now using the equation VGS = -IDRS and assuming RS of any suitable value we can draw the self bias 
line. 
Let us assume RS = 500Ω 
 With this Rs , we can plot two points corresponding to ID = 0 and Id = IDSS  
      for ID = 0 
VGS = -ID RS 
VGS = 0X (500.Ω) = 0V 
So the first point is (0 ,0) 
 
 
      ( Id, VGS) 

For ID= IDSS=5mA 
VGS = (-5mA) (500 Ω) = -3V 
So the 2nd  Point will be (5mA,-3V) 
By plotting these two points, we can draw the straight line through the points. This line will 
intersect the transconductance curve and it is known as self bias line.The intersection point gives the 
operating point of the self bias JFET for the circuit. 
At Q point , the ID is slightly  > than 2mA and VGS is slightly > -1V. The Q point for the self bias 
JFET depends on the value of Rs.If Rs is large, Q point far down on the transconductance curve ,ID is 
small, when Rs is small Q point is far up on the curve , ID is large. 
 
5.9.2 VOLTAGE DIVIDER BIAS:- 
 
The fig. shows N channel JFET with voltage divider bias. The voltage at the source of JFET must 
be more positive than the voltage at the gate in order to keep the gate to source junction reverse 
biased. The source voltage is  
VS = IDRS 
The gate voltage is set by resistors R1 and R2 as expressed by the following equation using the 
voltage divider formula. 
 Vg=
Vdd 
For dc analysis  
 

 
 
Applying KVL to the input circuit 
VG-VGS-VS =0 
:: VGS = VG-Vs=VG-ISRS 
VGS = VG-IDRS       :: IS = ID 
Applying KVL to the input circuit we get  
VDS+IDRD+VS-VDD =0 
::VDS = VDD-IDRD-IDRS 
VDS = VDD-ID ( RD +RS ) 
The Q point of a JFET amplifier , using the voltage divider bias is   
IDQ  = IDSS [1-VGS/VP]2  
VDSQ = VDD-ID ( RD+RS ) 
COMPARISON OF MOSFET WITH JFET 
a. In enhancement and depletion types of MOSFET, the transverse electric field induced 
across an insulating layer deposited on  the semiconductor material controls the 
conductivity of the channel. 
b. In the JFET the transverse electric field across the reverse biased PN junction controls the 
conductivity of the channel. 

c. The gate leakage current in a MOSFET is of the order of 10-12A. Hence the input resistance 
of a MOSFET is very high in the order of 1010  to  1015 Ω.  The gate leakage current of a JFET  
is of the order of 10-9A., and its input resistance is of the order of 108Ω. 
d. The output characteristics of the JFET are flatter than those of the MOSFET, and hence the 
drain resistance of a JFET (0.1 to 1MΩ)  is  much higher than that of a MOSFET (1 to 50kΩ). 
e. JFETs are operated only in the depletion mode. The depletion type MOSFET may be 
operated in both depletion and enhancement mode.  
f. Comparing to JFET, MOSFETs  are easier to fabricate. 
g. Special digital CMOS circuits are available which involve near zero power dissipation and 
very low voltage and current requirements. This makes them suitable for portable 
systems. 
 
 
FET AMPLIFIERS 
5.10 INTRODUCTION 
Field Effect Transistor (FET) amplifiers provide an excellent voltage gain and high input 
impedence. Because of high input impedence and other characteristics of JFETs they are preferred over 
BJTs for certain types of applications.  
 
There are 3 basic FET circuit configurations: 
i)Common Source 
ii)Common Drain 
iii)Common Gain 
 
Similar to BJT CE,CC and CB circuits, only difference is in BJT large output collector current is 
controlled by small input base current whereas FET controls output current by means of small input 
voltage. In both the cases output current is controlled variable. 
 
FET amplifier circuits use voltage controlled nature of the JFET. In Pinch off region, ID depends 
only on VGS. 
 

5.11 Common Source (CS) Amplifier 
 
                                Fig. 5.1 (a) CS Amplifier (b) Small-signal equivalent circuit 
 
A simple Common Source amplifier is shown in Fig.  5.1(a) and associated small signal equivalent circuit 
using voltage-source model of FET is shown in Fig. 5.1(b)  
 
 
Voltage Gain 
Source resistance (RS) is used to set the Q-Point but is bypassed by CS for mid-frequency operation. 
From the small signal equivalent circuit ,the output voltage 
 
 
VO = -RDµVgs(RD + rd) 
Where Vgs = Vi , the input voltage, 
Hence, the voltage gain, 
AV = VO / Vi = -RDµ(RD + rd) 
Input Impedence 
From Fig. 5.1(b) Input Impedence is  
 
 
Zi =  RG 
For voltage divider bias as in CE Amplifiers of BJT 
 
 
RG =  R1 ║ R2   
Output Impedance 
Output impedance is the impedance measured at the output  terminals with the input voltage VI = 0 
From the Fig. 5.1(b) when the input voltage Vi = 0, Vgs = 0 and hence  
 
 
µ Vgs = 0 

The equivalent circuit for calculating output impedence is given in Fig. 5.2. 
Output impedence  Zo = rd ║ RD 
Normally rd will be far greater than RD . Hence Zo ≈ RD 
 
5.12 Common Drain Amplifier 
A simple common drain amplifier is shown in Fig. 5.2(a) and associated small signal equivalent circuit 
using the voltage source model of FET is shown in Fig. 5.2(b).Since voltage Vgd is more easily 
determined than Vgs, the voltage source in the output circuit is expressed in terms of Vgs and Thevenin’s 
theorem.   
 
Fig. 5.2  (a)CD Amplifier  (b)Small-signal equivalent circuit 
Voltage Gain 
The output voltage, 
                   VO = RSµVgd / (µ + 1) RS + rd 
Where        Vgd = Vi  the input voltage.  
Hence, the voltage gain, 
                   Av = VO / Vi = RSµ / (µ + 1) RS + rd 
Input Impedence 
From Fig. 5.2(b), Input Impedence Zi = RG 
Output Impedence 
From Fig. 5.2(b), Output impedence measured at the output terminals with input voltage Vi = 0 can be 
calculated from the following equivalent circuit. 
As Vi = 0: Vgd = 0:  µvgd  / (µ + 1) = 0 
Output Impedence 

                 ZO = rd / (µ + 1) ║RS 
When  µ » 1  
                ZO = ( rd / µ) ║RS = (1/gm) ║RS 
 
5.13 BIASING FET 
                         For the proper functioning of a linear FET amplifier, it is necessary to maintain the 
operating point Q stable in the central portion of the pinch off region The Q point should be 
independent of device parameter variations and ambient temperature variations 
This can be achieved by suitably selecting the gate to source voltage VGS and drain current ID which is 
referred to as biasing 
 
JFET biasing circuits are very similar to BJT biasing circuitsThe main difference between JFET 
circuits and BJT circuits is the operation of the active components themselves 
 
 
There are mainly two types of Biasing circuits 
1. Self bias 
2. Voltage divider bias. 
   
5.13.1. SELF BIAS:- 
Self bias is a JFET biasing circuit that uses a source resistor to help reverse bias the JFET gate. 
 
 
A  self bias circuit is shown in the fig 5.3 
 

 
Self bias is the most common type of JFET bias. This JFET must be operated such that gate 
source junction is always reverse biased. This condition requires a negative VGS for an N channel JFET 
and a positive VGS for P channel JFET. This can be achieved using the self bias arrangement as shown in 
Fig 5.3. The gate resistor RG doesn’t affect the bias because it has essentially no voltage drop across it, 
and : the gate remains at 0V .RG is necessary only to isolate an ac signal from ground in amplifier 
applications. The voltage drop across resistor RS makes gate source junction reverse biased. 
 
 
DC analysis of self Bias:- 
In the following DC analysis , the N channel J FET shown in the fig5.4. is used for illustration. 
For DC analysis we can replace coupling capacitors by open circuits and   we can also replace       the 
resistor RG by a short circuit equivalent. 
:. IG = 0 
The relation between ID and VGS is given by 
             Id=Idss[1-
]2 
 
VGS for N channel JFET is =-id Rs 
Substuting  this value in the above equation  
          Id=Idss[1-
]2 
         Id=Idss[1+
]2 

For the N-chanel FET in the above figure  
Is produces a voltage drop across Rs and makes the source positive w.r.t ground  
in any JFET circuit all the source current passes through the device to drain circuit this is due to the fact 
that there is no significant gate current  
therefore we can define source current as Is=Id and Vg=0 then  
Vs= Is Rs =IdRs 
Vgs=Vg-Vs=0-IdRs=-IdRs 
Drawing the self bias line:- 
Typical transfer characteristics for a self biased JFET are shown in the fig5.5. 
The maximum drain current is 6mA and the gate source cut off voltage is -3V. This means the gate 
voltage has to be between 0 and -3V. 
 
 
 
Now using the equation VGS = -IDRS and assuming RS of any suitable value we can draw the self bias 
line. 
Let us assume RS = 500Ω 
 With this Rs , we can plot two points corresponding to ID = 0 and Id = IDSS  
      for ID = 0 
VGS = -ID RS 
VGS = 0X (500.Ω) = 0V 

So the first point is (0 ,0) 
 
 
      ( Id, VGS) 
For ID= IDSS=6mA 
VGS = (-6mA) (500 Ω) = -3V 
So the 2nd  Point will be (6mA,-3V) 
By plotting these two points, we can draw the straight line through the points. This line will 
intersect the transconductance curve and it is known as self bias line. The intersection point gives the 
operating point of the self bias JFET for the circuit. 
At Q point , the ID is slightly  > than 2mA and VGS is slightly > -1V. The Q point for the self bias 
JFET depends on the value of Rs.If Rs is large, Q point far down on the transconductance curve ,ID is 
small, when Rs is small Q point is far up on the curve , ID is large. 
 
5.13.2 VOLTAGE DIVIDER BIAS:- 
 
The fig5.6 shows N channel JFET with voltage divider bias. The voltage at the source of JFET 
must be more positive than the voltage at the gate in order to keep the gate to source junction reverse 
biased. The source voltage is  
VS = IDRS 
The gate voltage is set by resistors R1 and R2 as expressed by the following equation using the 
voltage divider formula. 
 Vg=
Vdd 

For dc analysis fig 5.5   
 
 
Applying KVL to the input circuit 
VG-VGS-VS =0 
:: VGS = VG-Vs=VG-ISRS 
VGS = VG-IDRS       :: IS = ID 
Applying KVL to the input circuit we get  
VDS+IDRD+VS-VDD =0 
::VDS = VDD-IDRD-IDRS 
VDS = VDD-ID ( RD +RS ) 
The Q point of a JFET amplifier , using the voltage divider bias is   
IDQ  = IDSS [1-VGS/VP]2  
VDSQ = VDD-ID ( RD+RS ) 
5.14  JFET AS A VVR OR VDR 
Let us consider the drain characteristics of FET as shown in the fig. 

 
In this characteristics we can see that in the region before pinch off voltage, drain 
characteristics are linear, i.e. FET operation is linear. In this region the FET is useful as a voltage 
controlled resistor,i.e. the drain to source resistance is controlled by the bias voltage VGS.( In this 
region only FET behaves like an ordinary resistor This resistances can be varied by VGS ) .The operation 
of FET in the region is useful in most linear applications of FET.In such an application the FET is also 
referred to as a voltage variable resistor (VVR) or voltage dependent resistor (VDR). 
The drain to source conductance ( rd ) 
                           gd=
   for small values of VDS which may also be expressed as  
                   gd=gd0(1-
)1/2) 
Where gd0 is the value of drain conductance  
When  the variation of the rd with VGS can be closely approximated by the expression  
rd=
)  Where ro = drain resistance at zero gate bias.K = a constant, dependent upon FET 
type. 
 
5.14.1 APPLICATION OF VVR 
The VVR property of FET can be used to vary the voltage gain of a multistage amplifier A, as the 
signal level is increased. This action is called AGC automatic gain control. A typical arrangement is 
shown in the fig. 

 
Here maximum value of signal is taken rectified; filter to produce a DC voltage proportional to 
the output signal level. This voltage is applied to the gate of JFET, this causing the resistance between 
drain and source to change. As this resistance is connected across RE, so effective RE also changes 
according to change in the drain to source resistance. When output signal level increases, the drain to 
source resistance rd increases, increasing effective RE. Increase in RE causes the gain of transistor Q1 
to decrease, reducing the output signal. Exactly reverse process takes place when output signal level 
decreased.  
:: The output signal level is maintained constant. It is to be noted that the DC bias conditions of 
Q1 are not affected by JFET since FET is isolated from Q1 by capacitor C2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EDC Model Papers  
MALLAREDDY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY, HYDERABAD 
B.Tech II Year I Semester Examinations, Model Paper I -2014 
Electronic Devices and Circuits 
(Common to EEE, ECE, CSE, EIE, BME, IT, MCT, ETM, ECOMPE) 
Time: 3 hours  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Max. Marks: 75  
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART-A 
1.Answer all the following questions: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)What is a pn junction? How is it formed?  
 
 
 
 
 
(2M) 
 (b) Sketch the energy-band picture for  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3M) 
              i} an  intrinsic  ii}n-type  iii} a p-type semiconductor 
       Indicates the positions of the fermi, the donor &the acceptor levels. 
(c) What is meant by rectifier? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (2M) 
(d) Compare the performance measure of different filters.   
 
 
 
(3M) 
(e) Why Transistor is called Current Controlled Device? 
 
 
 
 
 (2M) 
(f)What is early effect? How does it modify the V-I characteristics of a BJT? 
 
 (3M) 
 (g) What is meant by operating point? Explain its significance 
 
 
 
(2M) 
(h)What is the condition for thermal stability and thermal resistance?  
 
 
(3M) 
 (i) Explain when a FET acts as a voltage variable resistor.  
 
 
 
 (2M) 
(j) Explain the drain and transfer characteristics of a JFET in details  
 
 
(3M) 
 
Answer all the following questions                                       
 
 10x5=50 
2.a) Derive an expression for total diode current starting from Boltzmann relationship in terms of the 
applied voltage.  
b) The reverse saturation current of a silicon p – n function diode at an operating temperature of 270C is 
50 nA. Compute the dynamic forward and reverse resistances of the diode for applied voltages of 0.8 V 
and -0.4 V respectively.  
OR 
3.a) Explain the operation of silicon p – n junction diode and obtain the forward bias and reverse bias 
Volt – Ampere characteristics.  

b) Obtain the transition capacitance CT of a junction diode at a reverse bias voltage of 12 V if CT of the 
diode is given as 15 PF at a reverse bias of 8 V. Differentiate between transition and diffusion 
capacitances.  
4.a) Define the following terms of a rectifier and filter:  
i) Ripple Factor  
ii) Regulation  
iii) Rectification Efficiency  
iv) Form Factor 
b) What is the ripple factor if a power supply of 220 V, 50 Hz is to be Full Wave rectified and filtered 
with a 220μF capacitor before delivering to a resistive load of 120Ω? Compute the value of the capacitor 
for the ripple factor to be less than 15%.  
OR 
5.a) Derive expressions for ripple factor of a Full Wave Rectifier with and without a capacitive filter.  
b) Compute the average and RMS load currents, TUF of an unfiltered centre tapped Full Wave Rectifier 
specified below.  
Input voltage to transformer = 220 V/50 Hz.  
Step down ratio of centre tapped transformer = 4:1(Primary to each section secondary).  
Sum of transformer secondary winding in each secondary segment and diode forward resistance = 
100Ω. Load resistance, RL= 220Ω.  
6.a) With the help of input & output characteristics, explain the operation of a BJT in Common Emitter 
Configuration.  
b) For an NPN transistor with αN= 0.98, ICO= 2μA and IEO= 1.6μA connected in Common Emitter 
Configuration, calculate the minimum base current for which the transistor enters into saturation region. 
VCC and load resistance are given as 12 V and 4.0 KΩ respectively.  
OR 
7.a) Compare the characteristics of a BJT in CB, CE and CC configurations.  
b) A Silicon BJT is connected in common Emitter configuration with collector – to –Base bias. 
Calculate the base resistance Rb for the quiescent collector – to – Emitter voltage, VCE has to be 4 V. 
VCC and RC are given as 2 V and 1 KΩ respectively. Assume β= 100, VBE to be zero volts. Also find the 
stability factor of the circuit. 
8.a) Explain how self biasing can be done in a BJT with relevant sketches and waveforms.  

b) Design a self bias circuit for the following specifications: VCC = 12 V; VCE = 2V; IC = 4mA; hfe = 80. 
Assume any other design parameters required. Draw the designed circuit.  
OR 
9.a) Explain how biasing is provided to a transistor through potential divider bias. List the assumptions 
made. List the need of bias compensation methods.  
b) An NPN transistor with β= 50 is used in common Emitter configuration with VCC = 10V and RC = 2.2 
KΩ. Biasing is done through a 100 KΩ resistance from collector – to – Base. Assuming VBE to be zero 
volts, Find i) The quiescent point ii) The stability factor, „S‟.  
10.a) Detail the construction of an n-channel MOSFET of depletion  type. Draw and explain its 
characteristics.  
b) A self biased p – channel JFET has a pinch – off voltage of VP = 5 V and IDSS = 12 mA. The supply 
voltage is 12 V. Determine the values of RD and RS so that ID = 5 mA and VDS = 6V.  
OR 
11.a) Explain the significance of threshold voltage of a MOSFET. Discuss the methods to reduce 
threshold voltage, VT.  
b) A FET follows the relation ID = IDSS[1 – VGS/Vp]2. What are the values of ID and gm for VGS = -1.5 
V if IDSS and VP are given as 8.4 mA and -3V respectively.  
 

MALLAREDDY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY, HYDERABAD 
B.Tech II Year I Semester Examinations, Model Paper II -2014 
Electronic Devices and Circuits 
(Common to EEE, ECE, CSE, EIE, BME, IT, MCT, ETM, ECOMPE) 
Time: 3 hours  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Max. Marks: 75  
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART-A 
1.Answer all the following questions: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)What do you mean by potential barrier for a p-n junction?  
 
 
 
(2M) 
(b)What is the significance of negative resistance of a tunnel diode  
 
 
(3M) 
(c) Define peak inverse voltage (PIV).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2M) 
(d) Explain FWR working principle with circuit and waveforms.   
 
 
(3M) 
(e)What are the three regions of a Transistor? 
 
 
 
 
 
 (2M) 
(f) What is thermal runway ? how can it avoided?   
 
 
 
 
(3M) 
(g)What is faithful amplification?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2M) 
(h) How α,β and γ are related to each other?   
 
 
 
 
 
(3M) 
(i)Define the pinch off voltage (Vp) sketch the depletion region before and after pinchoff? (2M) 
(j) Derive Expression for saturation drain current    
 
 
 
 
(3M) 
 
Answer all the following questions:  
 
 
 
 
5x10= 50 marks 
2. Difference between  
i) Static and dynamic resistances of a p – n diode.  
ii) Transition and Diffusion capacitances of a p – n diode.  
iii)Volt – Ampere characteristics of a single silicon p – n diode and two identical silicon p- n diodes 
connected in parallel.  
iv) Avalanche and zener break down mechanisms 
 
OR 
3.a) Define the following terms for a PN diode  
i) Dynamic resistance  
ii) Load line  
iii) Difference capacitance  

iv) Reverse saturation current  
b) A reverse bias voltage of 90V is applied to a Germanium diode through a resistance R. The reverse 
saturation current of the diode is 50 μA at an operating temperature of  250C. Compute the diode current 
and voltage for  
i) R = 10 MΩ 
ii) R = 100 KΩ 
4.a) Define Ripple factor and form factor. Establish a relation between them.  
b) Explain the necessity of a bleeder resistor in an L – section filter used with a Full Wave filter. 
c) Compute ripple factor of an L – section choke input filter used at the output of a Full wave rectifier 
and capacitor values of the filter are given as 10 H and 8.2 μF respectively.  
OR 
5.a) List out the merits and demerits of Bridge type Full Wave rectifiers over centre tapped type Full 
Wave rectifiers.  
b) The secondary voltages of a centre tapped transformer are given as 60V-0V-60V the total resistance 
of secondary coil and forward diode resistance of each section of transformer secondary is 62 Ω. 
Compute the following for a load resistance of 1 KΩ.  
i) Average load current 
ii) Percentage load regulation  
iii) Rectification efficiency 
iv) Ripple factor for 240 V/50Hz supply to primary of transformer.  
c) What is bleeder resistance in L – section filters?  
6.a) Describe the significance of the terms, „α‟ and „β‟. Establish a relation between them.  
b) A transistor is operated at a forward emitter current of 2 mA and with the collector open – circuited. 
Assuming αN = 0.98, IEO = 1.6 μA and ICO = 2 μA, determine  
i) The junction voltages VC and VE 
ii) The collector to Emitter voltage VCE 
iii) The region of transistor operation (Saturation/Active/Cut-off).  
Assume any other values necessary.  
OR 
7.a) Describe the functioning of a BJT in common base configuration.  
b) Determine the collector current of a BJT with both of its junctions reverse biased. Assume ICO = 5μA, 
IEO = 3.58 μA, αN = 0.98 and any other parameter values as required.  

c) How do you identify the region of operation of a BJT to be saturation region from the values of 
various circuit currents?  
8.a) Justify statement “Potential divider bias is the most commonly used biasing method” for BJT 
circuits. Explain how bias compensation can be done in such biasing through diodes.  
b) An NPN transistor with β= 100 is used in common Emitter configuration with Collector – to – Base 
bias. If VCC = 10 V, RC = 1 K and VBE = 0 V, determine i)Rb such that quiescent Collector – to – 
Emitter Voltage is 4V. 
ii) The stability factor, „S‟.  
OR 
9.a) Define all the four hybrid parameters of a BJT in CE configuration. Draw the circuit and its 
equivalent circuit.  
b) The source and load resistances connected to a BJT amplifier in 
CE configuration are 680Ω and 1 KΩ respectively. Calculate the voltage gain AV and the input 
resistance Ri if the h-parameters are listed as hie = 1.1 kΩ ; hre = 2×10-4; hfe= 50 and hoe= 20 μmhas. 
Compute AV and Ri using both approximate and exact analysis.  
10.a) With the help of a neat schematic, explain the functioning of a common source amplifier.  
b) Bring out the differences between BJT and FET. Compare the three configurations of JFET 
amplifiers. 
OR 
11.a) Differentiate between enhancement and depletion modes of a MOSFET with the help of its 
characteristics and construction.  
b) Determine the pinch off voltage for an N – channel silicon. JFET if the thickness of its gate region is 
given as 3.2×10-4cm and the donor density in n-type region is 1.2x10-5/cm3.  
c) Establish a relation between the three JFET parameters, μ, rd and gm.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MALLAREDDY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY, HYDERABAD 
B.Tech II Year I Semester Examinations, Model Paper III -2014 
Electronic Devices and Circuits 
(Common to EEE, ECE, CSE, EIE, BME, IT, MCT, ETM, ECOMPE) 
Time: 3 hours  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Max. Marks: 75  
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART-A 
Answer all the following questions:  
 
 
 
 
 
(a)What is mean by zener breakdown  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2M) 
 (b)Explain the effect of temperature on the V-I characteristics of pn junction diode 
(3M) 
(c)What is meant by filter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2M) 
(d)Bridge rectifier is becoming more and more popular, why?  
 
 
 
(3M) 
(e)Write B.J.T specifications  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2M) 
(f) Explain how transistor acts as an Amplifier?  
 
 
 
 
 
(3M) 
(g)What is meant by stabilization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2M) 
(h)What is thermal runway? How can it avoid?  
 
 
 
 
 
(3M) 
(i)State  the application of JFET 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2M) 
(j) When FET acts as a voltage variable resistor ( vvr)?  
 
 
 
 
(3M) 
 
Answer all the following questions:  
 
 
 
 
5x10= 50 marks 
2.a) Explain the concept of diode capacitance. Derive expression for transition capacitance?  
b) Find the value of D.C. resistance and A.C resistance of a Germanium junction diode at 250C with 
reverse saturation current, Io= 25μA and at an applied voltage of 0.2V across the diode. 
OR 
3.a) What do you understand by depletion region at p-n junction? What is the effect of forward and 
reverse biasing of p-n junction on the depletion region? Explain with necessary diagrams.  
b) Explain Zener and avalanche breakdown mechanisms in detail.  
 
4. Define the following terms and derive the equations with respect to half-wave rectifier: i) Ripple 
factor ii) Peak inverse voltage iii) Rectification efficiency  iv) % Regulation.  
OR 

5.a) Draw the circuit diagram of full-wave rectifier with inductor filter. Explain its operation with 
necessary equations.  
b) A HWR circuit supplies 100mA DC current to a 250Ω load. Find the DC output voltage, PIV rating 
of a diode and the r.m.s. voltage for the transformer supplying the rectifier 
 
6.a) With neat sketches and necessary waveforms, explain the input and output characteristics of a BJT 
in CB configuration. Also derive expression for output current.  
b) Derive the relation among α, β and γ. 
OR 
7.a) With neat sketches and necessary waveforms, explain the input and output characteristics of a BJT 
in CE configuration. Also derive expression for output current.  
b) Calculate the collector current and emitter current for a transistor with α= 0.99 and ICBO= 50μA 
when the base current is 20μA. 
 
8.a) Explain the basic requirements of transistor biasing. Verify these requirements in collector to base 
bias circuit.  
b) Design a fixed bias circuit using silicon transistor, with the following specifications: VCC = 16V, 
VBE = 0.7V, VCEQ= 8V, ICQ = 4 mA & β= 50. 
OR 
9.a) What is thermal runaway in transistors? Obtain the condition for thermal stability in transistors.  
b) Draw the circuit diagram, AC equivalent & small signal equivalent of Emitter Follower amplifier 
using accurate h-parameter model. Derive expressions for AVs , AIs, RI & RO.  
 
10.a) Explain the construction & operation of an N-channel enhancement and depletion MOSFET with 
the help of static drain characteristics and transfer characteristics.  
b) Define pinch-off voltage and transconductance in field effect transistors. 
OR 
11(a) Write short notes on applications of FET as a voltage variable resistor.  
b) Explain the principle of CS amplifier with the help of circuit diagram. Derive the expressions for A
V, 
input impedance and output impedance. 
 
 

MALLAREDDY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY, HYDERABAD 
B.Tech II Year I Semester Examinations, Model Paper IV -2014 
Electronic Devices and Circuits 
(Common to EEE, ECE, CSE, EIE, BME, IT, MCT, ETM, ECOMPE) 
Time: 3 hours  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Max. Marks: 75  
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART-A 
1. Answer all the following questions: 
 
 
 
 
 
a) What is diode equation?   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2M) 
b) Draw the v-I characteristics of SCR & define all related terms.  
 
 
 (3M) 
c) What is the purpose of bleeder resistance in a rectifier circuit using LC filter?  
 (2M) 
 d) Write short note on Full wave rectifier (FWR) along with input output waveforms.  
(3M) 
 e) Why hybrid parameters are called so? Define those  
 
 
 
 
(2M) 
 f) What factors are to be considered for selecting the operating point Q for an amplifier? (3M) 
g) Why does potential divider method of biasing become universal? 
 
 
 (2M) 
h) What is the major difference between a BJT and FET?   
 
 
 
(3M) 
 i) Draw the symbols of JFET ( N  Channel/P channel )  MOSFET (Depletion MOSFET (n-  
     channel/p-channel)and  Enhancement  MOSFET (n-channel/p-channel)  
 
 (2M) 
 j) Draw the low frequency hybrid equivalent circuit for C.E .C.B and CC  
 
(3M) 
 
Answer all the following questions:  
 
 
 
 
5x10= 50 marks 
2.a) Explain about various current components in a forward biased p-n junction diode.  
b) With neat sketches and necessary waveforms explain about the  regulation characteristics  
OR 
3.a) With neat sketches and necessary waveforms explain the volt ampere characteristics of PN diode.  
b) Explain the temperature dependence of VI characteristics of PN diode.  
c) Compare ideal and practical diodes. 
4.a) Draw the circuit of full-wave rectifier with capacitor filter. Explain its operation with necessary 
equations.  
b) A full wave rectifier circuit uses two silicon diodes with a forward resistance of 20Ω each. A DC 
voltmeter connected across the load of 1K 
Ω reads 55.4 volts. Calculate  

i) Irms 
ii) Average voltage across each diode  
iii) ripple factor iv) Transformer secondary voltage rating.  
OR 
5.a) Draw the circuit of full-wave rectifier with L-section filter and derive expression  
for its ripple factor.  
b) A 230 V, 60Hz voltage is applied to the primary of a 5:1 step down, center tapped  
transformer used in a full wave rectifier having a load of 900Ω. If the diode resistance and the secondary 
coil resistance together has a resistance of 100Ω,  
determine  
i) dc voltage across the load.  
ii) dc current flowing through the load.  
iii) dc power delivered to the load.  
iv) PIV across each diode.  
6.a) With neat sketches and necessary waveforms, explain the input and output characteristics of a BJT 
in CE configuration. Also derive expression for output current.  
b) The reverse leakage current of the transistor when connected in CB configuration  
is 0.2 μA while it is 18 μA when the same transistor is connected in CE configuration. Calculate α and β 
of the transistor.  
OR 
7.a) With the help of a neat diagram explain different current components in an NPN  
bipolar junction transistor.  
b) With reference to bipolar junction transistors, define the following terms and  
explain.  
i) Emitter efficiency.  
ii) Base Transportation factor.  
iii) Large signal 
8.a) Explain how ICO variations are compensated with the help of diode and thermistor in transistor 
biasing circuits?  
b) Design a collector to base bias circuit using silicon transistor to achieve a stability  
factor of 20, with the following specifications: VCC = 16V, VBE = 0.7V, VCEQ= 8V, ICQ= 4 mA & 
β= 50. 

OR 
9.a) Explain the basic requirements of transistor biasing. Verify these requirements in Emitter feedback 
bias circuit.  
b) An NPN Silicon transistor with β=50 is used in a common emitter circuit with VCC=10V, RC=2K. 
The bias is obtained by connecting a 100K resistance from collector to base. Find i) Q-Point ii) Stability 
factor, S  
 
10.a) Explain the construction & operation of an P-channel enhancement and depletion MOSFET with 
the help of static drain characteristics and transfer characteristics.  
b) Explain why field effect transistor is called as unipolar and voltage controlled device 
OR 
11.a) With neat sketches, necessary equations explain the drain & transfer  
characteristics of MOSFET in enhancement mode.  
b) Why is a Field Effect Transistor called unipolar & voltage controlled device? Explain the drain & 
transfer characteristics of a JFET in detail.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MALLAREDDY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY, HYDERABAD 
B.Tech II Year I Semester Examinations, Model Paper V -2014 
Electronic Devices and Circuits 
(Common to EEE, ECE, CSE, EIE, BME, IT, MCT, ETM, ECOMPE) 
Time: 3 hours  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Max. Marks: 75  
1.Answer all the following questions: 
 
 
 
 
         5x2= 10 marks 
a) 
What is “dark current” of a photo diode? 
 
 
 
 
 
(2M) 
b) Which type of diode capacitance is used in the varactor diode, explain.  
 
(3M) 
c) What is Diffusion and Drift Currents? 
 
 
 
 
 
(2M) 
d) Derive ripple factor of FWR.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3M) 
e) What is a dc power supply (Regulated power supply)? 
 
 
 
(2M) 
f) Draw the characteristics of Photo Diode. 
 
 
 
 
 
(3M) 
g) Define reverse leakage current in C.E configuration  
 
 
 
(2M) 
h) Compare CB, CE and CC configurations. 
 
 
 
 
 
(3M) 
i) Define the four- h parameters  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2M) 
j) Explain the JFET  small signal model 
 
 
 
 
 
(3M) 
Answer all the following questions:  
 
 
 
 
        5x10= 50 marks 
1 a) Explain the formation of depletion region in an open circuited pn junction with neat Sketches. 
b) The voltage across a silicon diode at room temperature of 300oK is 0.7V when 2mA 
Current flows through it. If the voltage increases to 0.75V, calculate the diode current. 
(OR) 
3. Discuss the constructional details of SCR and Schotky barrier diode. 
 
2. A HWR circuit supplies 100mA DC current to a 250Ω load. Find the DC output voltage, PIV rating 
of a diode and the r.m.s. voltage for the transformer supplying the rectifier 
(OR)  
Draw the circuit of full-wave rectifier with capacitor filter. Explain its operation with necessary 
equations. 
3. The reverse leakage current of the transistor, when connected in CB configuration is 0.2mA, while it 
is 18 m A when the same transistor is connected in CE configuration. 
Calculate α and β of the transistor 
(OR) 

a) Compare the three transistor amplifier configurations with related to A
I, A
V, R
i and R
O.  
b) For the emitter follower with R
S = 0.5K, R
L = 50K, h
fe = -50, h
ie = 1K, h
oe = 25μA/V, h
re = 1. Calculate 
A
V, A
I, Z
i and Z
O. 
4. Draw a fixed bias circuit and explain its operation. Calculate the Stability factor 
(OR) 
(a)What is thermal runaway in transistors? Obtain the condition for thermal stability in transistors.  
b) Design a self bias circuit using silicon transistor to achieve a stability factor of 10, with the following 
specifications: V
CC = 16V, V
BE = 0.7V, V
CEQ = 8V, I
CQ = 4 mA & β = 50. 
5. a) Write the expressions for mid-frequency gain of a FET Common Source Amplifier.  
b) Discuss the high frequency response of CD Configuration. 
(OR) 
Explain the working of MOSFET in i) Enhancement mode ii) Depletion mode.  
Draw the necessary diagrams and graphs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

