28
Research Article – SACJ No. 50, July 2013
Academic perceptions of the ideal computer science student
Hannah Thinyane
Department of Computer Science, Rhodes University, South Africa
ABSTRACT
This paper presents the results of a case study aimed at identifying the skills that lecturers in a computer science department
value in an undergraduate student, and to determine if there is a departmental construction of an ‘ideal’ student. To answer
this question, a case study was undertaken in the Computer Science Department at a small university in South Africa.
Participants were asked to complete a questionnaire and to take part in an interview to solicit feedback on their notion of
an ‘ideal’ student. This study found that participants valued the following skills within undergraduate student: creativity;
computer playfulness; planning, analytical or abstract thinking, and problem solving; introverted personality; engagement
in class; working independently; self eﬃcacy; and responsibility. It also found a strong correlation between participant’s
own performance as a student and their understanding of an ‘ideal’ student. These results are then discussed within the
context of South African Higher Education, where student populations are becoming more diverse. The paper calls for
academics to reﬂect on their own teaching, and the relevance of their practices to the present conditions of transformation
in Higher Education in South Africa.
KEYWORDS: Higher education, ideal student, computer science
CATEGORIES: K.3.2
1
INTRODUCTION
Traditionally seen as ‘ivory tower elitist’, there is an
internationally recognised call [1] for Higher Education
Institutions (HEIs) to become more responsive across
a number of diﬀerent fronts. Middlehurst [2] classi-
ﬁes these pressures into four categories: “economic
and business dynamics; social and intellectual devel-
opments; technological developments; and changes in
government policy”.
Changes in economic and business dynamics in-
clude global trends of governments reducing funding
to HEIs [3], yet expecting lecturers “to engage with a
greater number and wider diversity of students, and
provide them with the knowledge, skills, and dispo-
sitions that are deemed necessary for society in the
21st Century” [4, p. 434]. Popular business concepts
are also being applied to HEIs, with “ﬁscal discipline,
eﬃciency and cost-beneﬁt optimisation principles from
the world of business . . . seen as the key to the transfor-
mation of higher education in the direction of greater
responsiveness to society” [5, p. 9].
Perhaps the two most signiﬁcant social and intel-
lectual developments that have been felt within HEIs
are due to massiﬁcation and diversiﬁcation of the stu-
dent body. These trends have been felt globally [6] [7],
but have been particularly noticeable in post-apartheid
South Africa. Since 1993, the number of black and
women South Africans, particularly from working class
Email: Hannah Thinyane H.Thinyane@ru.ac.za
and rural areas, participating in higher education has
increased [8]. Between 1993 and 2005, the total num-
ber of enrolments in higher education has increased by
160% (473,000 to 737,472) [9] [10]. Over the same time
period, black student enrolment levels have risen from
52% to 75%, and women enrolment has risen from 43%
to 54.5% [9] [10]. Despite these increases, government
subsidies to HEIs have fallen from 21.5% in 1991, to
13.9% in 2002-2004 [3].
Technological innovations have enabled both vir-
tual and physical networks between educators, industry,
and government to grow. So much so, that many com-
mentators “base their predictions of expansion, quality
and access to higher education on an increased use
of new technologies” [2, p. 9]. Many researchers have
illustrated that these new technologies (such as ad-
vances in connectivity, hardware, and software) have
had signiﬁcant eﬀect on teaching and learning in higher
education, in particular in areas such as e-learning,
dual-mode teaching, and Information and Communi-
cation Technologies (ICTs) within the classroom [11].
In some cases, such as within Computer Science and
Information Systems Departments, technological in-
novations necessarily aﬀect the teaching and learning
environments as well as content, far more than other
non-technical disciplines.
Finally, changes to government policy can also be
seen to impact higher education. Under apartheid,
HEIs within South Africa were separated, funded, and
allocated roles in order to reproduce the apartheid
social order [12]. Although a thing of the past, the
inequalities of this separate development are still felt

Research Article – SACJ No. 50, July 2013
29
today, as they “continue to condition the current ca-
pacities of institutions to pursue excellence, to provide
high quality learning and research experiences and
equity of opportunity, and to contribute to economic
and social development” [8, p. 6]. As also noted by
Badat, the current attempts at transforming higher
education with South Africa occur within “the context
of a formidable overall challenge of pursuing economic
development, . . . social equity and the extension and
deepening of democracy simultaneously” [8, p. 7].
These pressures together reﬂect the dynamic envi-
ronment in which HEIs are situated. From the discus-
sion above, it is evident that HEIs have been pressured
to change over the past decades, to respond to eco-
nomic and business dynamics; social and intellectual
developments; technological innovations; and changes
to government policy. This paper aims to determine
the skills that academics within a Computer Science
Department at a South African HEI believe are neces-
sary for the ‘ideal’ student. It also aims to understand
if these skills reﬂect the changes that have been evident
in the environments that HEIs operate. To do so, this
paper ﬁrst presents some related work in the ﬁelds of
teaching and learning. It then describes the research
design used throughout this study. The results are
then presented and discussed within the context of
South African Higher Education.
It is hoped that this paper can contribute to aca-
demics’ understanding of the driving forces that inﬂu-
ence change in the teaching and learning environments
that we work in. The paper calls for academics to re-
ﬂect on their own teaching, and the relevance of their
practices to the present conditions of transformation
in Higher Education in South Africa.
2
RELATED WORK
Educational researchers have contributed to a signif-
icant body of work, investigating the inﬂuences that
teachers perceptions of teaching have on students’
learning [13] [14]. Pratt [15] developed a taxonomy of
ﬁve diﬀerent perspectives on teaching: transmission,
developmental, apprenticeship, nurturing, and social
reform. Pratt found that of the 2,000 teachers who had
undertaken his Teaching Perspectives Inventory [16],
over 90% held only one or two of these perspectives
as their dominant view of teaching, and marginally
identiﬁed with one or two others.
Intertwined into any teaching environment is the
construction of a ‘good’, ‘ideal’, ‘clever’, ‘intelligent’
or ‘smart’ student. Studies have shown that concepts
of intelligence are culturally relative. As Wang, Ceci,
Williams and Kopko note:
. . . cognitive competence is relevant to spe-
ciﬁc cultures, to the social and physical con-
texts in which the child participates in or-
ganized activities, and to the cultural and
societal demands as perceived by the child
him or herself [17, p. 17].
Although Wang et al. refer in this paper to child learn-
ing, the same can be said for adult learning. Examples
can be found in literature of cultural diﬀerences in
concepts of learning: in America emphasis appears
to be primarily on cognitive skills [18]; Zambian def-
initions of intelligence include someone being clever,
but also include other factors such as obedience, co-
operation, listening and understanding, as well as a
prompt response [19]; Japanese deﬁnitions include a
cognitive component, but far more than the US in
particular emphasise a “heart and mind for wanting to
learn” [20, p. 122], or “socio-emotional prerequisites
of competence rather than on knowledge or skills as
such” [21, p. 193].
Culture has traditionally been deﬁned as learned
and shared behaviour that is common to a community
of people [22, p. 169].
This deﬁnition is typically
applied to groups of people located within a particular
area, such as the deﬁnition oﬀered by Kroeber and
Kluckhorn:
Culture consists of patterns, explicit and
implicit, of and for behaviour acquired and
transmitted by symbols, constituting the dis-
tinctive achievements of human groups, in-
cluding their embodiments in artefacts; the
essential core of culture consists of traditional
(i.e., historically derived and selected) ideas
and especially their attached values; culture
systems may, on the one hand, be considered
as products of action, and on the other as
conditioning elements of further action [23].
Becher and Trowler broaden the deﬁnition of culture by
applying it to diﬀerent disciplines within academia. In
“Academic Tribes and Territories”, Becher and Trowler
[24] illustrate the existence of these learned and shared
human patterns and practices which are unique within
academic disciplines, such as: gatekeeping practices;
the nature of innovations speciﬁc to disciplines; com-
munication patterns; career trajectories; and even the
sports and other pastimes that are preferred by diﬀer-
ent “tribes”. Within the “tribe” of computer science,
a number of studies have been undertaken to deter-
mine the skills that make an ‘ideal’ programmer. Early
studies [25] [26] concentrated on the Myers-Briggs in-
dicators to determine the psychological preferences
of programmers. These studies had mixed ﬁndings,
with Lyons ﬁnding the majority of programmers to
be “thinking judging”, and Sitton & Chmelir ﬁnding
the majority to be “thinking perceiving”. From a skill
perspective, a number of other studies have highlighted
the importance of self-eﬃcacy [27] [28] as a key char-
acteristic of computer programmers. Researchers have
found a correlation between “computer playfulness”
[29] [30] and stronger feelings of self-eﬃcacy.
If we return to our broadening deﬁnition of culture
and take a sociological perspective on the term, one
of the leaders in this area is Bourdieu [31]. One of his
key concepts is “habitus”, the internal structures that
determine how a person acts and reacts to the world.
We acquire this “habitus” ﬁrst from our families, but
then also from our schooling, that through habitua-
tion, repetition, and aﬃrmation of certain behaviours
(attitudinal, aﬀective, cognitive, and bodily) forms this

30
Research Article – SACJ No. 50, July 2013
largely unconscious disposition. Bourdieu argues that
although “habitus” is constructed on an individual
basis, shared experiences in the world will produce a
collective “habitus”. Another concept that Bourdieu
deﬁnes is “doxa”, which illustrates that a person’s
beliefs seem to have “a quasi-perfect correspondence
between the objective order and the subjective princi-
ples of organization [with which] the natural and social
world appears as self evident” [31, p. 156]. That is, the
ways that individuals have learnt to perceive, evaluate,
and behave become accepted and considered ‘normal’
to themselves [31, p. 164].
As further explored by
Throop and Murphy [32, p. 189], “it is the successful
‘internal’ replication of structure that leads individu-
als to mistake ‘objective structures’ as ‘natural’, as
they remain ignorant of the ever-present dialectical
reconstitution of internal and objective structures”.
What Bourdieu is perhaps most known for is his
application of these concepts within the sphere of ed-
ucation, particularly the public education system in
France [33]. Bourdieu sought to explain why students
from working class backgrounds continually performed
worse than their upper class peers. He concluded that
the students themselves were not to blame, but that
the curriculum itself favoured students who had been
exposed to upper class culture in the construction of
their “habitus”. Using Bourdieu’s terminology, it was
because of the students’ lack of ‘cultural capital’ that
working class students did not perform as well as their
upper class peers. He believed that it was for this rea-
son that education systems could reproduce themselves
and perpetuate inequality.
This section began by exploring the interplay be-
tween teachers’ diﬀering perspective on teaching and
students’ approaches to learning. It illustrated that
diﬀerent cultures have their own concept of an ‘ideal’
student, and then expanded the deﬁnition of culture
to include academic disciplines. The next section dis-
cusses the design of the experiment that was under-
taken to determine the concept of an ‘ideal’ student
within the Computer Science Department at Rhodes
University.
3
RESEARCH DESIGN
The main research question that was addressed in this
study was: what are the skills that lecturers in a com-
puter science department value in an undergraduate
student, and is there a departmental construction of
an ‘ideal’ student. In order to answer these questions,
the following subsidiary questions were posed:
• What skills do lecturers believe are critical in an
‘ideal’ computer science student?
• Is a lecturer’s construct of an ‘ideal’ student inﬂu-
enced by their own performance as a student?
• Is there a consensus across the department of an
‘ideal’ student?
3.1
Methodology: case study
Quantitative and qualitative studies are both valuable
in providing evidence across the study of diﬀerent phe-
nomena. On the one hand, quantitative studies use
large numbers of (typically) randomly selected partic-
ipants to study a speciﬁc group of variables. Quan-
titative studies can be used to produce generalizable
ﬁndings that can be applied to other populations, but
in doing so they lose much of the richness in the de-
tails of the studied activity or phenomena [34]. On
the other, qualitative studies provide rich causal ex-
planations, but deal with a small number of cases. A
disadvantage of qualitative studies is that they are
less generalizable. However, when a study is “contex-
tualized and carefully described . . . then others can
consider its usefulness in other contexts and examples”
[35, p. 191].
This research uses a qualitative approach and can
be seen as a case study. A case study is deﬁned as a
“strategy for doing research which involves an empirical
investigation of a particular contemporary phenomenon
in its real life context using multiple sources of evidence”
[36, p. 52]. This approach allows researchers to focus on
the primary strength of case study methodology, that
it “enables the uncovering of events or processes that
one might miss with more superﬁcial methods” [37,
p. 238]. Case study research does have its drawbacks
though. Social realist research, which underpins the
thinking in this study explicitly holds that:
No individual-level intervention works for
everyone. No institution-level intervention
works everywhere. The net eﬀect of any par-
ticular programme is thus made up of the
balance of successes and failures of individ-
ual subjects and locations. What this points
to is the need for a careful look at subject
and contextual diﬀerence in terms of who suc-
ceeds and who fails within any programme
[38, p. 30-1].
This reporting therefore does not claim to generalise,
but to highlight skills that are considered as essential in
an ‘ideal’ computer science student within a particular
context.
3.2
Participants
This research is based in the Computer Science Depart-
ment at Rhodes University, a relatively small (7200
students) public university in South Africa. At the
time of the study taking place, there were 12 full time
academic staﬀmembers in the department. As this
research aimed to investigate a departmental construc-
tion of an ideal student, only members of staﬀwho
had been employed for at least one full year in the
department took part in the study (n=10). The re-
searcher herself is part of the department, and thus did
not participate in the study (n=9, 3 females, 6 males).
3.3
Survey instruments
A survey of literature was ﬁrst undertaken to determine
the core skills and competencies that are suggested for

Research Article – SACJ No. 50, July 2013
31
computer science graduates. This review included a
number of diﬀerent sources such as ACM / IEEE cur-
riculum review documentation, the Rhodes University
Computer Science Department’s Vision and Values
statement, and peer reviewed journals and conference
papers in the ﬁeld [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] [44] [45] [46].
This review resulted in a list of 96 skills which were then
analysed and duplicates were removed. The remaining
63 skills were then categorised as follows: interper-
sonal skills, leadership skills, self-management, think-
ing skills, workload management, information handling,
personal qualities, and handling the unknown.
Four student scenarios were then developed based
on the skills from the list, with each student presented
with a number of positive skills and one negative char-
acteristic. The four student scenarios are: Andrew, a
team player who is reliable, good at time management,
but not creative; Bridget, a very introverted student
who is analytical, insightful, and good at written com-
munication; Cynthia, an extremely creative student
who is terrible at time management; and David, an
extrovert who is conﬁdent, and an independent and
critical thinker, but can become aggressive and critical.
These four scenarios represent a systematic variance
in gender, degree of extroversion / introversion, and
communication skills.
A two page questionnaire was developed with one
page based on the four scenarios, and the second page
based on the skills (see Appendix A). The ﬁrst page
asked participants to rank the four students from ‘ideal’
to ‘weak’ student (on a scale of 1 to 4 respectively), and
to justify their rankings. The second page asked partic-
ipants to select at most three skills from each category
that they felt were important in a student. It also gave
participants the chance to include any other skills that
they felt were important to each of the categories. The
scenarios and skill list were employed together in the
survey, and as will be described in the next subsection,
were followed by an interview to attempt to increase
the validity of the ﬁndings, by incorporating what
Denzin [47] refers to as methodological triangulation.
3.4
Method and analysis
Prior to the study, permission was granted from the
Computer Science and Information Systems Ethics
Committee, and each participant signed a consent
form.
When consent was given, participants were
provided with a copy of the questionnaire and asked
to notify the researcher when it was completed. On
completion of the questionnaire, each participant was
interviewed separately in order to solicit more infor-
mation on their rankings; their construction of an
‘ideal’ student; and their opinion on a departmental
construction of an ‘ideal’ student. The average dura-
tion of each interview was 10-23 minutes, and followed
a semi-structured interview schedule with a series of
key questions that commenced with non-emotive ques-
tions aimed at putting interviewees at ease, and then
progressed to more theory-laden questions. In this
context, theory-laden refers to theories from literature
and from the researcher’s own reﬂection that could
impact the construction of an ‘ideal’ student.
All interviews were recorded using a Samsung
Galaxy i9000s and compressed to MP3 format. In-
terviews were then transcribed verbatim by the re-
searcher. Transcriptions were sent to participants for
member checking to improve the accuracy and validity
of the study. Questionnaires were captured and en-
tered into Microsoft Excel for later incorporation in the
data analysis phase. Transcripts and questionnaires
were coded to maintain the anonymity of participants,
whilst allowing a correlation between the participants’
two forms of response.
Qualitative data analysis can involve using top-
down, bottom-up, or a combined coding approach [48].
This research used a combined approach. At the be-
ginning of the process, a top-down approach was used
in that questionnaire responses were analysed and all
skills that were ranked as important by at least 50% of
the participants were included as categories. Table 1
shows the 15 skills that were ranked as important by
participants and the frequency that the skill was se-
lected. The frequency was calculated as a percentage of
the number of participants who selected skills for that
grouping (regardless of how many skills they selected
per grouping). The brackets following each table entry
indicates the category under which the skill appeared
in the questionnaire:
• L – Leadership
• SM – Self Management
• TS – Thinking Skills
• WM – Workload Management
• IH – Information Handling
• PQ – Personal Qualities
• HU – Handling the Unknown
• IS – Interpersonal Skills
During the analysis, a bottom-up approach was also
used to derive additional categories based on the con-
tent of the data [48, p. 32].
The researcher made use of the constant compara-
tive analysis technique [49] to analyse transcripts and
questionnaire responses. NVivo, a qualitative software
package, was used to perform all coding and analysis of
qualitative feedback. Once all coding was completed,
reports were drawn from NVivo on the various themes
that will be presented in the following section.
4
RESULTS
This section presents the results of this case study,
organised as follows: student scenario rankings; ‘ideal’
student skills; inﬂuence of own experience as a student;
and departmental construct. Results for these three
questions are preceded by a description of the student
scenario ranking.
4.1
Student scenario ranking
Table 2 presents a summary of the participants’ rank-
ings of each of the four scenarios. From the left column,
this table presents the mean, median, mode, minimum,
and maximum rankings across all participants. All

32
Research Article – SACJ No. 50, July 2013
Table 1: Top-ranked skills
Initiative (L)
78%
Self-motivation (SM)
78%
Abstract thinking (TS)
67%
Dedication (L)
67%
Innovation (L)
67%
Organization (WM)
67%
Analysis and synthesis (TS)
56%
Good written communication (IH)
56%
Open to constructive criticism (IS)
56%
Problem solving (TS)
56%
Responsibility (SM)
56%
Responsibility (PQ)
56%
Seeing the larger picture (IH)
56%
Time management (WM)
56%
Ability to work independently (IS)
56%
scores are ranked on a scale of 1 to 4, where 1 rep-
resents an ‘ideal’ student, and 4 represents a ‘weak’
student.
As Table 2 shows, out of all of the students, Brid-
get was ranked the closest to ‘ideal’, being ranked in
position 1 or 2 by all participants. As such, her mean
ranking was signiﬁcantly lower than any of the other
student scenarios. David was closest behind her, with
a range of 1 to 3 across participants. Andrew and Cyn-
thia were ranked very similarly, with identical median,
mode, minimum, and maximum rankings. The only
diﬀerence was in their mean, with Cynthia receiving
a lower (and therefore closer to ‘ideal’) ranking than
Andrew.
It is interesting to see that the descriptions of the
two highest ranking students made speciﬁc mention of
their analytical ability, and diﬀered in how introverted
they were. Bridget, the top-ranked student, was a
classic introvert, who does not like oral communication
and is most comfortable out of the spot light. David
on the other hand is the classic extrovert, who is great
at oral communication and loves to be the centre of
attention. The descriptions of Cynthia and Andrew
also play oﬀof each other, with Cynthia being creative
with poor time management skills, and Andrew having
great time management skills, but not being creative.
These rankings cannot be used alone to identify
‘ideal’ skills, as each student represents a trade-oﬀ.
Participants commented on a number of occasions that
they struggled to choose one participant over another,
as each had skills that were not ‘ideal’. This question
aimed instead to explore the combination of skills that
were preferred. The following section describes ﬁndings
for individual skills as ranked by participants.
4.2
‘Ideal’ student skills
Due to the small sample size, statistical tests could not
be conducted to establish the statistical signiﬁcance
of participant rankings of skills (Table 1). Instead,
this section focuses on the qualitative feedback ob-
tained during the interviews. A large number of the
comments from participants in interviews identiﬁed
additional qualities of ‘ideal’ students that had not
been selected in their questionnaires, and were coded
using the bottom-up approach described in Section 3.4.
This section provides an overview of the skills, ordered
by the frequency that they were mentioned in the
interview.
4.2.1
Creativity
Although most participants indicated that creativity
was essential, a number of them expressed concern
that when left unchecked, this could have an impact
on deadlines. This concern was perhaps inﬂuenced
by Cynthia, one of the students from the scenarios
on the questionnaire who was creative but missed her
deadlines. One participant commented:
I love the creativity personally of Cynthia,
but her inability to complete things on time
and the sort of random creativity makes for
unfortunately not a good computer science
student. They tend to not get in depth into
the course but go oﬀon tangents. So the
foundation work is really not there. She prob-
ably won’t be a very good computer science
student.
When answering questions about the skills that he felt
were required in students, another participant noted
that he was particularly looking for skills that could
not be taught to students but had to be present already.
From his perspective,
. . . the inability to be creative is quite a
core thing and it represents something that is
diﬃcult to instil in a student if it’s not there
already
Creativity can also be viewed as being related to an
autotelic personality, where the student has an internal
motivation and is driven by curiosity. One participant
described the importance of an autotelic personality
for computer science students saying:
You get into the zone where you are organ-
ising things and they all are kind of working
. . . So this idea that you sit up and immerse
yourself in quite hard conceptual stuﬀand
lose track of time. I think that is what most
really good computer scientists do. I think
once you get into something, it just takes you
over and you’re in a diﬀerent space completely

Research Article – SACJ No. 50, July 2013
33
Table 2: Student scenario ranking
Mean
Median
Mode
Min
Max
Andrew
2.778
3
4
1
4
Bridget
1.556
2
2
1
2
Cynthia
2.667
3
4
1
4
David
2.556
3
3
1
3
. . . And so the idea of an autotelic personal-
ity and getting into the ﬂow or the zone of
things looks like an important thing about
being creative when you build software.
4.2.2
Computer playfulness
Computer playfulness has been deﬁned in literature
as “the tendency to interact spontaneously, inventively,
and imaginatively with microcomputers” [27, p. 417].
This skill was mentioned by a number of diﬀerent
participants, and can be seem to be complementary to
creativity. One participant described her experience
with playfulness:
. . . the people who become good program-
mers and computer scientists are those that
like playing with programs. And actually it
doesn’t matter if you’re getting the pracs in
on time because what you ﬁnd is in the ex-
ams, because they’re interested and because
they’ve played, they tend to be able to come
up with good solutions.
Participants also correlated a lack of playing to a su-
perﬁcial understanding of course content. A number
of participants described deep approaches to learning
within computer science as playing with programs.
I ranked Andrew lowest because of the
fact that he sounds like he’s very good at
handling work that he’s given, but he doesn’t
go much beyond that.
What you tend to
ﬁnd with those people is when you ask them
to extend themselves, they struggle to do
anything diﬀerent, because they’ve done the
prac and for the test they’ve memorised the
prac and what they did in class. But they’re
not ﬁnding it so easy to apply what they
learnt to anything else.
4.2.3
Planning, analytical or abstract thinking, and prob-
lem solving
Planning, analytical or abstract thinking, and problem
solving have been grouped together, as they refer to
what are typically considered as the cognitive skills
required of a computer scientist. As could be expected,
these skills ranked highly with participants.
I felt that an analytical deep thinking
student was someone who would do well in
undergraduate courses, because they would
think hard about the material, analyse it, and
then with that analytical capability be able
to provide something in the exams that was
good.
Another participant emphasised the importance of
abstract thinking, referring to it as one of the most
important skills in a computer science student:
So for me the two most important things
are abstracting and reasoning in an abstract
form. And the ability of taking the empirical
nature of the beast and then use it together
with the abstract thinking.
4.2.4
Extrovert vs. introvert
Computer scientists are typically portrayed as intro-
verts who lack in social skills [50].
Participants in
this study agreed with the stereotype, with a number
of them commenting that the introverted stereotypes
represented more typical computer science students.
One participant who had ranked David, an extrovert,
as their ‘ideal’ computer scientist was disconcerted by
this part of his character and remarked saying “an
extrovert shouldn’t be a typical computer scientist”.
Another participant rationalised his preference for
introverts as programmers, referring to the deep think-
ing skills that are required for computer science:
I’m not sure that extroverts are going to
make the best programmers. I think a lot
of computer science happens reﬂectively in
your head. So people who reﬂect . . . and think
quietly and organise ideas I think make better
computer scientists.
One of the participants focused on a particular aspect
of the introvert Bridget’s personality, in that she lacked
oral communication skills. He described that while
this lack of skill was quite common in undergraduate
computer science students, it typically would blossom
in postgraduate studies or a work environment.
Although they don’t speciﬁcally refer to extroverts
and introverts, one participant showed concern about
students who ‘need’ to work with other people. In her
comments, she referred to qualities of introverted and
extroverted students, with particular reference to the
typical introverted personalities in a computer science
class:
You need to like to do things indepen-
dently. I think that actually it is very impor-
tant in this ﬁeld, because it tends to attract
people who are nerdy etcetera and like to
work alone. So if you are somebody who needs

34
Research Article – SACJ No. 50, July 2013
to work with other people, what you’ll often
ﬁnd is you become isolated in a computer
science class because everyone is doing their
own thing and there’s this competitive vibe
going, particularly amongst the better stu-
dents, and if someone is collaborative rather
than competitive, it makes it diﬃcult to ﬁt
into that.
This comment refers to feelings of isolation that the
participant believes could be felt by an extrovert in a
class of introverts.
4.2.5
Engagement in class
The next most frequently discussed topic was engage-
ment in class. A surprising number of participants
referred to this skill when describing their ‘ideal’ com-
puter scientist. One of the questions on the question-
naire asked participants if there were any students they
could think of that they thought were ‘ideal’ computer
science students. One participant in particular named
two students who he felt were ‘ideal’. When asked what
characteristics the students shared, he ﬁrst mentioned
their intelligence, but then commented saying “both
of them will kind of interact with you and talk with
you”. Another participant made a correlation between
‘geeky’ students and willingness to participate in class:
This is going to be stereotypical but they
tend to be a little bit geeky. In other words
they don’t really care what other people think
of them in terms of asking questions. They
don’t care if they put their hand up three
times in a row.
They are focused on the
material.
Other respondents felt that engagement in class was a
sign of a deeper approach to learning for a course:
Stuﬀlike the dedication and the hard
working, and enthusiasm comes through in
the being prepared to interact and talk about
things . . . being prepared to stick your neck
out and answer questions in class.
4.2.6
Working independently
A number of participants described the importance
of working independently. Participants used the word
independence from two diﬀerent perspectives: indepen-
dence as opposed to working in a team, and indepen-
dence as opposed to working only as directed by the
lecturer. From the ﬁrst perspective, participants were
wary of students only working in teams, as they did
not believe that it would provide students with enough
opportunity to develop their own skills:
I don’t think you can really become a good
computer science student if you really only
work in teams . . . To a large extent there are
certain habits that you have to get into you
have to develop alone. And once you have
those, you and someone else who has those
can work together, or you can help them to
develop them.
Participants expressed an understanding that learning
was a social process, and that asking them to work in
pairs and talk through a problem was beneﬁcial, but
were still hesitant to allow students to work in groups
for a large portion of their assignments.
From the second perspective of working indepen-
dently, a number of participants commented on student
engagement with class material and showing initia-
tive to work by themselves. This could be seen as a
similar skill to ‘computer playfulness’ as described in
Section 4.2.2:
. . . if you just rely on what you’re given
and you don’t put any eﬀort in yourself then
you’re not going to get anywhere.
The ability to work independently is really
important . . . To act like an adult and do stuﬀ.
4.2.7
Self-eﬃcacy
Literature has often showed that people’s positive be-
lief in their own skills and capabilities has a positive
implication on their performance [30]. When describ-
ing his rankings for the four stereotype students, one
participant felt that the student Bridget represented a
gender stereotype that he had experienced in computer
science:
The scenario [Bridget] paints out that she
is insightful and I think it goes to an inter-
esting characteristic around self conﬁdence,
which in many ways is gender stereotyped
in my experience.
Young women coming
through the computer science program, some
of them are very conﬁdent, but they need
constant reassurance that they can do things.
And they often know the answer but are un-
willing to share it in the oﬀchance that they
are wrong. Someone like [Student] had a fan-
tastic work ethic, highly organised, and was
really good, but very insecure about her own
ability.
In referring to this need for constant reassurance, this
participant highlighted that an ‘ideal’ student would
demonstrate self eﬃcacy.
4.2.8
Responsibility
Responsibility was also suggested as a skill for the ideal
computer science student. One participant described
their reason for highlighting this skill saying:
Because I think if you are responsible it
covers a lot of the other aspects. Because you
are responsible to yourself for what you do,
and responsible towards others. It covers a
lot of the other evils.”
4.3
Inﬂuence of own experience as student
This section explores answers to the research question
“Is a lecturer’s construct of an ‘ideal’ student inﬂuenced
by their own performance as a student?”. To do so,
participants were asked how they believe their lecturers
found them when they were a student. They were also

Research Article – SACJ No. 50, July 2013
35
asked if they could relate to any of the four student
scenarios described in Section 3.4. In response to these
questions, all participants except for one (88.89%) said
that they were most like the student they had ranked
as ideal (66.67%), or a combination of their ideal stu-
dent plus the antithesis of their ideal student (i.e.,
Andrew-Cynthia, Bridget-David) (22.22%). The one
participant (11.11%) who did not rank in this way
responded saying he was unlike any of the scenarios.
These rankings show a strong correlation between lec-
turers’ individual construction of an ‘ideal’ student
and their own performance as a student.
A number of participants described that they ques-
tioned themselves when ranking students, with one
participant commenting that he asked himself “Am
I just looking for students who are like me?”. An-
other participant made some particularly insightful
comments regarding the ranking of ‘ideal’ students:
The parts of me that I am happy with
and feel comfortable with are what I like to
see in students as well. And it particularly
came out when I was thinking of Cynthia.
She epitomises a person who is very diﬀerent
from me. And can I really see the good parts
of that? To answer your question then, a lot
of how I was as a student is what I strived
for in what I’ve put down here.
This comment correlates with Bourdieu’s ﬁndings of
education systems reproducing themselves and perpet-
uating the culture of the department or educational
institution (Section 3.4).
4.4
Departmental construct
The ﬁnal question this research sought to address was
is there a departmental construct of an ideal student.
When asked if they thought that other staﬀmembers
had the same perceptions of what an ideal student was,
all participants responded that they did not believe this
was the case. Two participants (22.22%) believed that
there may be a “loose correlation” between skills, but
not across the whole department. The results presented
in the previous sections conﬁrm these suspicions, that
there are some skills that are rated high by participants,
but there is no consensus across all participants.
One third of the participants explicitly mentioned
that the diversity in constructions of ‘ideal’ students
amongst staﬀwas a positive factor. One participant
noted that the diversity in staﬀand the diversity in
the students were beneﬁcial:
I think it’s fortunate that students get a
cross section of teachers and we get a cross
section of students. You can’t win them all,
and they’re a probably some students you
can relate to and you can pull up, but there
are some students that you can’t . . . I always
hope that for every student that I manage to
get a spark in to, or from every one that I
don’t that there have been other people in the
department who get them over that. Because
if you are a student who doesn’t relate to any
one at all, with no staﬀas role models, it
must be very hard. The students will be left
behind.
5
DISCUSSION
Researchers from a vast array of disciplines have been
interested in investigating and understanding intelli-
gence. Dweck [51, p. 6] approaches the topic from
a psychological perspective and notes that there are
typically two views on intelligence that are held: ﬁxed
mindset, or growth mindset. From a ﬁxed mindset,
a student is viewed as having “a certain amount of
intelligence, a certain personality, and a certain moral
character”. This mindset does not allow for change
(improvement) and leaves the student in a position of
helplessness as they cannot do anything to change it
if they just so happened to be born “unintelligent”.
From a growth mindset however, your basic qualities of
intelligence, personality and moral character can be im-
proved through eﬀort. After twenty years of research,
Dweck found that students with a growth mindset
were more willing to try new things, to pick themselves
up when they failed, and to try again. When a stu-
dent’s self-worth is tied up in being “smart”, and when
a teacher only praises and rewards correct answers,
Dweck found that students either become lazy and rely
on their intelligence to pull them through; or they shy
away from new or diﬃcult tasks in case they are not
good at them. When a student has a ﬁxed mindset
and believes they are not one of the “smart” ones, then
they may be so scared to be wrong that they don’t try
at all.
When applied to teaching, the ﬁxed/growth mind-
set and importance of practice provide some interesting
connections with computer playfulness, creativity, and
to an extent working independently. Perhaps most ob-
viously, computer playfulness, creativity and working
independently can be seen as practicing. In promot-
ing skill practice, students would gain experience and
develop their computer science skills. The question be-
comes, within a computer science curriculum then how
could this be encouraged? Computer science students
are motivated by the same thing as other students: to
motivate students to practice typically there must be
marks allocated [52]. This is interesting as it changes
the dynamics of computer playfulness and working in-
dependently. No longer would these skills be employed
out of a place of curiosity or creativity (intrinsic motiva-
tion), but out of obligation (extrinsic rewards). Instead
of seeing this through a negative lens, by aligning out-
comes, teaching, and assessment [53], a lecturer could
take advantage of students motivation and encourage
participation in creative or playful exercises.
Dweck’s research also presents some interesting
challenges. For example, how can eﬀort be rewarded in
a teaching environment? How can we acknowledge the
“smart” students without setting them up to rely on
their intelligence? As mentioned earlier, students are
typically motivated by marks, and focus on learning
skills or theories that are assigned marks. To reward

36
Research Article – SACJ No. 50, July 2013
the process rather than just the outcome of learning,
marks must then be allocated for the process.
Another skill that was mentioned by a number
of participants was student engagement. Given the
particular context of South Africa, and particularly
previously disadvantaged schools within South Africa,
this can be a culture shock for students. Teaching in
previously disadvantaged schools tends to be teacher
dominated, where students are taught that to ques-
tion a teacher is to question their authority [54]. This
mismatch in expectations between staﬀand students
has been documented across diﬀerent countries and
academic departments [55] [56] [57]. To rectify this,
lecturers can engage students in discussions about their
expectations for the course. As well as providing clari-
ﬁcations to students, lecturers can use this process to
demonstrate active engagement with issues, mentor-
ing students in ways of participation within academic
discourse [58].
It is important to note that this research is framed
as a case study, and as discussed in Section 3.1, dis-
advantages of this research methodology include the
lack of direct generalizability of ﬁndings [38]. It is
interesting to note however, that the skills that were
selected as important by participants mirror ﬁndings
from other studies [27] [30] [39] [45].
The participants’ own experience as a student can
be seen to have an impact on the skills that they value
in their students. On reﬂection, it can be seen that
this process of valuing, and training students in par-
ticular skills replicates the existing status quo within
a system across each new intake of students. With
the massiﬁcation of university both internationally and
across Africa [10], there have been some interesting
consequences. Firstly, the increase in student numbers
has also brought changes to the composition and as-
pirations of the student body [32]. Students entering
higher education no longer enrol for the same reasons
as the academics that teach them did [8]. This has the
eﬀect that their motivation to participate in classes
may also be of a diﬀerent level to what the academic
may presume from their own experience.
From a diversity perspective, the increasing levels
of participation amongst previously underrepresented
groups have interesting consequences if not matched
by an equally diverse academic body. If all academics
were to act to (subconsciously) replicate themselves in
each new cohort of students, then previously underrep-
resented groups may struggle.
There is therefore a need for academics to be aware
of the changes in the composition of the student body
and students’ motivation for enrolling in higher edu-
cation. As described earlier, due to massiﬁcation and
diversiﬁcation within the higher education system, an
academic can no longer expect students to have the
same background or motivation as they themselves
once did. Academics must be aware that their notion
of an ‘ideal’ student is in most cases based on their own
experience, and if changes are not made to this notion,
we will merely replicate the pervasive gaps that exist
in the current higher education system. Within the
context of the South African higher education system
this is particularly important. Due to the legacy of
apartheid within the country, there is a transformative
agenda within higher education aimed at, amongst
other things, working towards diverse student popu-
lations that are more representative of the national
demographics [1].
Rodriguez calls educators to take up the role of
what he refers to as “‘cultural warriors’ for social
change” [59, p. 278]. Rodriguez notes that all work
in teaching and learning education either reproduces
or challenges the status quo. In this paper, he cited a
wide range of studies that had been undertaken with
evidence of cultural issues aﬀecting teacher’s pedago-
gies or classroom practice, highlighting their resistance
to pedagogical change. Rodriguez highlights the im-
portance of dealing with resistance to change in new
teachers who have had “an apprenticeship of observa-
tion on how to teach” [59, p. 286] by their own school
experience.
To become more eﬀective teachers within a system
that is known for failing its students [60] [61], we
must therefore reﬂect on our own role in the education
process, by asking ourselves the following questions
posed by Rodriguez:
. . . we can begin to (re)deﬁne our roles
as cultural warriors and begin to muster the
courage to hold the other’s gaze - the courage
to ask ourselves: Is our teaching and research
having the kind of socially transformative
eﬀect the present condition of education de-
mands? In what ways can we rethink our
teaching and research practices so that gen-
der issues and multicultural education are
more directly addressed? Are issues of gen-
der and diversity only addressed in the classes
of colleagues who do not look like me? [59,
p. 288]
6
CONCLUSION
This paper has presented an investigation that aimed
at identifying skills that staﬀat a computer science de-
partment in South Africa found were crucial within an
‘ideal’ computer science student. These skills include:
creativity; computer playfulness; planning, analytical
or abstract thinking, and problem solving; introverted
personality; engagement in class; working indepen-
dently; self eﬃcacy; and responsibility.
This paper also explored a pattern that emerged
amongst participants in the study, where their perspec-
tive on an ‘ideal’ student was found to be inﬂuenced
predominately by their own performance as a student.
This ﬁnding can be seen as validation of Bourdieu’s
notion of academic culture replicating itself and per-
petuating the culture of the academic department or
higher education institution. This was explored deeper
given the particular context of massiﬁcation and di-
versiﬁcation within South African higher education.
Finally the paper challenges us as academics to reﬂect
on our own teaching practice and the relevance of our

Research Article – SACJ No. 50, July 2013
37
teaching to the present conditions of teaching within
South Africa.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Moll. “Curriculum responsiveness: The anatomy of
a concept”. Curriculum responsiveness: Case studies
in higher education, pp. 1–20, 2004.
[2] R. Middlehurst. “University challenges: Borderless
higher education, today and tomorrow”.
Minerva,
vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 3–26, 2001.
[3] UNESCO. “Commitment to education: public spend-
ing”.
Human development report 2006. Beyond
scarcity: Power, poverty and the global water crisis,
2006.
[4] C. Hodgkinson-Williams, H. Slay and I. Sieb¨orger.
“Developing communities of practice within and outside
higher education institutions”.
British Journal of
Educational Technology, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 433–442,
2008.
[5] M. Singh. “Re-Inserting the ‘Public Good’ into Higher
Education Transformation”. In Kagisano. Council on
Higher Education Discussion Series, 2001.
[6] M. Pan and D. Luo.
“A comparative analysis on
models of higher education massiﬁcation”. Frontiers
of Education in China, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 64–78, 2008.
[7] S. Guri-Rosenblit, H. ˇSebkov´a and U. Teichler. “Mas-
siﬁcation and diversity of higher education systems:
Interplay of complex dimensions”. Higher Education
Policy, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 373–389, 2007.
[8] S. Badat. Higher Education Transformation in South
Africa Post 1994: Towards a Critical Assessment.
CEPD, 2007.
[9] D. of Education. Education statistics at a glance in
South Africa in 2005. Department of Education, Oc-
tober 2006.
[10] C. on Higher Education. South African higher edu-
cation in the ﬁrst decade of democracy. Council on
Higher Education, 2004.
[11] R. Mills and A. Tait. The convergence of distance and
conventional education: Patterns of ﬂexibility for the
individual learner. Routledge, 2002.
[12] S. Badat.
“Redressing the apartheid legacy of so-
cial exclusion: social equity, redress and admission to
higher education”. Presented at SANORD 2009: Inclu-
sion and exclusion in higher education, Grahamstown,
2009.
[13] K. Trigwell, M. Prosser and F. Waterhouse. “Relations
between teachers’ approaches to teaching and students’
approaches to learning”. Higher education, vol. 37,
no. 1, pp. 57–70, 1999.
[14] D. Kember and L. Gow. “Orientations to teaching
and their eﬀect on the quality of student learning”.
The Journal of Higher Education, pp. 58–74, 1994.
[15] D. D. Pratt. “Good teaching: One size ﬁts all?” New
Directions for Adult and Continuing Education, vol.
2002, no. 93, pp. 5–16, 2002.
[16] D. D. Pratt and J. B. Collins. “The teaching perspec-
tives inventory (TPI)”. In adult education research
conference, Vancouver, BC. 2000.
[17] W. Wang, S. Ceci, W. Williams and K. Kopko. “Cul-
turally situated cognitive competence: A function
framework”. In R. Sternberg and E. Grigorenko (edi-
tors), Culture and competence: Contexts of life success,
pp. 225–250. Washington DC: American Psychological
Association, 2004.
[18] S. Harkness, M. Blom, A. Oliva, U. Moscardino, P. O.
Zylicz, M. R. Bermudez, X. Feng, A. Carrasco-Zylicz,
G. Axia and C. M. Super. “Teachers’ ethnotheories
of the ‘ideal student’in ﬁve western cultures”. Com-
parative Education, vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 113–135, 2007.
[19] R. Serpell. The signiﬁcance of schooling: Life-journeys
in an African society. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1993.
[20] J. Li. “Chinese conceptualization of learning”. Ethos,
vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 111–137, 2001.
[21] L. Shapiro and H. Azuma. “Intellectual, attitudinal
and interpersonal aspects of competence in the United
States and Japan”.
In R. Sternberg and E. Grig-
orenko (editors), Culture and competence: Contexts of
life success, pp. 187–206. Washington DC: American
Psychological Association, 2004.
[22] J. Useem, R. Useem and J. Donoghue. “Men in the
middle of the third culture: The roles of American and
non-Western people in cross-cultural administration”.
Human Organization, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 169–179, 1963.
[23] A. L. Kroeber and C. Kluckhohn. “Culture: A critical
review of concepts and deﬁnitions.” Papers. Peabody
Museum of Archaeology & Ethnology, Harvard Uni-
versity, 1952.
[24] T. Becher and P. Trowler. Academic tribes and territo-
ries: Intellectual enquiry and the culture of disciplines.
Berkshire: Open University Press, 2001.
[25] S. Sitton and G. Chmelir. “The intuitive computer
programmer”. Datamation, vol. 30, no. 16, pp. 137–
140, 1984.
[26] M. Lyons. “The DP psyche: An international survey
sheds new light on the personalities of data processors”.
Datamation, vol. 31, pp. 103–107, 1985.
[27] J. Webster and J. J. Martocchio. “Microcomputer
playfulness: development of a measure with workplace
implications”. MIS quarterly, pp. 201–226, 1992.
[28] T. Hill, N. D. Smith and M. F. Mann. “Role of eﬃcacy
expectations in predicting the decision to use advanced
technologies: The case of computers.”
Journal of
applied psychology, vol. 72, no. 2, p. 307, 1987.
[29] J. J. Martocchio and J. Webster. “Eﬀects of feedback
and cognitive playfulness on performance in micro-
computer software training”. Personnel Psychology,
vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 553–578, 1992.
[30] D. Potosky. “A ﬁeld study of computer eﬃcacy beliefs
as an outcome of training: the role of computer play-
fulness, computer knowledge, and performance during
training”.
Computers in Human behavior, vol. 18,
no. 3, pp. 241–255, 2002.
[31] P. Bourdieu. Outline of a theory of practice. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1972.
[32] C. J. Throop and K. M. Murphy.
“Bourdieu and
phenomenology A critical assessment”. Anthropological
theory, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 185–207, 2002.
[33] P. Bourdieu. The state nobility: Elite schools in the
ﬁeld of power. Cambridge: Polity Press, 1996.

38
Research Article – SACJ No. 50, July 2013
[34] B. Johnson and L. Christensens. Educational research:
Quantitative, qualitative and mixed approaches. Thou-
sand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2008.
[35] G. Wisker. The postgraduate research handbook: Suc-
ceed with your MA, MPhil, EdD and PhD. New York:
Palgrave, 2001.
[36] C. Robson. Real world research. Oxford: Blackwell,
1993.
[37] F. Erickson. “Qualitative methods in research on teach-
ing”. In M. Wiitrock (editor), Handbook of research
on teaching. New York: Macmillan, 1986.
[38] R. Pawson. “Evidence-based policy: A realist per-
spective”. In B. Carter and C. New (editors), Making
realism work: Realist social theory and empirical re-
search. London: Routledge, 2004.
[39] L. Cassel, A. Clements, G. Davies, M. Guzdial, R. Mc-
Cauley, A. McGettrick, B. Sloan, L. Snyder, P. Ty-
mann, B. Weide, J. Cross, M. Johnson, E. Roberts,
J. Whittaker, A. Wright and S. Seidman. Computer
science curriculum 2008: An interim revision of CS
2001. Association for Computing Machine and IEEE
Computer Society, 2008.
[40] A. J. Kornecki. “Computing curricula for the 21st
Century”. Distributed Systems Online, IEEE, vol. 9,
no. 2, pp. 2–2, 2008.
[41] K. Figl and R. Motschnig. “Researching the devel-
opment of team competencies in computer science
courses”. In Frontiers in Education Conference, 2008.
FIE 2008. 38th Annual, pp. S3F–1. IEEE, 2008.
[42] K. Hoganson.
“A strategic approach to computer
science curriculum”. In Proceedings of the 43rd annual
Southeast regional conference-Volume 1, pp. 365–370.
ACM, 2005.
[43] G. Braught, C. S. Miller and D. Reed. “Core empiri-
cal concepts and skills for computer science”. ACM
SIGCSE Bulletin, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 245–249, 2004.
[44] M. J. Gallivan, D. P. Truex III and L. Kvasny. “Chang-
ing patterns in IT skill sets 1988-2003: a content anal-
ysis of classiﬁed advertising”. ACM SIGMIS Database,
vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 64–87, 2004.
[45] L. Carter. “Ideas for adding soft skills education to
service learning and capstone courses for computer
science students”. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM
technical symposium on Computer science education,
pp. 517–522. ACM, 2011.
[46] S. Kabicher, R. Motschnig-Pitrik and K. Figl. “What
competences do employers, staﬀand students expect
from a computer science graduate?” In Frontiers in
Education Conference, 2009. FIE’09. 39th IEEE, pp.
1–6. IEEE, 2009.
[47] N. Denzin. The research act: A theoretical introduction
to sociological methods. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1978.
[48] A. Coﬀey and P. Atkinson. Making sense of qualitative
data: Complementary research strategies. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 1996.
[49] B. G. Glaser and A. L. Strauss.
The discovery of
grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative research.
Chicago, USA: Aldine, 1967.
[50] G. Schott and N. Selwyn.
“Examining the” male,
antisocial” stereotype of high computer users”. Journal
of Educational Computing Research, vol. 23, no. 3, pp.
291–304, 2000.
[51] C. Dweck. Mindset: The new psychology of success.
New York: Ballantine Books, 2006.
[52] J. Biggs. “What the student does: teaching for en-
hanced learning”. Higher Education Research & De-
velopment, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 57–75, 1999.
[53] J. Biggs. “Aligning teaching for constructing learning”.
Higher Education Academy, 2003.
[54] K. Sedibe.
“Dismantling apartheid education: an
overview of change”. Cambridge Journal of Education,
vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 269–282, 1998.
[55] D. Turnbull, T. Nettlebeck, L. Ward, A. LeCouteur,
A. Sarris, P. Strlan, G. Crisp, E. Palmer and L. Schnei-
der. First year students’ expectations of University
study. Adelaide: University of Adelaide, 2006.
[56] B. Lam and K. Kwan. “Students’ Expectations of
University Education”.
In J. Jones and K. Kwan
(editors), Evaluation of the Student Experience Project.
Hong Kong: City University of Hong Kong, Centre
for the Enhancement of Learning and Teaching.
[57] H. Chen, Y.-C. Wong, M.-S. Ran and C. Gilson.
“Stress among Shanghai University Students The Need
for Social Work Support”. Journal of Social Work,
vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 323–344, 2009.
[58] A. Northedge. “Enabling participation in academic
discourse”. Teaching in Higher Education, vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 169–180, 2003.
[59] A. J. Rodriguez.
“Courage and the researcher’s
gaze:(Re) deﬁning our roles as cultural warriors for
social change”. Journal of Science Teacher Education,
vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 277–294, 2001.
[60] J. Bradbury and R. Miller. “A failure by any other
name: The phenomenon of underpreparedness”. South
African Journal of Science, vol. 107, no. 3-4, pp. 01–08,
2011.
[61] M. Solomon.
“’SA education a tragedy’ - Rhodes
VC”. The Daily Dispatch Online, 2011. URL http:
//www.dispatch.co.za/news/article/333.

Research Article – SACJ No. 50, July 2013
39
APPENDIX: QUESTIONNAIRE
Read the following four scenarios: 
The word used most often to describe Andrew is reliable.  If you have a deadline, Andrew is the person to talk 
to.  He is a great planner - give him a problem and he will break it into manageable portions and (when 
working in a team) assign it to members of the team.   He is very efficient at what he does, and is good at 
motivating other people to do their work as well.  When other team members come to him with a problem, he 
has the ability to see their perspective and together they work out a solution.  If there was a criticism to be 
made of Andrew, it would be that he always plays it safe – he is not comfortable in situations that call for 
creative or “out of the box” thinking.   
 
Bridget is an introvert.  She is much more comfortable being out of the spot light.  Typically she will only talk 
in a group if asked a direct question.  Bridget thinks very carefully before saying anything, so prefers the time 
/ space offered by email communication.  This time gives Bridget a chance to reflect on issues / feedback and 
form her argument away from the pressures that come with real time communication.  When Bridget does 
talk, people listen to what she says.  She is very insightful in her comments, drawing on her analytical way of 
thinking. 
 
Cynthia is extremely creative.  She loves taking risks and finding things out by “playing”.  However, this 
often ends in a bit of a problem.  Cynthia is extremely innovative and self motivated, but this often means that 
she takes so much time doing things her own way that she loses track of time and is late submitting her work.  
The work she comes up with though is very insightful – she often finds a new way of performing a task / 
completing a process. 
 
David has a strong work ethic and is an independent and critical thinker.  On top of this, David is also a great 
communicator.  He is very happy to jump into a conversation with his perspective.  He speaks with such 
confidence, that sometimes people believe what he says simply because he said it (although most times he is 
right).  Not to say that he doesn’t know what he’s talking about, but he speaks with such authority that 
sometimes people don’t bother checking what he says, but they take his word as law.  One thing David 
doesn’t always excel at is seeing other people’s perspective.  When confronted with a colleague that he 
believes is wrong, he can become a bit aggressive and critical. 
 
Rate the four people in their role as a computer science student (1 for an ideal student to 4 for a weak 
student). Explain your ranking: 
Andrew: _______ 
Bridget: _______ 
Cynthia: _______ 
David: _______ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Can you think of any students in the Computer Science Department at RU who you would consider as 
an “ideal” student?  Please explain why you consider them to be “ideal”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40
Research Article – SACJ No. 50, July 2013
For each category, circle a maximum of three (3) skills that you think are most important in a student. 
 
Interpersonal skills: 
team attitude 
team knowledge 
team skills 
conflict resolution 
respect for others 
work 
independently 
intercultural 
competence 
social competence 
ability to take and see 
other perspective 
assertive without 
aggressive 
team player 
work under 
supervision 
work in 
interdisciplinary teams 
open to constructive criticism 
other (please specify): 
 
Leadership skills: 
initiative 
innovative 
decision making 
dedication 
influential 
ambitious 
other (please specify): 
 
Self management: 
self motivated 
enthusiastic 
attention to detail 
self directed 
responsible 
lifelong learning 
other (please specify): 
 
Thinking skills:  
analysis and synthesis 
innovative 
entrepreneurial 
abstract thinking 
creative 
problem solving 
empirical skills 
independent critical 
thinking 
other (please specify): 
 
Workload management:  
work under 
pressure 
time 
management 
effective work 
habits 
ability to work well 
on multiple 
complex projects 
organized 
Planning 
other (please specify): 
 
Information handling:  
good oral 
communication 
good at working at an 
abstract level 
good written 
communication 
information management 
skills 
research skills 
detail oriented whilst maintain overall vision and focus 
see the larger picture 
other (please specify): 
 
Personal qualities:  
credible 
accountable 
responsible 
insightful 
visionary 
creative 
persevere 
practical 
confident 
patient 
empathetic 
work ethic 
critical and self 
critical abilities 
ability to work 
autonomously 
entrepreneurial 
spirit 
initiative 
passion for work 
passion for quality 
social modesty 
Independent 
other (please specify): 
 
Skills for handling unknown:  
risk taking 
resilient 
problem solving 
reasoning skills 
analytical skills 
adaptable 
flexible 
open 
mindedness 
risk 
management 
compromising 
ability to deal with 
new technologies 
efficiency 
other (please specify): 
 

