(i)
NATIONAL INSTRUCTIONAL
MEDIA INSTITUTE, CHENNAI
ELECTRICIAN
SECTOR: Power
TRADE THEORY
Post Box No. 3142, CTI Campus, Guindy, Chennai - 600 032
2nd Year (Volume I of II)
NSQF (LEVEL - 5)
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF TRAINING
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

(ii)
Sector
: Power
Duration
: 2 Year
Trade
: Electrician  - 2nd Year  (Volume I of II) Trade -  Theory NSQF (Level - 5)
Developed & Published by
National Instructional Media Institute
Post Box No.3142
Guindy, Chennai - 600032
INDIA
Email: chennai-nimi@nic.in
Website: www.nimi.gov.in
Copyright  2020 National Instructional Media Institute, Chennai
First Edition:
            October  2018
Copies: 1000
First Reprint:
         March 2020
Copies: 2000
Second Reprint:
         February 2021
Copies: 1000
Rs.250/-

(iii)
FOREWORD
The Government of India has set an ambitious target of imparting skills to 30 crores people, one out of every
four Indians, by 2020 to help them secure jobs as part of the National Skills Development Policy. Industrial
Training Institutes (ITIs) play a vital role in this process especially in terms of providing skilled manpower.
Keeping this in mind, and for providing the current industry relevant skill training to Trainees, ITI syllabus
has been recently updated with the help of Mentor Councils comprising various stakeholder's viz. Industries,
Entrepreneurs, Academicians and representatives from ITIs.
The National Instructional Media Institute (NIMI), Chennai, an autonomous body under Ministry of Skill
Development & Entrepreneurship is entrusted with developing producing and disseminating Instructional
Media Packages (IMPs) required for ITIs and other related institutions.
The institute has now come up with instructional material to suit the revised curriculum for  Electrician- 2nd
Year (Volume - I of II) Trade Theory  NSQF Level - 5 in Power sector under annual pattern. The NSQF
Level - 5 Trade Theory will help the trainees to get an international equivalency standard where their skill
proficiency and competency will be duly recognized across the globe and this will also increase the  scope
of recognition of prior learning. NSQF Level - 5 trainees will also get the opportunities to promote life long
learning and skill development.   I have no doubt that with NSQF Level - 5  the trainers and trainees of ITIs,
and all stakeholders will derive maximum benefits from these IMPs and that NIMI's effort will go a long way
in improving the quality of Vocational training in the country.
The Executive Director & Staff of NIMI and members of Media Development Committee deserve appreciation
for their contribution in bringing out this publication.
Jai Hind
 Director General
Directorate General of Training
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship,
Government of India.
         New Delhi - 110 001

(iv)
PREFACE
The National Instructional Media Institute (NIMI) was established in 1986 at Chennai by then Directorate
General of Training (D.G.T), Ministry of Labour and Employment, (now under Directorate General of Training
(D.G.T), Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship) (MSDE) Government of India, with technical
assistance from the Govt. of the Federal Republic of Germany. The prime objective of this institute is to
develop and provide instructional materials for various trades as per the prescribed syllabi (NSQF) under
the Craftsman and Apprenticeship Training Schemes.
The instructional materials are created keeping in mind, the main objective of Vocational Training under
NCVT/NAC in India, which is to help an individual to master skills to do a job. The instructional materials
are generated in the form of Instructional Media Packages (IMPs). An IMP consists of Theory book,
Practical book, Test and Assignment book, Instructor Guide, Audio Visual Aid (Wall charts and
Transparencies) and other supporting materials.
The trade theory book provides related theoretical knowledge required to enable the trainee to do a job.
The test and assignments will enable the instructor to give assignments for the evaluation of the performance
of a trainee. The wall charts and transparencies are unique, as they not only help the instructor to effectively
present a topic but also help him to assess the trainee's understanding. The instructor guide enables the
instructor to plan his schedule of instruction, plan the raw material requirements, day to day lessons and
demonstrations.
IMPs also deals with the complex skills required to be developed for effective team work. Necessary care
has also been taken to include important skill areas of allied trades as prescribed in the syllabus.
The availability of a complete Instructional Media Package in an institute helps both the trainer and
management to impart effective training.
The IMPs are the outcome of collective efforts of the staff members of NIMI and the members of the Media
Development Committees specially drawn from Public and Private sector industries, various training institutes
under the Directorate General of Training (DGT), Government and Private ITIs.
NIMI would like to take this opportunity to convey sincere thanks to the Directors of Employment &
Training of various State Governments, Training Departments of Industries both in the Public and Private
sectors, Officers of DGT and DGT field institutes, proof readers, individual media developers and coordinators,
but for whose active support NIMI would not have been able to bring out this materials.
R. P. DHINGRA
Chennai - 600 032
     EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR

(v)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
National Instructional Media Institute (NIMI) sincerely acknowledges with thanks for the co-operation and
contribution extended by the following Media Developers and their sponsoring organisations to bring out this
Instructional Material (Trade Theory)  for the trade of  Electrician NSQF (LEVEL - 5) under Power Sector for ITIs.
MEDIA DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Shri. D.S. Varadarajulu
-
DD/Principal, (Retd.,),
Govt. I.T.I, Ambattur,
Chennai - 98.
Shri. G.Ethirajulu
-
Principal (Retd.),
Govt. I.T.I, Guindy,
Chennai - 32.
Shri. M.H. Nagesh
-
Junior Training Officer
Govt. I.T.I,
Mysuru - 570 007.
Smt. S.Chandrakala
-
Junior Training Officer
Govt. I.T.I,
Mysuru - 570 007.
Smt. D.Vinutha
-
Junior Training Officer
Govt. I.T.I,
Bangalore - 560 029.
Shri P. Natarajan
-
Assistant Training Officer
Govt. ITI, Anaikatti,
Coimbatore (Dist)
Shri K. Mohandass
-
Assistant Training Officer
Govt. ITI, North Chennai
Chennai - 21.
NIMI CO-ORDINATORS
Shri. K. Srinivasa Rao
-
Joint Director
NIMI, Chennai - 32.
Shri. Subhankar Bhowmik
-
Assistant Manager,
NIMI, Chennai - 32.
NIMI records its appreciation for the Data Entry, CAD, DTP operators for their excellent and devoted services in the
process of development of this Instructional Material.
NIMI also acknowledges with thanks the invaluable efforts rendered by all other NIMI staff who have contributed
towards the development of this Instructional Material.
NIMI is also grateful to everyone who has directly or indirectly helped in developing this Instructional Material.

(vi)
INTRODUCTION
This manual for trade practical is intended for use in the ITI  workshop.  It consists of a series of practical exercises
that are to be completed by the trainees during the course of Electrician trade under Power Sector. It is
National Skills Qualifications Framework (NSQF) - Level 5, supplemented and supported by instructions/
information to assist the trainees in performing the exercise.  The exercises are designed to ensure that all the
skills prescribed in the syllabus are covered including the allied trades.The Practical is divided into seven
modules.The allocation of time for the various modules is given below:
Module 1 - DC Generator
7 Exercises
78  Hrs
Module 2 - DC Motor
9 Exercises
122 Hrs
Module 3 - AC Three Phase Motor
11 Exercises
125 Hrs
Module 4 - AC Single Phase Motor
9 Exercises
100 Hrs
Module 5 - Alternator
5 Exercises
50 Hrs
Module 6 - Synchronous Motor and MG Set
4 Exercises
50 Hrs
 Total
45 Exercises
525 Hrs
The syllabus and the content in the modules  are interlinked. As  the number of workstations available in the
electrical section is limited by the machinery and equipment, it is necessary to interpolate the exercises in the
modules to form a proper teaching and learning sequence.  The sequence of instruction  is given in the schedule
of instruction which is incorporated in the Instructor's Guide.  With 25 practical hours a week of 5 working days
100 hours of practical per month is available.
Contents of Trade Practical
The procedure for working through the  45 exercises  with the specific objectives as the learning out comes at the
end of each exercise is given is this book.
The skill objectives and tools/instruments, equipment/machines and materials required to perform the exercise
are given in the beginning of each exercise.Skill training in the shop floor is planned through a series of practical
exercises/experiments to support the related theory  to make the trainees get hands on trainning  in the Electrician
trade along  with the relevant cognitive skills appropriate for the level. A minimum number of projects have been
included to make the training more effective and develop attitude to work in a team. Pictorial, schematic, wiring
and circuit diagrams have been included in the exercises, wherever necessary, to assist the trainees broaden their
views.  The symbols used in the diagrams comply with the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) specifications.
Illustrations in this manual, help trainess visual perspective of the ideas and concepts.The procedures to be
followed for completing the exercises is also given. Different forms of intermediate test questions have been
included in the exercises, to enhance the trainee to trainee and trainee to instructor interactions.
Skill Information
Skill areas which are repetitive in nature are given as separate skill information sheets. Skills which are to be
developed in specific areas are included in the exercises itself.  Some subexercises are developed to fulfill the
sequence of exercises in keeping with the syllabus.
This manual on trade practical forms part of the Written Instructional Material (WIM).  Which includes manual  on
trade theory and assignment/test.

(vii)
Module 1 : DC Generator
3.1.115 & 116
DC Generator - principle - parts - types - function - e.m.f. equation
1
3.1.117
Building up of a DC shunt generator
1
16
3.1.118
Test  a  DC machine for continuity and insulation resistance
19
3.1.120 to 123
Characteristics of DC generator
21
Module 2 : DC Motor
3.2.119 to 127
DC motor - principle and types
36
The relation between applied voltage, back emf, armature voltage drop,
speed and flux of  DC motor - method of changing direction of rotation
37
DC motor starters
39
Relation between torque, flux and armature current in a DC motor
40
Service and maintenance of DC motor starters
42
Characteristics and applications of a DC series motor
44
Characteristic and applications of a DC shunt motor
46
DC compound motor - load characteristics
48
3.2.128
Speed control methods of a DC motor and their applications
51
Method of calculation of control resistance and new speed
2
54
3.2.129
Troubleshooting in DC machines
56
Maintenance procedure for DC machines
59
DC motor control system (drives) AC-DC and DC-AC control
63
3.2.130
Materials used for  winding - field coil winding
64
Winding wires
66
Armature winding - terms - types - rewinding of mixer/liquidizer
70
Simplex lap and wave winding - developed diagram
74
Preparation of armature for rewinding
77
Rewinding of mixer/liquidizer
80
Method of rewinding and balancing the armature
83
Testing of armature winding
86
Module 3 : AC Three Phase Motor
3.3.131 to 139
Principle of induction motor
89
Construction  of a 3-phase squirrel cage induction motor - relation
between slip, speed, rotor frequency, copper  loss and torque
91
Classification of squirrel cage motors
95
Insulation test on 3 phase induction motors
96
Starter for 3-phase induction motor - power control circuits - D.O.L starter
99
B.I.S. symbols pertaining to contactor and machines
103
D.O.L. starter
3
119
Numerical problems in ac 3-phase induction motors
120
Jogging (inching) control circuits for motors
121
Rotary type switches
123
Manual star-delta starter
125
Semi-automatic star-delta starter
128
Exercise No.
Title of the Exercise
Learning
Page No.
Outcome
CONTENTS

(viii)
Automatic star-delta starter
129
Three-phase, slip-ring induction motor
130
Resistance starter for 3-phase, slip-ring induction motor
132
Method of measurement of slip in induction motor
133
Efficiency - characteristics of induction motor- no load test -
blocked rotor test
134
Characteristics of squirrel cage induction motor
136
No-load test of induction motor
137
Blocked rotor test
138
Efficiency from no-load and blocked rotor test
3
139
Effect of external resistance in slip ring motor rotor circuit
140
Auto-transformer starter
140
Single phasing preventer / phase failure relay
141
Braking system of motors
144
Method of speed control of 3 phase induction motor
145
3.3.140
Fundamental terms used in AC winding
147
Hand winding process
151
3 phase squirrel cage induction motor winding (single layer
distributed winding)
152
Method of placing coils in a basket or distributed winding
154
Three-phase induction motor  winding (single layer  - concentric type
- half coil connection)
158
3 phase squirrel cage induction motor - double layer distributed type
winding
161
Testing of windings
164
Insulating varnish and varnishing process in electric machines
167
Method of connecting end connection, group connection, terminal leads,
binding and forming the overhangs
169
3.3.141
Maintenance, service and troubleshooting in AC 3 phase squirrel cage
induction motor and starters
172
Troubleshooting of motor starters
180
Module 4 : AC Single Phase Motor
3.4.142 to 150
Single phase motors - split phase induction motor - induction-start,
induction-run motor
183
Centrifugal switch
185
Single phase, split phase type motor winding (concentric coil winding)
188
Capacitor-start, induction-run motor
191
Capacitors used in single phase capacitor motors
192
Permanent capacitor motor - capacitor-start, capacitor-run motor and
4
shaded pole motor
194
The shaded pole motor
195
Universal motor
197
Troubleshooting of universal motor
199
Repulsion motor
200
Stepper motor
202
Hysteresis motor
204
Reluctance motor
206
Exercise No.
Title of the Exercise
Learning
Page No.
Outcome

(ix)
Module 5 : Alternator
3.5.151 to 153
Alternator - principle - relation between poles, speed and frequency
207
Types  and construction of alternators
209
Generation of 3-phase voltage and general test on alternator
211
Emf equation of  the alternator
214
3.5.154
Characteristic and voltage regulation of  the alternator
5,6
217
3.5.155
Parallel operation and synchronisation of three phase alternators -
brushless alternator
220
Synchroscope method
222
Brushless alternator
224
Module 6: Synchronous Motor and MG Set
3.6.156 & 157
Synchronous motor
226
3.6.158 & 159
MG set and rotary converter and inverter
230
Maintenance of MG set
7
231
Project work
233
Exercise No.
Title of the Exercise
Learning
Page No.
Outcome
LEARNING / OUTCOME
On completion of this book you shall be able to
SI.No.
Learning /Outcome
Refer Ex:No
1
Plan, execute commissioning and evaluate
performance of DC machines.
3.1.115 to 123
2
Execute testing and maintenance of DC machines and
motor starters.
3.2.119 to 130
3
Plan, execute commissioning and evaluate
erformance of AC motors.
3.3.131 to 141
4
Execute testing and maintenance of AC motors and
starters.
3.4.142 to 150
5
Plan, execute testing, evaluate performance and carry
out maintenance of Alternator/MG set.
3.5.151 to 155
6
Execute parallel operation of Alternators.
3.5.151 to 155
7
Distinguish organize and perform motor winding.
3.6.156  to 159

(x)
ELECTRICIAN  SYLLABUS
Syllabus Duration: Six Months
Week
No.
Learning outcome
Reference
Professional Skills
(Trade Practical)
With Indicative Hours
Professional Knowledge
(Trade Theory)
• Plan, Execute
commissioning
and evaluate
performance of
DC machines.
115.Identify terminals, parts and
connections of different types of DC
machines. (10 Hrs)
116. Measure field and armature
resistance of DC machines.
(10 Hrs)
117. Determine build up voltage of DC
shunt generator with varying field
excitation and performance
analysis on load. (15 Hrs)
118. Test for continuity and insulation
resistance of DC machine. (5 Hrs)
119. Start, run and reverse direction of
rotation of DC series, shunt and
compound motors. (10 Hrs)
53-54
General concept of rotating electrical
machines.
Principle of DC generator.
Use of Armature, Field Coil, Polarity,
Yoke, Cooling Fan, Commutator, slip ring
and Brushes, Laminated core etc.
E.M.F. equation Separately excited and
self excited generators.
Series, shunt and compound generators.
55-56
• Plan, Execute
commissioning
and evaluate
performance of
DC machines.
• Execute testing,
and maintenance of
DC machines and
motor starters.
120. Perform no load and load test and
determine characteristics of series
and shunt generators. (12 Hrs)
121. Perform no load and load test and
determine characteristics of
compound generators (cumulative
and differential). (13 Hrs)
122.Practice 
dismantling 
and
assembling in DC shunt motor.
(12 Hrs)
123.Practice 
dismantling 
and
assembling in DC compound
generator. (13 Hrs)
Armature reaction, Commutation, inter
poles and connection of inter poles.
Parallel Operation of DC Generators.
Load characteristics of DC generators.
Application, losses & efficiency of DC
Generators.
Routine & maintenance.
57-58
• Plan, Execute
commissioning
and evaluate
performance of
DC machines.
• Execute testing,
and maintenance of
DC machines and
motor starters.
124. Conduct performance analysis of
DC series, shunt and compound
motors. (15 Hrs)
125. Dismantle and identify parts of three
point and four point DC motor
starters. (10 Hrs)
126. Assemble, Service and repair three
point and four point DC motor
starters. (15 Hrs)
127. Practice maintenance of carbon
brushes, 
brush 
holders,
Commutator and slip-rings. (10 Hrs)
Principle and types of DC motor.
Relation between applied voltage back
e.m.f., armature voltage drop, speed and
flux of DC motor.
DC motor Starters, relation between
torque, flux and armature current.
Changing the direction of rotation.
Characteristics, Losses & Efficiency of
DC motors.
Routine and maintenance.
59-60
• Execute testing,
and maintenance of
DC machines and
motor starters.
• Distinguish,
organise and
perform motor
winding.
128. Perform speed control of DC motors
- field and armature control method.
(10 Hrs)
129. Carry out overhauling of DC
machines. (15 Hrs)
130. Perform DC machine winding by
developing connection diagram,
test on growler and assemble.
(25 Hrs)
Methods of speed control of DC motors.
Lap and wave winding and related terms.

(xi)
ELECTRICIAN  SYLLABUS
Syllabus Duration: Six Months
Week
No.
Learning outcome
Reference
Professional Skills
(Trade Practical)
With Indicative Hours
Professional Knowledge
(Trade Theory)
• Plan, Execute
commissioning
and evaluate
performance of
AC motors.
• Execute testing,
and maintenance of
AC motors and
starters.
61-62
131. Identify parts and terminals of three
phase AC motors. (5 Hrs)
132. Make an internal connection of
automatic star-delta starter with
three contactors. (10 Hrs)
133. Connect, start and run three phase
induction motors by using DOL,
stardelta and auto-transformer
starters. (20 Hrs)
134. Connect, start, run and reverse
direction of rotation of slip-ring
motor through rotor resistance
starter and determine performance
characteristic. (15 Hrs)
Working principle of three phase
induction motor.
Squirrel Cage Induction motor, Slip-ring
induction 
motor; 
construction,
characteristics, Slip and Torque.
Different types of starters for three phase
induction motors, its necessity, basic
contactor circuit, parts and their
functions.
63-64
• Plan, Execute
commissioning
and evaluate
performance of
AC motors.
• Execute testing,
and maintenance of
AC motors and
starters.
135. Determine the efficiency of squirrel
cage induction motor by brake test.
(8 Hrs)
136. Determine the efficiency of three
phase squirrel cage induction
motor by no load test and blocked
rotor test. (8 Hrs)
137. Measure slip and power factor to
draw speedtorque (slip/torque)
characteristics. (14 Hrs)
138. Test for continuity and insulation
resistance of three phase induction
motors. (5 Hrs)
139. Perform speed control of three
phase induction motors by various
methods like rheostatic control,
autotransformer etc. (15 Hrs)
Single phasing prevention.
No load test and blocked rotor test of
induction motor.
Losses & efficiency.
Various methods of speed control.
Braking system of motor.
Maintenance and repair.
65
• Distinguish,
organise and
perform motor
winding.
140. Perform winding of three phase AC
motor by developing connection
diagram, test and assemble.
(20 Hrs)
141. Maintain, service and troubleshoot
the AC motor starter. (05 Hrs)
Concentric/ distributed, single/ double
layer winding and related terms.
66-67
• Plan, Execute
commissioning
and evaluate
performance of
AC motors.
• Execute testing,
and maintenance of
AC motors and
starters.
142. Identify parts and terminals of
different types  of single phase AC
motors. (5 Hrs)
143. Install, connect and determine
performance of single phase AC
motors. (15 Hrs)
144. Start, run and reverse the direction
of rotation of single phase AC
motors. (10 Hrs)
145. Practice on speed control of single
phase AC motors. (10 Hrs)
Working principle, different method of
starting and running of various single
phase AC motors.
Domestic and industrial applications of
different single phase AC motors.
Characteristics, losses and efficiency.

(xii)
ELECTRICIAN  SYLLABUS
Syllabus Duration: Six Months
Week
No.
Learning outcome
Reference
Professional Skills
(Trade Practical)
With Indicative Hours
Professional Knowledge
(Trade Theory)
146. Compare starting and running
winding currents of a capacitor run
motor at various loads and
measure the speed. (10 Hrs)
68-69
• Distinguish,
organise and
perform motor
winding.
Concentric/ distributed, single/ double
layer winding and related terms.
Troubleshooting of single phase AC
induction motors and universal motor.
147. Carry out maintenance, service
and repair of single phase AC
motors. (10 Hrs)
148. Practice on single/double layer and
concentric winding for AC motors,
testing and assembling. (25 Hrs)
149. Connect, start, run and reverse the
direction of rotation of universal
motor. (10 Hrs)
150.Carry out maintenance and
servicing of universal motor.
(05 Hrs)
70-71
• Plan, execute
testing, evaluate
performance and
carry out
maintenance of
Alternator / MG
set.
• Execute parallel
operation of
alternators.
151. Install an alternator, identify parts
and terminals of alternator. (10 Hrs)
152. Test for continuity and insulation
resistance of alternator. (5 Hrs)
153. Connect, start and run an alternator
and build up the voltage. (10 Hrs)
154. Determine the load performance
and voltage regulation of three
phase alternator. (10 Hrs)
155.Parallel 
operation 
and
synchronization of three phase
alternators. (15 Hrs)
Principle of alternator, e.m.f. equation,
relation between poles, speed and
frequency.
Types and construction.
Efficiency, characteristics, regulation,
phase sequence and parallel operation.
Effect of changing the field excitation and
power factor correction.
72
• Plan, execute
testing, evaluate
performance and
carry out
maintenance of
Alternator / MG
set.
156. Install a synchronous motor,
identify its parts and terminals.
(10 Hrs)
157. Connect, start and plot Vcurves for
synchronous motor under different
excitation and load conditions.
(15 Hrs)
Working principle of synchronous motor.
Effect of change of excitation and load.
V and anti V curve.
Power factor improvement.
73
• Plan, execute
testing, evaluate
performance and
carry out
maintenance of
Alternator / MG
set.
158. Identify parts and terminals of MG
set. (5 Hrs)
159. Start and load MG set with 3 phase
induction motor coupled to DC
shunt generator. (20 Hrs)
Rotary Converter, MG Set description
and Maintenance.

(xiii)
ELECTRICIAN  SYLLABUS
Syllabus Duration: Six Months
Week
No.
Learning outcome
Reference
Professional Skills
(Trade Practical)
With Indicative Hours
Professional Knowledge
(Trade Theory)
74-75
Project work/Industrial visit (optional)
Broad Areas:
a) Phase sequence checker for 3 phase supply
b) Induction motor protection system
c) Motor starters with protection
d) Solar/wind power generation


1
General concept of rotating Power machine
In rotating machines, there are two parts, the stator and
rotor. Rotating Power machines are also of two types -
DC and AC machines. Power machines are widely used.
In DC machines  the stator is used as a field and the rotor
is used as an armature, while reverse is the case for AC
machines. That is synchronous generators and
synchronous motors. The  induction motor is another kind
of AC machine, which is singly excited; that  is AC supply
voltage is only given to the stator and no supply is given
to the rotor. In DC machines and synchronous machines,
the field is always excited.
Generator:An Power generator is a machine which
converts mechanical energy into Power energy.
Principle of the generator:To facilitate this energy
conversion, the generator works on the principle of Faraday's
Laws of Electromagnetic Induction.
Faraday's Laws of Electromagnetic Induction: There
are two laws.
The first law states:
First law: Whenever the flux linking to a conductor or
circuit changes, an emf will be induced.
The second law states: The magnitude of such induced
emf depends upon the rate of change of the flux linkage.
emf ∝
Change of flux
Time taken for change .
Types of emf: According to Faraday's Laws, an emf can
be induced, either by the relative movement of the conductor
and the magnetic field or by the change of flux linking on
a stationary conductor.
Dynamically induced emf: In case, the induced emf is
due to the movement of the conductor in a stationary
magnetic field as shown in Fig 1a or by the movement of
the magnetic field on a stationary conductor as shown in
Fig 1b, the induced emf is called dynamically induced emf.
Power
Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.115 & 3.1.116
Electrician - DC Generator
DC generator - principle - parts - types - function - e.m.f. equation
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the general concepts of rotating Power machine
• state the principle of the DC generator
• explain the faraday's of laws of electro magnetic induction
• explain the production of dynamically induced e.m.f., its magnitude and direction
• describe the parts of a DC generator and their function
• classify and identify the different type of generators and their terminal markings
• explain the armature circuit resistance and its relation
• derive the emf equation and calculation of a DC generator
• explain about separately excited DC generator with different types of windings.
As shown in Figs 1a & 1b, the conductor cuts the lines of
force in both cases to induce an emf, and the presence of
the emf could be found by the deflection of the needle of
the galvanometer `G'. This principle is used in DC and AC
generators to produce electricity.
Statically induced emf: In case, the induced emf is due
to change of flux linkage over a  stationary conductor as
shown in Fig 2, the emf thus induced is termed as
statically induced emf. The coils 1 and 2 shown in Fig 2 are
not touching each other, and there is no Power connection
between them.
According to Fig 2, when the battery (DC) supply is used
in coil 1, an emf will be induced in coil 2 only at the time
of closing or opening of the switch S.  If the switch is
permanently closed or opened, the flux produced by coil
1 becomes static or zero respectively and no emf will be
induced in coil 2. EMF will be induced only when there is
a  change in flux which happens during the closing or
opening of the circuit of coil 1 by the switch in a DC circuit.

2
Alternatively the battery and switch could be removed and
coil 1 can be connected to an AC supply as shown in
Fig 2. Then an emf will be induced in coil 2 continuously
as long as coil 1 is connected to an AC source which
produces alternating magnetic flux in coil 1 and links with
coil 2. This principle is used in transformers.
Production of dynamically induced emf: Whenever a
conductor cuts the magnetic flux, a dynamically induced
emf is produced in it. This emf causes a current to flow if
the circuit of the conductor is closed.
For producing dynamically induced emf, the requirements
are:
•
magnetic field
•
conductor
•
relative motion between the conductor and the magnetic
field.
If the conductor moves with a relative velocity 'v' with
respect to the field, then the induced emf `E' will be
E = BLV Sinθ Volts
where
B =
magnetic flux density, measured in tesla
L =
effective length of the conductor in the field in
metres
V =
 relative velocity between field and conductor in
metre/second
θ =
the angle at which the conductor cuts the magnetic
field.
Let us consider Fig 3a in which conductors A to I are
placed on the periphery of the armature under magnetic
poles. Assume for this particular generator shown in
Fig 3a, the value of BLV = 100V.
Accordingly the conductor A induces an emf
=
BLV Sin θ where θ = zero and Sin zero is equal to
zero
=
100 x 0 = zero.
emf induced in
Conductor B = BLV Sin 30°
= 100 x 0.50
= 50 volts.
emf induced in
Conductor C = BLV Sin 90°
= 100 x 1
= 100 V.
emf induced in
Conductor D = BLV Sin 135°
= BLV Sin 45°
= 100 x 0.707
= 70.7 volts.
emf induced in
Conductor E = BLV Sin 180°
= Sin 180°= 0
= 100 x 0
= zero.
Likewise for every position of the remaining conductors in
the periphery, the emf induced could be calculated. If
these values are plotted on a graph, it will represent the
sine wave pattern of induced emf in a conductor when it
rotates under N and S poles of uniform magnetic field.
As in Fig 3b the emf induced by this process is basically
alternating in nature, and this alternating current is converted
into direct current in a DC generator by the commutator.
Fleming's right hand rule: The direction of dynamically
induced emf can be identified by this rule. Hold the thumb,
forefinger and middle finger of the right hand at right angles
to each other as shown in Fig 4 such that the forefinger is
in the direction of flux and the thumb is in the direction of
the motion of the conductor, then the middle finger
indicates the direction of emf induced, i.e. towards the
observer or away from the observer.
Imagine a conductor moving in between north and south
poles in an anticlockwise direction as shown in Fig 5a.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.115 & 3.1.116

3
Applying Fleming's right hand rule, we find that the
conductor 1 which is moving upwards under the north pole
will induce an emf in the direction towards the observer
indicated by the dot sign and the conductor 2 which is
moving down under the south pole will induce an emf in the
direction away from the observer indicated by the plus
sign.
Fig 5b indicates the current direction in the form of an
arrow.  The dot sign indicates the pointed head of the arrow
showing the current direction towards the observer and the
plus sign indicates the cross-feather of the arrow showing
the current direction away from the observer.
Parts  of DC generator
A DC generator consists of the following essential parts as
shown in Fig 6.
1
Frame or yoke
2
Field poles and pole-shoes (Figs 8,9 & 10)
3
Field coils or field winding (Fig 11)
4
Armature core
5
Armature windings or armature conductors
6
Commutator
7
Brushes
8
Bearings and end plates
9
Air filter for fan
10 Shaft
The yoke, the pole cores, the armature core and the air
gaps between the poles and the armature core form the
magnetic circuit, whereas the armature conductors, field
coils, commutators, and brushes form the Power circuit.
Yoke: The outer frame or yoke serves a dual purpose.
Firstly, it provides mechanical support for the poles and
acts as a protecting cover for the whole machine as shown
in Fig 6. Secondly, it allows the magnetic circuit to
complete through it.
In small generators where cheapness rather than weight is
the main consideration, yokes are made of cast iron.  But
for large machines usually cast steel or rolled steel is
used. The modern process of forming the yoke consists of
rolling a steel slab round a cylindrical mandrel, and then
welding it at the seams.  The feet, the terminal box etc. are
welded to the frame afterwards as shown in Fig 7.  Such
yokes possess sufficient mechanical strength and have
high permeability.
Poles cores and pole shoes (Fig 8): The field magnets
consist of pole cores and pole shoes.  The pole shoes
serve two purposes; (i) they spread out the flux in the air
gap uniformly and also, being of a larger cross-section,
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.115 & 3.1.116

4
reduce the reluctance of the magnetic path, and (ii) they
also support the field coils.
There are two main types of pole construction.
The pole core itself may be a solid piece made out of either
cast iron or cast steel but the pole shoe is laminated and
is fastened to the pole face by means of countersunk
screws as shown in Fig 8.
In modern designs, the complete pole cores and pole
shoes are built of thin laminations of annealed steel which
are riveted together under hydraulic pressure.  The thickness
of laminations varies from 1mm to 0.25mm.  The laminated
poles may be secured to the yoke in any of the following
two ways.
Either the pole is secured to the yoke by means of screws
bolted through the yoke and into the pole body as in
Fig 9 or holding screws are bolted into a steel bar which
passes through the pole across the plane of laminations
as in Fig 10.
Pole coils (Field coils): The field coils or pole coils, which
consist of copper wire or strip are former-wound for the
correct dimension.  Then the former is removed and the
wound coils are put into place over the core as shown in
Fig 11.
When a current is passed through the coils, they magnetise
the poles which produce the necessary flux that is cut by
revolving armature conductors.
Both thick gauge wire winding (series) and thin gauge
winding (shunt) are wound, one over the other with separate
insulations, and the terminals are brought out separately.
Armature core: The armature core houses the armature
conductors and rotate in the magnetic field so as to make
the conductors to cut the magnetic flux. In addition to this,
its most important function is to provide a path of very low
reluctance to the field flux, thereby allowing the magnetic
circuit to complete through the yoke and the poles.
The armature core is cylindrical or drum-shaped as shown
in Fig 12, and build up of circular sheet steel discs or
laminations approximately 0.5mm thick as shown in
Fig 13.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.115 & 3.1.116

5
The slots are either die-cut or punched on the outer
periphery of the disc and the keyway is located on the
inner diameter as shown.  In small machines, the armature
stampings are keyed directly to the shaft. Usually these
laminations are perforated for air ducts which permit axial
flow of air through the armature for cooling purposes.  Such
ventilating holes are clearly visible in the laminations
shown in Figs 12,13 and 14.
Up to armature diameters of about one metre, the circular
stampings  are cut out in one piece as shown in Fig 13.  But
above this size, these circles, especially of very thin
sections, are difficult to handle because they tend to
distort and become wavy when assembled together.
Hence, the circular laminations, instead of being cut out
in one piece, are cut in a number of suitable sections of
segments which form part of a complete ring.
A complete circular lamination is made up of four or six or
even eight segmental laminations.  Usually, two keyways
are notched in each segment and are dovetailed or
wedge-shaped to make the laminations self-locking in
position as shown in Fig 14.
The purpose of using lamination is to reduce the loss due
to eddy currents.  Thinner the laminations are, greater the
resistance offered against eddy current loss.
Armature windings: The armature windings are usually
former-wound.  These are first wound in the form of flat
rectangular coils and are  then pulled into their proper
shape with a coil puller.  Various conductors of the coils
are insulated from each other.  The conductors are placed
in the armature slots which are lined with tough insulating
material. After placing the conductors in the slot, this slot
insulation is folded over the armature conductors, and is
secured in place by special, hard, wooden or fibre wedges.
Commutator: The function of the commutator is to
facilitate collection of current from the armature conductors.
It rectifies i.e. converts the alternating current induced in
the armature conductors into uni-directional current for the
external load circuit.  It is of cylindrical structure and is
built up of wedge-shaped segments of high conductivity,
hard-drawn or drop-forged copper.  These segments are
insulated from each other by thin layers of mica.  The
number of segments is equal to the number of armature
coils.
Each commutator segment is connected to the armature
conductor by means of a copper lug or riser.  To prevent
them from flying out under the action of centrifugal forces,
the segments have V-grooves, these grooves being
insulated by conical micanite rings.  A sectional view of a
commutator is shown in Fig 15, whose general appearance
when assembled is shown in Fig 16.
Brushes: The brushes whose function is to collect current
from the commutator are usually made of carbon and
graphite and are in the shape of a rectangular block.
These brushes are housed in brush-holders, shown in
Fig 17, which have a box-holder for the brush, a spring to
maintain the brush tension and a hole to fix the holder to
the rocker arm. The brushes can slide in the rectangular
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.115 & 3.1.116

6
box, open at both ends.  The brushes are made to bear
down on the commutator by a spring whose tension can
be adjusted by changing the position of the tension lever
in the notches.  A flexible, copper pigtail mounted at the
top of the brush conveys the current from the brushes to
the holder.  The number of brushes per spindle depends on
the magnitude of the current to be collected from the
commutator.
Brush-rocker: The spindle is used to have a number of
brushes connected in a large machine. There may be only
two brushes for a small machine.  All the spindles are
insulated and attached to the brush rocker.
The brush-rocker may either be supported by a bearing
cover in a small machine or by brackets attached to the
yoke as shown in Fig 18. The brush position to the neutral
axis can be set by changing the position of the brush-
rocker.
Bearings (Fig 19): Because of their reliability, half-bearings
are frequently employed, though for heavy duties roller
bearings are preferable. The ball and rollers are generally
filled with hard oil for quieter operation and for reduced
bearing wear. When sleeve bearings are used, these are
lubricated by ring oilers fed from an oil reservoir in the
bearing bracket.
End plates (Fig  20): The bearings are housed in these end
plates, and they are fixed to the yoke. They help the
armature for frictionless rotation and to position the armature
in the air gap of the field poles.
Cooling fan
DC Machines are often selected based upon a particular
work or load requirement. In most cases, heat dissipation
is achieved through a cooling fan fitted on the DC Machine
shaft. Another method to remove heat from DC machine
is by providing forced air cooling. This is commonly done
by providing an electric fan externally to blow air over the
DC machine. Forced air cooling can reduce the amount
of heat transferred into the machine structure and allow
the machine to be operated at a higher load.
Types of DC generators: The type of a DC generator is
determined by the manner in which the field excitation is
provided. In general, the methods employed to connect
the field and armature windings, fall into the following
groups.(Fig 21)
Separately excited generator: The field excitation for a
separately excited generator, shown in Fig 22, is supplied
from an independent source, such as storage battery,
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.115 & 3.1.116

7
separate DC generator or rectified DC supply from an AC
source.
The field excitation voltage may be the same as that of
generated (armature) voltage or may differ. Generally, the
excitation voltage will be of low voltage, say 24, 36 or 48V
DC.
Self-excited generator: The field excitation is provided
by its own armature. In this type of generators, initially the
voltage is built up by residual magnetism retained in the
field poles. Self-excited generators may be further classified
as shunt, series and compound generators.
Shunt generator: The field winding is connected to the
armature terminals as shown in Fig 23. (i.e. shunt field
winding is connected in parallel with armature winding).
The shunt field contains many turns of relatively fine wire
and carries a comparatively small current only which is a
small percentage of the rated current of the generator.
Series generator: The field winding is connected in
series with the armature winding as shown in Fig 24. The
series field winding has a few turns of heavy wire. Since it
is in series with the armature it carries the load current.
Compound generator: The field excitation is provided by
a combination of shunt and series field windings.
Short-shunt compound generator: This is a generator
in which the shunt field is directly across the armature as
shown in Fig 25.
Long-shunt compound generator: This is a generator in
which the shunt field is connected after the series field as
shown in Fig 26.
Differential and cumulative compound generator:
The compound generators can also be further classified as
cumulative and differential.  In cumulative compound
generators the magnetising forces of the shunt and the
series field ampere-turns are cumulative, i.e. they both
tend to set up flux in the air gap in the same direction.
However, in case the ampere turns of the shunt widning
oppose those of the series winding, the machine is said to
be differentially compound wound generator.  Both the
types are shown in Fig 27.
Terminal markings : As per BIS 4718-1975 the terminal
markings for DC commutator machines shall be according
to the marking principles stated below.
•
Windings are distinguished by capital letters.
•
End points and intermediate points of windings are
distinguished by a numerical suffix.
•
Winding letters for DC windings are chosen from the
earlier part of the alphabet.(Fig 28)
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.115 & 3.1.116

8
Commutator (Split rings)
A generator produces Power power with the help of  the
rotation of a group of conductors in a magnetic field. It uses
the principle of electromagnetic induction to convert the
input mechanical power into Power power.
Slip rings: Let us consider a simple AC generator having
a single loop of wire and rotated within a fixed magnetic
field, as shown in Fig 29.
Let each end of the single loop coil be connected to copper
or brass rings  called slip rings. These slip-rings are
insulated from each other, insulated and mounted on the
shaft. In a broader sense this rotating assembly (coil,shaft
& slip-ring) is called armature. The wire loop (armature
coil) is connected to an external circuit by means of two
brushes which are positioned to rub against the slip-rings.
As the armature is rotated at a uniform angular velocity,
the generated voltage in the loop conductor will actually be
of alternating voltage.
For the clockwise rotation indicated, the direction of
generated voltage and the resulting current in the coil side
under the north pole will be directed from A to B making the
slip-ring 2 negative. This is readily confirmed by using
Fleming's right hand rule. Similarly the direction of the
induced voltage and the resulting current under the south
pole is to be directed from C to D making the slip- ring 1
as positive. When the conductor AB moves from the north
pole to the south pole, the direction of induced emf in it will
reverse, so that the current will now flow from B to A
making the slip-ring 2 positive. At the same time coil side
CD has moved into the north pole region and its induced
emf is reversed and current will flow from D to C making the
slip-ring 1 negative.
Thus for one half of a revolution (for a two-pole generator)
the emf is directed around the coils A to B & C to D.  For
the other half of the revolution the emf is directed around
the coil D to C and B to A. The current in the externally
connected load resistor via the stationary brushes in
contact with the pair of slip rings `1'and `2' will be
alternating (AC) in nature.
Wave-shape of the induced voltage: When the output
voltage is plotted against Power degrees we get the output
wave-form.
The output wave-form obtained across the load, according
to the pole shape shown in Fig 29, will not be of sinusoidal
shape due to un-uniform magnetic field but of rectangular
shape as shown in Fig 30.
However, if the magnetic field is uniform, the output wave-
form will be of sinusoidal shape as shown in Fig 31.
Simple generator with split-rings: A direct current
generator is simply an AC generator provided with split
rings instead of slip-rings.
The split ring is a ring made up of hard drawn copper cut
into two segments, insulated from each other and the shaft
in which it is mounted. A commercial generator uses a
number of split rings  called commutators. The split ring is
a device for reversing the brush contact with the armature
coil terminals, every time the induced current in the coil
reverses, so that the output current taken by the brushes
remains always in the same direction.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.115 & 3.1.116

9
As shown in Fig 32a, if the armature rotates clockwise the
split ring rotates with it, and the brushes and the poles are
stationary in their position.  As shown in Fig 4a, when the
moving coil  is in the horizontal position, the induced
current will flow through the coil from ABCD to the segment
`B' via the positive brush and load to the negative brush and
segment A. The direction of current flow in the external
circuit is shown in Figures 32a and 32c.
When the armature rotates so that the coil just assumes
a vertical position as in Fig 32b,  the brushes will short-
circuit both the segments. The induced emf is zero and no
current flows through the load circuit for a short moment.
When the armature rotates and the coil assumes the
position as indicated in Fig 32c, the coil side AB  will enter
the south pole region and its induced emf will reverse,
compared to the direction it had while moving under the
north pole region as shown in Fig 32a.
But when this happens the split ring segments `A' and `B'
will also have exchanged their positions since they rotate
along with the coil.
As the emfs in the coil sides AB and CD reverse their
polarity, the split ring segments to which they are connected
simultaneously change their positions under the stationary
brushes. As a result, the polarity of the brushes remains
fixed and the current direction through the load remains as
shown in Fig 32c which is the same as shown in Fig 32a.
Figure 33 represents the generated voltage of a simple DC
generator. The voltage is uni-directional due to the split
ring action.
The induced emf by a single loop (one turn) coil is very
small in magnitude and pulsating in nature as shown in
Fig 33. Coils, having a number of turns in series, multiply
the generated emf by the same number. However to get a
steady (DC) current it is necessary to increase the pulses
produced in the armature; thereby their average value is
constant.
There are two ways to increase the number of pulses
during each rotation of the armature.
•
Increase the number of field poles.
•
Increase the number of separate coils (multi-coil) in the
armature.
The multi-coils necessitate a multiple segment split-rings
which is called a commutator.
Fig 34 represents the generated voltages and their wave
shapes when the armature has different number of split
rings, i.e. commutator segments. The practical generator
will have more number of commutator segments as shown
in Fig 34c, and the induced emf will be as shown in the
adjoining graph.
Armature circuit resistance and its relation with
different types of windings and brush resistance
Armature windings (  Fig 35 Lap winding, Fig 36 wave
winding): We have seen earlier, when a single loop
conductor is rotated through a magnetic field, an alternating
voltage is induced in it. This alternating voltage can be
changed into direct voltage (rectified) by the commutator.
In practice, there are several coils in the armature, each
with a large number of turns laid in the slots of the armature
core. This arrangement of the coil is called armature
winding. The ends of the coils are soldered to the
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.115 & 3.1.116

10
commutator raisers, depending on the kind of winding i.e.
lap or wave, which decides the number of parallel paths in
the armature.
i.e. lap or wave, which decides the numbers of parallel
paths in the armature.
A preliminary knowledge about the different types of
winding is essential to tackle problems related to the
calculation of induced voltage in various types of generators.
Lap and wave windings could  readily be identified by the
manner in which the coil ends are connected to the
commutator bars. As shown in Fig 35, in a simplex lap
winding, the ends of a coil are connected to adjacent
commutator segments. Fig 36 shows the simplex wave
winding in which the coil ends are connected to the
commutator segments almost equal to the distance
between poles of the same polarity.
Table 1 shows the main differences between lap and
wave winding.
Table 1
Lap winding
Wave winding
The two ends of each armature coil are connected to
The two ends of each coil connect to the commutator
adjacent commutator segments in the case of simplex,
segments placed between adjacent poles of the same
two segments apart in duplex and three segments apart
polarity.
in triplex.
There are many parallel paths for current as there
 There are two parallel paths regardless of the number
are field poles in the case of lap winding
 of field poles in the case of  simplex wave winding.
No. of parallel paths = Number of poles x plex of the
Number of parallel paths in wave windings = 2 x plex of
winding
the winding where plex for-simplex is 1, duplex is 2
and triplex is 3.
The number of brush positions is equal to the number of
Only two brush positions are required  regardless of
    poles.
the number of field poles.
Used for machines having low voltage and high current
Used in machines having low current and high voltage
capacity.
capacity.
DC armature circuit - voltage drop and its importance:
One of the major reasons for the drop in voltage at the
terminals of a loaded generator is due to armature voltage
drop. This depends on the armature circuit resistance and
the armature current. A thorough understanding of the
armature resistance, apart from helping an electrician to
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.115 & 3.1.116

11
calculate the efficiency of a DC machine, is of great help
to check the correctness of the rewind armature without
physically checking the number of turns and the size of the
winding wire. This is done in all established factories,
where a record is maintained to indicate voltage drop
across the armature of each DC machine, at a specified
armature current. Any variation from this recorded value to
the value obtained from the rewind armature (having the
same grade of brushes), clearly indicates either the size
of the winding wire or the number of turns has changed,
and the performance of the machine will not be the same
as earlier. Normally armature circuit resistance will be in
the order of one ohm or below.
Voltage drop: This could be calculated by finding the
total resistance of the armature conductors in series per
parallel path and dividing it by the number of parallel paths,
but in actual practice it is calculated by the voltage drop
method.
Refer to the circuit shown in Fig 37.
Let 'r' be the specific resistance of the armature conductors,
'a' be the area of the cross-section of the armature
conductor in sq. cm.
'L' be the length of the conductor in cms.
'Ra' - armature resistance in ohms.
'Rp' - resistance per parallel path in ohms.
Method of calculating the armature resistance: Let P
be the number of parallel paths in the armature,
Z be the total  conductors in armature.
Then the number of conductors per parallel path = Z/P.
Resistance per parallel path 
a
L
P
Z
 =
 
Rp
ρ
×
Armature resistance in ohms = Ra
paths
 
parallel
 
of
 .
No
R
 
=
 
R
P
a
Example: In a DC 4-pole lap-wound machine the resistance
of one conductor is 0.1 ohm;  there are 48 conductors.
Calculate the armature resistance.
Since it is lap-wound,
No. of parallel paths=No.of poles (assuming simplex
winding).
Therefore, No. of parallel paths = 4.
Conductors per
parallel path =  Total No.of conductors
No.of parallel paths
 =  48
4  =  12.
Resistance per parallel path =  12 x 0.1 = 1.2 ohms.
Therefore the total armature resistance for 4 parallel paths
= 1.2/4 = 0.3 ohms.
In addition to this, the total armature circuit resistance
includes brush resistance and brush contact resistance.
Hence the value measured will be more than 0.3 ohms in
the above example.
Brushes: The main function of the brushes is to transfer
the energy present at the armature to the external circuit.
Brushes are usually made from a compound of carbon and
graphite. Graphite content provides a self-lubricating action
as the brushes rub against the commutator.
The most important characteristics of brushes are specific
resistance, friction coefficient, current-carrying capacity,
maximum operating speed and abrasiveness.
Specific resistance is the resistivity of the brush material.
Friction coefficient  is the ratio of the force on the surface
to the force required to slide   another surface over it, and
is  influenced by the brush temperature, pressure, current,
atmospheric condition, mechanical condition,  commutator
material, surface films and speed. The resulting high brush
friction often causes the brush to chatter and chip. Since
friction serves no useful purpose, low brush friction is
preferred. Low brush friction will have a friction coefficient
in the order 0.22 or below whereas a high brush friction will
have a friction coefficient above 0.4.
Current-carrying capacity: It depends on the brush
material, operating conditions, type of ventilation and
operating temperature. If the temperature is high due to
high current density, the brush life will be shortened.
Speed: The allowable speed depends upon the
characteristics of the brush material, spring pressure,
current density, types of brush-holders, brush angle and
the area of contact of the commutator.
Abrasiveness: The ability of the brush to prevent excessive
build up of film usually caused by corrosive or oily
atmosphere is called the abrasiveness or polishing action.
Grade and types of brushes: There are four major brush
families classified according to the manufacturing
process.
•
Graphite
•
Carbon and carbon graphite
•
Electro-graphite
•
Metal graphite
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.115 & 3.1.116

12
Graphite: Graphite brushes are usually made of natural
or artificial graphite. Natural graphite contains impurities.
Artificial graphite is usually pure. It is used in fractional HP
machines.
Carbon and carbon graphite: It has high hardness, high
mechanical strength, cleaning action and long brush life.
Electro-graphite: It consists of various forms of amorphous
carbon. These brushes usually have higher current density,
lower strength, lower hardness and lower specific
resistance. They generally have good commutating
characteristic but may not always be used because of the
lesser requirement of high current, and the requirement of
severe mechanical conditions.
Metal graphite: It is generally made from natural graphite,
and finally divided into metal powders. Copper is the most
common metal constituent, but silver, tin, lead and other
metals are sometimes used. The metal content ranges
from approximately 10 to 95% by weight. A high metal
content provides greater current capacity, higher
mechanical strength and also certain combined
characteristics of contact drop and friction. It is used
where high current and low voltages  are involved. Its
typical applications are for electroplating generators,
battery chargers, welding generators and other high current
equipment.
Whenever the brushes are to be changed, the same grade
of brushes is to be procured and used to get the same
performance characteristics from the machine.
As an accepted procedure, every electrician should identify
the brush grade of each machine, either from service
manuals or by visual inspection, and record it in the
maintenance card of the machine for proper selection of
replacement at a later date.
Brush contact resistance is the resistance offered between
the brush and the commutator for the current flow.  This
resistance value depends upon the grade of brushes,
material used for the commutator, contact area between
the brush and commutator, and the brush tension.  Normally
the brush contact resistance is measured in terms of
voltage drop at specific current ratings.
Table 2  shows the different grades of brushes and
their characteristics.
Table 2
Characteristics of brushes
Grade of
Max. current
Max.contact
Pressure on
Voltage
carbon
density A/cm2
resistance
commutator
drop
ohms/cm2
kg/cm2
in volts
Soft graphite
9 to 9.5 A/cm2
      –
0.12
1.6
Copper carbon
15 to 16 A/cm2
0.00000465
0.15-0.18
0.25-0.35
Carbon
5.5 to 6.5A/cm2
0.000062
0.22-0.27
2
Electro-graphite
8.5 to 9 A/cm2
0.000031
0.22
1.7-1.8
EMF equation of DC generator
When the armature of a DC generator, containing a
number of conductors in the form of a winding, rotates at
a specific speed in the magnetic field, emf is induced in the
armature winding and is available across the brushes. The
equation and the numerical problems given as examples
will help an electrician to better his understanding about
the construction of a DC machine.
Induced emf in a DC generator can be calculated as
explained below.
Figure 38 is given for your reference.
LetØ = flux/pole in weber
Z  = total number of armature conductors = No. of slots x
No.of conductors/slot
P = No. of poles in the generator
A = No. of parallel paths in armature
N = armature revolution per minute (r.p.m.)
E = emf induced in the generator.
Average emf generated
= Rate of change of flux
per conductor in one
  (Faraday's Laws of
revolution
  Electromagnetic induction
d
dt
∅ volt (since N=1)
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.115 & 3.1.116

13
Now, flux cut/conductor in one revolution, (dØ) = PØ Wb
No. of revolutions/second = N/60
Time for one revolution, (dt) = 60/N second
According to Faraday's Laws of Electromagnetic Induction,
we have emf generated/conductor/second
  =
∅
∅
 
 =  P
N
60  
d
dt
volts
emf generated in `Z'conductors in the armature assuming
they are all in series =  P
60
 volts.
∅ZN
The emf generated in the armature
of the DC generator when there are
`A' parallel paths in the armature      
=  P
60 A  volts.
∅ZN
Could be written as =
∅
 
ZN
60 x P
A  volts.
A = 2  -  for simplex wave winding
= P  -  for simplex lap winding.
Example: A four-pole generator, having a simplex
wave-wound armature has 51 slots, each slot containing
20 conductors. What will be the voltage generated in the
machine, when driven at 1500 r.p.m assuming the flux per
pole to be 7.0 mWb?
Solution:  E =
∅
 
ZN
60 x P
A  volts.
Here, Ø= 7x 10-3 Wb, Z = 51 x 20 = 1020, P=4, N = 1500
r.p.m.
A = 2 as the winding is simplex wave.
E =
×
×
×
×
 7
10
1020
1500
4
2  =  357V.
-3
60
An 8-pole DC generator has 960 armature conductors and
a flux per pole of 20mWb running at 500 r.p.m.  Calculate
the emf generated when the armature is connected as (i)
a simplex lap-winding, (ii) a simplex wave winding.
Solution
(i) Simplex lap winding
E 
=
∅
 
ZN
60 x P
A  
E =
×
×
×
×
−
 
8
8  =  160V.
20
10
960
500
60
3
(ii) Simplex wave winding
640V.
 
=
 
2
8
60
500
960
10
20
 
3
×
×
×
×
=
−
E
Separately excited DC generator
Introduction
A DC generator is the most commonly used separately
excited generator, used for electroplating and battery
charging. A separately excited generator is one in which
the magnetic field is excited from an external DC source.
The DC source may be a DC generator or a battery or a
metal rectifier connected to an AC supply. Generally a
potential divider is connected across the DC source, and
the required DC voltage is supplied to the field as shown
in Fig 39.
An ammeter is connected in the field circuit to measure
the field current. The shaft of the generator is coupled to
a prime mover. (Not shown in Fig 39)
Magnetisation characteristic: This characteristic gives
the relation between the field flux and the induced voltage
in a generator. However, it is difficult to measure the field
flux, and, hence, the field current is taken instead of the
field flux. The characteristic curve is drawn by keeping the
field current in the `X' axis and the induced emf in the `Y'
axis. To draw the characteristic curve, the connections are
made as shown in Fig 39, and then, the prime mover is
started and made to run at its rated speed, keeping the
field switch `s' open. The terminal voltage which appears
at the armature terminals is measured and recorded. This
small voltage Er is known as residual voltage which is due
to the residual magnetism available in the field cores.
Throughout the experiment, the speed of the generator is
held constant. Next, the field switch `S' is closed keeping
the potential divider at its minimum position, and gradually
the field current is increased in steps. For each step, the
field current and the corresponding voltage at the armature
terminals are noted. The readings are tabulated in Table 3.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.115 & 3.1.116

14
Table 3
Sl.No.
Field current
Terminal voltage
If a graph is plotted between the field current and the
terminal voltage, the curve will be as shown in Fig 40. The
field current is taken on the X-axis and the emf E on the
Y-axis. The curve drawn is known as the magnetisation
characteristic of a separately excited generator.
A study of the curve indicates that it starts just above
the origin, travels straight in the linear region indicating
that the emf induced is directly proportional to the field
current If.
As the poles are in the process of saturation, the relation
between the terminal voltage and the field current no longer
stands in direct proportion as indicated by the knee portion
of the curve.
Finally when the poles get fully saturated the induced emf
ceases to increase even at the increased field current
which is indicated by the last portion of the curve and
named as saturation region.
Reasons for not building up of voltage in a separately
excited generator and their remedies
Sometimes a separately excited generator may not build
up voltage. The probable reasons and remedies thereof are
given in Table 4.
Load characteristic of a separately excited generator:
The load characteristic shows the relation between the
load current and the terminal voltage. Through this
characteristic curve, we can determine the behaviour of
the generator on load.
Fig 41 shows the method of connecting the separately
excited DC generator to obtain the load characteristic. The
generator speed should be brought to the rated value with
the help of the prime mover and the voltage is built up to
its normal rated voltage. Then  the load switch is closed.
Gradually the load is increased in steps.  Each time, the
load current IL in amps and the corresponding terminal
voltage `V' in volts are noted. The readings are tabulated
in Table 5.
Table 4
Reasons
Remedies
A break or opening in the armature or field circuit.
Test the field and armature  circuits for open circuit.
Locate the fault and rectify.
A short circuit in the armature or field.
Test the field and armature for short circuit.  Locate
the fault and rectify.
Loose brush connections or loose brush contact.
Tighten the brush connections. Check up the brush
tension. Adjust, if necessary. If the brushes are worn
out, replace them.
A dirty or severely pitted commutator.
Clean the commutator for dirt, dust and greasy
material. Use trichloroethylene. If the segments are
pitted, dress them up.
The speed is too low.
Increase the speed of the generator to its rated speed.
The DC supply for excitation is absent.
Check the DC supply across the field winding
terminals. If the supply is not there, check the supply
source and rectify the fault Where AC main supply is
converted as DC supply through rectifiers, the fault
may be located in the rectifier circuit.
Table 5
Sl.No.
Load current IL in amps
Terminal  voltage in volts
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.115 & 3.1.116

15
The graph shown in Fig 42 is the load characteristic or
external characteristic  of a separately excited  generator
having load current in the X axis and terminal voltage in the
Y axis.
It is observed from the graph that a slight voltage drop
occurs when the generator is loaded.  This is due to the
armature voltage drop (IaRa) and armature reaction.
If the voltage drop from no load to full load is very small, the
separately excited DC generator can be regarded as a
constant voltage generator.
Advantages of a separately excited generator
The terminal voltage remains almost stable when compared
to the self-excited generators because the field circuit is
independent of the induced voltage.
As the field is independent, the IaRa drop in the armature
will not affect the field flux.
This generator can be used where a wide range of terminal
voltage is required.
Disadvantage
1   The disadvantage of a separately excited generator is
the inconvenience of providing a separate DC source
for excitation.
2   Besides it is expensive.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.115 & 3.1.116

16
Power
Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.117
Electrician - DC Generator
Building up of a DC shunt generator
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the conditions and method of building up of voltage in a DC shunt generator
• explain the method of creating residual magnetism in the poles of a DC generator
• determine the magnetization characteristic of a DC shunt generator
• estimate the value of field critical resistance in the DC shunt generator.
Condition for a self-excited DC generator to build up
voltage: For a self-excited DC generator to build up
voltage, the following conditions should be fulfilled,
assuming the generator is in sound condition.
•
There must be residual magnetism in the field cores.
•
The field resistance should be below the field critical
resistance value.
•
The generator should run at the rated speed.
•
There must be a proper relation between the direction
of rotation and the direction of field current. It could be
explained as stated below.
The polarity of the induced voltage must be in such a
direction as to produce the field current to assist the
residual magnetism.
The polarity of the induced emf depends upon the direction
of rotation and the polarity of the field poles depends upon
the field current direction.
Even after fulfilling the above conditions, if the self-excited
DC shunt generator fails to build up voltage, there may be
other reasons as listed in Table 1.
Table 1
Sl.No.
Causes
Reasons
Remedies
1
A break or opening in
Break or loose connection
Locate the open circuit and rectify.
the field or armature
in the field or in the
circuit.
armature winding/circuit.
High resistance in the field
Reduce the resistance of the
circuit beyond the field critical
field regulator.
resistance value.
2
Loose brush connections
Improper brush
Check the brushes for excessive
or contacts.
contact/loose brush
wear, and replace them, if
connections.
necessary. Check the commutator
for pitting. If  necessary, turn down
the commutator.  Always clean the
commutator when poor brush contact
is discovered. Check the brush
tension and readjust it, if necessary
Tighten any loose connections.
3
A dirty or severely
Severe sparking due
In this case, follow the same
pitted commutator.
to overload.
procedure as outlined above.
4
A short circuit in
Overload or excess
Do a resistance check, ascertain,
the armature or field
heating.
locate and remove the fault.
Method of building up voltage in a DC shunt generator:
Fig 1 shows the circuit diagram for building up voltage in
a DC shunt generator. When the generator is made to run
at its rated speed initially, the voltmeter reads a small
amount of voltage say, 4 to 10 volts. It is due to the residual
magnetism.  Since the field coils are connected across
the armature terminals, this voltage causes a small
amount of current to flow through the field coil. If the current
flow in the field coils is in the correct direction, it will
strengthen the residual magnetism and induce more
voltage.
As such, the generated voltage will rise marginally. This
rise in voltage, in turn, will further strengthen the increasing
field current and induce more voltage.  This rise in voltage,
in turn, will further strengthen the increasing field current.
This cumulative action will build up voltage until saturation
is reached. After saturation, any increase in the field
current will not increase the induced voltage. However, the

17
whole procedure of building up of voltage takes a few
seconds only.
Method of creating residual magnetism: Without
residual magnetism, a self-excited generator will not build
up its voltage. A generator may lose its residual magnetism
due to any one of the following reasons.
–
The generator is kept idle for a long time.
–
Heavy short circuit.
–
Heavy overloading.
–
The generator is subjected to too much heat.
When the generator loses its residual magnetism, it can
be re-created as stated below.
Flashing of field: One of the methods to create residual
magnetism is called the flashing of the `field'.  This can be
done by connecting the shunt field across a battery or any
DC source for a few minutes as shown in Fig 2.
While flashing the field, the polarity of the magnetic field,
now created, should be the same as that of the residual
magnetic field it lost earlier.
In practice, this checking may not be possible.
Alternatively note the polarity of the DC supply used for
flashing the field and the corresponding field terminals.
Run the generator in the specified direction at its rated
speed. Measure the residual voltage induced and its
polarity.  Check whether the polarity of the residual voltage
is the same as that of the DC generator.  If found reversed,
flash the field again by connecting the supply voltage in
reverse polarity.
Magnetisation characteristic of a DC shunt generator:
The magnetisation characteristic curve shown in Fig 3
gives the relation between the field current and the induced
voltage. Referring to the emf equation, the induced emf in
a generator is proportional to the flux per pole and the
revolutions per minute of the generator.  At a constant
speed, the generated emf becomes directly proportional
to the field flux. In a given machine, the flux depends upon
the field current. The graph (Fig 3) illustrates this feature.
Because of the residual magnetism, the curved part below
point `a' does not start at zero.  Between the points `ab',
the curve is in almost a straight line indicating that the
voltage in the area is proportional to the field current.
Between points `b' and `c' a large increase in field current
causes only a slight increase in the voltage. It indicates
that the field cores are reaching saturation and this part of
the curve is called the `knee' of the curve. Between points
`c' and `d', the curve is flat indicating that the increased
field current is not able to increase the induced voltage.
This is due to saturation of the field cores. Because of
saturation, the field flux becomes constant, and the
induced voltage will not be in a position to increase further.
This curve is also called a no-load or open-circuit
characteristic curve.
Critical resistance: If the shunt field circuit resistance is
too large, it does not allow sufficient current to flow into the
field to build up its voltage. In other words, it acts like an
open field. Therefore, the field circuit resistance should be
smaller than a value called critical field resistance. Critical
field resistance is the highest value of resistance of the
shunt field circuit with which a DC shunt generator can
build up voltage. Beyond this value of resistance, the
generator fails to build up voltage. The value of the critical
resistance can be determined by drawing a tangential line
to  the open circuit characteristic curve as shown in
Fig 4.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.117

18
For example, by drawing the tangent on the open-circuit
characteristic curve as shown by line OR of Fig 4, we find
the tangent is parting at point `b' from the curve. By drawing
ordinates from point `b' to x and y axis, the value of critical
resistance (Rc) can be determined as below.
Rc  =  Field critical resistance
     
=  voltage represented by the tangent
current represented by the tangent
=  OF
OH  =  200 V
0.2 A  =  1000 ohms.
Field circuit resistance is the sum of the field resistance
and field rheostat resistance. This value should be less
than, say 1000 ohms (field circuit resistance) to enable the
generator to build up voltage, if the generator is intended
to self-excite. Normally this happens when the field
regulator resistance is set at a high value.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.117

19
Power
Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.118
Electrician - DC Generator
Test a DC machine for continuity and insulation resistance
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the necessity of measuring the insulation resistance of an Power machine
• state the frequency of tests
• state the required conditions for the tests
• state the reasons for the low value of insulation resistance in the machines
• state the method of improving the insulation resistance of DC machines.
Necessity of measuring insulation resistance: The
most important aspect in the maintenance of DC machines
is taking care of the insulation. Power insulation of DC
machine windings is designed for the satisfactory operation
at the specified voltage, temperature and to retain the
Power and mechanical strength and the  dimensional
stability over many years  of operation. The insulation
resistance of DC machines in service should be checked
periodically, preferably every month. The possibility of
reduction in the value of insulation  resistance is due to the
continuous working of the machine under full load condition,
the heat generated in the winding and local atmospheric
moisture, dust and dirt. If they are not checked in time, the
insulation becomes weak and the winding will loose its
dielectric  property, and will ultimately lead to failure of the
machine. Periodical checks and measurement of insulation
resistance and improvement thereof to the required level
will ensure prevention of failure of insulation, and thereby,
the breakdown of the machine.
A common device for measuring insulation resistance is a
direct indicating insulation tester or Megger. The
measurements are made at voltages 500/1000 volt DC
depending upon the voltage rating of the machine.
Measurement of insulation resistance: Insulation
resistance shall be measured between the winding and
frame (earth), and between windings.
For low and medium voltage rated machines, the insulation
resistance, when the high voltage test is applied, shall not
be less than one megohm as per B.I.S. 9320 - 1979. The
insulation resistance shall be measured with a DC voltage
of about 500 V applied for a sufficient time for the reading
of the indicator to become practically steady, such voltage
being taken from an independent source or generated in
the measuring instrument.
When it is required to dry out windings at site
to obtain the minimum value of insulation
resistance, it is recommended that the
procedure for drying out as specified in
IS:900-1965 may be followed.
Frequency of test: Periodical checks or tests are
predetermined in preventive maintenance programmes
with a forethought. The planning of the preventive
maintenance (PM) schedule should be based on the past
experience of maintenance personnel, and the
recommendations made by the machine manufacturer.
Usually the measurement of insulation resistance is a
must during the period of overhauls. The duration of
overhaul will be once in 6 months, ideal for DC machines
where they are working continuously. Overhauling is done
once a year, for such of those machines as are not working
continuously. The overhauling is done during plant
shut-down periods.
However in DC machines where the overhaul interval is too
long, or delayed, it is advisable to have constant vigil and
check the insulation resistance at least once a month
regularly, and maintain a record of the values of the
insulation resistance tests as shown in Table 1.
Table 1
Insulation resistance test
Date
Time
Weather
Duty
Test
Insulation
         Remarks
condition
cycle
between
resistance
terminals

20
Required conditions for test: The high potential dielectric
test and the insulation resistance test are the principal
methods of evaluating insulation capability and condition
of the machine. The insulation resistance test is often
used as a measure of the condition of the winding.
Insulation resistance is the ratio of the applied voltage to
the leakage current which passes in the circuit at some
specified time after the voltage is applied. Direct, rather,
than alternating voltages are used for measuring insulation
resistance.
The principal currents affecting insulation resistance on
application of the test potential for sufficient time are (1)
leakage current over the winding surface (2) conduction in
current through the insulation material and (3) absorption
current in the insulation. The first two currents are steady
with time, but the last current delays approximately
exponentially from an initial high value. Such insulation
resistance measurements are affected by surface
conditions (dirt or moisture on the windings), moisture
within the insulation wall and the insulation temperature.
The magnitude of the test potential may also affect the
insulation value, especially if the insulation is not in good
condition. Therefore, it is desirable to use insulation
resistance as a measure to determine the condition of the
machine over a period of years, and to make readings
under similar conditions each time and record the values
in the test card of the machine in a table similar to Table
1. However, before testing the winding for insulation
resistance, it is recommended that the continuity test
should be conducted in the armature and field windings to
ensure soundness of the respective circuits. As sometimes
continuity tests will not reveal internal short circuits,
resistance measurement test is recommended, and a
record should be maintained for comparison at intervals.
Reasons for low value insulation resistance: The low
value of insulation resistance in DC machines is due to
excess heat developed in the winding due to their routine
working with full load condition or overloading at times or
frequent starting with loads. In addition to this, high
ambient temperatures are also the reason for low insulation
resistance. The other possibility is accumulation of
unnecessary local dust and dirt, carbonisation due to
brush, local atmospheric moisture, acids and alkalies
present in the surroundings of the machine etc. All these
are collectively or individually responsible for the weakening
of insulation resistance of the winding. Because of these
conditions the  dielectric property of the insulating material
gets reduced, which, in turn, results in low or poor
insulation resistance, responsible for the breakdown of the
winding due to insulation failure.
Method of improving insulation resistance: On
identifying the weak insulation resistance, during the
course of preventive maintenance observation in a DC
machine, it is necessary to improve the insulation
resistance to restore it to a safe value.
Improvement of insulation resistance could be done by
any one of the following methods after cleaning the dust
and dirt from the machinery.
•
By blowing hot air through the machines.
•
By heating the machine with carbon filament or
incandescent lamps.
•
By dismantling and varnishing the winding of  the
machine.
The following steps are to be adopted for dismantling and
varnishing.
•
Measure the insulation resistance value between the
windings and the frame of the machine and record the
value.
•
Mark and dismantle the machine.
•
Remove dirt and dust in the field winding by blowing dry
air with the help of an electric blower.
•
Clean and remove dirt, dust and carbon on the armature
with special attention to the commutators.
•
Clean the brushes, brush-holders and rocker arms.
•
Measure the insulation resistance of the winding with
an insulation tester; note the values.
•
Heat and dry the field coils and armature by external
measures.
•
Apply insulating varnish of air-drying type to field coils
and armature conductors.
•
Dry the varnish coating on field coils and armature by
external means.
•
Measure the insulation resistance and note the
improved value of insulation resistance.
•
Assemble the machine.
•
Measure the insulation value between the windings and
the  frame of  the machine; record the values. Compare
these results with those of the first step and make sure
the present value shows improvement.
•
Connect the machine to the system and run it to check
its normal working condition.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.118

21
Power
Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.120 to 3.1.123
Electrician - DC Generator
Characteristics of DC generator
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the characteristic of DC series generator
• explain the characteristic of DC shunt generator
• explain the characteristic of DC compound generator
• explain the operation of paralleling of DC shunt generators
• explain the effect of armature reaction and remedies
• explain losses and efficiency of DC generators
• explain the  routine and maintenance of DC generator.
Characeteristics of series generator
In these types of generators the field windings, armature
windings and external load circuit all are connected in
series as shown in Figure 1.
Therefore, the same current flows through armature winding,
field winding and the load. Let, I = la = lsc =lL  Here, Ia =
armature current lsc = series field current lL = load current
There are generally three most important characteristics
of series wound DC generator which show the relation
between various quantities such as series field current or
excitation current, generated voltage, terminal voltage and
load current.
Magentic or open circuit characteristic of series
wound DC generator
The curve which shows the relation between no load
voltage and the field excitation current is called magnetic
or open circuit characteristic curve. As during no load, the
load terminals are open circuited, there will be no field
current in the field since, the armature, field and load are
series conected and these three make a closed loop of
circuit. So, this curve can be obtained practically by
separating the field winding and exciting the DC generator
by an external source.
Here in the diagram below AB curve is showing the
magnetic characteristic of sereis wound DC generator.
The linearity of the curve will continue till the saturation of
the poles. After that there will be no further significant
change of terminal voltage of DC generator for increasing
field current. Due to residual magnetism there will be a
small initial voltage across the armature that is why the
curve started from a point A which is a little above the
origin O.
Internal characteristic of series wound DC generator
The internal characteristic curve gives the relation between
voltage generated in the armature and the load current.
This curve is obtained by subtracting the drop due to the
demagnetizing effect of armature reaction from the no load
voltage. So, the actual generated voltage (Eg) will be less
than the no load voltage (E0). That is why the curve is
slightly dropping from the open circuit characteristic
curve. Here in the diagram below OC curve is showing the
internal characteristic or total characteristic of the series
wound DC generator. (Fig 2)
External characteristic of series wound DC generator
The external characteristic curve shows the variation of
terminal voltage (V) with the load current (lL). Terminal
voltage of this type of generator is obtained by subtracting
ohmic drop due to armature resistance (Ra) and series field
resistance (Rsc) from the actually generated voltage (Eg).
Terminal voltage V = Eg - l (Ra + Rsc) The external
characteristic curve lies below the internal characeristic
curve because the value of terminal voltage is less than the
generated voltage. Here in the Figure 2 OD curve is
showing the external characteristic of the series wound
DC generator
Characteristic curves of  series wound DC generators
It can be observed from the characteristics of series wound
DC generator, that with the increase in load (load is
increased when load current increases ) the terminal
voltage of the machine increases. But after reaching its
maximum value it starts to decrease due to excessive
demagnetizing effect of armature reaction. This
phenomenon is shown in the figure by the dotted line.

22
Dotted portion of the characteristic gives approximately
constant current irrespective of the external load resistance.
This is because if load is increased, the field current is
increased as field is series connected with load. Similarly
if load is increased, armature current is increased as the
armature is also series connected with load. But due to
saturation, there will be no further significance raise of
magnetic field strength hence any further increase in
induced voltage. But due to increased armature current
the affect of armature reaction increases significantly
which causes significant fall in load voltage. If load voltage
falls, the load current  is also decreased proportionally
since current is proportional to voltage as per ohm’s law.
So increasing load tends to increase the load current, but
decreasing load voltage, tends to decrease load current.
Due to these two simultaneous effects, there will be no
significant change in load current in dotted portion of
external characteristics of series wound DC generator.
That is why series DC generator is called constant current
DC generator.
The external/load characteristic of a shunt generator:
The external/load characteristic is important for judging
the suitability of a generator for a particular purpose. When
the DC shunt generator is loaded, it is found that the
terminal voltage drops with increase in the load current. In
a shunt generator, the field current appears to be constant,
and, hence, `V' also should remain constant and be
independent of the load. But, it is not so practically. There
are two main reasons for the drop in terminal voltage. They
are :
•
armature resistance drop (directly)
•
armature reaction drop (indirectly).
Because of the above two reasons, the terminal voltage is
reduced. This in turn affects the field current also. The
decreased field current reduces the field flux which further
reduces the induced emf.
Armature resistance drop: According to formula
Terminal voltage = Induced  emf – armature voltage drop
V = E – IaRa
where Ia is the armature current
and Ra is the armature circuit resistance.
As such, when the load current is increased, more voltage
is dropped in the armature circuit. Hence, the terminal
voltage `V' decreases, under load condition.
Armature reaction drop: Due to the demagnetising
effect of armature reaction, the main pole flux is weakened,
and the induced emf (E) will be reduced in its magnitude.
The external characteristic gives the relation between
terminal voltage and load current. Fig 3 gives the circuit
diagram to determine this characteristic. The generator is
first built up to its rated voltage. Then it is loaded in suitable
steps up to full load. The terminal voltage and the
corresponding load currents are noted for each step.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.120 to 123
In this experiment, the field current has to be kept
constant. This is due to the fact that when terminal
potential decreases on load, the field which is connected
across the armature will have a decreased current. This
effect, if allowed, will reduce the field flux, thereby,
decreasing the induced voltage. This effect cumulatively
reduces the terminal voltage further. From the obtained
values of the terminal voltage VT and load current IL, the
external characteristic curve is plotted as shown in Fig 4,
keeping in VT on `Y' axis and IL  on X axis. From the curve
it will be observed that the no-load voltage OA is maximum,
and it falls to OB when loaded, to indicate that the full load
current value is OK as noted in the name-plate of the
generator.
Fall of voltage from no load to full load, which is due to
armature reaction, and the armature voltage drop are found
to be not appreciable. Normally the generators are designed
to deliver full load current IL, and the fall of voltage will be
about 5 to 8 percent of the no-load voltage which can be
regarded as negligible. If the load current is further increased
by decreasing the load resistance, the curve reaches a
point `C' as shown in Fig 5. At this point, the terminal
voltage falls to OC which will be an appreciable fall when
compared to the no-load terminal voltage. At this point `C',
though the load current is maximum (OK), the terminal
voltage will be much less than the no-load voltage.
However, when the load resistance is further decreased
the load current decreases to OM and VT is reduced to
`OD', that means the load current  cannot be increased
beyond OK and the point `C' is called the breakdown point.
It is the maximum possible current that a generator can

23
supply. Beyond this point `C', the curve drops rapidly with
decrease in the load resistance, indicating that the load
current is also decreasing, instead of increasing. At point
`E' the generator is virtually short-circuited, and all the
voltage induced is dropped to near zero due to IaRa drop
and armature  reaction. Rather, we can say OE is the
residual voltage of the generator. Practically all the
generators operate only on the portion `AB' of the curve
where the efficiency of the generator is maximum.
Internal characteristic: The internal characteristic gives
the relation between induced voltage and the armature
current. In a shunt generator,
Ia = IL + Ish
E = VT + IaRa
Ish = 
V
R
T
sh
.
So, E/Ia curve can be obtained from the external charac-
teristic shown in Fig 4. By plotting `Ish' horizontally against
`V', we get Rsh line which is a straight line through the
origin, but because of the high resistance of the shunt field
it has a very steep gradient as shown in Fig 6. Also draw
the armature resistance(Ra) line  by plotting the drop in
voltage against the armature current as shown in
Fig 4. Take any point `M' on the external characteristic
(Fig 4) and draw the perpendicular `MP'. Then for the given
terminal voltage the load current IL = OP. Draw 'MB'
horizontally, then BF = Ish, and mark off PN = BF in the
'X' axis.
Then ON = OP + PN = (IL + Ish) = Ia.
Draw a line vertically from N to meet the armature resist-
ance line Ra at `R'. Then, the vertical line `RN' is equal to
the drop in the armature and, therefore, if the line PM is
extended further to point `Q', making MQ = RN, the total
length `PQ' is the sum of the terminal voltage and total
armature drop, which is equal to the emf generated. Thus
a point `Q' on the internal characteristic is obtained, and
the total (internal) characteristic can be drawn by joining
points A and Q.
If the load resistance is decreased, then the curve turns
back as in Fig 7. If the load resistance is too small, then
the generator is short-circuited and there is no generated
emf due to heavy demagnetisation of the main poles.
Load critical resistance: It is defined as the minimum
value of load resistance with which the generator builds up
voltage, and, just below this value of load resistance the
DC shunt generator will fail to build up its voltage when
started with the load. When the DC shunt generator is
started with the load, the terminal voltage may not raise
beyond about 10V, the reason is the load resistance is so
low, as if the generator is short-circuited. In Fig 7 the
tangent line `OZ' to the internal characteristic APB is
drawn. Its slope will give the value of the load critical
resistance. As the DC shunt generator will not build up emf
when made to build up with load below this value of
resistance, it is called the load critical resistance.
Load critical resistance in ohms =
Voltage at point 'P'
Load current at point 'P'  (amps)  =  OP
OK
There are thus two critical resistances for a shunt genera-
tor, one for the field circuit and the other for the load
external circuit.
Applications of DC shunt generator: According to the
load characteristic of the DC shunt generator, the drop in
voltage from no load to full load is not appreciable, up to its
rated value of load current. Hence, it can be called a
constant voltage generator. Therefore, it can be used for
constant loads like:
•
centrifugal pump
•
lighting load
•
fans
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.120 to 123

24
•
battery charging and electroplating.
Compound generator: Combination of shunt field and
series field within one generator provides two sources of
excitation, and such a generator is called a compound
generator.
Long shunt compound generator: When the shunt field
is connected in parallel with the series combination of the
armature and the series field, the generator is said to be
connected as a long shunt compound generator which is
shown in Fig 8.
Short shunt compound generator: When the shunt field
is connected in parallel with only the armature, the
generator is said to be connected as a short shunt
compound generator which is shown in Fig 9.
Cumulative compound generator: The shunt field
excitation flux is usually more or less steady, and is
affected only slightly as the terminal voltage fluctuates.
The flux of the series field is quite variable because its
ampere-turns depend upon the load current.  When the
load current is zero, it produces less flux (long shunt) or
no flux (short shunt) and when the load current is high, it
creates a good amount of flux.  How much flux it must
develop depends upon the extent to which it must
compensate for the voltage drop.  In a compound machine,
the series field is wound directly over the shunt field with
proper separation by insulations.
The series field coils may be connected to `assist' or `aid'
the shunt field, as shown in Fig 10. Then this machine is
said to be a cumulative (increasing by successive additions)
compound generator. The ampere turns of the series field
determines the amount of compounding.
Differentially compounded generator: If the flux
produced by the series field opposes the shunt field flux as
shown in Fig 11, then the action is called `bucking' and the
machine is said to be a differential (decreasing by
successive subtractions) compound generator.
External characteristics of DC compound generator
Cumulative compound generator: Fig 12 shows the
connection diagram for a long shunt cumulative compound
generator. In such a connection, the series field aids the
shunt field and the total flux is equal to the sum of both the
fluxes. By taking a set of readings for different load
currents IL and the corresponding terminal voltage VT, we
can draw a graph showing the relation between VT and IL.
This curve is called the external characteristic curve.
If the shape of the curve is as shown in  curve `C' of     Figure
13, then it will be the same as the curve shown for the shunt
generator, and this generator could be used for constant
voltage loads. If the shape of the curve is as shown in curve
`a' of Fig 13, it shows that the terminal voltage goes on
increasing with an increase of the load current.  It is due
to  the reason that the series ampere-turns produce more
flux than the flux required to over come the IaRa drop and
the armature reaction. Such a machine is called an
over-compounded generator, and this generator could be
used for supplying load to long distance distribution lines
so that the voltage drop in the line could be compensated
by increased voltage.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.120 to 123

25
If the shape of the curve is as shown in curve `b' of Fig 13,
it shows that the series ampere-turns at light load are
producing more flux than required to overcome the IaRa
drop but at full load the series field flux is just sufficient to
overcome the IaRa drop and armature reaction.  Such a
machine is called a flat (level) compounded generator, and
this generator could be used for supplying power to
constant loads requiring specified terminal voltage.
If the shape of the curve is as shown in curve `D', it shows
that the series ampere-turns are not sufficient to overcome
the drop in the terminal voltage due to the IaRa drop and the
armature reaction but still they are aiding the shunt field.
Such a machine is called an under-compounded generator,
and this generator may be used for electroplating or
lighting.
Degree of compoundings in a cumulative compound
generator: The level of compounding in a generator can
be altered by the amount of the series field current. Hence
to adjust the series field current, a diverter may be
connected as shown in Fig 14.
Differential compound generator: If the series field
terminals are interchanged as shown in Fig 15, then the
curve obtained may be as shown in Fig 16. In such a
connection, the series field opposes the shunt field, and
the generator becomes a differential compound generator.
The total flux produced will be equal to the shunt field flux
minus the series field flux. From the curve, it is clear that
the terminal voltage drastically reduces with increase in
the load current.  It is due to the reason that series
ampere-turns produce flux which are opposing or bucking
the shunt field flux. This characteristic may be used in
welding work, where the potential difference between the
electrode and the job before striking an arc is in the order
of, say 100V, and when the arc strikes it falls to, say 40
to 50 V, to maintain the flow of current.
Application of a compound generator: Table 1 gives
the different types of compound generators and their
application in industry.
Table 1
Sl.No.
Type of compound generator
Uses
1
Cumulative compound generator
a.
Over-compounded
Used where the load is at a considerable  distance from the
generator as in railways, street lights etc.
b.
Flat or level compound
Used where the load is nearby, such as lighting loads and
power loads of small buildings or lathes which require
constant voltage.
c.
Under-compounded
Used for electroplating, lighting, etc.
2
Differential compound generator
Used for arc welding generators.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.120 to 123

26
Numerical problems pertaining to DC generator:
When the generator is loaded, there will be voltage drops
in the armature resistance and series field resistance. To
calculate the  induced emf from the available data, the
following steps should be adopted.
Eg  =  V + IaRa + IseRse
In the case of a short shunt compound generator
shown in Fig 17,  Ise = IL and Ia = IL + Ish.
In the case of a long shunt compound generator shown in
Fig 18 Ise = Ia  and Ia =IL + Ish = Ise
where Ia  = armature current in amps
Ish = shunt field current in amps
Ise = series field current in amps
IL  = load current in amps.
Example: A long-shunt compound generator delivers a
load current of 100 A at 400 V, and has armature, series
field and shunt field resistances of 0.1 ohm, 0.03 ohm and
200 ohm respectively.  Calculate the generated voltage
and the armature current.  Allow 1 V per brush for contact
drop.
Solution
Generator circuit is shown in Fig 19.
Ish = 400/200 = 2 A
Current through armature and series winding is the same.
Hence Ia = Ise = 100 + 2 = 102 A.
Voltage drop in series field winding=IseRse =102 x 0.03 =
3.06 V
Armature voltage drop IaRa = 102 x 0.1 = 10.2 V.
Assuming 2 brushes,
drop at brushes = 2 x 1 = 2 V.
Now,  Eg = V + IaRa + series drop + brush drop
 = 400 + 10.2 + 3.06 + 2 = 415.26 V
Example: A 10 kW compound generator works on full
load with a terminal voltage of 220 V. The armature, series
and shunt windings have resistances of 0.05 ohm, 0.025
ohm and 440 ohms respectively. Calculate the total emf
generated in the armature when the machine is connected
as short shunt.
Solution: Generator circuit is shown in Fig  20.
Load current =
tts
=  10,000
220
=  45.45A.
Load in wa
Ter
a voltage
min
Voltage drop in series windings = 45.45 x 0.025 = 1.14 V.
Voltage across shunt winding = 220 + 1.14 = 221.14 V
Ish = 221.14/440 = 0.503 A
Ia = 45.45 + 0.503 = 45.953 A
IaRa = 45.953 x 0.05 = 2.297 V.
Generator emf  = Terminal voltage + voltage drop in
armature  + voltage drop in series field = 220 + 2.297 + 1.14
= 223.44 V.
Example: In a long-shunt compound generator, as shown
in Fig 21, the terminal voltage is 440 V when the generator
delivers 150 A.  Determine (i) induced emf  (ii) total power
generated and  (iii) distribution of this power given that
shunt field, series field, divertor and armature resistances
are 110 ohms, 0.015 ohm, 0.03 ohm and 0.055 ohm
respectively.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.120 to 123

27
Solution
Ish = 440/110 = 4A;
Ia  = 150 + 4 = 154 A
Since the series field resistance and divertor resistance
are in parallel (Fig 14), their combined resistance is = 0.03
x 0.015/0.045 = 0.01 ohm.
Total armature circuit resistance is =  0.055 + 0.01 = 0.065
ohm.
voltage drop across the series field and armature
= 154 x 0.065 = 10.01V.
(i)
Voltage generated by armature Eg   = 440 + 10.01
= 450.01 V, say 450 V
(ii)
Total power generated by armature = EgIa = 450
x 154  = 69,300 W.
(iii)
Power lost in armature =Ia
2Ra = 1542 x 0.055 =
1304.4 W.
Power lost in the series field and divertor = 1542 x 0.01
 = 237.2 W
Power dissipated in shunt winding  =  VIsh = 440 x 4
    = 1760 W
Power delivered to load
    = 440 x 150
     =  66000 W.
Parallel operation of DC generators
Parallel Operation of DC Generators: In a dc power plant,
power is usually supplied from several generators of small
ratings connected in parallel instead of from one large
generator.
The necessity of parallel operation
1
Continuity of service: If a single large generator is
used in the power plant, then in case of its breakdown,
the whole plant will be shut down.
The supply can be obtained from a number of small
units operating in parallel, then in case of failure of one
unit, the continuity of supply can be maintained by
other healthy units.
2
Efficiency: Generators run most efficiently when load
demand on power plant decreases, one or more
generators can be shut down and the remaining units
can be efficiently loaded.
3
Maintenance and repair: If generators are operated
in parallel, the routine or emergency operations can be
performed by isolating the affected generator while
load is being supplied by other units. This leads to both
safety and economy.
4
Increasing plant capacity:  When added capacity is
required, the new unit can be simply paralleled with the
old units to increase the plant capacity.
Conditions for paralleling of DC Generators
1
Output voltage must be same
2
Polarities must be same
Connecting Shunt Generators in Parallel: The genera-
tors in a power plant are connected in parallel through bus-
bars. The bus-bars are heavy thick copper bars and they
act as +ve and -ve terminals. The positive terminals of the
generators are .connected to the +ve side of bus-bars and
negative terminals to the negative side of bus-bars. Fig. 22
shows shunt generator 1 connected to the bus-bars and
supplying load. When the load on the power plant increases
beyond the capacity of this generator, the second shunt
generator 2 is connected in parallel with the first to meet
the increased load demand.
Operation of paralleling of DC Generator
1
The prime mover of generator 2 is brought up to the
rated speed. Now switch S4 in the field circuit of the
generator 2 is closed.
2
Next circuit breaker CB2 is closed and the excitation of
generator 2 is adjusted till it generates voltage equal to
the bus-bars voltage. This is indicated by voltmeter V2.
3
Now the generator 2 is ready to be paralleled with
generator 1. The main switch S3 is closed, thus putting
generator 2 in parallel with generator 1. Note the
generator 2 is not suplying any load because its
generated emf is equal to bus-bars voltage. The
generator is said to be “floating” (i.e. not supplying any
load) on the bus-bars (Fig 22).
4
If generator 2 is to deliver any current then its generated
voltage E should be greater than the bus-bars voltage
V. In that case, current supplied by it I = (E-V)/Ra is the
resistance of the armature circuit. By increasing the
field current (and hence induced emf E), the generator
2 can be made to supply proper amount of load.
5
The load may be shifted from one shunt generator to
another merely by adjusting the field excitation. Thus
if generator 1 is to be shut down, the whole load can be
shifted onto generator 2 provided it has the generator
1 to zero (This will be indicated by ammeter A1) open
CB1 and then open the main switch S1
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.120 to 123

28
Load Sharing: The load may be shifted from one generator
to another merely by adjusting the field excitation. The
load sharing of two generators which have unequal no-load
voltages. Let E1, E2 = no-load voltages of the two generators
R1, R2 = their armature resistances
Thus current output of the generators depends upon the
values of E1 and E2. These values may be changed by field
rheostats. The common terminal voltage (or bus-bars
voltage) will depend upon (i) the emfs of individual genera-
tors and (ii) the total load current supplied. It is generally
desired to keep the busbars voltage constant. This can be
achieved by adjusting the field excitations of the generators
operating in parallel.
Armature reaction
When armature conductors carry a lower load current, the
mmf set up by the armature conductors interact with the
main field flux in such a way that the field of the main field
flux gets distorted and this is called cross-magnetizing
effect.
However, the effect could be nullified by shifting the brush
position of the generator by a small angle in the direction
of rotation.
When the generator is loaded further, the pole tips get
saturated which results in demagnetising the main field
flux, thereby reducing the induced emf. This effect is called
demagnetising effect, and can be explained further.
Fig 23  shows the flux distribution by the main field flux
only.  Since there is no current in the armature conductors,
the flux is uniform.  The GNA (Geometrical Neutral Axis)
and MNA (Magnetic Neutral Axis) are coincident with
each other.
Fig 24  shows the flux set up by the armature conductors
alone. The current direction is marked as a plus sign(+),
under the N.pole and dot (•) under the south pole as shown
in the figure. The strength of this armature field (mmf)
depends upon the armature current which, in turn, depends
upon the load current.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.120 to 123

29
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.120 to 123
Cross-magnetising effect: Fig 25 shows the flux
distribution by the combined effect of the main field and the
armature mmf. The resulting field is found to have
strengthened at the trailing pole tips and weakened at the
leading pole tips. Due to this cross-magnetizing effect, the
magnetic neutral axis (MNA) is shifted from the geometrical
neutral axis (GNA) by an angle Q in the direction of
rotation.
The effect of the main field flux (FF) and the armature flux
(FA) are shown by vectors in Fig 25. The magnetic neutral
axis (MNA) should be at right angle to the resultant flux (F).
Remedy: The effect of the cross-magnetisation can be
neutralized by shifting the brushes from GNA to MNA with
the help of the rocker arm. Of course the amount of shifting
depends upon the magnitude of the armature current. At
the correct position of the brush, the induced emf will be
maximum and the spark at the sides of brushes will be
minimum.
Demagnetising effect: The uneven distribution of magnetic
flux at heavy armature current results in a demagnetizing
effect because strengthening on the trailing pole tip is only
up to saturation of that tip. After saturation the flux cannot
increase at the trailing tips equally with the decrease in
flux at the leading pole tips which causes the demagnetising
effect, and hence, the induced emf reduces under heavy
load condition.
Remedy: To compensate the demagnetizing effect of the
reduced induced emf, the ampere-turns are increased in
the field winding itself to strengthen the main field for small
machines.  But, for large machines, the demagnetizing
effect can be neutralized by providing compensating
winding in the main pole-faces as shown in Fig 26, and
connecting this compensating winding in series with
armature as shown in Fig 27, which is for a compound
machine.
Compensating winding: The demagnetizing effect due
to armature reaction in large machines, which are subjected
to fluctuation of load, can be neutralized by this winding.
This winding carries an equal current in the opposite
direction to the current in armature conductors. So the flux
set up by them is also in the opposite direction and of equal
magnitude to that of the armature flux. Hence they
neutralize each other, and thereby, the demagnetising
effect is nullified at any load, even at fluctuating loads.
Commutation
When a DC generator is loaded, the current flows through
the armature winding, commutator and brushes to the
external circuit. During this process, whenever a brush
spans the two commutator segments, the winding element
connected to those commutator segments is
short-circuited. The changes in current direction, which
take place in the winding element, just before, during and
after the short circuit is called commutation.
If the change in the current direction is gradual, then a
smooth commutation takes place. On the other hand a
sudden change in current in the winding element is called
rough commutation which results in heavy sparking at the
sides of brushes. If rough commutation is allowed to
continue, the brushes and commutator get spoiled
ultimately due to the excess heat produced by the sparks.
These changes in current are explained through the
following figures. Fig 28 shows the current in the coil B
flows in a clockwise direction, and the brush collects I1

30
amps from the left side winding and I2 amps from the right
side winding.
Fig 29  shows that the brush short-circuits segments 2 and
3, and hence, coil B is short-circuited. Current I1 in the left
side winding passes to the brush through coil A, and the
right side winding current passes through coil C. No
current is in coil B as it is short-circuited.
Fig 30  shows that the brush contacts segment  2  only,
and the current in the left side winding passes to the brush
through coil A. On the other hand the current in the right
hand side (I2) should now pass through coil B via segment
2 to the brush.
At this instant, the current in coil B, has to change its
direction from clockwise to anticlockwise, but even though
it changes it would not attain the full value of current  after
the short circuit. Therefore, a major portion of current I2
from the right side passes to the brush through an arc from
segment 3. This is due to the fact that the sudden change
of current direction in coil B induces a statically induced
(reactance) emf equal to ∅
t  or t
I
where Ø is the flux created by the current I in amps, and
't' represents the time of short circuit in seconds.
Further, the induced emf can also be calculated by
knowing the reactance of the coil under commutation
which depends upon the self-inductance of the coil, and
the mutual inductance of the neighbouring coils.
For example,  a2-pole, 2-brush DC generator delivers 100
amps to a load when running at 1440 r.p.m., and has 24
segments in its commutator. Then to find the statically
induced emf in the winding element soon after the
short-circuit, we have the current from the left side of the
brush - 50 amps and the current from the right side of the
brush - 50 amps.
Hence the change of current is from 50 amps in the
clockwise direction to zero, then to 50 amps in the
anticlockwise direction amounting to 100 amps.
Time taken for one revolution
=
60
1440
 =  0.04166 seconds
Time taken for short circuit
= 
0 04166
24
.
 seconds
 segments
 0.001736 seconds
 =
which is equal to time reqd. to pass one segment
Hence the statically induced emf
=  t  =  
100
0.001730  =  57,603V
I
.
This induced emf will obey Lenz's law, and oppose the
change in the current. Hence the current from the right
hand side as shown in Fig 30 would not be able to pass
through coil B, and hence it jumps to the brush in the form
of an arc. This is called rough commutation.
Remedies for rough commutation by providing
interpoles
To avoid sparks in the brush position, the following
methods are used which effectively change the rough
commutation to smooth commutation.
•
Resistance wires are introduced between the end
connection of the coil to the commutator, as shown in
Fig 31. This increased resistance helps the current  to
change its direction smoothly, increasing the timing
and reducing the statically induced emf.
•
High resistance brushes are used. Hence the contact
resistance variation allows the current to change its
direction smoothly, thereby reducing the statically
induced emf.
• Small field poles called inter-poles are provided in
between the main poles as shown in Fig 32. These
inter-poles have their polarity the same as the next pole
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.120 to 123

31
ahead in the direction of rotation of the, generators.
Further, their winding is connected in series with the
armature so that they carry the same current as that of
the armature.
and medium sized machines. By knowing the losses, the
machine efficiency can be found by
(
)
(
)
motors
For
input
losses
-
input
 
 η
generators
For
losses
output
output
η
=
+
=
In the process of energy conversion in rotating machines
- current, flux and rotation are involved which cause losses
in conductors, ferromagnetic materials and mechanical
losses respectively. Various losses occurring in a DC
machine are listed below (FIg 34 shows losses of DC
machine.
Total losses can be broadly divided into two types
1
Constant losses
2
Variable losses
These losses can be further divided as
1
Constant losses - i) Core loss or iron loss
a
Hysteresis loss
b
Eddy current loss
ii
Mechanical loss
a
Windage loss
b
Friction loss - brush friction loss and Bearing friction
loss.
2
Variable losses - i) copper loss (I2R)
a
Armature copper loss
b
Field copper loss
c
Brush contact loss
ii
Stray load loss
a
Copper stray load loss
b
Core stray load loss
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.120 to 123
These inter-poles produce an emf opposite in direction to
the statically induced emf, and have a magnitude depending
upon the current. Thereby, the effect of statically induced
emf is nullified.
These inter-poles are wound with less number of turns
having thick gauge wire. Fig 33  shows the connection of
inter-pole winding in a DC compound machine.
Losses and efficiency of DC machines
It is convenient to determine the efficiency of a rotating
machine by determining the losses than by direct loading.
Further it is not possible to arrange actual load for large

32
Core loss or iron loss occurs in the armature core is
due to the rotation of armature core in the magnetic flux
produced by the field system. Iron loss consists of a)
Hysteresis loss and b) Eddy current loss.
a) Hysteresis loss: This loss is due to the reversal of
magnetization of armature core as the core passes
under  north and south poles alternatively. This loss
depends on the volume and grade of iron, maximum
value of flux density BM and frequency. Hysteresis
loss Wh is given by Steinmetz formula.
Wh = KhBm1.6 f v joule/sec. or watt
where Kh = Constant of proportionalitiy - depends on core
material.
Bm = Maximum flux density in wb/m2
F = Frequency in hertz
V = Volume of the armature core in m3
b) Eddy Current loss: Eddy currents are the currents
set up by the induced emf in the armature core when
the core cuts the magnetic flux. The loss occurring
due to the flow of eddy current is known as eddy current
loss. To reduce this loss, the core is laminated, stacked
and  riveted. These laminations are insulated from each
other by a thin coating of varnish. The effect of
lamination is to reduce the current path because of
increased resistance due to reduced cross section
area of laminated core. Thus the magnitude of eddy
current is reduced resulting in the reduction of eddy
current loss.
Eddy Current loss We is given by
We = KeB2
mf2t2v Watt
Where Ke = Constant of Proportionality
Bm = Maximum flux density in Wb/m2
f = Frequency in Hz.
t = Thickness of the lamination in meters
v = Volume of the armature core in m3.
ii
Mechanical loss: these losses include losses due to
windage, brush friction and bearing friction losses.
2) Variable losses: Variable losses consist of (i) Copper
loss:
Armature copper loss (Ia
2 ra) loss: This loss occurs in
the armature windings because of the resistance of
armature windings, when the current flows through them.
The loss occurring is termed as copper loss or Ia
2 ra loss.
This loss varies with the varying load.
b) Field contact drop: This is due the contact resistance
between the brush and the commutator. This loss
remains constant with load.
c) Brush contact drop: This is due the contact resistance
between the brush and the commutator. This loss
remains constant with load.
ii) Stray load loss: The additional losses which vary with
the load but cannot be related to current in a simple
manner are called stray load loss. Stray load losses
are.
i)
Copper stray load loss : The loss occuring in the
conductor due to skin effect and loss due to the eddy
currents in the conductor. Set up  by the flux passing
through them are called copper stray load loss.
ii) Core stray load loss: When the load current flows
through the armature conductors, the flux density
distribution gets distorted in the teeth and core. The
flux density decreases at one end of the flux density
wave and increases at the other. Since the core loss
is proportional to the square of the flux density, the
decrease in flux density will be less than the increase
due to the increase in flux density, resulting in a net
increase in the core loss predominantly in the teeth,
known as stray load loss in the core.
Further under highly saturated conditions of teeth, flux
leaks through the frame and end shields causing eddy
current loss in them. This loss is a component of stray
load loss. Stray load loss is difficult to calculate accurately
and therefore it is taken as 1 % of the output of DC
machine.
Efficiency of a DC generator
Power flow in a DC generator is shown in Figure 35.
e
a
2
a
W
r
I
VI
VI
losses
output
output
+
+
=
+
=
where we is constant loss
Condition for maximum efficiency
Generator  output
= VI
Generator input
= output+losses
= VI+I2a Ra+We
= VI+(I+Ish)2 Ra+We  ∴ Ia =(I+Ish)
However, if Ish is negligible as compared to load current
Ia=I (approx.)
e
a
2
e
a
2
W
R
I
VI
VI
W
R
a
I
VI
VI
input
output
+
+
=
+
+
=
=
η
Θ
Efficiency is maximum when variable loss = constant loss.
The load current corresponding to maximum efficiency is
given by the relation.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.120 to 123

33
a
e
a
2
R
W
I
We
R
I
=
=
Efficiency of DC motor
The power flow in a DC motor is shown in Figure 36
input
losses
input
motor
DC
a
of
Efficiency
−
=
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.120 to 123
VI
w
r
I
VI
c
a
2
a
−
−
=
The condition for maximum power developed
a
a
b
r
I
2
V
E
=
=
This is shown in equation
The condition for maximum efficiency is variable loss =
constant loss
I2 ra= we
Losses in a DC generator and DC motor
A DC generator converts mechanical power into Power
power and a DC motor converts Power power into
mechanical power. Thus, for a dc generator, input power
is in the form of mechanical and the output power is in
the form of Power. On the other hand, for a dc motor,
input power is in the form of Power and output power is in
the form of mechanical. In a practical machine, whole of
the input power cannot be converted into output power as
some power is lost in the conversion process. This causes
the efficiency of the machine to be reduced. Efficiency is
the ratio of output power to the input power. Thus, in order
to design rotating dc machines (or andy Power machine)
with higher efficiency, it is important to study the losses
occurring in them. Various losses in a rotating DC machine
(DC generator or DC motor) can be characterised as
follows:
Losses in a rotating DC machine
•
Copper losses
•
Armature Cu loss
•
Field Cu loss
•
Loss due to brush contact resistance
•
Iron losses
•
Hysteresis loss
•
Eddy current loss

34
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.120 to 123
•
Mechanical losses
•
Friction loss
•
Windage loss
The above tree categorizes various types of losses that
occur in a dc generator or a dc motor. Each of these is
explained in details below.
Copper Losses
These losses occur in armature and field copper windings.
Copper losses consist of Armature copper loss, Field
copper loss and loss due to brush contact resistance.
Armature copper loss = la
2Ra ( where, la
2Ra (where, la =
Armature current and Ra = Armature resistance)
This loss contributes about 30 to 40% to full load losses.
The armature copper loss is variable and depends upon
the amount of loading of the machine.
Field copper loss = lf
2Rf  (where,  lf  = field current and Rf
= field resistance) In the case of a shunt wounded field,
field copper loss is practically constant. It contributes
about 20 to 30% to full load losses.
Brush contact resistance also contributes to the copper
losses. Generally, this loss is included into armature
copper loss.
Iron losses (Core losses)
As the armature core is made of iron and it rotates in a
magnetic field, a small current gets induced in the core
itself too. Due to this current, eddy current loss and
hysteresis loss occur in the armature iron core. Iron losses
are also called as Core losses or magnetic losses.
Hysteresis loss is due to the reversal of magnetization of
the armature core. When the core passes under one pair
of poles, it undergoes one complete cycle of magnetic
reversal. The frequency of magnetic reversal is given by,
f=P.N/120 (where, P = no. of poles and N = Speed in rpm)
The loss depends upon the volume and grade of the iron,
frequency of magnetic reversals and value of flux density.
Hysteresis loss is given by, Steinmetz formula: Wh=ηBmax
1.6
fV (watts), η = Steinmetz hysteresis constant V = volume
of the core in m3
Eddy current loss: When the armature core rotates in
the magnetic field, an emf is also induced in the core
(just like it induces in armature conductors), according to
the Faraday’s law of electromagnetic induction. Though
this induced emf is small, it causes a large current to
folw in the body due to the low resistance of the core.
This current is known as eddy current. The powe loss
due to this current is known as eddy current loss.
Mechanical losses
Mechanical losses consist of the losses due to friction in
bearings and commutator. Air friction loss of rotating
armature also contributes to these. These losses are about
10 to 20% of full load losses.
Stray losses
In addition to the losses stated above, there may be small
losses present which are called as stray losses or
miscellaneous losses. These losses are difficult to
account. They are usually due to inaccuracies in the
designing and modeling of the machine. Most of the times,
stray losses are assumed to be 1% of the full load.
Power flow diagram
The most convenient method to understand these losses
in a dc generator or a dc motor is using the power flow
diagram. The diagram visualizes the amount of power that
has been lost in various types of losses and the amount
of power which has been actually converted into the output.
Following are the typical flow diagrams for a dc generator
and a dc motor. (Fig 37 & 38)

35
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.1.120 to 123
Efficiency of DC generator
Efficiency is simply defined as the ratio of output power
to the input power. Let R = total resistance of the armature
circuit (including the brush contact resistance, at series
winding resistance, inter-pole winding resistance and
compensating winding resistance). The efficiency of DC
generator is explained in the line diagram Fig 39
I is the output current
Ish is the current through the shunt field
Ia is the armature current = I + Ish
V is the terminal voltage.
Total copper loss in the armature circuit = la
2Rat
Power loss in the shunt circuit = VIsh (this includes the
loss in the shunt regulating resistance).
Mechanical losses = friction loss of bearings + friction
loss at a commutator + windage loss.
Stray loss = mechanical loss + core loss
The sum of the shunt field copper loss and stray losses
may be considered as a combined fixed (constant) loss
that does not vary with the load current I.
Therefore, the constant losses ( in shunt and compound
generators) = stray loss + shunt field copper losses.
Generator efficiency is given by the equation shown below.
sh
k
BD
at
2
a
a
a
I
I
I
P
I
V
R
I
VI
VI
ηG
losses
output
Generator
output
Generator
ηG
+
=
+
+
+
=
+
=

36
Power
Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.119 & 124 to 127
Electrician - DC Motor
DC motor - principle and types
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the working principle of a DC motor
• state the different types of DC motors.
Introduction: A DC motor is a machine which converts
DC Power energy into mechanical energy. It is similar to
a DC generator in construction. Therefore, a DC machine
can be used as a generator or as a motor. Even today,
because of the excellent torque, speed and load
characteristics of DC motors, 90% of the motors used in
precision machines, wire drawing industry and traction are
of this type. The DC motor needs frequent care and
maintenance by qualified electricians. Hence more job
opportunities exist in this area for an electrician.
Principles of a DC motor: It works on the principle that
whenever a current-carrying conductor is kept in a uniform
magnetic field, a force will be set up on the conductor so
as to move it at right angles to the magnetic field. It can be
explained as follows. Fig 1a shows the uniform magnetic
field  produced by a magnet, whereas Fig 1b shows the
magnetic field produced around the current-carrying
conductor. Combining the effects of Fig 1a and Fig 1b in
one figure, Fig 1c shows the resultant field produced by the
flux of the magnet and the flux of the current-carrying
conductor. Due to the interactions of these two fields, the
flux above the conductor will be increased and the flux
below the conductor is decreased as represented in Fig
1c. The increased flux above the conductor takes a curved
path thus producing a force on the conductor to move it
downwards.
If the conductor in Fig 1 is replaced by a loop of wire as
shown in Fig 2, the resultant field makes one side of the
conductor move upwards and the other side move
downwards. It forms a twisting torque over the conductors,
and they tend to rotate, if they are free to rotate. But in a
practical motor, there are a number of such conductors/
coils. Fig 3 shows the part of a motor. When its armature
and field are supplied with current, the  armature
experiences a force tending to rotate in an anticlockwise
direction as shown in Fig 3.
The direction of rotation or movement can be determined
by  Fleming's left hand rule. Accordingly, the direction of
rotation of the armature could be changed either by
changing the direction of armature current or the polarity
of the field.
Fleming's Left Hand Rule: The direction of force produced
on a current-carrying conductor placed in a magnetic field
can be determined by this rule. As shown in Fig 4a, hold
the thumb, forefinger and middle finger of the left hand
mutually at right angles to each other, such that the
forefinger is in the direction of flux, and the middle finger is
in the direction of current flow in the conductor; then the
thumb indicates the direction of motion of the conductor.
For example, a loop of coil carrying current, when  placed
under north and south poles as shown in Fig 4b, rotates
in an anticlockwise direction.
Types of DC motors: As the DC motors are identical in
construction to that of DC generators, they are also
classified as series, shunt and compound motors,
depending upon their connection of field winding with the
armature and supply.
When the armature and field are connected in series, as
shown in Fig 5, it is called a series motor.
When the armature and field are connected in parallel
across supply, as shown in Fig 6, it is called a shunt
motor.

37
When the motor has two field coils, one in series with the
armature and the other in parallel with the armature, as
shown in Fig 7, it is called a compound motor.
The relation between applied voltage, back emf, armature voltage drop,
speed  and flux of  DC motor - method of changing direction of rotation
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the relation between applied voltage, back emf, armature voltage drop - speed - flux
• describe the method of changing the direction of rotation of a DC motor.
Back emf: As the armature of a DC motor starts rotating,
the armature conductors cut the magnetic flux produced
by the field poles. Due to this action, an emf will be
produced in these conductors. The induced emf is in such
a direction as to oppose the flow of current in the armature
conductor as shown in Fig 1. As it opposes the supply
voltage it is called  `BACK EMF' and is denoted by Eb. Its
value is the same as that found in the generator. It could
be written as
Eb =  
ZNP
60A
 volts
∅
The direction of the induced (back) emf could be determined
by Fleming's right hand rule.
Applied voltage: The voltage applied across the motor
terminals is denoted by `V'.
Armature voltage drop: Since armature conductors
have some resistance, whenever they carry current a
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.119 & 3.2.124 to 3.2.127
voltage drop occurs. It is called IaRa drop because it is
proportional to the product of the armature current Ia and
armature resistance Ra. It has a definite relation with the
applied voltage and back emf as shown by the formula
V = Eb+IaRa.
Alternatively, IaRa = V – Eb.
The relation between applied voltage, back
emf, armature voltage drop, speed and flux
of DC motor, method of changing direction of
rotation.

38
Further the back or counter emf Eb depends upon flux per
pole 'Ø' and speed `N'. Therefore, the applied voltage, back
emf, armature drop, flux and speed are related to one
another as follows.
Eb = V – IaRa
∅
=
ZNP
60A
 
 V -  
R
a
a
I
∴
×
∅
 N =   (V -  
R
 rpm
a
a
I
)
60A
ZP
For a given motor ZPA and 60 are constants and can be
denoted by a single letter K
where 
ZP
60A
 
=
 
K
Therefore N = K Eb/Ø.
It shows that the speed of a DC motor is directly proportional
to Eb and inversely proportional to the flux Ø.
Reversing the direction of rotation of DC motors: The
direction of rotation of a DC motor can be changed either
by changing the direction of the armature current or by
changing the direction of the field current. The direction of
rotation of a DC motor cannot be changed by interchanging
the supply connections because this changes the direction
of the field as well as the armature current. Its effect is as
shown in Figs 2 and 3.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.119 & 3.2.124 to 3.2.127
But when the field current direction alone is changed, the
direction of rotation changes as shown in Fig 4. When the
armature current direction alone is changed, the direction
of rotation changes as shown in Fig 5.
To reverse the direction of rotation of a compound motor
without changing its characteristics, the best method is to
change only the armature current direction. In case,
changing the direction of rotation needs to be done by
changing the field terminals, it is essential to change the
current direction in both the shunt and series windings.
Otherwise, the machine, which was running as cumulatively
compounded, will change its characteristic as differentially
compounded or vice versa.

39
DC motor starters
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the necessity of starter  for a DC motor
• state the different types of starters - construction and working principle of 2-point, 3-point and 4-point
starters.
Necessity of starters: Since the armature is stationary
before starting, the back emf which is proportional to
speed is zero.  As the armature resistance is very small,
if the rated voltage is applied to the armature, it will draw
many times the full load current, and thereby, there is
every possibility of damaging the armature due to heavy
starting current.  Therefore, the starting current should be
limited to a safe value. This is done by inserting a
resistance in series with the armature at the time of
starting for a period of 5 to 10 seconds.  As the motor gains
in speed, back emf is built up, and then the starting
resistance could be gradually cut off. Fig 1 shows such an
arrangement. Resistance R is fully included in the armature
circuit by keeping the moving arm in position `S' at the time
of starting, and then it is moved towards position `N' to
exclude the resistance `R' when the motor has picked up
its speed. But such an arrangement will be purely manual
and needs constant monitoring. For example, if the motor
is running, the resistance `R' will be excluded, and the
moving arm position will be at position `N'. In case the
supply fails, the motor will stop but the moving arm will still
be in position `N'. When the supply returns, as there is no
resistance included in the armature circuit through `R', the
armature may draw heavy current and may get damaged.
To prevent such a happening a device called starter is used
in motor circuits.
In addition to the automatic inclusion of resistance at the
time of starting, the starters may protect the motor from
overload and will switch `off' the motor, when supply fails.
These starters are named according to the number of
connecting terminals as explained subsequently.
Types of starters: Starters used to start the DC motors
are generally of three types.
•
Two-point starter
•
Three-point starter
•
Four-point starter
Two-point starter: This contains the following components.
•
The series resistor required for starting a motor.
•
The contacts (brass studs) and switching arm required
to include or exclude the resistor in the armature
circuit.
•
A spring on the handle to bring the handle to the `OFF'
position when supply fails.
•
An electromagnet to hold the handle in the `ON'
position.
The two-point starter is frequently used with a DC series
motor.  The starting resistance, electromagnet armature
and the series field are all connected in series as shown
in Fig 2.
When the arm is moved to the first contact point, the circuit
is completed, and the armature begins to rotate.  As the
armature speed increases, the arm is slowly moved
towards the right side electromagnet, thereby the starter
resistance is reduced. When the arm is against the
electromagnet, complete starter resistance is cut off from
the circuit.
The electromagnet is wound with a thick gauge wire to
carry the rated armature current of the motor.  This holds
the handle in the `ON' position when the motor is working.
The handle comes back to the `OFF' position, due to
spring action when the electromagnet demagnetises due
to failure of supply. This starter in general will not have
protection against overloads.
Three-point starter: Fig 3 shows the internal diagram of
a three(terminal) point  starter connected to a DC shunt
motor.  The direct current supply is connected to the
starter, the motor circuit through a double pole switch and
suitable fuses. The starter has an insulated handle or knob
for the operator's use.  By moving the starter handle from
the `off' position to the first brass contact (1) of the starter,
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.119 & 3.2.124 to 3.2.127

40
the armature is connected across the line through the
starting resistance. Note that the armature is in series with
the total starting resistance.  The shunt field, in series with
the holding coil, is also connected across the line.  In this
mode of operation, the rush of the initial current to the
armature is limited by the resistance.  At the same time,
the field current is at the maximum value to provide a good
starting torque.
As the handle arm is moved to the right, the starting
resistance is reduced and the motor gradually accelerates.
When the last contact is reached, the armature is connected
directly across the supply; thus, the motor is at full speed.
The holding coil is connected in series with the shunt field
to provide a `no-field release'.  If the field circuit opens by
accident, the motor speed will become excessive should
the armature remain connected across the line. To prevent
this increase in speed, the holding coil is connected in
series with the field. In case of an open circuit in the field,
there will be no current through the holding coil, and hence,
it will be demagnetized, and the spring action returns the
arm to the `off' position.
An overload coil is provided to prevent damage to the motor
from overload. Under normal load condition, the flux
produced by the O/L coil will not be in a position to attract
the armature contact. When the load current increases
beyond a certain specified value, the flux of the O/L coil will
attract the armature. The contact points of the armature
then short-circuit the holding coil and demagnetize it. This
enables the handle to come to the `OFF' position due to
the tension of the spiral spring.
This type of starter can be used to start both shunt and
compound motors.
However, a 3-point starter will be found to be tripping when
the motor speed is controlled through the field regulator.
The reason could be explained as stated below.
When the speed of a shunt or compound motor is to be
increased beyond its rated speed, the resistance is
increased in the field regulator to reduce the field current,
and thereby, the field flux. While doing so, the holding coil
which is in series with the field gets very low current and
produces less holding force on the handle armature
against the tension of the spiral spring. When the current
reduces below a certain value, the handle is pulled out from
the `ON' position to the `OFF' position. This is an undesirable
effect. To avoid this, the 3-point starter circuit is modified,
and the holding coil circuit is made independent of the field
circuit. Such a starter is called a 4-point starter.
Four-point starter: In applications where many motor
speeds are to be increased beyond their rated value, a
four-terminal, face plate starter is used with the motor.  The
four(terminal) point starter, shown in Fig 4, differs from the
three-point starter in that the holding coil is not connected
in series with the shunt field.  Instead, it is connected
across the supply in series with a resistor.  This resistor
limits the current in the holding coil to the desired value.
The holding coil serves as a no-voltage release rather than
as a no-field release.  If the line voltage drops below the
desired value, the magnetic attraction of the holding coil is
decreased, and then the  spring pulls the starter handle
back to the `off' position.
Relation between torque, flux and armature current in a DC motor
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the relation between torque, flux and armature current
• solve problems pertaining to metric HP; load current, rated voltage, torque and speed of DC motors.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.119 & 3.2.124 to 3.2.127

41
Relation between armature current, flux and torque
Torque: The turning or twisting moment of a force about
an axis is called torque. It is equal to the product of force
and the radius of the pulley.
Consider a pulley of radius `r' metres acts upon by a
circumferential force `F' Newton, and rotates at a speed of
`n' r.p.s. as shown in Fig 1.
Then torque T
= F x r Newton-metres(N-m)
Work done by this force
in one revolution
= Force x distance
= F x 2πr joules.
Power developed
= F x 2πr x n joule/second or
in one second
   watts
= (Fxr)2πn watts
As 2πN is angular velocity ω in radian/second and
                   (F x r)   = Torque T
Power developed      = T x ω watts
                           P   = Tω watts.
Torque of a motor: Let Ta be the torque developed by the
armature of a motor in newton-metre and `n' the speed of
armature in r.p.s.
Then the power developed in the armature = Ta 2πn watts.
As we know the Power power is converted into mechanical
power
Power power supplied to the armature = EbIa where
Eb is the back emf
Ia is the armature current.
Power power supplied to the armature = Mechanical
power developed in the armature
We get EbIa=Ta2πn
Since Eb =  
ZnP
A
 volts
∅
(By taking `n' in r.p.s.)
Ta x 2πn = ∅
×
ZnP
A
 Ia
By cross multiplication we get
Ta
a
 =  
ZP 
 
2 A
 Newton - metre
∅
× I
π
or T
A
a
a
 =  0.159 
ZP 
 Newton - metre
∅
×I
For a given motor. ZP and A are constants as they depend
upon the design.
0.159 ZP 
grded as constant 'K'
A
can be rea
Then Ta = KØIa
where Ø is the flux pole in weber
Ia is the armature current
K 
A
=  0.159 ZP 
Ta is the armature torque in newton metres.
Therefore, we can say the torque of a DC motor is directly
proportional to the field flux and the armature current.
The other formula which gives torque
Ta
a
 is =  9.55
E
N
 Newton - metre
b
×
I
where `N' is speed in r.p.m.
Shaft torque: The complete armature torque calculated
above is not available for doing useful work because of the
losses in the motor.
The torque which is available for doing work is
known as shaft or output torque, and it is
denoted as Tsh.
The difference (Ta – Tsh) is known as loss of torque due to
iron, friction and windage losses of motor.
One H.P. metric =  2 nT
735.5  =  
2 NT
60
735.5  HP
sh
sh
π
π
×
where 'n' is the speed is in r.p.s., N is the speed in r.p.m.
and  Tsh is the shaft torque in newton metre.
If the torque is given in kg. metre, it can be converted into
newton metre as given below.
Newton metre = Kg. metre x 9.81
Example 1: A 250V, 4 pole, wave-wound DC series motor
has 782 conductors in its armature. It has a combined
armature and series field resistance of 0.75 ohms. The
motor takes a current of 40 A. Estimate its speed,
armature torque and H.P. if the flux per pole is 25
milli-weber.
Eb
= V – IaRa
= 250 – (40 x 0.75)
= 250 – 30 = 220 volts
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.119 & 3.2.124 to 3.2.127

42
Therefore,Eb =  
ZnP
A
 volts
∅
N 
A
ZP
Metric H.
a
=  E
=
220
60
2
25
10
    =  220
60
2
10
 =  338 rpm.
T  =  9.55
E
N
 =  Nm
T  =  9.55
220
40
338
= 248.64 Nm.
Assuming armature Torque T =  Shaft torque T
P. =  
2 NT
60
735.5 = 2
22
338
248.64
7
60
735.5
                   =  11.97 HP metric.
b
-3
3
a
b
a
a
sh
sh
×
×
∅
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
60
782
4
25
782
4
I
π
Example 2: A 220V DC shunt motor runs at 500 r.p.m.
when the armature current is 50A. It has an armature
resistance of 0.2 ohm. Calculate the speed if the torque is
doubled.
The torque is proportional to Ia and Ø. But Ø is constant for
shunt motor T a Ia.
Therefore, Ta1 a Ia1 and Ta2 a Ia2.
Therefore, 
=  
 is double of T  we have T
T
 =  2
2 =  
 =  
a2
a2
a1
a2
a1
a2
a2
T
T
As T
a
a
a
a
2
1
1
1
50
I
I
I
I
I
Therefore Ia2 = 50 x 2 = 100 amps.
Eb1
= V – IaRa
= 220 – (50 x .2)
= 220 – 10 = 210 volts
Eb2
= V – IaRa
Eb2
= 220 – (100 x .2)
= 220 – 20 = 200 volts.
Now 
Therefore
=  N
N  =  E
E
        =  N
500  =  200
210
 N  200
500
210
= 476 rpm.
2
1
b2
b1
2
2
,
×
Service and maintenance of DC motor starters
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the procedure of service and troubleshoot the DC motor starter
• state how to check the handle for its spring tension and contact pressure against the studs
• state how to check the no-volt coil assembly
• explain the overload relay for the desired current rating.
Servicing the starter: The starting resistance of the 3-
point and 4-point starters is made up of coiled Eureka wire
and it is fixed between the studs of the starter.  The brass
studs are arranged on the face plate of the starter in a
semi- circular form as shown in Fig 1. The studs are firmly
fixed on the insulated face plate. During maintenance the
studs should be dressed with zero number sandpaper if
the burrs are small and a smooth file should be used for
pittings and big burrs, and then cleaned properly with a
contact cleaner. In case the starter resistance is found
open, replace it with a new resistance coil as per the
original specification of the manufacturer.
Figs 2 and 3 show  the schematic diagrams of 3 and 4 point
starters respectively.
Handle: The handle of the face plate starter consists of a
movable arm attached with a spiral spring which acts
against the magnetic action of the no volt coil. In case the
spring becomes weak, the arm will not come to the off
position even though the supply fails.
During the course of maintenance these points have to be
checked. If the starter handle does not come to the off
position in case of power failure, it is necessary to replace
the spring as per the manufacturer specification. Also
ensure during maintenance, proper pressure of the movable
contact of the arm is available against the brass studs of
the face place. If proper tension is not found then the
starter handle is to be tightened with the help of fixing
screw by adding one or two flat washers on the top of the
handle as shown in Fig 4.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.119 & 3.2.124 to 3.2.127

43
Maintenance and servicing of no-volt coil assembly:
The no-volt coil is connected in series with the field winding
in the case of 3-point starter and in parallel with the supply
through a limiting resistance in the case of 4 point starter.
The no-volt coil is wound with a thin insulated wire and has
a few number of turns.
When the handle of  the starter is moved to the running
position, the armature of the handle should be touching the
core assembly of the no-volt coil. In case the core
assembly is not touching properly, loosen the mounting
screws of the core/coil assembly, align the core and
tighten the screws. (Fig 5).
If the NVC is not energised check visually the condition of
the NVC. Measure the value and resistance of the coil as
well as the insulation value and make a note of these
readings. Periodically check these values and compare
these with original manufacturer’s data. In any case, at
any time if the value falls below 80% of the normal value,
then replace it with a new no-volt coil of the same
specification.
In the case of 4-point starter, the no-volt coil should be
checked as mentioned above. If found OK, then the
protective resistance should be checked with a multimeter.
If found defective it has to be replaced with a resistance of
same specification. (Fig 6.)
The overload relay coil is wound with thick gauge insulated
wire suitable to carry the load current and has less turns.
When the load current exceeds the set current, the
magnetic strength of the overload coil assembly will be
sufficient to attract the armature. The upward movement of
the armature short-circuits the tapped contacts of the no-
volt coil, thereby bypasses the current in the no-volt coil
resulting in the demagnetisation of the no volt coil and
releasing the handle to off position.
Maintenance of overload relay (Fig 7): A magnetic
overload relay is provided near the handle on the left side
of the starter face plate; underneath the overload relay an
armature is provided and it  is adjusted as per the load
current of the motor.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.119 & 3.2.124 to 3.2.127

44
To test the overload relay the motor has to be loaded and
the tripping of the overload relay to be observed. In case the
overload relay trips at a lower current or higher current
value when compared to set current value the current scale
has to be recalibrated.
In the case of chattering noise observed at the no-volt coil
the surfaces of the core assembly and armature need to
be cleaned.
For the troubleshooting procedure follow the chart given in
the trade practical exercise.
Characteristics and applications of a DC series motor
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the characteristics of a series motor
–  torque versus load
–  speed versus load
–  speed versus torque
• state the uses of a DC series motor
• explain the method of changing the direction of rotation of a DC series motor
• state the method of loading the motor and explain the brake test.
DC series motors: The DC series motor, like the DC
series generator, has its field connected in series with the
armature as shown in Fig 1. Due to this mode of connection,
all the current that flows through the armature must also
flow through the field, and hence, the field strength varies
with the change in the load.
A DC series motor has a very high starting torque. In some
motors, it may be as high as five times the full load torque.
Further, the speed of the DC series motor also varies with
the load.
Characteristics of DC series motors: The torque `T' in a
DC motor is proportional to the flux `Ø' and the armature
current `Ia'. The speed is inversely proportional to the flux.
The relation between these factors i.e. torque vs load,
speed Vs load and torque Vs speed are plotted on a graph,
and are known as characteristic curves of motors. The
study of these characteristics enables us to understand
the behaviour of the motors under different conditions.
Torque load characteristics of the DC series motor:
Fig 2 shows the torque load characteristic curve of a DC
series motor. At low or light load, the torque is low due to
the low armature current and low field flux. But as the load
increases, the torque also increases proportionate to the
square of the armature current up to the point `P' of the
curve. This could be illustrated by the formula T proportional
to armature current and field flux. T a Ia Øse as Øse is
proportional to Ise and, further, Ise is proportional to the
armature current. We have
T a  IaIse
T a IaIa
T a  Ia
2.
Beyond this point 'P' the curve becomes a straight line,
and indicates the torque is proportional to the armature
current only as the field cores are saturated. This curve
shows that the torque is low at light loads and increases
at heavy loads. Further the starting current of a DC series
motor is about 1.5 times the full load current and the torque
is about 2.25 times (1.52) the full load torque assuming the
poles are not saturated.
Speed Vs load characteristics: Fig 3 shows the speed
load characteristic curve of a DC series motor. From the
curve it is clear that when the load is small the speed is
high, and as the load increases the speed decreases. As
the curve shown is parallel to the `Y' axis at low load
currents, it can be inferred that the speed attains a
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.119 & 3.2.124 to 3.2.127

45
dangerous value. Therefore, the DC series motors are
seldom used without load. Care should be taken while
using belt drives where the load can be `OFF' if the belt
breaks or slips out. To avoid this, usually the load is
connected directly or through gears to a DC series motor.
Speed-torque characteristics: Fig 4 shows the speed-
torque  characteristic of a DC motor. It shows that when
the torque is low, the speed is high. This is due to the low
field flux (N a 1/Ø). As the torque increases the motor
draws more current and causes the speed to reduce. This
is due to the increased field flux by increased load current
in the DC series field.
Uses of a DC series motor: The DC series motor is used
in applications where torque and speed requirements vary
substantially, and in jobs that require a heavy starting
torque and a high rate of acceleration as in traction, hoists,
cranes, and heavy construction trucks.
Method of changing the direction of rotation of a DC
series motor: We know that by applying Fleming's left
hand rule, the direction of rotation of the armature in a DC
motor could be determined. According to Fleming's left
hand rule, either by changing the polarity of the field or by
changing the direction of current in the armature, the
direction of rotation could be changed. However, if the
polarity of the supply is changed, as both the polarity of
field and the direction of current in the armature change,
the direction of rotation will remain unchanged. Therefore,
the direction of rotation of a DC series motor can be
changed by changing either the field or the armature
connection.
Method of loading a DC series motor: A DC series
motor should never be operated without load. To keep the
speed of the DC series motor within safe limits, we have
to maintain a certain load on the shaft. This could be done
by connecting the DC series motor to a direct-coupled
load or by mounting a gear-coupled load.
The method of loading a DC series motor of small capacity
for testing in a laboratory is by the brake test which is
explained below.
Brake test (Method I): It is a direct method and consists
of applying a brake through a special (camel hair) belt to
a water-cooled drum mounted on the motor shaft as shown
in Fig 5. One end of the belt is fixed to the ground via  a
spring balance S, and the other end is connected to a
suspended weight W1. The motor is run and the load on the
motor is adjusted till it carries its full load current.
Let
W1 – suspended weight in kg.
W2 – reading on spring balance in kg.wt.
The net pull on the belt due to friction at the pulley is
(W1 – W2) kg. wt. or 9.81 (W1 – W2) newton. If R-radius of
the pulley is in metre then, the shaft torque Tsh developed
by the motor
= (W1 – W2)R kg.m
=  9.81(W1 – W2)R N–m
If n – motor or drum speed in r.p.s.
Motor output power =Tsh x2πn watt
 = 2π x 9.81 n (W1 – W2)R watt
 = 61.68 n (W1 – W2)R watt.
Let, V
 = supply voltage;
       I= load current taken by the motor.
Then, input power
 = VI watt.
Therefore, efficiency =  output
input  =  61.68n(W - W
V
1
2 )R
I
Further the metric horsepower developed by the motor can
be calculated by the formula
HP metric = 
2
735 6
πnTsh
.
where 'n'  is the speed in r.p.s.
Tsh is the shaft torque in newton metres.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.119 & 3.2.124 to 3.2.127

46
The power rating given in the name-plate of the motor
indicates the horsepower which is developed at the shaft.
The simple brake test described above can be used for
small motors only, because in the case of larger motors,
it is difficult to dissipate the large amount of heat generated
at the brake.
It is most important to remember that a series
motor should never be operated without a
load.
The field is very weak at no load. Operating the
motor without a load will allow the motor to
reach such high speeds that the centrifugal
force will cause the windings to tear free.
Brake test (Method II): The torque developed by a motor
may be measured alternatively by a device called a prony
brake as shown in Fig 6.
There are various prony brake designs available.  In Fig  6,
the brake drum is encased in split wooden blocks. By
tightening the wing-nuts, the pressure of the wooden
blocks on the brake drum can be varied, and thereby, the
load can be adjusted to the desired value. The brake drum
has an extension torque arm that is fastened to a spring
scale which measures the force developed on the brake
drum in newtons. The torque developed is the product of
the net force on the scale (in newtons) X the effective length
(L ) of the torque arm in metres.
Torque  = force x distance
  = spring balance reading in Kg.wt x 'L' in metres.
The efficiency and the output of the motor in metric
horsepower could be calculated as explained in the above
paragraphs.
Example 1: A prony brake arm is 0.4 m in length. The
wing-nuts on the brake are tightened on the motor pulley,
creating a force of 50 Kg.wt. What is the  torque that is
being developed by the motor?
1 Kg.wt = 9.8 newtons
Torque = force x length(distance)
= 50 x 9.81 x 0.4
= 196.2 newton metres.
Example 2: In the above case calculate the metric
horsepower developed by the motor when the shaft speed
is 1500 r.p.m.
HP metric = 
2
735 6
πnTsh
.
 
(metric)
 
HP
 
41.9
 =
 
735.5
196.2
25
2
 =
 
(metric)
 
HP
N.m
   
196.2
 =
sh
T
r.p.s)
 
=
 n
( 
r.p.s.
 
25
 =
 
60
1500
=
n
×
×
π
Characteristic and applications of a DC shunt motor
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• describe the characteristics of a DC shunt motor
– speed vs load characteristics
– torque vs load characteristics
– torque vs speed characteristics
• state the applications of a DC shunt motor.
Shunt motor: As shown in Fig 1, in a shunt motor, the field
is connected directly across the armature and the supply.
The field current, and hence, the field flux are constant.
When operating without a load, the  torque requirement is
small, since it is only needed to overcome windage and
friction losses. Because of the constant field flux, the
armature will develop a back emf that will limit the current
to the value needed to develop only the required torque.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.119 & 3.2.124 to 3.2.127

47
Speed load characteristic of the DC shunt motor:
Shunt motors are classified as constant speed motors. In
other words, there is very little variation in the speed of the
shunt motor from no load to full load. Equation 1 may be
used  to determine the speed of the DC motor at various
loads.
N 
Ra
=  
V -
K
 =  
E
K
 (Eqn.1)
a
1
b
1
I
∅
∅
where
N
-
speed of the armature in r.p.m.
V
-
applied voltage
Ia
-
armature current at a specific load
Ra
-
armature resistance
Ø
-
flux per pole
K1
-
a constant value for the specific motor
Eb
-
the back emf
In a shunt motor, V,Ra,K1 and Ø are practically constant
values, and the armature current  is the only variable. At
no load the value of `Ia' is small, leading to the maximum
speed. At full load, IaRa is generally about 5 percent of V.
The actual value depends upon the size and design of the
motor. Consequently, at full load, the speed is about 95
percent of the no-load value.
However the speed will drop slightly to reduce the back
emf such that the armature can draw more current to
develop an increased torque from no load to full load.
Fig 2  shows the speed-load characteristic of a DC shunt
motor. From the curve it is observed that the speed slightly
drops from its no-load speed OA to OB when the motor
delivers full load. This is due to the increased Ia Ra drop in
armature. As the drop is small, the DC shunt motor is
regarded as a practically constant speed motor.
Torque vs load characteristics of the DC shunt motor:
Motor torque is proportional to the product of the field flux
and the armature current. As the field flux is constant, the
torque varies as the load current varies. Fig 3 shows the
torque vs load curve of a DC shunt motor. From this it is
clear that the torque is directly proportional to load or
armature current Ia.
The starting torque of a shunt motor is about 1.5 times the
full load torque indicating that the shunt motor does not
have as high a starting torque as the series motor, but it
has much better speed regulation.
Torque Vs speed characteristics: Fig 4 shows the
torque speed characteristic of a DC shunt motor. From the
curve it is  observed that the increase in torque has
negligible effect on the speed. The speed slightly drops as
the torque increases.
Application of DC shunt motor: A DC shunt motor is
best suited for constant speed drives. It meets the
requirements of many industrial applications. Some specific
applications are machine tools, wood planers, circular
saws, grinders, polishers, printing processes, blowers
and motor generator sets.
When working with a shunt motor, never open
the field circuit when it is in operation. If this
happens, as the flux is only due to the residual
field, the motor speed increases to a dangerous
magnitude. At light loads this speed could
become dangerously high, and the armature
may fly off.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.119 & 3.2.124 to 3.2.127

48
DC compound motor - load characteristics
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the types, applications of DC motors
• state the characteristic of a DC compound motor
• state the precautions to be observed while starting a differential compound motor.
DC compound motor: A DC compound motor has both
shunt and series fields for producing the required main flux
in the poles. A DC compound machine can be used as a
motor or generator. It can be classified as indicated below.
Compound motor
Cumulative compound     Differential compound
Long shunt
Short shunt
Long shunt
 Short shunt
Cumulative compound motor: When the series field of
the DC compound motor is connected in such a way that
its flux aids the flux produced by the shunt field, as shown
in Fig 1, then it is called a cumulative compound motor.
Depending on the shunt field connection, it is further sub-
divided as the long shunt, (Fig 1) the short shunt (Fig 2)
cumulative compound motor.
As this motor has both shunt and series fields, it has the
combined behaviour of the shunt and series motor,
depending on the magnitude of the fluxes due to these two
fields. If the series ampere-turns are more predominant
than the shunt ampere-turns at full load, then it has a
higher starting torque than the shunt motor, and its speed
falls more than that of the shunt motor. If the shunt
ampere-turns are more predominant than the series
ampere-turns at full load, the motor acts almost like a
shunt motor but its speed drops a little more than that of
a shunt motor.
Speed-load characteristic: Fig 3 shows the speed-load
characteristic of the cumulative compound motor, and
also of the series and shunt motors for comparison. The
speed of this motor falls more than the shunt motor but
falls less than the series motor. As the speed load curve
starts from Y-axis, unlike in a DC series motor, the
cumulative compound motor can also run on no-load at a
specified speed.
The increased drop in speed at load is due to the combined
drop of the voltage due to armature and series field
resistances.
Torque-load characteristic: Fig 4 shows the torque-
load characteristic of the cumulative compound motor,
and also that of the series and shunt motors for comparison.
Up to full load, the torque developed in a cumulative
compound motor is less than that in the shunt motor but
more than in the series motor.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.119 & 3.2.124 to 3.2.127

49
However, at the time of starting, the starting current is
about 1.5 times the full load current, and hence, the
cumulative compound motor produces a high torque,
which is better than that of the shunt motor during starting.
Torque-speed characteristic: Fig 5 shows the torque-
speed characteristic of the cumulatively compound motor.
As the total flux of the motor increases with load, the
speed decreases but the torque increases. As the output
power is proportional to the product of speed and torque,
the cumulative compound motor will not be overloaded in
case of sudden appearance of load as in rolling mills.
Application of cumulative compound motors:
Compound motors are used to drive machines that require
a relatively constant speed under varying loads. They are
frequently used on machines that require sudden
application of heavy loads, such as presses, shears,
compressors, reciprocating tools, steel rolling machinery
and elevators. Compound motors are also used when it is
desired to protect the motor by causing it to decrease the
speed under heavy loads. However, using a flywheel along
the motor facilitates almost constant speed by converting
the stored energy in the flywheel to be utilised during
heavy loads. During light loads the kinetic energy is stored
in the flywheel.
Never open the shunt field of a compound
motor when the motor is operating at high
load.
Differential compound motor: When the series field of
the DC compound motor is connected in such a way that
its flux opposes (bucks) the flux produced by the shunt
field as shown in Fig 6, it is called a differential compound
motor.
Depending upon the shunt field connection, the compound
motor is further subdivided as long shunt (Fig 6) and short
shunt (Fig 7) differential compound motor.
As the series field flux is in the opposite direction to the
shunt field flux, there is some inherent problem at the time
of starting. At the time of starting, the shunt field takes
some time to build up, whereas a heavy rush of current will
be through the series field and armature. The motor will,
therefore, tend to start up the wrong way. When the shunt
field is fully established, the total flux, which is the
difference of series and shunt field fluxes, may be so small
that the motor may not produce sufficient torque to run the
motor. Hence it is advisable to short-circuit the series field
of the differential compound motor at the time of starting,
and then put the series field in the circuit when the motor
is running.
Characteristics of a differential compound motor:
The speed-load characteristic of the differential compound
motor, shown in Fig 8, indicates that the motor speed
increases with the increase in load due to the fact that the
total flux decreases at the increased load.
The torque-load characteristic of the DC differential
compound motor shown in Fig 9, indicates that the torque
increases with the increased load.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.119 & 3.2.124 to 3.2.127

50
Fig 10 shows the torque-speed characteristic indicating
that both speed and torque increase in the machine,
resulting in the overloading of the machine initially, and
thereby, reaching an unstable state.
Application of DC differential compound motor: This
motor is not in common use due to its unstable behaviour
at overloads. This motor is dangerous to use unless there
is no possibility of the load exceeding the normal full load
value as it is designed to work within full load limits.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.119 & 3.2.124 to 3.2.127

51
Power
Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.128
Electrician - DC Motor
Speed control methods of a DC motor and their applications
Objective: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the principle and the methods of controlling the speed of a DC motor.
Principle of speed control in DC motors: In certain
industrial applications, the variation of speed is a necessity.
In DC motors the speed can be changed to any specified
value easily. This is the main reason for certain industries
to prefer DC motors for drives rather than AC motors. The
speed of a DC motor can be varied, based on the following
simple relationship.
It is known that the applied voltage = back e m f + armature
resistance voltage drop
V  = Eb + IaRa.
Hence Eb = V – IaRa and also
the back emf Eb =  P
N
60
Z
A  =  K
N
∅
×
∅
where K is a constant.
Therefore  N =  E
k
 =  V -  
 ..........Eqn.1
b
a
∅
∅
I Ra
k
From the above expression, it is clear that  the speed of
a DC motor is directly proportional to the back emf Eb, and
inversely proportional to flux (Ø). Thus the speed of the DC
motor can be varied by changing either the back emf Eb or
the flux Øor both. In fact, if the back emf is decreased
across the armature, the speed decreases, and if the flux
is decreased the speed increases. The following are the
most common methods of controlling the speed of DC
motors based on the above principle.
Methods of speed control in DC shunt motors and
compound motors
Armature control method: This method works on the
principle that the speed of the DC motor could be varied by
varying the back emf. As the back emf = V – IaRa, by
varying the armature resistance we can obtain various
speeds. A variable resistance called controller is connected
in series with the armature as shown in Fig 1. The
controller should be selected to carry the armature current
for a longer period.
Let the initial and final speeds of the motor be N1 and N2,
and the back emf be Eb1 and Eb2 respectively,
.
.....Eqn.3
     
k
E
 =
 
N2
         
.
.....Eqn.2
     
k
E
 =
 
N1
 
Then
b2
b1
.
E
N
E
 =
 
N
have
 
 we
Eqn.2
by 
 
Eqn.3
 
dividing
By 
1
b
1
b2
2
By varying the controller resistance value in the armature
circuit, the back emf can be varied from Eb1 to Eb2, thereby,
the speed can be varied from N1 to N2.
Advantages
This method is suitable for constant load drives where
speed variations from low speed up to normal speed are
only required.
Disadvantages
•
Speeds below normal can only be obtained.
•
After setting the required speed, it changes with the
change in the load because of speed variations not only
due to control resistance but also due to load. Hence
a stable speed cannot be maintained when the load
changes.
•
Power loss in the control resistance is high due to the
higher current rating, leading to low efficiency of the
motor.
•
Cost of control resistance is high due to the fact it has
to be designed to carry the armature current.
•
Requires expensive arrangement to dissipate the heat
developed in the control resistance.
Application of the armature control method: Suitable
for DC shunt and compound motors used in printing
machines, cranes and hoists where the duration of low
speed operation is minimum.
The shunt field control method: This method works on
the principle that the speed of the DC motor could be varied
by varying the field flux. For this, a variable resistance

52
(rheostat) is connected in series with the shunt winding as
shown in Fig 2.
When the resistance is increased in the field circuit, the
field current and the flux are reduced. Due to the reduction
of flux, the speed is increased.
Advantages
•
Higher speeds i.e. above normal speed only can be
obtained which will be stable from no load to full load.
•
As the magnitude of the field current is low, the power
loss in the field rheostat is minimum.
•
Control is easy, economical and efficient.
Disadvantages
•
Owing to the very weak field, a reduced torque is
obtained at top speeds.
•
The operation at high speeds with a weak field
leads to commutation difficulties unless inter-poles
are used.
Application of shunt field control: This method is the
most widely used speed control method where speeds
above normal are required, and at the same time, the load
applied to the motor changes often.
Method of speed control in DC series motors
Field diverter method: A variable resistance, called a
diverter, is connected in parallel with the field winding as
in Fig 3. RV represents the variable portion of the divertor
and RF the fixed portion. The function of RF is to prevent the
series winding being short-circuited, when the diverter is
operated.
The smaller the value of RV + RF, the greater is the current
diverted from the series winding, and, higher the speed of
the motor. The minimum speed for a given input current is
obtained by opening the switch `S', thereby breaking the
circuit through the diverter.
Application of the series field diverter method: This
method is mainly used in the speed control of electric
trains. By this method, speeds above normal only could be
obtained, and the power loss in the diverter is quite
considerable.
Field tapping method: A tap changing arrangement is
made on the series field winding as shown in Fig 4. By
varying the number of effective turns of the field winding,
the speed can be controlled. The motor circuit should be
started with all the winding included, and the speed can be
changed then, by setting at a suitable tapping. This
provision should be incorporated in the switch gear.
Otherwise, if the tapping is kept at a lower setting and the
motor is started, the motor races to a high speed at the
time of starting itself, which is undesirable.
Application of series field tapping method: This method
is used in small motors like food mixers, fans etc.
Series parallel method: Fig 5(a) shows a series
motor with two halves of the field winding connected
in series. If the two halves of the field winding are
connected in parallel as in Fig 5(b), then for a given
current 'I' taken from the supply, the current in each
field coil is reduced to half and the flux is, therefore,
reduced and the speed increased.
Application of series parallel method: This is the
simplest method though only two speeds are possible.
This method is often used for controlling the speed of fan
motors.
Supply voltage control method: A controller (variable
resistance) is connected in series with the motor as
shown in Fig 6. This method can be used to control the
speed from zero up to full normal speed.
The disadvantage in this method is that there is loss of
energy in the control resistance in the form of heat. But
with the introduction of SCR based control circuit, obtaining
a variable supply voltage to motor is achieved with the least
power loss. This method is widely used in larger modern
machines where power loss is a major concern.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.128

53
Armature diverter method: In this method, a variable
resistor called a diverter is connected across the armature
as shown in Fig 7. By this method, the armature current
is controlled to vary the speed below the rated value for
series motors.
For a motor running at constant load torque, if the armature
current is reduced by the armature diverter, the line current
increases to meet the torque, thereby, the series field
current increases. This increased field current reduces the
speed.
This method is wasteful, costly and unsuitable for changing
loads.
The speed control methods illustrated for DCseries motor
cannot be used for compound motors as these adjustments
would radically change the performance characteristics of
the compound motor.
Ward-Leonard system of speed control: In all the
methods explained so far, it is clear that the speed cannot
be varied from zero to above normal by any one method
and atleast two methods are required to be combined to do
so. Further, the efficiency of the above mentioned controls
is much less, due to power loss and instability due to load
variation.
A smooth variation of speed from zero to above normal with
inherent stability of speed at all loads is achieved through
an adjustable voltage system of speed control called
Ward-Leonard system of speed control.
In this system, a DC generator is mechanically
coupled to a constant speed DC motor or an AC
3-phase induction motor as shown in Fig 8. The
generated supply from the DC generator is fed directly
to the armature of the controlled DC motor. The fields
of both the DC generator and the controlled DC motor
are separately excited from a suitable DC supply. The
field of the DC generator is controlled through a field
rheostat and a change-over switch to vary the
generated voltage and to change the polarity
respectively. This enables the supply to the controlled
DC motor to vary at a wide range and also makes it
possible to reverse the supply voltage polarity. This,
in turn, changes the speed of the controlled DC motor
to vary from zero to above normal speed as well as
change the direction of rotation, if necessary. The
controlled DC motor speed can be brought down to
zero by reducing the supply voltage of the generator
to a suitable level.
Advantages
•
By this system, a speed as low as zero and as high as
two times the normal speed could be achieved.
•
The direction of rotation of the controlled DC motor can
be changed simply by reversing the controller in the
field circuit of the generator.
•
As there is not much power loss in the field rheostat,
the speed variations are achieved at higher efficiency.
•
The speed of the controlled DC motor is independent of
the load.
Disadvantage
This method requires high initial cost and low overall
efficiency due to three machines in operation.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.128

54
Application of the Ward-Leonard speed control
method: This system is used in steel rolling mills and
paper mill drives, hoists, elevators etc. where a precise
control of speed over a wide range is required. Even today
DC motors are used in India as Power drives in modern
steel rolling mills, heavy industries like BHEL, HMT etc.
Due to modernization, these DC motors are incorporated
with solid state control devices like transistors, diodes,
thyristors and microprocessors to eliminate human errors
of operation and to maintain trouble-free service though the
basic principles for the speed control, remain, as already
stated, valid.
Method of calculation of control resistance and new speed
Objective: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the method of calculating the value of control resistance when full load current of the motor,
armature resistance and applied voltages are known.
We know from the earlier discussions that the speed of a
DC motor.
N 
R
K
a
=  V -
 =  E
K
a
b
I
∅
∅
where
V   =
rated voltage of motor
Ia  =
armature current
Ra  =
armature circuit resistance
K is a constant for a particular motor
Ø is the flux in webers per pole of the motor
N is the speed in r.p.m.
The various methods of speed control discussed in the
earlier chapter were based on this formula. From these we
know that the speed of the motor can be controlled by
either changing the flux Ø or by changing the back emf Eb=
(V – IaRa). To obtain these, we found that control resistance
is connected either in field or in armature circuits. When
control resistance is added, the speed will change. An
electrician should be in a position to determine the value
of the control resistance to be connected in the circuit to
obtain a designated speed. The value of control resistance
to be used to obtain a new speed can be calculated based
on the following information (Fig 1).
Method of calculating control resistance in series
with the shunt field
Let
Eb1  =
back emf at speed N1
Eb2  =
back emf at speed N2
N1   =
speed at which it is running
N2   =
new speed/speed to which it changes
IF1  =
field current at N1
IF2  =
field current at N2
Rt    =
total shunt field circuit resistance
Rsh  =
shunt field resistance
Rc   =
value of control resistance in series with shunt
field.
Then 
N
k 
N
E
E
 =  k 
b1
b2
1
2
∅
∅
1
2
As Ø is proportional to the field current IF.
Therefore
E
N
N
Therefore 
N
Further 
R
R
R
R
b
c
c
sh
sh
,
.
 we have E
 =  k
k
the new speed N  =  E
E
=
Applied voltage
shunt field circuit resistance =
V
R
 =  V
     = R
b1
F1
F2
2
b2
F1
b1
F2
F2
sh
F2
t
2
1
2
1
I
I
I
I
I
I
+
−
−
Method of calculating the control resistance in series
with the armature
Referring to Fig 2 we have
Ia1    = armature current at N1
Ia2    = armature current at N2
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.128

55
If Ia1  = Ia2, then the load is of constant torque
N1     = initial speed
N2     = new or final speed
V      = supply voltage
Rt     =  total armature circuit resistance
Rs     =  control resistance
R      =  control resistance in series with armatures
N
k
k
N
E
E
V
R
V
R
where R
R
b
b
a
t
a
a
a
1
b1
2
b2
1
1
t
s
 =  E
 and N  =  E
 =  N
 =  N
 =  R
∅
∅
−
−
+
2
2
1
1
2
(
)
(
)
.
I
I
Example 1 : A 230 volts DC  shunt motor runs at 1000
r.p.m. and takes an armature current of 20A. Find the
resistance to be added to the field to increase speed to
1200 r.p.m. at an armature current of 30 amps, if Ra = 0.25
ohms, Rsh = 230 ohms.
As the armature current varies from 20 to 30 amps, we get
two variables Eb1 and Eb2. Further the speed has to be
increased by adding resistance in the shunt field. As such
the field current changes from IF1 to IF2.
Eb1 = V – Ia1Ra = 230 – (20 x 0.25) = 230 - 5 = 225 V
Eb2 =  V –Ia2Ra  = 230 – (30 x 0.25) = 230 - 7.5 = 222.5 volts
I
I
I
I
I
F
b
b
F
F
F
F
b
E
E
N
E
1
1
2
1
2
2
1
1
1
 =  230
230  =  1 amp.
        
 =
N
N
 
 =  E
N
 
      =  222.5
1
1000
225
1200
      =  0.824 amp
1
2
b2
2
×
×
×
×
×
R   =  230  =  239
0.824  =  279.12 ohms.
Therefore, R =  R - 230 = 279.12 - 230 = 49.12 ohms.
t
c
t
IF2
Example 2 : A DC  shunt motor operates on 230V takes
an armature current of 20A at 1000 r.p.m.. Its armature
resistance is 1 ohm. Calculate the value of resistance to
be added to the series with armature to reduce its speed
to 800 r.p.m..
Eb1 = V – IaRa = 230 – (20 x 1) = 230 – 20 = 210 volts
E
E
 =  N
 E
                       = 210
800
1000
 =  168 volts.
b1
b2
1
b2
N
Therefore
E
N
N
b
2
1
2
1
,
=
×
×
Eb2 = V – Ia Rt.
Therefore IaRt = V – Eb2
= 230-168 =62 volts.
Therefore Rt = 62/20 = 3.1 ohms
Rs = Rt – Ra
= 3.1–1 = 2.1 ohms.
Example 3 : A 240 volts series motor takes 10 amps when
giving its rated output at 2000 r.p.m.. Its resistance is 0.5
ohm. Find what resistance must be added to obtain the
same torque at 1500 rpm. Calculate the power loss in
control. (As torque is the same the current taken by the
motor should be same.)
Eb1 = V – IaRa = 240 – (10 x 0.5) = 240-5 = 235 volts
E
 = 235
1500
2000
=  176.3 volts.
b2 =
×
E N
N
b1
2
1
IaRt = V – Eb2 = 240-176.3 = 63.7 volts
Therefore
Rt
, R  =  
=  63.7
10  =  6.37 ohms.
Therefore, R  =  R - R
=  6.37 - 0.5
t
a
a
s
t
a
I
I
Series control resistance = 5.87 ohms
Power loss in control resistance Ia
2Rs = 102 x 5.87 = 587
watts.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.128

56
Power                                                    Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.129
Electrician - DC Motor
Troubleshooting in DC machines
Objective: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• use the trouble shooting chart to rectify defects in i) DC machines in general  ii) DC motors  iii) DC generators.
DC machines have Power problems which are not normally
found in AC machines. DC motors and generators have
commutators and brushes, which cause special problems.
If the commutator is properly maintained, it will give many
years of useful service.
Troubleshooting in DC machines in general is discussed
in Chart 1 where as Chart 2 deals with DC motors and
Chart 3 is for DC generator.
Chart 1
Troubleshooting chart for DC machines
Symptoms
Cause
Remedies
Very rapid wearing out of the brushes
a) Insufficient brush tension.
a) Test brush tension.
b) Brushes not fully bedded.
b) Inspect the brush faces and
or  over heating of pig tails
the brushes.
c) Incorrect size of grade of replaced
c) Use correct grade of brush
or heavy sparking at the commutator
brushes
for replacement.
d) Overloading.
d) Reduce the load.
or over heating of commutator.
e) Excessive brush pressure.
e) Adjust the brush tension to
lower value
f)
Insufficient or unequal brush
f)
Check the free movement of
pressure due to brushes sticking
brushes in holder.
in holder.
g) Short circuit in commutator
g) Clean the commutator and
segment.
test for shorts. Rectify the
defect.  Inspect the
commutator surface.
h) Uneven commutator surface.
h) Under cut the mica and skin
     the commutator if necessary.
i)
Brushes may not be in magnetic
i)
Adjust the rocker arm to
magnetic neutral plane.
neutral plane.
j)
Dirty oily or tarnished commutator
j)
Clean and polish the
surface.
commutator.
k) Incorrect direction of rotation.
k) Check the direction of
rotation and  rectify the
defect.
Brush chatter or hissing noise
a) Excessive clearance of brush
a) Adjust holders.
holders.
b) Incorrect angle of brush.
b) Adjust to correct angle.
c) Incorrect brushes for the service.
c) Get manufacturer’s
recommendation.
d) High mica.
d) Undercut mica.
e) Incorrect brush spring pressure.
e) Adjust to correct value.
Selective commutation (one brush
a) Insufficeint brush spring pressure.
a) Adjust the correct pressure
takes more load than it should)
b) Unbalanced circuits in armature.
making sure brushes ride
free in holders.

57
Symptoms
Cause
Remedies
b)
Eliminate high resistance in
defective joints by checking
armature or equalizer circuit or
commutator risers. Check  for
poor contacts between bus  and
bus rings.
Sparking at light loads
a) Paint spray, chemicals, oil or
a)
Use motor designed for application
grease or other foreign material on
Clean commutator, and provide
commutator.
protection against foreign matter.
Install an enclosed motor designed
for the application.
Overheating of field coils
a) Short circuit between turns or
a)
Replace defective coil or rewind
layers
the coil.
Overheating of armature
a) More voltage across the armature.
a)
In the case of generator the speed
may be high or in the case of motor
may be high measure and reduce
the applied voltage.
it.
b) More current in armature.
b)
Reduce the overload.
c) Armature winding shorted.
c)
Check the commutator and remove
any metallic particles in between
segments. Test the machine for
shorts and rectify the defect.
d) Insufficient air circulation around
d)
Allow good ventilation around
machine
the machine by providing fan etc.
Machine operates but
a) Overloading.
a)
Reduce load.
overheats
b) Worn out bearing.
b)
Replace bearing.
c) Tight bearing.
c)
Grease it.
d) Shorted or earthed winding.
d)
 Test the winding.
e) Wrong alignment of pulley.
e)
Align properly.
Vibration while running
a) Loose foundation bolts.
a)
Tighten them.
b) Loose coupling pulleys.
b) Tighten them.
c) Wrong alignment.
c)
Align properly
d) Loose internal parts.
d)
 Tighten them.
e) Bent shaft.
e)
True the shaft in a lathe
f)
Unbalanced armature.
f)
Balance it.
g) Damaged bearing.
g)
Inspect the bearing and
replace  it if necessary.
Mechanical noise
a) Foreign matter in air gap.
a)
Clean the machine.
b) Defective alignment.
b)
Align the machine.
c) Defective bearing.
c)
Replace the bearing.
Bearing overheating
a) Incorrect grade or quantity of
a)
Remove incorrect grade or  surplus
grease (roller type).
 grease and replenish withcorrect
quantity of  recommended grease
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.129

58
Chart 2
Troubleshooting chart for DC motors
Symptoms
Cause
Remedies
Motor will not start
a) Open circuit in starter.
a)
Check for open startingresistor,
b) Low or no terminal voltage.
b)
Check the incoming voltage with
name-plate rating and correct the
supply voltage.
c) Bearing frozen.
c)
Recondition the shaft and  replace
the bearing.
d) Overload.
d)
Reduce the load.
e) Excessive friction.
e)
Check the bearing lubrication to
make sure that the oil is sufficient
quantity and of good quality.
Disconnect motor from driven
machine and turn motor by hand
to see if trouble is in motor. Strip
and reassemble motor; then check
part by part for proper location and
fit.Straighten or replace bent
shaft.
Motor stops after running
a) Motor is not getting power.
a)
Check voltage in the motor
short time
terminals: also fuses and overload
relay. Rectify the defect.
b) Motor is started with weak or no
b)
If adjustable-speed motor, check
field.
the rheostat for correct setting. If
correct, check the condition of
rheostat.  Check the field coils for
open winding. Check the wiring for
loose or broken condition
c) Motor torque insufficient to drive
c)
Check the line voltage with name
load.
plate rating. Use larger motor or
one with suitable  characteristic to
match the load.
Motor runs too slow
a) Line voltage too low.
a)
Rectify the supply voltage or under
under load.
load check and remove any
excess resistance in supply line,
connections or controller.
b) Brushes ahead of neutral plane.
b)
Set brushes on neutral plane.
c) Overload.
c)
Check to see that load does not
exceed allowable load on motor.
Motor runs too fast
a) Weak field.
a)
Check for resistance in shunt-
under load.
under load field  circuits. Check for
grounds.
b) Line voltage too high.
b)
Correct high voltage condition.
c) Brushes are out of neutral plane.
c)
Set brushes on neutral plane.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.129

59
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.129
Chart 3
Troubleshooting chart for DC Generators
Symptoms
Cause
Remedies
Generator fails to build up
a) The direction of rotation must have
a)
Change the direction of rotation
voltage
been reversed.
b) Brushes not resting on the
b)
Brushes to be set over the
      commutator.
commutator in correct position.
c) Residual magnetism is completely
c)
Run the generator as a DC
     lost.
motor or sometime (few seconds)
or connect the field circuit to a
battery or DC voltage to
reestablish the residual
magnetism.
d) Generator speed is too low.
d)
Generator speed should be
restored to normal speed by
increasing the prime mover speed.
e) Short circuit in the armature.
e)
Rectify the short circuit in the
armature.
f)
Open circuit in the armature.
f)
Test and rectify the open circuit.
g) Short circuit in the field circuit.
g)
Test and rectify the short circuit
which may be in the coil. Faulty
coil will show much less
resistance than a good coil.
h) Open circuit in field winding.
h)
Check the continuity of the
circuit and rectify the defect.
Maintenance procedure for DC machines
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state what is meant by preventive maintenance and its importance
• describe the recommended maintenance schedule for DC motors
• explain how to maintain the maintenance record.
Preventive maintenance: Preventive maintenance of
Power machines consists of routinely scheduled periodical
inspections, tests, planned minor maintenance repairs
and a system of maintaining inspection records for future
reference. Preventive maintenance is a combination of
routine and planned operations.
Routine operations: Routine operations are those which
follow fixed schedules to maintain Power motors at daily,
weekly or at other fixed intervals.
Planned operation: By contrast, planned operation
consists of additional work which is performed at irregular
frequencies, and is determined by inspection and previous
operating experience or the details of defects found in the
maintenance records.
Necessity of preventive maintenance: By carrying out
an effective preventive maintenance programme on Power
machines, we can eliminate major failures of the machines,
accidents, heavy repair costs and loss of production time.
Proper preventive maintenance will lead to economy of
operation, less down-time, dependable machine operation,
longer machine life and lower overall cost of maintenance
and repair.
Scheduling of preventive maintenance: Routine
periodical inspection and tests may be scheduled to be
carried out daily, weekly, monthly, half-yearly and annualy
depending upon the following factors.
•
The importance of the motor/generator in the production
•
The duty cycle of the machine
•
The age of the machine
•
The earlier history of the machine
•
The environment in which the machine operates
•
The recommendations of the manufacturer.
Recommended maintenance schedule for machines:
While carrying out routine periodical maintenance, an
electrician will make full use of his senses to diagnose and
locate problems in Power machines. The sense of smell
directs attention to burning insulation: the sense of feel

60
detects excessive heating in winding or bearing; the sense
of hearing detects excessive noise, speed or vibration and
the sense of sight detects excessive sparking and many
other mechanical faults.
Sensory impressions must also be supplemented by
various testing procedures to localize the trouble. A
thorough understanding of Power principles and the efficient
use of test equipment are important to an electrician
during this phase of operation.
Machine details
Page 1
Manufacturer, Trade Mark 
Type, Model or List number 
Type of current 
Function 
 Generator/Motor
Fabrication or serial number 
Type of connection
Sep/Shunt/Series/Compound
Rated voltage 
 volts
Rated current 
 amps
Rated power 
 K.W.
Rated speed  
 r.p.m.
Rated exc. voltage 
 volts
Rated exc. current  
amps
Rating class
Directon of rotation 
Insulation class 
Protection class 
The following maintenance schedule is recommended for
DC machines.
1  Daily maintenance
•
Examine visually earth connections and machine
leads.
•
Check the sparking at the commutator.
•
Check the motor windings for overheating. (The
permissible maximum temperature is near about
that which can be comfortably felt by hand.)
•
Examine the control equipment.
•
In the case of oil-ring lubricated machines
a) examine the bearings to see that the oil rings are
working
b) note the temperature of the bearings
c) add oil, if necessary
d) check end play.
•
Check for unusual noise at the machine while
running.
2
 Weekly maintenance
•
Examine the commutator and brushes.
•
Check belt tension. In cases where this is excessive
it should immediately be reduced. In the case of
sleeve-bearing machines, the air gap between the
rotor and stator should be checked.
•
Blow out air through the windings of protected type
machines situated in dusty locations.
•
Examine the starting equipment for burnt contacts
where machine is started and stopped frequently.
•
Examine oil in the case of oil-ring lubricated bearings
for contamination by dust, grit, etc.(This can be
roughly judged from the colour of the oil.)
•
Check foundation bolts and other fasteners.
3
Monthly maintenance
•
Overhaul controllers.
•
Inspect and clean the oil circuit breakers.
•
Renew the oil in high- speed bearings which are in
damp and dusty locations.
•
Wipe the brush-holders and check the bedding of
brushes of DC machines.
•
Test the insulation of windings.
4
Half-yearly maintenance
•
Check the brushes and replace, if necessary.
•
Check the windings of machines subjected to
corrosive and other elements. If necessary, bake
the windings and varnish.
•
Check the brush tension and adjust, if necessary.
•
Check the grease in the ball and roller bearings, and
make it up, where necessary, taking care to avoid
overfilling.
•
Check the current input to the motor or the output
of the generator and compare it with normal values.
•
Drain all the oil bearings, wash with petrol to which
a few drops of oil have been added; flush with
lubricating oil and refill with clean oil.
5
Annual maintenance
•
Check all the high speed bearings, and renew, if
necessary.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.129

61
•
Blow out all the machine winding thoroughly with
clean dry air. Make sure that the pressure is not that
high as to damage the insulation.
•
Clean and varnish the oily windings.
•
Overhaul the motors which have been subjected to
severe operating conditions.
•
Renew the switch and fuse contacts, if damaged.
•
Check the oil in the starter and the grease/oil in the
bearings.
•
Renew the oil in the starters subjected to damp or
corrosive elements.
•
Check the switch conditions, resistance to earth
between motor/generator windings, control gear
and wiring.
•
Check the resistance of earth connections.
•
Check the air gaps in between the armature and
field.
•
Test the insulation of windings before and after
overhauling the motors/generators.
6  Records
•
Maintain a register giving one or more pages for
each machine, and record therein all important
inspections and maintenance works carried out
from time to time. These records should show past
performance, normal insulation level, air gap
measurements, nature of repairs and interval between
previous repairs and other important information
which would be of help for good performance and
maintenance.
While routine maintenance could be done either during
the working of the machine or during short interval `down'
periods, the planned maintenance requires to be done
during holidays or by taking shut-downs of small duration.
Planned maintenance schedule needs to be decided,
based on the routine maintenance reports entered in the
maintenance card.
Details of inner parts
  Page 1
Bearing
Sleeve ball roller
Front end No. 
Pulley end No. 
Grease type  
Coupling type 
Brush grade  
Brush No. as per manufacturer
Particulars of supply order
Supply order No:
Year of purchase 
Date of first inspection and test  
Date of installation
Location 
Initial test results
  Page 1
Resistance value of shunt winding 
Resistance value of series winding 
Resistance value of armature 
Insulation resistance value between
armature and shunt field 
armature and series field 
series field and shunt field
armature and frame
shunt field and frame
series field and frame
The 2nd page gives the record of maintenance carried out, and, in particular the defects noted therein.
Maintenance record
Maintaining a system of inspection records is a must in
preventive maintenance schedule. This system uses a
register as stated above or cards as shown below which
are kept in the master file. By referring to these maintenance
cards, the foreman can schedule the planned maintenance.
Maintenance card: The 1st page gives the details of
name-plate, location, year of purchase, initial test results
etc pertaining to the machine.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.129

62
A careful study of the maintenance card helps the foreman
to plan the shut-down date to facilitate early overhauling or
planned maintenance schedule to prevent a major
breakdown.
Method of maintenance: During the routine maintenance
inspection, the investigations and adjustment to be carried
out for the parts and accessories of the motors/generators
are given below to improve the efficiency of preventive
maintenance.
•
Clean daily the motor/generator, switch gear and
associated cables free from dirt, dust and grease. Use
dry compressed air to drive away the dust from the
machines.
•
Check the bearing daily for excessive noise and
temperature. If required, re-grease or re-oil the
bearing with the same grade of grease/oil as in
original. Do not mix different grades of grease together
as it may result in forming sludge or acids, and spoil the
bearings.
•
Check the machine daily against strains of water or oil
or grease which may leak from the surroundings. Take
the necessary protective steps to prevent the leakage.
•
 Check daily the belts, gears and coupling for looseness,
vibration and noise. Adjust/replace the parts, if found
defective.
•
Check weekly the brushes and the commutator for
sparking and wear.
•
Check weekly the bearing for proper lubrication.
•
Check weekly the terminals and switch contacts.
•
Inspect the brushes and the commutator once in a
month for excessive wear, chatter and sparking. Worn-
out brushes need to be replaced with the same grade
brushes. Check spring tension on the brushes, and
adjust, if necessary. Badly worn-out commutators
need to be turned in a lathe or be replaced.
•
Check monthly the brushes for proper seating. If
necessary, reshape the brushes to proper curvature to
suit the commutator surface.
•
Check monthly the end plates and the shaft for
excessive end play.
•
Check monthly the main and auxiliary contact points
of the switch gear for wear, pitting and burns. Badly
worn out contact point needs replacement. Check the
connection terminals for loose connection and scales
or burning. Rectify the defects.
•
Test monthly once the field windings and armature for
insulation and ground faults. Low reading of insulation
below 1 megohm indicates weak insulation. Dry out the
winding, and re-varnish, if necessary.
•
Check monthly once the foundation bolt and other
fasteners for tightness.
•
Once a year undercut the mica in between the
commutator bars. Test the commutator and armature
for shorts, open and ground faults.
Maintenance card
Report on routine maintenance
Page 2
     Date of
Scheduled maintenance
Defects
 Attended
 Reported
Remarks
maintenance
             carried out
  noted
       by
      to
(Signature)
(Signature)
The 3rd page gives the details of the test carried out in the motor at intervals with corresponding readings
Maintenance card
Report on test details
Page 3
Date of
Schedule
    Test
 Test
  Tested
Reported
Remarks
  Test
particulars
results
      by
       to
(Signature)
(Signature)
From the above it is clear that atleast once in a year, the motor/generator needs a thorough overhauling in addition to
frequent routine maintenance.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.129

63
The 4th page gives the details of the defects,causes and repair  carried out
Motor service card
Page 4
Date of
     Repair and
Cause
 Repaired
Supervised
Remarks
  repair
  parts replaced
      by
       by
(Signature)
 (Signature)
DC motor control system (drives) AC-DC and DC-AC control
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the importance of AC to DC drive control
• list the advantages and applications of AC to DC drives
• explain the DC-DC drive control system (chopper)
• list the advantages and application of DC-DC drive.
AC to DC drive control
AC/DC drive in an electronic device which converts a fixed
frequency and voltage to an adjustable frequency and AC
voltage source. It controls
•
the speed
•
the torque
•
the horse power
•
the directions of AC motor
These drives are also known as "Adjustable Speed Drives
(ASD)" or "Variable Frequency Drives (VFD)"
It becomes more popularity due to energy saving.
 The AC/DC converter is an SCR bridge, which receives
AC power from the output wire and provides adjustable
voltage DC power to DC bus, by using inverter.
The voltage regulator is required to preset the DC bus
voltage level required for the output voltage amplitude to
the motor
The frequency is adjusted by the frequency control device
which is cause to control the speed of the motor.
Advances in technology have made the size, cost,
reliability and performance of  AC drives very appealing
as Industrial "Variable Speed Applications"
Advantages
•
Precise speed control
•
Energy saving
•
Simple operation
•
No external control
•
Good reliability
•
Lighter and smaller in size
•
It is preferable method of speed control
Application
Fans, Blowers, Compressors, Pumps, Lathes, Stamping
presses, Etc.
DC - DC drive control (Chopper)
DC - DC converter (chopper) drives are widely used in
traction application all over the world. A DC - DC Converter
is connected between a fixed voltage DC source and a
DC motor to vary the armature voltage. In addition to
armature voltage control a DC - DC converter can provide
regenerative braking of the motors and can return energy
back to the supply. It operates at high frequency.
DC-DC converter drives are also used in battery electric
vehicle (BEVs). There are few control methods in DC-DC
converter drive such as
•
Power (or) acceleration control
•
Regenerative brake control
•
Rheostatic brake control
•
Combined regenerative and rheostatic  brake control
Advantages
It provides high starting torque. It is also possible to obtain
speed control over a wide range. The methods of speed
control are normally simpler and less expensive than
those of AC drives.
Applications
•
Servo applications
•
Robotics
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.129

64
Power
Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130
Electrician - DC Motor
Materials used for  winding - field coil winding
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• classify different types of insulating materials used for winding according to their ability to withstand
temperature
• list out the insulating materials used for winding and their applications.
Insulating materials : In winding work, proper selection
of insulating materials is an important criterion. The ageing
factor of the insulation of Power equipment and apparatus
depends upon many factors, such as temperature, Power
and mechanical stress, vibration, moisture, dirt and
chemical reaction.
Classification of insulating materials used for winding:
The temperature encountered in Power equipment and
apparatus very often decides the ageing factor of insulating
materials  of the system. Certain basic thermal
classifications have proved useful and have been accepted
throughout the world. Hence the insulating materials used
for winding are classified according to their ability to
withstand a particular range of temperatures.
Each class of insulation is associated (according to BIS
1271-1985) with a particular temperature. When this
temperature is not exceeded, it will ensure an economic
life for the insulation of an equipment under usual conditions
of service. One must also take into account other factors
like vibration, dirty conditions, the presence of chemicals,
etc. since these factors may cause early breakdown of an
insulation material.
The recognised classes of the most commonly used
insulating  materials and the temperatures assigned to
them are given in Table 1.
The temperature quoted in Table 1 is the actual temperature
of the insulation and not the rise in temperature of the
Power equipment.
Materials: The following are the common insulating
materials used for winding purposes.
Insulation paper sheets: They are generally used for
insulating slots and other metal parts from the live wire in
a winding system.
Leatheroid paper: It is a special paper having better
ageing and dielectric strength. It is available in colours of
dark grey and bottle green. It is used for Class A insulation
scheme.
Pressphan paper: It consists of highly glazed and
pressed paper, having good dielectric strength. Normally,
it is available in yellow colour. Used for Class A insulation
scheme.
Table 1
Classification of insulations
(as per BIS:1271-1958/1985)
Sl.
Class
Max.
     Description of
No.
safe
     insulation material
temp.
(1)
(2)
(3)
            (4)
1
Y
90oC
Cotton, silk, paper
without impregnation,
2
A
105oC
Cotton,silk, paper immersed
in oil.
3
E
120oC
Leatheroid paper, empire
cloth., fibre.
4
B
130oC
Mica, glass fibre, asbestos.
5
F
155oC
The insulation of this class
consists of materials of a
better quality than class B
insulation.  Glass fibre,
mica,asbestos etc.
6
H
180oC
Silicon elastomer and
combinations of materials
such as mica, glass fibre,
asbestos etc.
7
200
200oC
This class consists of
220
220oC
materials such as mica,
250
250oC
porcelain, glass, quartz, etc.
Triplex paper: In this a layer of polyester film is deposited
on the surface/surfaces of leatheroid or pressphan paper
or elephantide paper to make it non-hygroscopic. Normally
one side of this paper is glazed and colours may be brown,
green, grey or yellow depending upon the papers used.
This paper is used for Class E insulation schemes.
Millinex paper: This is a synthetic paper, milky white in
colour. It is highly non-hygroscopic and possesses good
Power and mechanical strength. Used for class E and B
insulation schemes.
Micanite paper (mica folium) and micanite cloth: It
consists of soft mica, bonded with paper or cloth base.
This can withstand higher temperatures. Normally it is
white in colour with the mica visible. Used for Class E and
B insulation schemes.

65
Empire cloth: It is an impregnated cloth and is highly
flexible. Generally it is available in black or yellow colour,
depending upon the colour of  the varnishes used. It is
recommended for Class A insulation scheme.
Glass fibre cloth: It is a cloth made of glass wool. It has
high dielectric strength and can withstand high temperature.
It is highly flexible. When not impregnated, the colour is
white. Impregnated  fibre glass cloth is normally used in
winding, and the colour will be golden yellow or black.
Used for Class E and B insulation schemes.
The above insulating sheets are available in thicknesses
of 2 mil, 5 mil, 7 mil, 10 mil & 15 mil, having a width of one
metre. They are  generally sold in kilograms.
For Classes `F' and `H', special type of insulation sheets
are used. Some of the brand names are `Hypotherm and
Nomex'.
TAPES: These are used for wrapping the conductor or
groups of conductors in the winding process.
Cotton tape: Generally it is not impregnated and is
available with cross and straight woven fabric. It is white in
colour. Used for Class A and E insulation schemes.
Empire tape: It is an impregnated cloth tape. The colour
of the tape will be the colour of the impregnating varnish
used, i.e. yellow or black. Used for class A insulation
scheme.
Fibre glass tape: It is available as either impregnated or
non-impregnated types. It has got high dielectric strength
and can withstand high temperature. It is generally used
for Class E, B and F insulation schemes.
The above mentioned tapes are available in sizes 2,5, 7
and 10 mils thick, 12mm, 19mm and 25 mm wide-in rolls
of 25, 50 and 100 metres.
For class `F' and `H' insulation schemes, special types of
silicon based tapes are used. For example, SILICON-
ELASTOMER which is a brand name.
SLEEVES : Sleeves are used to insulate winding lead
connections and terminations.
Cotton sleeves: These are made of cotton fabric, generally
not varnished. They are used for class A insulation
scheme.
Empire sleeves: These are impregnated cotton sleeves
and are used for class A insulation scheme.
Fibre glass sleeves : These are impregnated fibre glass,
woven fabric sleeves. Generally, they are yellow and black
in colour. Used for class E, B & F insulation schemes.
PVC sleeves:  These are made up of polyvinyl chloride
sheets and are available in different colours. They are
highly non-hygroscopic. Due to their deterioration at rise
in temperature, they are not used for winding purposes.
They may be used for insulating exposed lead terminations.
The above mentioned sleeves are available in sizes 1mm,
2mm, 3mm, 4mm up to 12 mm in dia. and generally one
metre long. Sometimes they may be rolled into 25, 50 and
100 metre rolls.
Other insulating materials
Fibre: Generally fabric-based fibre is used in insulation. It
is used for wedges and packing purposes. It is somewhat
reddish in colour and is available in sheets with a thickness
of 1 mm to 12 mm, and is sold by weight in kgs. It is used
for Class A,E & B insulation schemes.
Bamboo: Well seasoned bamboos are used as wedges
in the winding process. Readymade cut pieces of suitable
sizes are available in shops. It is used for Class A & E
insulation schemes.
Hemp thread:  It is used for binding the coils and
overhangs. It is available in different thicknesses and in
rolls. Used for Class A insulation scheme.
Terylene thread:  It is made up of terylene material and
is used for binding the coils and overhangs. It is available
in different thicknesses and in rolls. It is suitable for Class
E & B insulation schemes.
Varnish:  It is a liquid insulating material which is used for
increasing the insulating property of some of the materials
used in the winding process. Two types of varnishes are
available for winding purposes.
–
Air-drying insulating varnish
–
Baking insulation varnish
These varnishes are available in two colours, golden
yellow and black. They are available in tins of 1 to 5 litres
normally.
More particulars about varnish and varnishing
processes are discussed in Ex. 3.2.130.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

66
Winding wires
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• refer to a winding-wire table having particulars like gauge number, diameter, area of cross-section, weight
per km, accommodation of turns per square cm and their current-carrying capacity etc.
• state the scheme of insulation of a field coil
• explain the method of winding field coils
• explain the method of connecting the field coils,and the method of testing.
Winding wires : The annealed copper conductors,
normally in round shape, are used for winding small and
medium capacity Power machines and equipments. These
copper wires are provided with a variety of insulation as
stated below.
•
Super-enamelled copper wire (S.E.)
•
Single cotton-covered copper wire (S.C.C.)
•
Double cotton-covered copper wire (D.C.C.)
•
Single silk-covered copper wire (S.S.C.)
•
Double silk-covered copper wire (D.S.C.)
•
PVC-covered copper winding wire
Generally super-enamelled copper winding wire with
medium covering is used for most of the winding
applications, whereas for some special applications super-
enamelled copper wire with thick covering may be used.
Field coils and armature of certain DC machines might be
wound with super-enamelled,  DCC or DSC copper winding
wires.
PVC covered copper winding wire is mainly used for
submersible pumps.
The winding wires are available in different sizes and
grades of insulation.
All the required particulars for SE copper wire having
medium covering are given in Table 1.
Such tables are published by all leading
manufacturers of winding wires to help the
winder in his task. The current-carrying capacity
of the conductor shown in Table 1 is at 2.3A/
mm2. In general usage, a rating nearly 3 to 4
times higher in value, is used depending upon
the insulation and temperature grade of the
machinery.
Winding of  field coils: In rewinding a field coil, special
attention shall be given for selection of proper winding wire
- its insulation, correct size of coil and the insulation
scheme involved in different stages so as to satisfy the
original condition, unless otherwise warranted by necessity.
Insulation details for a field coil : The field coil shall be
well insulated from the frame, field pole and pole shoes.
Collar : The insulation used around the field pole, called
a collar, is shown in Fig 1.
Flanges: The insulation used on either side of the coil i.e.
to insulate it from the frame and pole shoes is called
flanges. (Fig 1)
Table 1
(Data for super - enamelled copper wire)
 Size Dia-
  Dia-     Area      Turns
Curr-
Per
meter meter sq.
per
ent in 1000
inches mm
mm
square
am-
metre
cm.
pere
in Kg.
14
.080
2.03
3.244
22
7.5
28.18
15
.072
1.82
2.63
27
6.1
22.84
16
.064
1.62
2.1
33
4.8
18.06
17
.056
1.42
1.59
42
3.7
13.85
18
.048
1.21
1.167
58
2.7
11.05
19
.040
1.01
0.811
87
1.9
 7.08
20
.036
.91
0.636
105
1.5
5.75
21
.032
.81
0.52
134
1.2
4.55
22
.028
.71
0.4
172
.92
3.58
23
.024
.60
0.29
234
.68       2.56
24
.022
.55
0.25
275
.57       2.24
25
.020
.50
0.202
329
.4
1.78
26
.018
.45
0.162
397
.38       1.45
27
.0164
.41
0.137
484
.32       1.29
28
.0148
.37
0.111
583
.26       1.01
29
.0136
.34
0.094
680
.22       0.804
30
.0124
.31
0.078
834
.18
0.712
31
.0116
.29
0.070
939
.158
0.646
32
.0108
.27
0.06
1,068
.137
0.505
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

67
 Size Dia-
  Dia-     Area      Turns
Curr-
Per
meter meter sq.
per
ent in 1000
inches mm
mm
square
am-
metre
cm.
pere
in Kg.
33
.0100
.26
0.055
1,070
.118
0.45
34
.0092
.23
0.043
1,490
.100
0.362
35
.0084
.21
0.036
1,744
.083
0.324
36
.0076
.19
0.029
2,085
.068     0.261
37
.0068
.17
0.023
2,542
.054     0.209
38
.0060
.15
0.018
3,162
.042     0.164
39
.0052
.13
0.014
4,379
.032     0.127
40
.0048
.12
0.0117
5,030
.027     0.114
41
.0044
.11
0.0098
6,060
.028
0.09
42
.0040
.10
0.0078
7,692
.018     0.073
43
.0036
.09
0.0064
9,375
.015
0.06
44
.0032
.08
0.005
12,000
.012     0.047
45
.0028
.07
0.0039
15,384
.009     0.037
46
.0024
.06
0.0028
21,428
.006
0.026
47
.0020
.05
0.00196
30,612
.005
0.015
48
.0016
.04
0.00126
47,619
.003     0.012
 * Current  carrying  capacity  taken as 2.3 ampere
per sq. mm.
the former after completion of the winding, if strips of tape
or cord are placed on the centre-piece (winding frame)
before starting the winding of the coil as shown in Fig 3.
These tapes or cords can then be tied up easily after
completion of winding as shown in Fig 4. The former is
placed in a lathe chuck or in a coil-winding machine or in
a hand winder to wind the coil, with the same size wire and
the same number of turns as those of the original coil. The
collar and flange insulation papers should be of the same
type, grade,thickness and size as those of the original.
The size of the former may be obtained from the original
coil or by measuring the dimensions of the field pole and
allowing for the thickness of the tape. (Fig 5 shows the coil
taped with cotton tape.)
Coil wrapping or coil taping : The insulation used
around the coil is called coil wrapping or coil taping.
For example, the following are the details of insulation for
a typical field coil.
•
Conductor - super-enamelled  copper  wire with medium
covering.
•
Collar - 10 mils single, leatheroid.
•
 Flanges - 15 mils single, leatheroid.
•
Coil wrapping - two layers of 7 mils, 19 mm wide cotton
tape.
•
Coil lead covering - empire sleeves.
•
Varnish - air-dry, golden yellow, Class E. varnish.
Preparation of a field coil : Field coils are wound with
insulated copper wire whose diameter and number of turns
depend on the exciting voltage and machine capacity.
While rewinding, it is essential to follow the same size of
winding wire,coil and insulation scheme as that of the
original. The wire can be wound on a wooden former that
consists of a centre-piece (cut to the size of the inner
dimensions of the coil) and two side pieces to hold the coil
in place. The construction of the former is given in Fig 2.
The centre-piece (winding frame) is slightly tapered to one
side to facilitate removal of the coil from the former. Proper
shape of the coil could be retained during its removal from
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

68
When a field coil consists of many turns of fine wire
arranged as shown in the cut-away view of shunt field
winding (Fig 6), there may be thousands of turns. It is not
advisable to try to rewind this type of coil by counting the
number of turns. The usual method is to weigh the old coil
and to wind the new coil with the same  wire size having
the same weight.
The mean circumference of the coil could be taken as
length of one turn.
turn
 
the
 
of
 
Length
 wire
winding
of
 
length
 
Total
 
 
coil
 
the
 
of
 
turns
 
of
 
No.
=
After determining the number of turns, refer to the column
under `Turns per square cm' against the chosen winding
wire.
Using the following formula, the cross-section of the
proposed coil in sq cm could be found.
sq.cm.
 
per
 
Turns
turns
 
of
number
 
Total
 
sq.cm.
 
in
  
coil
 
the
 
of
 
section
-
Cross
=
Check the available space with respect to the calculated
cross-section of the coil. You may multiply the cross-
section of the coil by a factor of 1.25 to allow for the
additional area required for insulation.
Termination of  field coil leads: While winding, see that
the ends of the coil are taken to the coil sides. Insulate the
end leads with the proper size of cotton/empire/fibre glass
sleeving and terminate the same. In the case of fine super-
enamelled copper wires used for coil winding, use insulated
flexible cord for lead connections. (Fig 5)
Solder the flexible cord with the enamelled copper wire. At
the end, the soldered joints should be insulated properly
with empire/fibre glass tapes.
Taping the field coil : When required, tape the coil with
a suitable size of cotton/empire/fibre glass tape. Before
starting for taping, tie down the end leads of the coil to
prevent them from being cut or damaged. Tape the coil
tightly and uniformly. The tape of the coil must not tear or
slip off while it is being placed on the pole.
Some field coils may not be taped. But they are
definitely insulated from the body and pole
using insulating paper flanges and collars.
Grounding of a field coil may be caused by
careless insulation work at this stage.
Varnishing the field coil : After preparing the field coil,
preheat the coil in an oven at about 90oC for 3 to 4 hours
to drive the moisture out from the field coil. Cool the coil to
60oC and dip the coil in baking varnish for 5 to 10 minutes,
till the air bubbles ceases in the varnish tank. Drain the
varnish and bake in the oven at 120oC for 6 to 8 hours.
After the varnishing is over, assemble the field coils on the
field poles. While laying the field coils, observe the lead
end position for the right connection.
Connecting field coils : In DC machines, the field coils
are connected so that alternate polarity is formed in the
machine.
However, Table 1 could be used to check whether the coil,
when wound, will be having the same size as that of the
original so that it could be accommodated without difficulty.
Often in such trials it is found that the coil after completion
is found to be larger in size and has to be modified by
reducing some of the turns.
Reasons for such problems can be as follows.
•
Slight change in diameter of the selected winding wire.
•
Extra thick coating of insulation.
•
Loose winding.
•
Slight change in thickness of the insulation paper used
in between the layers.
Procedure to find the size of the coil before actual
winding: Weigh the coil without taped insulation and refer
to the last column of  Table 1 and determine the length of
the winding wire in metres. From the original coil determine
the average length of a turn.
Suppose, referring to Fig 7, we have
inner circumference of the coil = LINcm.
outer circumference of the coil = LOUTcm.
mean circumference of the coil
 
2
L
L
L
OUT
IN
M
+
=
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

69
Thus, in a two-pole DC machine as shown in Fig 8, one of
the poles is north and the other one is south. In a four-pole
DC machine the poles must be alternately north and south
as shown in Fig 9.
The field coils are connected in series except in very large
DC machines and in machines that have been reconnected
from a higher to a lower voltage, in such cases they are
connected in parallel with reverse polarity for alternate
poles.
To form alternate polarity in the field coils, which are wound
in a similar direction, the current should flow through the
first pole coil - say in a clockwise direction, through the
second pole coil in a counter-clockwise direction and
through the third pole coil in a clockwise direction and the
fourth pole coil in an anticlockwise direction and so on. It
is extremely difficult to determine this direction once the
field coils are taped, as the direction of the winding turns
is not visible.
Testing of field coil connections : There are two
methods to test the correct field coil polarity.
–
Compass method
–
Iron rod method
Compass method : The compass method may be used
on any number of poles. (If it is a compound motor, test one
field winding - either shunt or series at a time.) For testing
the field coils of a four-pole motor, the four field coils are
connected in series, as shown in Fig 9.
Fig.10 shows series and parallel connection of field coils
to create alternate poles
Then a low DC voltage, say 10 to 20% of the rated voltage,
is applied to the field circuit. A compass is placed near a
pole either inside of the machine or alongside the field coil
as shown in Fig 11. A notation is made as to the end of  the
needle which points to the pole. When the compass is
moved to the next pole, the other end of the needle should
be attracted. Thus the poles should be of alternate
polarity. If not, interchange the lead connection of the
particular field coil.
Iron rod method : In this method, the rated DC voltage is
applied to the field circuit. The head of an iron nail is placed
against one pole, as shown in Fig 12. If the polarities are
correct, the other end of the nail will be attracted to the next
pole; if incorrect, it will be repulsed.
In the case of a small two-pole DC motor, the trial and error
method is used. Initially two field coils and armature are
connected in series as shown in Fig 13a. If the motor runs,
the polarities of the connected field poles are correct. If the
motor does not rotate, interchange the field coil connection
as in Fig 13b. If the motor runs, it is assumed the field and
armature are in good condition and properly connected.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

70
Armature winding - terms - types - rewinding of mixer/liquidizer
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• define the general terms used in DC armature winding
• explain the different types of DC armature winding.
Winding : Winding is an orderly arrangement of insulated
conductors in the slots of armature/stator cores with their
end connection in a specified sequence.
Winding is mainly classified as:
•
closed coil winding
•
open coil winding.
Closed coil winding : It is also called DC armature
winding. In closed coil winding, the end of the coil, after
connecting through the other coils in the armature, finds
itself connected to the commencement end  of  the starting
coil  as  shown  in  Fig 1.
Open coil winding : It is also called  AC  stator winding.
In open coil winding, the end of the coil after connecting
through other coils in the stator, is terminated as end lead,
i.e. the starting end of the coil and the finishing end of the
coil are kept open as shown in Fig 2.
DC  armature winding : It is a closed coil winding,
wherein the coil ends are connected through the
commutator segments to form the closed circuit.
Terms used in DC armature winding
Coil or winding element : Length of a wire lying in the
magnetic field and in which an emf is induced is called an
active conductor.
Referring to Fig 3, we find the two active conductors AB
and CD along with their end connections constitute one
coil or winding element of the armature winding. The coil
may consist of  a single turn only as shown in   Fig 3  or
multi-turns as shown in Fig  4. A single-turn coil or winding
element will have two conductors only. But a multi-turn coil
may have many conductors per coil side. In Fig 4 for
example, each coil side has 3 conductors. The group of
conductors constituting a coil side of a multi-turn coil is
tied together with a tape as a unit (Fig 5) and is placed in
the armature slot. It may be noted that each winding
element has two connecting leads and each commutator
bar has two connecting leads brought from the winding. As
such there are as many commutator bars as the number
of winding elements.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

71
armature conductors between two sides of a coil. It is in
fact the periphery of the armature measured in terms of
slots or conductors spanned by the two sides of the coil.
It is denoted by YS as shown in Fig 6.
Coil-pitch YS is calculated in the same way as is done for
Pole pitch.
Hence the modified calculation will be
)
conductors
 
of
 
terms
 
(in
K 
 - 
P
C
 
K 
 - 
 
poles
 
of
 
No.
conductors
 
of
 
No.
 
slots)
 
of
 
terms
 
(in
K 
 - 
P
S
 
K 
 - 
poles
 
of
 
No.
slots
 
of
 
No.
 
 
YS
=
=
=
=
where K = any part of S/P or C/P that is subtracted to make
Ys an integer.
Back pitch (YB) : The distance measured in terms of the
armature conductors which a coil advances on the back of
the armature is called back pitch and is denoted by YB.
This is illustrated in Figs 7 and 8. The back pitch is also
equal to the coil-pitch.
Active sides :  These are the sides which lie within the
slots. They are also known as coil sides. The induction
takes place only in the active sides of the coil while they
move in the magnetic field. (Fig 5)
In winding calculation these active sides are
considered as conductors. The coil has got two
conductors irrespective of the number of turns.
Inactive sides : That part of a coil which does not lie in the
slot is known as the inactive side of a coil. No induction
takes place in the inactive sides.
Example:  Back and front end connections. (Fig 5)
Leads of coil : The ends coming out from a coil are known
as leads of a coil. Every coil has got two leads.
Pole-pitch(Yp) : It may be variously defined as:
•
the periphery of the armature divided by the number of
poles of the machine i.e. the distance between two
adjacent poles.It is denoted by Yp.
•
it is equal to the number of armature conductors (or
armature slots) per pole. For example, if there are 48
conductors, 24 coils, 24 slots and 4 poles, then the
pole pitch is
conductors
 
of
 
terms
 
in
 
12
 
 
4
48
 
 
poles
 
of
 
No.
conductors
 
of
 
No.
 
 
Y
or
         
          
          
          
slots
 
of
 
terms
 
in
 6 
 
4
24
 
 
poles
 
of
 
Number
slots
 
of
 
Number
 
 
Y
P
P
=
=
=
=
=
=
Coil-span or coil-pitch(YS) : The coil-span or coil-pitch is
the distance, measured in terms of armature slots or
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

72
As shown in Fig 9, coil side 1 is connected on the back of
armature to coil side 8 (same coil). Hence YB = 8 – 1 = 7
conductors.
Simplex lap winding : In a simplex lap winding, the end
lead of coil 1 is connected to the beginning lead of the
adjacent coil(coil 2) through the  commutator segments.
The commutator pitch of one segment is maintained.
Fig 10 shows the lead connection of a simplex lap winding.
Duplex lap winding :  In duplex lap winding, the end lead
of coil 1 is connected to the beginning lead of coil 3,
through commutator segments. The commutator pitch of
two segments is maintained as shown in Figs 11a and b.
Front pitch(YF) : The number of armature conductors or
elements spanned by a coil on the front (commutator end
of an armature) is called the front pitch and is designated
by YF. This is shown in Figs 7,8 and 9.  Coil side 8 is
connected to coil side 3 (second coil) through the
commutator segment. Hence YF= 8 – 3 = 5 conductors.
Average pitch (YA) : The average of the front pitch YFand
the back pitch YB is called average pitch.YA
2
Y
 
Y
 
 
 Y
i.e.,
F
B
A
+
=
It is expressed in number of conductors.
Resultant pitch (YR) : In general, it may be defined as the
distance between the beginning of one coil and the
beginning of the next coil to which it is connected or it is
the distance between the beginnings of two consecutive
coil sides as shown in Figs 7 and 8 and denoted by letter
YR. As in Fig 9, YR=YB–YF, i.e. YR =7–5 =2 conductors.
The  resultant  pitch YR depends upon the type of winding
like lap or wave, as well as simplex or multiplex.
Commutator pitch(Yc) : It is the distance (measured in
commutator bars or segments) between the segments to
which the two ends of a coil are connected. It is denoted
by Yc. From the figures 7, 8 and 9, it is clear the
commutator pitch Yc = 1 segment.
The commutator pitch Yc varies with the type of winding,
like lap or wave as well as simplex or multiplex.
Types of DC armature windings
Lap and wave winding : The DC armature windings are
classified into two main groups, lap and wave windings.
The difference between them is the manner in which, the
leads are connected to the commutator segments.
In triplex lap and quadruplex lap windings, the end leads
of coil 1 are connected to the beginning leads of coil 4 and
coil 5 respectively through commutator segments. In
general commutator pitches
Yc = 1 segment for simplex lap winding
Yc = 2 segments for duplex lap winding
Yc = 3 segments for triplex lap winding
Yc = 4 segments for quadruplex lap winding.
Simplex wave winding : In simplex wave winding, the
end lead of the coil 1 is connected to the beginning of a coil
placed at a distance equal to one pole pitch. (Fig 12)
Duplex wave winding : In duplex wave winding there is
parallel combination of two simplex wave windings as
shown in Fig 13.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

73
Single layer winding : A single layer winding is one in
which only one coil side is placed in each armature slot,
as shown in Fig 17. Such a winding is not used much.
Triplex wave winding : Triplex wave winding will have a
parallel combination of three simplex wave windings, and
so on.
The width of the brush will be such that in
simplex lap or wave winding, the brush will
make contact with only one segment. The
brush will contact two segments in duplex,
three in triplex and four in quadruplex. (Refer
to Fig 14)
Progressive lap or wave winding : In progressive lap or
wave winding, the front pitch YFwill be less than the back
pitch YB, i.e. as you lay the coils clock-wise, the
connections to the commutator segments will also proceed
clockwise as in Figs 15a and b. In progressive winding, Yc
is referred to as +1.
Retrogressive lap or wave winding:  In retrogressive
lap or wave winding, the front pitch YFwill be greater than
the back pitch YB, i.e. as you lay the coils  clockwise, the
connection to the commutator segments will proceed
anticlockwise as shown in Figs 16 a & b. In retrogressive
winding Yc is represented as -1.
Two-layer winding : In this type of winding, there are two
conductors or coil sides per slot arranged in two layers as
shown in Fig 18. Usually, one side of every coil lies in the
upper half of one slot and the other side of the same coil
lies in the lower half of some other slot at a distance of one
coil pitch away.
Multi-coil winding : Sometimes 4 or 6 or 8 coil sides are
used in each slot in several layers because it is not
practicable to have too many slots.(Fig 19) The coil sides
lying at the upper half of the slots are numbered odd, i.e.
1,3,5,7 etc. while those at the lower half are numbered
even, i.e. 2,4,6,8 etc.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

74
Simplex lap and wave winding - developed diagram
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the conditions for Lap winding and wave winding
• calculate and draw the developed ring diagram for simplex lap and wave winding.
Development winding diagram : To draw the
development winding diagram, the winding particulars like
number of conductors, number of poles, pitches, types of
windings etc. are required. For any DC armature winding,
there shall be as many coils as the number of commutator
segments. Further, the number of coils will be the multiple
of the number of slots, i.e. for a single layer, there will be
double the number of slots as that of the commutator
segments and for a double layer there will as many slots
as the commutator segments.
Lap winding
Conditions for lap winding : For lap winding the following
terms and conditions are to be fulfilled.
•
The front pitch  YFand the back pitch YBshould be
approximately equal to the pole-pitch YP.
•
Both the front pitch  YFand the back pitch YBshould be
an odd number.
•
The back pitch YBand the front pitch  YFshould differ by
2 conductors, for simplex lap winding. In the case of
multiplex winding, it is equal to 2 x No. of `plex'.
Ex.
For duplex 2x2
= 4 conductors.
For triplex 2x3   = 6 conductors and so on.
The average pitch should be as given by the formula
Commutator pitch should be
YC = ± 1 for simplex
= ± 2 for duplex
= ± 3 for triplex and so on.
•
The number of parallel paths `A' in the armature will be
the multiple of the number of poles. A = P, in the case
of simplex lap winding, i.e 2-pole armature winding will
have 2 parallel paths, 4-pole armature winding will have
4 parallel paths and so on. However, the number of
parallel paths for multiplex winding will be equal to A =
P x No. of `plex'.
•
There must be as many brushes as there are poles.
•
The brushes must be wide enough to cover atleast m
segments, where 'm ' is the 'plex' (multiplicity) of the
winding.
Progressive winding
1 
 
P
Z
 
 
pitchY
 
Back
B
+
=
Front pitch  YF  = YB  2 x plex
Reprogressive winding
1 
 
P
Z
 
 
pitchY
 
Front
F
+
=
Back pitch   YB=  YF  2 x plex
To  make  the  winding possible as lap-winding,
Z/P must be an even number.
Considering the above points, only the armature
having the designated slots can be wound for
lap winding.
Calculations : The following calculations are made for
finding out winding pitches and coil connections with
commutator segments for simplex lap winding.
Example
No. of commutator segments
6
No. of slots
6
No. of poles
2
Type of winding
simple lap.
As pointed out earlier the winding should be in double layer
only.
Solution
No. of coils = No. of commutator segments = 6 coils
No. of conductors or  coil sides = No. of coils x 2
= 6 x 2 = 12 conductors.
slots
 3 
 
6/2
 
 
poles
 
of
 
No.
slots
 
of
 
No.
 
 
pitchY
 
Pole
P
=
=
=
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

75
conductors
 6 
 
12/2
 
          
          
          
          
          
 
poles
 
of
 
No.
conductors
 
of
 
No.
 
  
conductors
 
of
 
terms
 
in
 
 Y
Also
P
=
=
=
No. of conductors/slot = 12/6 = 2 conductors/slots.
Hence the winding is double layer winding.
7 
 1 
 6
 
 1 
 
12/2
 
 1 
 
P
Z
 
 
 Y
pitch
 
Back
B
=
+
=
+
=
+
=
Front pitch YF  = YB  2  x  Plex      = 7  2 = 5
YB  = 7 and YF  =  5 for progressive winding
YB  = 5 and YF  = 7 for retrogressive winding
The winding sequence of conductors for progressive lap
winding is shown in Fig 1.
Winding Table
  Coil
Conductor
Slot
Commutator
segments
From
To
From
To
From
To
1
1
8
1
4
I
II
2
3
10
2
5
II
III
3
5
12
3
6
III
IV
4
7
2
4
1
IV
V
5
9
4
5
2
V
VI
6
11
6
6
3
VI
I
Development winding diagram for 12
conductors, 2 poles, 6 slots, 6 segments, simplex
double layer lap winding
Fig 2 shows the arrangement of coils in the respective
slots and the connection of the coils with the segments.
Development diagram with conductors : Fig 3 shows
the arrangement of armature conductors in the slots and
connections to commutator segments.
Ring diagram :  Fig 4 shows the connection of 6 coils with
the commutator segments in the form of a ring diagram.
Sequence diagram :  This diagram is mainly used to
trace the direction of current in the coil sides (conductors).
With the help of this diagram the brush position can be
located. (Fig 5)
Wave winding
Conditions for wave winding : For wave winding, the
following terms and conditions should be fulfilled.
•
The front pitch YF and back pitch YB should be
approximately equal to the pole pitch YP.
•
Both the front pitch YF and the back pitch YB should be
an odd number.
•
The back pitch YB and the front pitch YF may be of the
same value or may differ by 2 conductors, in the case
of simplex, and the same or 2 or 4 conductors for
multiplex wave winding,  depending  upon  the condition
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

76
 
2
 Y
 
Y
 
 
Y
F
B
A
+
=
 approximately
•
The average pitch should be as given by the formula
 
2
 Y
 
Y
 
 
Y
F
B
A
+
=
  (or)
 
poles
 
of
 
No.
plex
 x 
2
 
 
conductors
 
No.of
 
 
YA
±
=
on
 
so
 
and
 
 winding
ve
triplex wa
 
for
 
P
 6
 
 
Z
 
 
Y
 winding
e
duplex wav
 
for
 
P
 4
 
 
Z
 
 
Y
 winding
ve
simplex wa
 
ive
retrogress
 
for
 
P
 2
 
 
Z
 
   
          
 winding
ve
simplex wa
 e
progressiv
 
for
 
P
 2
 
 
Z
 
   
          
 winding
ve
simplex wa
 
for
 
P
 2
 
 
Z
 
 
Y
A
A
A
±
=
±
=
−
=
+
=
±
=
•
p/2
m
 
C
 
 
poles
 
of
 
Pairs
m
 
 
segments
 
commutator
 
No.of
 
 
YC
±
=
±
=
where Yc is the commutator pitch
   C
= total number of commutator segments
   p
= number of poles
   m
= the plex of the winding.
The commutator pitch Ycshall be equal to the average pitch
YA .  Yc= YA
The resultant pitch is the sum of the front and back
pitches.   YR = YB+ YF
•
The number of coil sides must satisfy the following
relations.
Z = P x YA ± 2 where P is the number of poles.
•
In the case of simplex wave winding the number of
parallel paths `A' is equal to 2 only, irrespective of the
number of poles. However the number of parallel paths
increases in multiples of the plex of the windings.
Eg. A = 2 x plex.
Considering the above points, only an armature
having designated slots can be wound for
wave winding.
•
Two brushes are necessary, but as many brushes as
there are poles may be used, and they must be set so
that they short-circuit only the coils cutting no flux.
•
The brushes must be wide enough  to cover atleast `m'
segments where 'm' is the 'plex' of the winding.
Calculations : The following calculations are made for
finding out winding pitches and coil connections with
commutator segments for simplex wave winding.
Example
Number of commutator segments
7 Nos.
Number of slots
7 Nos.
Number of poles
2 Nos.
Type of winding
Wave.
Winding table
1
The number of coils  =  Number of commutator
    segments = 7 coils.
2
The number of conductors or No. of coil sides
= No. of coils x 2 = 7 x 2 = 14 conductors.
slots
 3
say 
        
          
          
 
slots,
 
3.5
 
 
7/2
 
 
poles
 
of
 
No.
slots
 
No.of
 
 
 Y
pitch
 
Pole
  
3
P
=
=
=
conductors
 7 
 
14/2
 
 
poles
 
of
 
No.
conductors
 
No.of
 
 
 Y
Also,
P
=
=
=
4
No. of conductors/slot = 14/7 = 2 conductors/slot.
Hence, the winding is double layer.
 winding).
ive
retrogress
 
(for
 6
 
 
12/2
 
 
2
2
 
 
14
 
  
          
 winding).
e
progressiv
 
(for
 8 
 
16/2
 
 
2
2
 
 
14
 
  
          
P
2
 
 
Z
 
 
 Y
pitch
 
  Average
5
A
=
=
−
=
=
=
+
=
±
=
Hence YA= YC= 8 or 6.
6
Taking YA= 8 for progressive winding we have
      2YA    = 2 x 8 = 16 = YB+ YF
YB   YF   =  2
YB+ YF     = 16.
Hence back pitch YB= 9 and front pitch YF= 7.
Taking YA= 6 for retrogressive winding we have
        2YA = 2 x 6 = 12 = YB+ YF
     YB– YF= 12.
Hence, back pitch YB= 7 and front pitch YF = 5 for
retrogressive wave winding.
The winding sequence of conductors for retrogressive
wave winding is shown in Fig 6.
YB= 7, YF= 5.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

77
Winding Table
Coil
Conductor
      Slot
Commutator
segments
From
To
From
To
From
To
1
1
8
1
4
I
VII
2
13
6
7
3
VII
VI
3
11
4
6
2
VI
V
4
9
2
5
1
V
IV
5
7
14
4
7
IV
III
6
5
12
3
6
III
II
7
3
10
2
5
II
I
Development winding diagram for 14
conductors, 2 poles, 7 slots, 7 segments,
simplex, double layer wave winding
Development diagram with coil connection : Fig 7
shows the arrangement of coils in their respective slots
and their connection to the segments.
Development diagram with conductors : Fig 8 shows
the arrangement of armature conductors in the slots and
the connection to commutator segments.
Ring diagram : The ring diagram of wave winding in the
case of a 2-pole armature  will appear similar to that of lap
winding, but the coil ends will be connected as shown in
Fig 9.
Sequence diagram : This diagram (Fig 10) is mainly
used to trace the current direction of the coil sides
(conductors) and, thereby, locate the brush position.
Please note  the brush is placed at a distance of 3
commutator segments i.e. less than 180o geometrical
(app.155o).
Preparation of armature for rewinding
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the types of slots and their relative advantages, and the place of their use
• state the scheme of insulation of armature
• state the necessity and the method of testing a commutator before rewinding.
Slots : Slots are provided in the armature laminated core,
to house the armature conductors in position.
Types of slots: Generally the following three types of slots
are provided in armature cores.
•
Open type
•
Semi-enclosed type
•
Closed type
Open type slots : Open type slots are used for medium
and high voltage machines. The slots are tapered a little
or dovetailed on the top to receive the wedges after
rewinding, as shown in Figs1 a, b & c. Former wound coils
after being properly insulated are housed in the slots. To
prevent the coils from coming out of the slots, banding is
done with steel wire on the shallow channel over the
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

78
circumference of the armature. In such types of armatures,
better cooling facilities are provided by keeping ventilating
ducts below the slots.
Semi-enclosed type slots :  Semi-enclosed types of
slots are used for low and medium voltage machines. The
slots in this type of armature are tapered towards the
periphery, i.e. openings towards the teeth are smaller as
compared to the base, as shown in Figs 2 a & b.  So
reluctance is less than in open type slots. Moreover, the
coils cannot come out easily because of the provision of
small wedges on the teeth. The conductors are placed in
the slots one by one, and not  the complete coil at the
same time during the winding process. In the case of bar
or strip winding, they are pushed through sideways and
bent to shape to form the overhangs required.
Closed type slots: Closed type of slots are used in  rotors
of AC machines and high speed alternators. The slots in
this type of armature are totally closed as shown in
Figs 3 a & b.
They have no opening on the periphery to receive the
conductors. Therefore, conductors are pushed through
the slots. The reluctance is lower than in the above two
types, and so the efficiency is high.
Insulation scheme for armature
For armature winding, the following insulation schemes
are required.
Armature core insulation : Both the sides of the armature
core ends have to be insulated with fibre or insulation paper
cut in the shape of the stampings. (Fig 4)
Shaft insulation: The exposed portion of the shaft on
either side of the armature shall be insulated. Cotton or
fibre glass tapes are wound on the area of the shaft where
the overhangs of the winding are exposed. The number of
layers of tapping depends upon the overhang projection.
(Fig 5)
Slot insulation
Slot liner : The slot liner is an insulation sheet cut to the
inner dimensions of the slots and projected on either side
of the slots. (Fig 6)
Cuffing : In some applications, the edges of the slot liner
are folded on either  end to prevent them from sliding in the
slots. (Fig 7)
Coil separator : When multi-layer windings are used to
insulate the winding layers from each other, coil separators
are used. They  should  be  extended  on  either  side  of
the slot. (Fig 8)
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

79
Packing strip : The thick insulation paper used in between
the slot liner and wedge is called a packing strip. This
should extend beyond each end of the armature core.
(Fig 9)
Wedge : A solid insulation piece like bamboo or fibre used
to prevent the conductors from coming out of slots is called
a wedge. This should be tightly held in the slots. (Fig 10)
Coil insulation : In some applications, the slot portions
of the coil sides are taped with cotton or fibre glass tapes.
This is known as coil insulation.
Overhang insulation : The overhang portion of the
winding, insulated with flexible insulation sheets like fibre
glass cloth, to prevent the conductors of different groups
contacting each other is known as overhang insulation.
Lead insulation : Lead insulation is one where the end
leads of armature conductors are insulated with sleeves,
like empire or fibre glass, before soldering with the
commutator segments. (Fig 11)
Banding insulation : In the case of small armatures,
overhangs of armature are tied with hemp/terylene threads.
In large DC armatures overhang is insulated with insulating
sheets and tied with steel wires (banding). (Fig 12)
Varnishing : Baking varnish is used for impregnation of
armature windings.  This process is known as varnishing.
Testing of the commutator before winding : Before
attempting to wind the armature, the usual procedure is to
test the commutator. This is done to facilitate repairs in
case the commutator is defective. The commutator is
tested for grounded bars and shorted bars. If the commutator
is extensively damaged and the segments have come out,
the commutator has to be replaced with a new one.
Test  for grounded commutator : A commutator is
grounded when one or more bars contact the iron core of
the commutator or shaft. This can be tested by a test lamp
as shown in Fig 13. Touch one lead of the test lamp
permanently to the shaft of the armature. Touch the other
lead of the test lamp on the commutator bar. If the
commutator is not grounded the lamp should not glow;
there should be no sparking or arcing between the bar and
the ground. Place the test lead on the next commutator
bar and test in the same manner. Similarly test all the bars
individually. If the lamp lights when a bar is touched that
bar is grounded.
Test for shorted commutator : The test which is illustrated
in Fig 14  is made to reveal defects in the mica between
the bars. Place one test lead on a commutator bar and the
other test lead on an adjacent bar. No light should be
visible in the test lamp. If a light is observed, a short exists
between the bars contacted by the test leads. Move each
lead over one bar at a time and test as before. Continue in
this manner until all the bars have been tested.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

80
Rewinding of mixer/liquidizer
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the type of winding used in mixer/liquidizer
• explain the connections of coils, with and without loops
• explain the data to be collected for rewinding an armature
• explain the term ‘lead swing’
• explain the method of winding the armature
• explain the method of balancing the armature.
Almost all the domestic mixers/liquidizers use universal
motors for their high speed and high torque requirements.
Though the basic design remains the same, there will be
variation in capacity, number of slots, segments, size of
winding wire, brush grade and time rating etc.
When rewinding the mixer/liquidizer, great care needs to
be exercised in taking data so as to strictly follow the
pattern of winding as in the original. Even a slight change
in the diameter of the winding wire or change of number of
turns will result in bad performance of the rewound mixer.
In general, care should be taken while selecting the
winding wire, insulation paper, solder and the soldering
iron. As the armature winding requires high skill, most of
the beginners may not be successful in their first attempt.
As it has high potential for self-employment with good
financial gains, go ahead with a number of attempts till you
reach perfection. But at each time of failure of winding,
investigate the fault and do not repeat that mistake.
Before collecting the necessary data for rewinding it is
essential that the trainee is familiar with the type of
windings used in mixer/liquidizers and the variations
thereof. Types of armature winding is discussed in the
earlier portion of this information sheet. Normally simplex
lap winding with loops is used in mixers/liquidizers.
Winding may further be progressive or retrogressive as
shown in Figs 1 (a) and (b).
Lap winding with loops :  A lap winding with two coils
per each slot which is commonly found in mixers/ liquidizers
is shown in Fig 2. A 12 slot armature in this case has 24
coils and 24 segments. There must be twice as many
commutator segments as slots. As shown in Fig 2 one
loop is made short and the next one long, so that the leads
may be soldered to the segments in proper sequence.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

81
Lap winding may also have three coils for each slot. Then
it is necessary to have three times as many commutator
segments as slots.
Lap winding without loops :  In lap winding each coil can
be wound independently and the two ends of the coil
brought out. Then the end leads may be connected to the
segments in proper sequence.
Collection of data for rewinding a mixer : When
rewinding the armature and field of a universal motor,
sufficient information must be gathered on the process of
stripping to enable the trainee to rewind it exactly as it was
wound originally. Initially we should take the name-plate
details and a sample is given in Table 1.
After taking the name plate details, dismantle the mixer
and strip the winding carefully. During this process collect
the information as detailed in the data sheet shown in
Table 2.
Table 1
Name-plate details
Make
: ___________________
Type
: _____________
Code No
: _____________
KW
: ___________________
Volts
: _____________
Amps
: _____________
No. of poles : ___________________
Hertz
: _____________
r.p.m
: _____________
Frame
: ___________________
Model
: _____________
Table 2
Size of wire
Turns
Insulation
Connection
STATOR
Size of wire         No.of turns
Coil pitch
Coils/Slots
ROTOR
No.of slots
Bars
Draw the end connection
and show the lead swing.
Details of lead swing
               Centre of bars
Centre of slots to
               Centre of mica
Lap
Commutator pitch
Wave
Lead swing : As the machines are desinged to have a
particular position of the brushes in the periphery of the
commutator, the coil end connections to the commutator
segments are fixed at certain positions which should not
be changed while rewinding to have trouble free operation.
The positioning of the coil leads to the particular segment
is called lead swing.
One of the most important operations in the winding of an
armature is placing the coil leads in the proper commutator
bars. Leads may be placed in the bars in any one of three
different positions, depending on the original location. If a
slot in the armature is viewed from the commutator end,
the leads to the commutator may swing to the right of the
slot as shown in Fig 3 or to the left, as shown in Fig 4 or
they may be aligned with it as shown in Fig 5.  The following
method is used in determining the position of the leads in
the commutator.
Stretch a piece of cord or string through the centre of a slot.
Note whether it is aligned with a commutator bar or with the
mica between bars. If the data calls for a lead swing of
three bars to the right, place the lead of the first coil three
bars to the right, counting the bar that lines up with the slot
as No.1. All the other leads follow in succession, as shown
in the figure 3. If the centre of the slot is in line with the
mica, consider the bar to the right of the mica as bar No.1.
Method of winding single or double coil per slot
Armature with one coil per slot : The procedure for
winding and connecting an armature having one coil per
slot is as follows:
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

82
Start in any slot and wind one complete coil in the slots of
proper pitch. Place the beginning of coil 1 into the proper
commutator according to the lead swing bar and leave the
end lead free for connections after the armature is wound
as shown in Fig 6.
Wind the entire armature in this manner, leaving all the end
leads disconnected. After all the coils are wound, start
connecting all the top or end lead to the commutator bar
adjacent to the bottom lead of the same coil to produce a
simplex lap winding like that given in the Fig 7.
Armature with two coils per slot : Simplex lap-wound
armatures having two coils per slot are more common than
those having one coil per slot. The procedure for winding
this type of armature is as follows:
Start winding with two wires and place the beginning leads
in the commutator bars according to the data taken. Cut
the wires when the proper number of turns have been
wound into the slots and leave the end leads free. Start the
next coil, one slot to the left of the first coil as viewed from
the commutator end. (When the coils proceed to the left,
the winding is called left- handed and to the right, right-
handed.) Follow this procedure until all coils have been
wound. (Fig 8). Then place the top or end, leads in the
commutator bars in the proper succession. This is shown
in Fig 9.
Sleeving of different colours is used for identification of the
leads. One colour is used for the beginning and end of the
first coil and another colour for the second coil in the same
slot, the third coil uses the same colour as the first and so
on. It will be necessary to test the first top lead and the
colours to identify all the others. Using short and long
leads for the two coils in the same slot is another method
of identifying the leads so that they can be connected
properly.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

83
Method of rewinding and balancing the armature
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the method of rewinding a DC armature
• explain the methods of soldering/brazing/hot stacking of the winding ends to the commutator raisers
• explain the necessity of banding and the method of banding
• state the necessity of balancing and the method of balancing the armature.
Method of winding the armature : To start the armature
winding, the armature is mounted on the winding stand as
in Fig 1; then the shaft, armature core and slots are
insulated as per the insulation scheme taken from the
data.
Winding methods :  There are two methods of winding the
armature.
Hand winding
Formed coil winding
Hand winding : For hand winding, four numbers of slot
feeders are placed in the two designated slots at a
distance from the coil pitch. The required number of turns
are wound into the slots, say slots  Nos.1 and 4 as in
Fig 2.  Enough tension is applied on the wire to make a
tight winding without breaking the wire. A loop is made at
the end of the first coil and the beginning of the second coil.
The second coil is started in the designated slot and the
coil is wound with the same number of turns as in coil 1.
The span of coil 2, has to be equal to that of coil 1.
When the second coil is finished, a loop is made again and
then the third coil is started. In this manner the winding is
continued, until all the coils have been wound. The end
lead of the last coil is connected to the beginning lead of
the first coil. After the entire armature is wound, there will
be two coil sides in each slot, in double layer winding. It
has to be ensured that all the coils have the same pitch and
turns. The loops made at the end of the coils will look as
shown in Fig 3, and have to be connected to the commutator
raisers. The procedure of making loops while winding,
explained here, is for simplex lap winding. This method is
usually adopted for small armatures. For wave winding and
multiplex windings, connection for raisers shall be taken
from the coil ends according to the winding pattern.
Formed coil winding : For this method, wooden formers
are made to the dimensions of the armature coils, similar
to those of the field coils as explained in Exercise 1. The
total number of coils required for the armature are wound
and kept ready.
The inactive side of the coils is bound with tape and tied
with cotton strings as shown in Fig 4.
The active side of the coil is spread as in Fig 5 and the coil
sides are inserted in the respective armature slots,
conductor by conductor as shown in Fig 6. Similarly all the
coils of the armature are placed in the respective slots and
the coil ends are looped and soldered to the respective
commutator segments.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

84
Connection of winding ends with the commutator
segments : After winding the armature, the end leads of
the armature conductors are placed in the slits of the
commutator raisers. (Raiser slits should be properly
cleaned and well prepared to receive the  conductors.) For
secure and good Power contact, these conductors are
well cleaned to remove insulation and dirt. Then the
conductor ends are placed in the respective raiser slits
and soldered/brazed or hot-stacked.
Soldering : For soldering, electric irons are generally
used on small armatures and gas irons on the larger ones.
The size of the iron used depends on the size of the
commutator. Leads are soldered to the commutator by
means of soldering iron or torch.
The procedure of soldering is as follows. First the soldering
flux  is  applied over the  wires to be soldered and also the
identified commutator raiser. The wires are then placed in
the respective raisers. Then the tip of the soldering iron is
kept on the commutator raiser as shown in Fig 7 for some
time until the heat from the iron is transferred to the area
of the commutator raiser. This heat transfer could be
identified by the bubbling of the flux.
When the commutator raiser is sufficiently hot, the solder
is placed on the commutator raiser, and the iron is kept
over it and the solder melted. The solder is allowed to flow
entirely around the leads. To prevent the solder from
flowing down the back of the commutator and thereby
causing short circuits, raise one end of the armature. To
prevent the solder from flowing from one bar to another, the
iron is held as shown in Fig 8. Excess flux is wiped out after
the soldering is completed.
Brazing : In the case of large armature windings, the
armature winding lead ends are brazed with the respective
commutator raiser slits by means of a gas torch. Close
inspection and care should be exercised in the control of
the flame.
Hot stacking : In the case of small DC armatures, the
armature conductors are kept in the commutator raiser
slits and spot-welded. This is called  hot stacking. A
specially designed hot-stacking machine is available for
this purpose.
Banding the armature : A temporary banding is
sometimes applied on the armature before the permanent
banding is done, to keep the coils in position and to
facilitate shaping of the overhang.
Permanent bands are used on armatures to hold the
armature end leads in position. A cord band is used on
small armatures to prevent the leads from flying out of the
slots, while the armature is rotating. Large armatures have
steel bands for the same purpose. For large armatures
having open-type slots, steel or tape bands are used to
prevent the coil from flying out of the slots.
Cord bands : The procedure for making a cord band on an
armature is shown in Fig 9, and the following directions
should be observed.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

85
Use a proper size of banding cord - heavy for larger
armatures, light for smaller armatures. Start at the end
nearest the commutator and wind several turns in layers,
allowing about 150mm long cord at the beginning to be
free. Bend the cord in the form of a loop as shown in
Fig 9. After winding several turns over the loop, insert the
last end of the cord band through the loop, and then pull
the free end of the loop. This will pull the end under the core
band and secure it there. Then the pulled end of the cord
can be cut off. Use enough pressure in winding so that the
band will be tight.
Steel bands : Steel bands are placed on the front and
back ends of the coils. These bands are put on the
armature in a different manner than in the cord bands. The
procedure is illustrated in Fig 10, and is as follows. Place
the armature in a lathe and place mica or paper insulation
in the band slot around the entire armature to insulate the
band from the coil sides. Hold the insulation in place by
tying a turn of cord around it.
Place small strips of tin or copper under the cord, equidistant
around the armature, in order to secure the band after it is
wound. Use the same gauge steel band wire as is found
in the original band.
Steel bands must be put on the armature with much more
pressure than is needed for cord bands. It is, therefore,
necessary to utilize a device called a wire clamp to provide
the required pressure. This device consists of two pieces
of fibre fastened together by means of two screws and two
wing nuts. The steel band wire is fed through this clamp to
the armature. The clamp has to be secured to a bench so
that it can be held stationary while slowly turning the
armature while banding. Take care not to put too much
pressure on the wire; otherwise it will break. After the band
is placed on the coil, copper or tin strips are turned over
and the entire band is soldered. One by one each band is
completed in this manner.
Testing the new winding : After the rewinding and
connections are completed, it is important that both the
winding and the connections are tested for shorts, grounds,
open circuits and correctness of connections. This must
be done before varnishing the winding so that any defect
that is found may be corrected more readily.
Baking and varnishing : After the armature has been
wound, soldered, banded and tested, the next operation is
varnishing. This process makes it moisture-proof and also
prevents vibration of the coils of wire in the slots. Vibration
has a tendency to impair the insulation on the wires and
cause shorts. Moisture will also cause the insulation on
the wires to deteriorate. Before varnishing the armature, it
must be preheated to drive out the moisture on it.
Armatures may be varnished by  either baking varnish or
air-drying varnish. Air-drying varnish is applied to the
armature when baking is undesirable or inconvenient.
Baking varnish is more effective because the moisture can
be eliminated fully only by baking.
Importance of balancing the armature : The armature
used in mixers/liquidizers runs at 3000 to 6000 r.p.m.
depending on the load. As such these armatures should
have equal weight in all directions. The causes of unbalance
in weight are given below :
•
Unequal turns in coils.
•
Unequal core assembly.
•
Unequal weight of wedges.
•
Unequal slot liner insulations.
In case of unbalance, the centrifugal force which is
produced due to high speed of the armature may shake
loose its core and commutator in a very short space of
time. In extreme cases the armature will damage the
bearings and fly out. In mild cases of unbalance, there will
be vibration and noise while the motor is running. Most of
the manufacturers use a dynamic balancing machine to
balance the armature. To balance higher weight of one
side, the opposite side is plugged with lead weights. In
certain cases the heavier side is balanced by drilling
suitable sized holes in the periphery of the armature to
reduce the weight.
Static balancing - method 1 : In small sized winding
shops, the rewound armature is rolled on the surface of a
horizontally positioned surface plate as shown in Fig 11.
For every rolling, if the armature stops at different positions
of its periphery, then it is regarded as balanced. On the
other hand for each rolling the armature stops at the same
position of the periphery then the armature is regarded as
unbalanced. Where the armature  stops at the same place
and the portion of the armature touches the surface plate
is regarded to have higher weight than the opposite
portion.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

86
In such cases, the wedges in the lighter portion have to be
removed and replaced with heavier wedges made of brass
or lead. However, this rolling test should be carried out a
number of times till the electrician is completely satisfied
that the armature is perfectly balanced.
To avoid such unbalanced condition, the armature winder
should see to it the causes of unbalancing are removed at
the time of winding itself.
Static balancing - method 2:  A balancer, similar to the
balancing grinding wheel in machine shops, may be used.
These balancers are built in various sizes. The method of
balancing an armature using this type is as follows.
Place the armature on the balancing ways, (Fig 12) and roll
the armature gently. When the armature comes to a stop,
the heavier portion of the armature will be at the bottom.
Mark this point (portion) with a chalk piece. With such
successive rolling, if the armature stops at different
positions, the armature is balanced, and if it stops in a
particular position, it is necessary to counterbalance it
with weights diagonally opposite to the heavy portion.
This is accomplished by placing a lead or a small metal
piece on the banding of the armature. In small armatures,
this weight may be placed in the place of the wedge, under
the banding. Experience will determine the amount of
metal necessary to balance the armature. This method of
balancing is called ‘static balancing’.
Testing of armature winding
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• describe the methods of testing armature, such as the
– winding resistance test
– insulation resistance test
– growler test
– voltage drop test.
Testing the winding : After an armature is wound and the
leads are connected to the commutator, a test should be
conducted. From this test, defects may be revealed,
which might have occurred during winding. The common
defects in armature windings are grounding, shorts in the
coils, open in the coil and reversal in the coil connection.
These defects can be located by different test procedures.
Armature winding resistance test : Resistance of the
armature coil is measured by using a low range  ohmmeter
and  preferably  with  the  Kelvin  bridge. Resistance
between consecutive segments in the case of simplex lap
winding (for wave and multiplex windings at a distance of
commutator pitch Yc) is measured. Fig 1 shows a simple
arrangement to measure the resistance between the
successive  commutator  segments.
As  shown  in Fig 1, a  cotton tape with a counterweight
is passed around the commutator to hold the connecting
leads to the segments. Measurement of resistance is
done in all the coils by  changing  the  position  of the
connecting leads to successive commutator segments.
The resistance measured should be the same in all coils.
Lower resistance shows short in turns, while a higher
resistance shows higher numbers of turns or open in the
coil.
Insulation resistance test : With a bare copper wire short
all the commutator segments. (Fig 2)  Test the insulation
resistance between the body and the commutator
segments by a 500V Megger, for armatures rated up to
250 volts. The IR so measured shall be greater than 1
megohm. If the value is less than 1 megohm, moisture in
the winding or a weak insulation is  to be suspected.
This test is sometimes conducted by a series test lamp
and is called the ‘ground test’. It will only indicate if any coil
is grounded, and not the insulation resistance.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130
Dynamic balancing :  Dynamic balancing machines are
available to balance the armature or rotating the parts of
Power machines. The armatures are fixed on those
machines and rotated at the rated speed. A pointer or an
indicator shows the position on the armature and the
weight to be added. The balancing machines available are
either with the mechanical balancing or with the
stroboscopic balancing.

87
Growler test : A simple and most common method to test
armature winding for short and open coils is by a growler.
Growler : There are two types of growlers - 1) internal and
2) external growlers. An external growler is used for testing
small armatures and an internal growler for large DC
armatures and AC motor stator windings.
External growler : An external growler, shown in Fig 3,
is an electromagnetic device that is used to detect and
locate grounded, shorted and open coils in an armature.
This growler consists of a coil wound around an iron core
and is connected to a 240 volt AC line. The core is
generally H shaped and cut out on top so that the armature
will fit on it, as shown in Fig 4.
When an alternating current is applied to the growler coil,
the voltage will be induced in the armature coils by
transformer action.
Internal   growler : An internal growler, such as the one
used for stators, may be used for armatures as well. These
are made with or without  built-in feelers. The growler with
a built-in feeler has a flexible blade attached to the growler
so that a hacksaw blade or similar instrument is not
necessary. This type is especially desirable in smaller
stators that have no room for a separate feeler. Fig 5 shows
an internal growler with a separate feeler, used for large
armatures.
Growler test for grounded coil : The armature to be
tested is placed on the growler and then the growler is
switched ‘ON’. Place one lead of an AC milli-voltmeter on
the top commutator bar and the other meter lead on the
shaft, as shown in Fig 6.
If a reading is noticed on the meter, turn the armature so
that the next commutator bar is in the same position as the
earlier one, and test as before. Continue in this manner
until all the bars are tested. Where the meter gives no
deflection, it is an indication that the grounded coil is
connected to this particular bar.
Growler test for shorted coil : The procedure to test for
short circuits in an armature is as follows.
The armature to be tested is placed on the growler and
then the growler is switched on. A thin piece of metal, such
as a hacksaw blade, is held over the top slot of the
armature as shown in Fig 7. In case of short in the winding,
the blade will vibrate rapidly and create a growling noise.
If the blade remains stationary, it is an indication that no
short exists in the coil under test. After several top slots
have been given the hacksaw blade test, turn the armature
so that the next few slots are on top. Test as before and
continue this procedure for the entire armature.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

88
An armature having cross connections or equalizers
cannot be given the hacksaw blade test. This type of
armature will cause the blade to vibrate at every slot, which
would seem to indicate that possibly every coil is shorted.
Test for open coil : Growlers are also provided with
meters (milli-volt or ammeter) on the panel with variable
resistance. In this case an open in the armature coil can
be found out as follows.
Growler test for an open coil : To locate an open coil
with a growler, set up the armature on the growler in the
usual manner. Test the top two adjacent bars with an AC
milli-voltmeter as shown in Fig 8. Rotate the armature and
continue testing the adjacent bars. When the milli-voltmeter
bridges the two bars connected to the open coil, the meter
pointer will not deflect. All the other bars will give a
deflection. This test for an open coil can be made without
the meter by shorting the two top bars with a piece of wire.
Absence of a spark indicates that the coil is open. The
open may be either at the commutator bar or in the coil
itself. The procedure may be used to determine the
location of the leads of a shorted coil. However, the
hacksaw blade test is the most satisfactory method of
determining a shorted coil.
Drop test : The most accurate method of testing the
armature for correct resistance, number of turns, short and
open and reversed coil connection is by the drop test.
Connect a low voltage DC supply across the commutator
segments at a distance of pole pitch. Insert a variable
resistance in series with the circuit. Switch ‘ON’ the DC
supply and connect a milli-voltmeter to the adjacent
segments as in Fig 9a and b.
Adjust the readings to a specified value, by using a variable
rheostat. Record the milli-voltmeter readings on the
consequent commutator segments by rotating the armature
in one direction. The position of the segments and the
connection should be the same as in the first set up. The
result could be concluded as enumerated below.
•
If all the readings are the same, the winding is correct.
•
If the milli-voltmeter reads zero or low voltage, the coil
connected to the segment is short.
•
If the milli-voltmeter reads high voltage, the coil
connected to the segment is open.
•
If the milli-voltmeter deflects in the reverse direction as
shown in Fig 9b, the coil connected with the segment
is reversed.
Generally armatures are tested as a routine for insulation
resistance and for shorted coils. Only when a fault in the
armature winding is suspected, a drop test is conducted.
Power : Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.2.130

89
Power
Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 139
Electrician - AC Three Phase Motor
Principle of induction motor
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the principle of a 3-phase induction motor
• explain briefly the method of producing a rotating magnetic field.
The three-phase induction motor is used more extensively
than any other form of Powermotor, due to its simple
construction, trouble-free operation, lower cost and a fairly
good torque speed characteristic.
Principle of 3-phase induction motor: It works on the
same principle as a DC motor, that is, the current-carrying
conductors kept in a magnetic field will tend to create a
force. However, the induction motor differs from the DC
motor in fact that the rotor of the induction motor is not
electrically connected to the stator, but induces a voltage/
current in the rotor by the transformer action, as the stator
magnetic field sweeps across the rotor. The induction
motor derives its name from the fact that the current in the
rotor is not drawn directly from the supply, but is induced
by the relative motion of the rotor conductors and the
magnetic field produced by the stator currents.
The stator of the 3-phase induction motor is similar to that
of a 3-phase alternator, of revolving field type. The
three-phase winding in the stator produces a rotating
magnetic field in the stator core as it will be explained later.
The rotor of the induction motor may have either shorted
rotor conductors in the form of a squirrel cage or in the form
of a 3-phase winding to facilitate the circulation of current
through a closed circuit.
Let us assume that the stator field of the induction motor
is rotating in a clockwise direction as shown in Fig 1. This
makes for the relative motion of the rotor in an anticlockwise
direction as shown in Fig 1. Applying Fleming's right hand
rule, the direction of emf induced in the rotor will be towards
the observer as shown in Fig 2. As the rotor conductors
have a closed electric path, due to their shorting, a current
will flow through them as in a short-circuited secondary of
a transformer.
The magnetic field produced by the rotor currents will be
in a counter-clockwise direction as shown in Fig 2 according
to Maxwell's Corkscrew rule. The interaction between the
stator magnetic field and the rotor magnetic field results in
a force to move the rotor in the same direction as that of
the rotating magnetic field of the stator, as shown in Fig 3.
As such the rotor follows the stator field in the same
direction by rotating at a speed lesser than the synchronous
speed of the stator rotating magneticfield.
At higher speeds of the rotor nearing to synchronous
speeds, the relative speed between the rotor and the
rotating magnetic field of the stator reduces and results in
a smaller induced emf in the rotor. Theoretically, if we
assume that the rotor attains a speed equal to the
synchronous speed of the rotating magnetic field of the
stator, there will be no relative motion between the stator
field and the rotor, and thereby no induced emf or current
will be there in the rotor. Consequently there will not be any
torque in the rotor. Hence the rotor of the induction motor
cannot run at a synchronous speed at all. As the motor is
loaded, the rotor speed has to fall to cope up with the
mechanical force; thereby the relative speed increases,
and the induced emf and current increase in the rotor
resulting in an increased torque.
To reverse the direction of rotation of a rotor: The
direction of rotation of the stator magnetic field depends
upon the phase sequence of the supply. To reverse the
direction of rotation of the stator as well as the rotor, the

90
phase sequence of the supply is to be changed by
changing any two leads connected to the stator.
Rotating magnetic field from a three-phase stator:
The operation of the induction motor is dependent on the
presence of a rotating magnetic field in the stator. The
stator of the induction motor contains three-phase windings
placed at 120 Powerdegrees apart from each other. These
windings are placed on the stator core to form non-salient
stator field poles.  When the stator is energized from a
three-phase voltage supply, in each phase winding will set
up a pulsating field.  However, by virtue of the spacing
between the windings, and the phase difference, the
magnetic fields combine to produce a field rotating at a
constant speed around the inside surface of the stator
core.  This resultant movement of the flux is called the
`rotating magnetic field', and its speed is called the
`synchronous speed'.
The manner, in which the rotating field is set up, may be
described by considering the direction of the phase
currents at successive instants during a cycle.  Fig 4a
shows a simplified star-connected, three-phase stator
winding.  The winding shown is for a two-pole induction
motor.  Fig 4b shows the phase currents for the three-phase
windings.  The phase currents will be 120 Powerdegrees
apart as shown in Fig 4b. The resultant magnetic field
produced by the combined effect of the three currents is
shown at increments of 60° for one cycle of the current.
At position (1) in Fig 4b, the phase current IR is zero, and
hence coil R will be producing zero flux.  However, the
phase current IB is positive and Iy is negative.
Considering the instantaneous current directions of these
three phase windings, as shown in Fig 4b at position 1, we
can indicate the current direction in Fig 5(1).
For convenience the +ve current is shown as +ve sign, and
the -ve current is shown as dot (•) sign. Accordingly Y2 and
B1 are shown as positive and Y1 and B2 are shown as
negative. Using Maxwell's corkscrew rule, the resulting
flux by these currents will produce a flux as shown in
Fig 5(1). The arrow shows the direction of the magnetic
field and the magnetic poles in the stator core.
At position 2, as shown by Fig 5(2), 60 Powerdegrees
later, the phase current IB is zero, the current IR is positive
and the current IY is negative. In Fig (2) the current is now
observed to be flowing into the conductors at the coil  ends
R1 and Y2, and out of the conductors at coil R2 and Y1.
Therefore, as shown in Fig 5(2), the resultant magnetic
poles are now at a new position in the stator core. In fact
the poles in position 2 have also rotated 60° from position
(1).
Using the same reasoning as above for the current wave
positions 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, it will be seen that for each
successive increment of 60 Powerdegrees, the resultant
stator field will rotate a further 60° as shown in Fig 5.  Note
that from the resultant flux from position (1) to position (7),
it is obvious that for each cycle of applied voltage the field
of the two-pole stator will also rotate one revolution around
its core.
From what is stated above it will be clear that the rotating
magnetic field could be produced by a set of 3-phase
stationary windings, placed at 120° Powerdegrees apart,
and supplied with a 3-phase voltage.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

91
The speed at which the field rotates is called synchronous
speed, and, it depends upon the frequency of supply and
the number of poles for which the stator is wound.
Hence
Ns =
Synchronous speed in r.p.m.
=
P
F
120
rpm
where `P' is the number of poles in the stator, and `F' is the
frequency of the supply.
Construction  of a 3-phase squirrel cage induction motor - relation between
slip, speed, rotor frequency, copper  loss and torque
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• describe the construction of a 3-phase, squirrel cage induction motor
• describe the construction of double squirrel cage motor and its advantage
• explain slip, speed, rotor frequency, rotor copper loss, torque and their relationship.
Three-phase induction motors are classified according to
their rotor construction. Accordingly, we have two major
types.
–
Squirrel cage induction motors
–
Slip ring induction motors.
Squirrel cage motors have a rotor with short-circuited bars
whereas slip ring motors have wound rotors having three
windings, either connected in star or delta. The terminals
of the rotor windings of the slip ring motors are brought out
through slip-rings which are in contact with stationary
brushes.
Development of these two types of induction motors is due
to the fact that the torque of the induction motor depends
upon the rotor resistance. Higher rotor resistance offers
higher starting torque but the running torque will be low
with increased losses and poor efficiency. For certain
applications of loads where high starting torque and
sufficient running torque are the only requirements, the
rotor resistance should be high at the time of starting, and
low while the motor is running. If the motor circuit is left with
high resistance, the rotor copper loss will be more,
resulting in low speed and poor efficiency. Hence it is
advisable to have low resistance in the rotor while in
operation.
Both these requirements are possible in slip-ring motors
by adding external resistance at the start and cutting it off
while the motor runs. As this is not possible in squirrel
cage motors, the above requirements are met by developing
a rotor called double squirrel cage rotor where there will be
two sets of short circuited bars in the rotor.
Stator of an induction motor: There is no difference
between squirrel cage and slip-ring motor stators.
The induction motor stator resembles the stator of a
revolving field, three-phase alternator. The stator or the
stationary part consists of three-phase winding held in
place in the slots of a laminated steel core which is
enclosed and supported by a cast iron or a steel frame as
shown in Fig 1. The phase windings are placed 120
Powerdegrees apart, and may be connected in either star
or delta externally, for which six leads are brought  out to
a terminal box mounted on the frame of the motor. When
the stator is energised from a three-phase voltage it will
produce a rotating magnetic field in the stator core.
Rotor of a squirrel cage induction motor: The rotor of
the squirrel cage induction motor shown in Fig 2 contains
no windings. Instead it is a cylindrical core constructed of
steel laminations with conductor bars mounted parallel to
the shaft and embedded near the surface of the rotor core.
These conductor bars are short circuited by an end-ring at
either end of the rotor core. On large machines, these
conductor bars and the end-rings are made up of copper
with the bars brazed or welded to the end rings as shown
in Fig 3. On small machines the conductor bars and
end-rings are sometimes made of aluminium with the bars
and rings cast in as part of the rotor core.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

92
The rotor or rotating part is not connected electrically to
the power supply but has voltage induced in it by transformer
action from the stator. For this reason, the stator is
sometimes called the primary, and the rotor is referred to
as the secondary of the motor. Since the motor operates
on the principle of induction; and as the construction of the
rotor, with the bars and end-rings resembles a squirrel
cage, the name squirrel cage induction motor is used.
(Fig 3)
The rotor bars are not insulated from the rotor core
because they are made of metals having less resistance
than the core. The induced current will flow mainly in them.
Also, the bars are usually not quite parallel to the rotor
shaft but are mounted in a slightly skewed position. This
feature tends to produce a more uniform rotor field and
torque; also it helps to reduce some of the internal
magnetic noise when the motor is running.
End shields: The function of the two end shields which are
to support the rotor shaft. They are fitted with bearings and
attached to the stator frame with the help of studs or bolts.
Double squirrel cage induction motor
Rotor construction and its working: This consists of
two sets of conductor bars called outer and inner cages as
shown in Fig 4. The outer cage consists of bars of high
resistance metals like brass, and is short-circuited by the
end-rings. The inner cage consists of low resistance metal
bars like copper, and is short-circuited by the end-rings.
The outer cage has high resistance and low reactance,
whereas the inner cage has low resistance but being
situated deep in the rotor core, has a large ratio of
reactance to resistance.
At the time of starting, the rotor frequency is the same as
the stator frequency. Hence the inner cage which has
higher inductive reactance offers more resistance to the
current flow. As such very little current flows through the
inner cage at the time of starting.
The major part of the rotor current at the time of starting
could flow through the outer ring which has high resistance.
This high resistance enables to produce a high starting
torque.
As the speed increases, the rotor frequency is reduced. At
low frequency, the total resistance offered for the current
flow in the inner cage reduces due to reduction of reactance
(XL = 2πfrL), and the major part of the rotor current will be in
the inner cage rather than in the highly resistant outer
cage.
As such, the low resistance of the inner cage becomes
responsible for producing a torque just sufficient to maintain
the speed. Fig 5 shows the exploded view of 3 phase
squirrel cage induction motor
Slip and rotor speed: We have already found that the
rotor of an induction motor must rotate in the same
direction as the rotating magnetic field, but it cannot rotate
at the same speed as that of the magnetic field. Only when
the rotor runs at a lesser speed than the stator magnetic
field, the rotor conductors could cut the stator magnetic
field for an emf to be induced. The rotor current could then
flow and the rotor magnetic field will set up to produce a
torque.
The speed at which the rotor rotates is called the rotor
speed or speed of the motor. The difference between the
synchronous speed and the actual rotor speed is called
the `slip speed'. Slip speed is the number of revolutions per
minute by which the rotor continues to fall behind the
revolving magnetic field.
When the slip speed is expressed as a fraction of the
synchronous speed, it is called a fractional slip.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

93
Therefore, fractional slip S
= 
s
r
s
N
N
  
- 
N
Then percentage slip (% slip)
= 
100
 x 
N
N
 - 
N
s
r
s
where Ns = synchronous speed of the stator magnetic
field
Nr =
Actual rotating speed of the rotor in r.p.m.
Most squirrel cage induction motors will have a percentage
slip of 2 to 5 percent of the rated load.
Example
Calculate the percentage slip of an induction motor having
6 poles fed with 50 cycles supply rotating with an actual
speed of 960 r.p.m.
Given:
Poles  =  6
Nr
=  Rotor speed = 960 r.p.m.
F
=  frequency of supply = 50 Hz
Ns
 =  Synchronous speed
=  
P
f
120
=  
1000r.p.m.
 
 
6
50
 x 
120
=
% slip  =
100
 x 
N
N
 - 
N
s
r
s
=  
4%
 
 
100
 x 
1000
960
 - 
1000
=
Generated voltage in the rotor and its frequency: As
the rotor cuts the stator flux, it induces voltage in rotor
conductors and it is called the rotor voltage. The frequency
of this rotor voltage is equal to the product of the slip and
stator (supply) frequency (fs).
Frequency of the rotor voltage
fr
=
Fractional slip x stator frequency
=  
 
(or)
 f
 x 
N
N
  
- 
N
s
r
s
From the above, we find that, at the time of starting, the
rotor is at rest, and the slip will be equal to one and the rotor
frequency will be the same as the stator frequency. When
the motor is running at high speed, the slip will be low and
the frequency of the rotor will also be low.
Example 1
A 3-phase induction motor is wound for 4 poles, and is
supplied from a 50 Hz supply. Calculate a) the synchronous
speed, b) the speed of the rotor when the slip is 4 percent,
and c) the rotor frequency.
a
Synchronous speed=Ns = 
 
P
f
120
= 
r.p.m.
 
1500
 
 
4
50
 x 
120
=
b
Actual speed of the rotor = Nr
Percentage slip = 
100
 x 
N
N
 - 
N
s
r
s
Ns – Nr  =  
100
slip
 
Percentage
 x 
Ns
Nr =  
100
%slip
 x 
N
 - 
N
s
s
= 
100
4
 x 
1500
 - 
1500
= 1440 r.p.m.
c
Rotor frequency fr = Slip x Stator frequency
=  
f
 x 
N
N
 - 
N
s
r
s
= 
1500
50
 x 
1440
 - 
1500
= 
Hz.
 2
 
 
1500
50
 x 
60
=
Example 2
A 12-pole, 3-phase alternator driven at a speed of 500
r.p.m. supplies power to a 8-pole, 3-phase induction
motor. If the slip of the motor at full load is 3%, calculate
the full load speed of the motor.
Let Nr = actual speed of motor
Supply frequency = frequency of alternator
= 
Hz.
 
50
 
 
120
500
 x 
12
=
Synchronous speed Ns of the induction motor
= 
750r.p.m.
 
 
8
50
 x 
120
=
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

94
% slip S = 
3 
 
100
 x 
N
N
 - 
N
s
r
s
=
= 
3 
 
100
 x 
750
N
 - 
750
r
=
750 – Nr  =
22.5
 
 
100
750
 x 
3
=
Nr  =727.5 r.p.m.
Example 3
A 400V, 3-phase, eight-pole 50 Hz squirrel cage motor has
a rated full load speed of 720 r.p.m. Determine
a
the synchronous speed
b
the rotor slip at rated load
b
the percentage slip at rated load
d
the percentage slip at the instant of start up
e
the rotor frequency at the rated load
f
the rotor frequency at the instant of start up.
Solution
a
Synchronous speed Ns=
p
f
 x 
120
= 
750r.p.m.
 
 
8
50
 x 
120
=
b
Slip at rated load = 750 - 720 = 30 r.p.m.
c
Percent slip at rated load= 
4%
 
 
750
100
 x 
30
=
d
At the instant of start up the rotor speed is zero, and
hence the percentage slip will be 100 percent.
e
Rotor frequency at rated load fr
= 
100
slip)
 
percentage
 x 
f(
=  
Hz.
 2 
 
100
4
 x 
50
=
f
At the instant of starting the slip is 100 percent.
Therefore, at this instant the rotor frequency will be
equal to the stator frequency fr (at starting) = f = 50 Hz.
Rotor copper loss: Rotor copper loss is the loss of power
taking place in the rotor due to its resistance and the rotor
current. Though the resistance of the rotor for a squirrel
cage motor remains constant, the current in the rotor
depends upon the slip, transformation ratio between the
stator and rotor voltages and the inductive reactance of the
rotor circuit.
Let T = torque developed by the motor
PR = power developed in the rotor
Pm = power converted in the rotor as mechanical power
nS = the synchronous speed in r.p.m.
nr = the rotor speed in r.p.m.
Then PR= 2πnsT watts
Pm =  2πnrT watts.
The difference between PR - Pm is the rotor copper loss.
PR – Pm  = Rotor copper loss
Rotor copper loss
= 2πT(ns– nr)
T
2
loss
 
copper
 
Rotor
π
  = (ns– nr)
T
n
2
loss
 
copper
 
Rotor
s
π
= 
(
)
s
r
s
n
n - 
n
= Fractional slip
Rotor copper loss = Fractional slip x Input power to the
rotor
= S x 2πnsT.
Torque : The torque production in an induction motor is
more or less the same as in the DC motor. In the DC motor
the torque is proportional to the product of the flux per pole
and the armature current. Similarly in the induction motor
the torque is proportional to the flux per stator pole, the
rotor current and also the rotor power factor.
Thus we have,
Torque is proportionally = Stator flux  x  rotor current x rotor
power factor.
Let E1 be the applied voltage
Ø be the stator flux which is proportional to E1
S be the fractional slip
R2 be the rotor resistance
X2 be the rotor inductive reactance at standstill
SX2 be the rotor inductive reactance at fractional slip S
K be the transformation ratio between stator and rotor
voltages
E2 be the rotor induced emf and equal to SKE1
I2 be the rotor current,
Cosθ be the rotor power factor.
Z2 be the rotor impendence.
We can conclude mathematically the following final results.
T  α  Ø I2 Cosθ
This can be deduced in to a formula
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

95
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
X
S
 
 
R
R
SKE
 
 
T
+
α
slip
 
Fractional
loss
 
copper
 
Rotor
 
 
T α
2
2
2
2
2
X
 
 
R
R
 
 
torque
 
Starting
+
α
 as fractional slip S = 1
2
X
1
 
 
torque
 
Maximum
α
where X2 in inductive reactance of the rotor at standstill and
is constant.
Motor torque calculation: Since the stator flux and
induced rotor current for an induction motor are not easily
measured, the torque equation T = K Øs IR Cos θR is not the
most practical equation to be used for determining a motor
torque. Instead the Prony Brake torque equation described
earlier may be used, provided the motor's output power
and Rev/min are known.
Output power in watts= 
60
Rev/min
 x 
torque
 x 
2π
Torque (newton metres)= 
Rev/min)
 x 
(2
 watts)
output
 x 
60
(
π
= 
min)
/
v
(Re
 watts)
output
 x 
55
.
9
(
A motor's power may also be stated in British horsepower
(hp). In this case the output power in watts will be equal to
the output horsepower multiplied by 746 (1 hp = 746w).
In case the motor power is given in metric horsepower, the
output power in watts will be equal to the metric horsepower,
multiplied by 735.6 (1 metric horsepower = 735.6 watts).
Example
Determine the torque in Newton metres produced by a 5
hp squirrel cage motors rotating at 1440 r.p.m.
Assuming it is metric horsepower, output power in watts
=
hp x 735.5
=
5 x 735.5 = 3677.5 Watts.
Torque (Newton metres) = (
)
(
)
1440
 x 
3.14
 x 
2
3677.5
 x 
60
=
24.4 Newton metres.
Classification of squirrel cage motors
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the squirrel cage bar arrangement for different classes of induction motors say class A, B, C, D, E & F
• compare the starting torque, starting current and slip for different types of squirrel-cage motors.
The three-phase squirrel cage motors have been
standardised according to their electric characteristics
into six types designated as design A, B, C, D, E and F.
Standard squirrel cage induction motors which were of
shallow, slot types are designated as class A. For this
reason class A motors are used as a reference and are
referred to as ‘normal starting-torque’, normal starting
current, normal slip motors.
Classes of squirrel-cage motors
(According to starting characteristics)
Class
Starting
Starting
Current Slip
torque
A
Normal
Normal
Normal
B
Normal
Low
Normal
C
High
Low
Normal
D
High
Low
 High
E
Low
Normal
 Low
F
Low
Low
Normal
Out of these six, four specific designs A through D are
common squirrel cage motors. These four classes, however,
cover nearly all practical applications of induction
machines.
Class A motors: These motors are characterised by
having a low rotor-circuit resistance and reactance. Its
locked rotor current with full voltage is generally more than
6 times the full load current. Because of their low resistance,
starting currents are very high. They operate at very small
slips (s < 0.01) under full load. Machines in this class are
suitable only in situations where very small starting
torques are required. The rotor bar construction of such
motor is shown in Fig 1.
Class B motors: These are general purpose motors of
normal starting torque and starting current. The speed
regulation at full load is low (usually under 5%) and the
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

96
starting torque is in the order of 15% of the rated speed
being lower for the lower speed and larger motors. It should
be realised that although the starting current is low, it
generally is 600% of full load value (Fig 2).
Class C motors: Compared to class B motors, class C
motors have higher starting torque, normal starting current
and run at slips of less than 0.05 at full load. The starting
torque is about 200% of the rated speed and the motors
are generally designed to start at full-load. Typical
application of this class motor is driving conveyors,
reciprocating pumps, and compressors (Fig 3).
Class D motors: These are high slip motors with high
starting torque and relatively low starting current. As a
result of the high full load slip, their efficiency is generally
lower than that of the other motor classes. The peak of the
torque speed curve, resulting in a starting torque of about
300%, is identical to the starting torque. (Fig 4)
Class E motor: The Fig 5 shows the class ‘E’ motor having
Low starting torque and low current slip
Class F motor: The Fig 6 shows the class ‘F’ motor having
low starting torque and normal current slip
Now when the motor is stationary, the frequency of the
rotor current is the same as the supply frequency. But
when the rotor starts revolving, then the frequency depends
upon the relative speed or on slip speed. Let at any slip
speed, the frequency of the rotor current be f’, then
Ns - N = 
p
'f
120
also, Ns = 
p
f
120
Dividing one by the other, we get
f
'f
= 
s 
 
N
N
 - 
N
s
s
=
  f' = sf
Insulation test on 3 phase induction motors
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the necessity for and the method of testing continuity and insulation resistance in a 3-phase induction
motor
• state the necessity of continuity test before insulation test
• state the N.E. code and B.I.S. recommendations pertaining to insulation tests and earthing of a 3-phase
induction motor.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

97
It is often said that electricity is a good servant but a bad
master. This is because electricity is so useful but can
cause accidents, and even death if one is careless. A large
number of accidents, which occur in Powermotors, is due
to leakage of current from the conducting part of the motor
to the non-conducting part. The main reason is the weak
insulation caused by the damaged insulation materials of
the motor.
Insulation materials used on winding wires or in between
winding wires and the slots of the laminated core, or the
insulated sleeves of lead cables may get damaged due to
the following reasons.
•
Moisture content in the atmosphere (Ex. Powermotors
in harbours)
•
Chemicals and their fumes in the surroundings (Ex.
Powermachines in chemical plants)
•
High temperature of the surrounding (Ex.
Powermachines in steel rolling mill)
•
High temperature emanating from the machine itself
while working. (Ex. Powermachines at hill tops where
the cooling ability of the thin air is poor.)
•
Dust, dirt, oil particles deposited on the windings and
cables. (Ex. Powermachines in cement plants, oil
mills, chemical plants etc.)
•
Aging of the machine.
When the insulation deteriorates, the insulation resistance
value is reduced, and the current may leak to the frame of
the Powermachine. If the machine is not properly earthed,
the leakage currents may develop a dangerous potential
on the frame. If somebody comes in contact with the
frame, he may get even fatal shocks. These leakage
currents also produce erroneous readings in the measuring
equipment, and also affect the working of the other
Powerequipments.  As such the National PowerCode has
stipulated certain minimum standards for the insulation
resistance value.
Method of testing insulation resistance of the
Powermotor and the recommended value of the
resistance as per National PowerCode: Before putting
into operation, the Powermotor must be tested for its
insulation resistance. This is to make sure that there is no
leakage between the current carrying parts of the motor
and the non-current carrying metal parts of the motor. As
insulation resistance may fail during the course of operation
due to the reasons mentioned above, it is most necessary
to check the insulation resistance at intervals, say once
in a month, for any motor which is in operation, as a
preventive maintenance check. These values of insulation
resistance must be recorded in the maintenance card and
whenever the value goes below the accepted value, the
motor winding has to be dried and varnished to improve the
conditions.
Condition and acceptable test results: According to
NE code, the insulation resistance of each phase winding
against the frame and between the windings shall be
measured. A megohm-meter of 500V or 1000V rating shall
be used. Star points should be disconnected while testing.
To avoid accidents due to weak insulations, first the
insulation resistance value between any conducting part
of the machine and the frame of the machine should be
tested, and the measured value should not be lesser than
one megohm as a thumb rule, or more precisely should not
be less than a value based on the voltage and rated power
of the motor as given in the National PowerCode.
Insulation resistance Ri = 
2P
 
 
1000
E
 x 
20
+
where
R1 is the insulation resistance in megohms at 25°C
En related phase-to-phase voltage and
P  rated power in KW.
If the resistance is measured at a temperature different
from 25°C, the value shall be corrected to 25°C.
General instruction for the measurement of insulation
resistance: Insulation resistance of an electric motor may
be in the range of 10 to 100 megohms but as it varies
greatly in accordance with the temperature and humidity
of the electric motor, it would be difficult to give a definite
value. When the temperature of such a motor is raised, the
insulation resistance will initially drop considerably, even
below the acceptable minimum. If any suspicion exists on
this score, the motor winding shall be dried out. The
equation given above is used to calculate the insulation
resistance as a standard value. However it should not be
less than 1 megohm as an acceptable value.
Secondly, in the case of accidental leakage of currents
from any current carrying part to non-current carrying
metal part, there should be a ground system which should
provide a minimum impedence path for the faulty (leakage)
current to flow. Thereby protective devices like fuses or
circuit-breakers or earth leakage circuit-breakers or earth
fault relays would function and disconnect the supply to
the defective motor circuit.
However, this will not be possible unless and until the
ground (earth) system has minimum impedance. This
could be achieved by the following means.
–
Using low resistance earth continuity conductors
between the frame of the motor and the earth electrode.
–
Providing rust-proof metal parts like bolts, nuts and
lugs for connecting the earth continuity conductor
(ECC) with the frame as well as the main electrodes.
(Galvanised nuts and bolts are to be used.)
–
Keeping the earth electrode resistance value as low as
possible such that in case of leakage, any one unit of
the protective system will operate to isolate the motor
from the supply.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

98
Necessity of continuity test before insulation test:
While testing the insulation resistance between the winding
and the frame, it is the usual practice to connect one prod
of the Megger to the frame and the other prod to any one
of the terminals of the winding. Likewise, when testing
insulation resistance between windings, it is the usual
practice to connect the two prods of the Megger to any two
ends of a different winding. In all the cases it is assumed
that the windings are in sound condition and the two ends
of the same winding will be having continuity. However, it
is possible the winding may have a break, and part of the
winding may have a higher insulation resistance and the
other part might have been grounded. Hence, to increase
the reliability of the insulation resistance test, it is
recommended that continuity test may be conducted in
the motor before the insulation test, to be sure, that the
winding is sound and the insulation resistance includes
the entire winding.
Continuity test: The continuity of the winding is checked
by using a test lamp in the following method as shown in
Fig 1. First the links between the terminals should be
removed.
The test lamp is connected in series with a fuse and a
switch to the phase wire and the other end is connected
to one of the terminals (say U1 in Fig 1). The neutral of the
supply wire is touched to the other terminals one by one.
The terminal in which the lamp lights is the other end of the
winding connected to the phase wire (say U2 in Fig 1). The
pairs are to be found in a similar manner. Lighting of the
lamp between two terminals shows continuity of the
winding. Lighting of the lamp between more than two
terminals shows short between the windings.
Limitations of lamp continuity test: However, this test
only shows the continuity but will not indicate any short
between the turns of the same winding. A better test would
be to use an ohmmeter having an accurate low resistance
range to measure the resistance of the individual windings.
In a 3-phase induction motor, the resistance of the three
windings should be the same, or more or less equal. If the
reading is less in one winding, it shows that the winding is
shorted.
Insulation test between windings: As shown in Fig 2,
one of the Megger terminals is connected to one terminal
of any one winding (say U1 in Fig 2) and the other terminal
of the Megger is connected to one terminal of the other
windings (say W2 in Fig 2).
When the Megger handle is rotated at its rated speed, the
reading should be more than one megohm. A lower
reading than one megohm shows weak insulation between
the windings, and needs to be improved. Likewise the
insulation resistance between the other windings is tested.
Insulation resistance between windings and frame:
As shown in Fig 3, one terminal of the Megger is connected
to one of the phase windings, and the other terminal of the
Megger is connected to the earthing terminal of the frame.
When the Megger handle is rotated at the rated speed, the
reading obtained should be more than one megohm. A
lower reading than one megohm indicates poor insulation
between the winding and the frame and needs to be
improved by drying and varnishing the windings.
Likewise the other windings are tested.
Necessity of frame earthing: The frame of the
Powerequipment/machine needs to be earthed because :
•
the earthing system provides safety for persons and
apparatus against earth faults.
•
the object of an earthing frame is to provide as nearly
as possible a surface under and around the motor
which shall be of uniform potential, and as near zero or
absolute earth potential, as possible.
According to I.E.rules, for reasons of safety, the frame of
the motor has to be connected by two distinct earth
connections to two earth electrodes with the help of
properly sized earth continuity conductors. Further the
earth system resistance (earth electrode 5 ohms and
earth continuity conductor one ohm, if not specified)
should be sufficiently low such that the protective devices
in the motor circuit will operate and isolate the circuit in
case of earth faults.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

99
Starter for 3-phase induction motor - power control circuits - D.O.L starter
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the necessity of starters for a 3-phase induction motor and name the types of starters
• explain the basic contactor circuit with a single push-button station for start and stop
• state the function of the overload relay, different types of overload relays
• state the function of a no-volt coil, its rated voltage, position of operation, its common troubles, their causes
and remedies.
Necessity of starter: A squirrel cage induction motor just
before starting is similar to a polyphase transformer with
a short-circuited secondary. If normal voltage is applied to
the stationary motor, then, as in the case of a transformer,
a very large initial current, to the tune of 5 to 6 times the
normal current, will be drawn by the motor from the mains.
This initial excessive current is objectionable, because it
will produce large line voltage drop, which in turn will affect
the operation of other Powerequipment and lights connected
to the same line.
The initial rush of current is controlled by applying a
reduced voltage to the stator winding during the starting
period, and then the full normal voltage is applied when the
motor has run up to speed. For small capacity motors, say
up to 3 Hp, full normal voltage can be applied at the start.
However, to start and stop the motor, and to protect the
motor from overload currents and low voltages, a starter is
required in the motor circuit. In addition to this, the starter
may also reduce the applied voltage to the motor at the
time of starting.
Types of starters: Following are the different types of
starters used for starting squirrel cage induction motors.
•
Direct on-line starter
•
Star-delta starter
•
Step-down transformer starter
•
Auto-transformer starter
In the above starters, except for the direct on-line starter,
reduced voltage is applied to the stator winding of the
squirrel cage induction motor at the time of starting, and
regular voltage is applied once the motor picks up the
speed.
Selection of starter: Many factors must be considered
when selecting starting equipment. These factors include
starting current, the full load current, voltage rating of
motor, voltage (line) drop, cycle of operation, type of load,
motor protection and safety of the operator.
Contactors: The contactor forms the main part in all the
starters. A contactor is defined as a switching device
capable of making, carrying and breaking a load circuit at
a frequency of 60 cycles per hour or more. It may be
operated by hand (mechanical), electromagnetic,
pneumatic or electro-pneumatic relays.
The contactors shown in Fig 1 consist of main contacts,
auxiliary contacts and no-volt coil. As per Fig 1, there are
three sets of normally open, main contacts between
terminals 1 and 2, 3 and 4, 5 and 6, two sets of normally
open auxiliary contacts between terminals 23 and 24, 13
and 14, and one set of normally closed auxiliary contact
between terminals 21 and 22. Auxiliary contacts carry
less current than main contacts. Normally contactors will
not have the push-button stations and O.L. relay as an
integrated part, but will have to be used as separate
accessories along with the contactor to form the starter
function.
The main parts of a magnetic contactor are shown in
Fig 1, and Fig 2 shows the schematic diagram of the
contactor when used along with fused switches (ICTP),
push-button stations and OL relay for connecting a squirrel
cage motor for starting directly from the main supply. In the
same way the direct on-line starter consists of a contactor,
OL relay and push-button station in an enclosure.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

100
Functional description
Power circuit: As shown in Fig 2, when the main ICTP
switch is closed and the contactor K1 is operated, all the
three windings U V & W of the motor are connected to the
supply terminals R Y B via the ICTP switch, contactor and
OL relay.
The overload current relay  (bimetallic relay) protects the
motor from overload (`motor protection'), while the fuses
F1/F2/F3 protect the motor circuit in the event of
phase-to-phase or phase-to-frame short circuits.
Control circuits
Push-button actuation from one operating location:
As shown in the complete circuit Fig 2, and the control
circuit Fig 3, when the `ON' push-button S3 is pressed, the
control circuit closes, the contactor coil is energised and
the contactor K1 closes. An auxiliary, a normally open
contact 13,14 is also actuated together with the main
contacts of K1. If this normally open contact is connected
in parallel with S3, it is called a self-holding auxiliary
contact.
After S3 is released, the current flows via this self-holding
contact 13,14, and the contactor remains closed. In order
to open the contactor, S2 must be actuated. If S3 and S2 are
actuated simultaneously, the contactor is unaffected.
In the event of overloads in the power circuit, the normally
closed contact 95 and 96 of overload relay `O' opens, and
switches off the control circuit. Thereby K1 switches `OFF'
the motor circuit. (Fig 3)
Once the contact between 95 and 96, is opened due to the
activation of the overload relay `O', the contacts stay open
and the motor cannot be started again by pushing the `ON'
button S3. It has to be reset to normally closed position by
pushing the reset button. In certain starters, the reset
could be done by pushing the `OFF' button which is in line
with the overload relay `O'.
Push-button actuation from two operating locations:
If it is desired to switch a contactor off and on from either
of the two locations, the corresponding OFF push-buttons
should be connected in series, and the ON push-buttons
in parallel, as shown in the complete diagram Fig 4 and the
control diagram Fig 5.
If either of the two ON push-buttons is actuated, K1 is
energised and holds itself closed with the help of
normally-open contact 13 & 14 which is closed by contactor
K1. If either of the two OFF push -buttons is actuated, the
contactor opens.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

101
Purpose of overload relays: The overload relays protect
the motor against repeated, excessive momentary surges
or normal overloads existing for long periods, or high
currents caused in two phases by the single-phasing
effect. These relays have characteristics which help the
relay to open the contactor in 10 seconds if the motor
current is 500 percent of the full load current, or in 4
minutes if the current is 150 percent of the full load current.
Types of overload relay
There are two types of overload relays. They are :
•
magnetic overload relay
•
thermal (bimetallic) overload relay.
Normally there are 3 coils in a magnetic relay and 3 sets
of heater coils in a bimetallic relay so that two coils will
operate in case of single phasing which help in avoiding the
burning out of the motor.
Magnetic overload relay: The magnetic overload relay
coil is connected in series with the motor circuits as
shown in Fig 2. The coil of the magnetic relay must be
wound with a wire, large enough in size to pass the motor
current. As these overload relays operate by current
intensity and not by heat, they are faster than bimetal
relays.
As shown in Fig 6, the magnetic coil carries the motor
current through terminals 2 and 2' which is in series with
the power circuit. The relay contacts, 95 and 96, are in
series with the control circuit. When a current more than
a certain stipulated value, as set by the relay set scale,
passes through the power circuit, the magnetic flux
produced by the coil will lift the plunger in an upward
direction. This upward movement makes the plunger tip to
push the relay contact lever, and the contact between
terminals 95 and 96 opens. This breaks the no volt coil
circuit and the contactor opens the power circuit to the
motor. The relay contacts between terminals 95 and 96
stay open till the rest-button (not shown in the figure) is
pressed.
useful when the recommended heater size may result in
unnecessary tripping, while the next larger size will not
give adequate protection. Ambient temperatures affect
thermally-operated overload relays.
The tripping of the control circuit in the bimetallic relay
results from the difference of expansion of two dissimilar
metals fused together. Movement occurs if one of the
metal expands more than the other when subjected to
heat. A U-shaped bimetallic strip is used in the relay as
shown in Fig 7. The U-shaped strip and a heater element
inserted in the centre of the U compartments for avoiding
possible uneven heating due to variations in the mounting
location of the heater element.
As shown in Fig 7, under normal conditions, the bimetallic
strip pushes the pin against the leaf-spring tension, and
the point contacts 95 and 96 are in a closed position, and
hence the no-volt coil circuit is completed while the motor
is running. When a higher current passes through the
heater coil connected to terminals 2 and 2', the heat
generated in the coil heats up the bimetal strip which
bends inward. Hence the pin retracts in the right hand
direction and the leaf-spring opens the contact between 95
and 96 to open the contactor. The relay cannot be reset
immediately as the heat in the bimetallic strips require
some time for cooling.
Bimetallic overload relays: Most bimetallic relays can
be adjusted to trip within a range of 85 to 115 per cent of
the nominal trip rating of the heater unit. This feature is
Relay setting: The overload relay unit is the protection
centre of the motor starter. Relays come in a number of
ranges. Selection of a relay for a starter depends upon the
motor type, rating and duty.
For all direct on-line starters, relays should be set to the
actual load current of the motor. This value should be equal
to or lower than the full load current indicated on the
name-plate of the motor. Described here is a simple
procedure for setting the relay to the actual load current.
Set the relay to about 80% of the full load current. If it trips,
increase the setting to 85% or more till the relay holds. The
relay should never be set at more than the actual current
drawn by the motor. (The actual current drawn by a motor
will be less than the full load current in most cases, as
motors may not be loaded to capacity.)
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

102
Table 1
Symptoms
Causes
Remedies
Motor does not start when the
Open in no-volt coil circuit.
Check the main voltage for lower
'start' button is pressed. However on
than acceptable value. Rectify the
pressing the armature of the
main voltage. Check the control
contactor manually, motor starts
circuit wiring for loose connection.
and runs.
Check the resistance of the no-volt
coil winding. If found incorrect
replace the coil.
Motor starts when `ON' button is
Auxiliary contact in
Check the parallel connection from
pressed. It however stops
parallel with the start-button
`ON' button terminals to the auxiliary
immediately when `ON' button is
is not closing.
contact of the contactor.
released.
Rectify the defect.
Check the auxiliary contact points of
the contactor for erosion and pittings.
Replace, if found defective.
Motor does start when the start-
Movable armature and fixed
Dust or dirt or grit between the mating
button is pressed. However, a
limb of electromagnet are
surfaces of the electromagnetic core.
humming or chattering noise comes
not stably attracted.
Clean them.
from the starter.
Low voltage supply. Find the cause
and rectify the defect.
Break in the shading ring in the case
of AC magnet.
Failure of contactor due to too much
Higher incoming supply rating.
Higher supply voltage than normal.
heating of the `No' volt coil.
No-volt coil rating is not high.
Reduce the incoming voltage.
Voltage rating of the no-volt coil is
less. Replace with standard rating,
according to the main supply.
Motor does not restart immediately
It takes a little time for the thermal
Wait for 2 to 4 minutes before re-
after tripping of OL relay even
bimetal to cool and reset.
starting.
though OL relay was reset.
Coil does not get energised even
Open-circuited NVC.
Check the nylon strip on relay.
though supply voltage is found
NVC burnt out.
across the no-volt coil terminals.
Check the nylon button below the
start button
Replace, if necessary.
Relay coil has been changed.
Control circuit of relay open.
Check the control circuit for open.
However motor does not start
Clean the control station contacts.
when the start-button is pressed.
Overload relay not reset.
Tripping of starters: A starter may trip due to the
following reasons.
•
Low voltage or failure of power supply
•
Persistent overload on the motor
In the first instance, the tripping occurs through the coil
which opens the contacts when the voltage falls below a
certain level. The starter can be restarted as soon as the
supply is back to normal.
The relay trips the starter when there is an overload. It can
be restarted only after the relay is reset and the load
becomes normal.
No-volt coil: A no-volt coil consists of generally more
number of turns of thin gauge of wire.
Coil voltages: Selection of coils depends on the actual
supply voltage available. A wide variety of coil voltages like
24V, 40V, 110V, 220 V (or)  230/250 V, 380V (or) 400/
440V AC or DC are available as standard for contactors
and starters.
Troubleshooting in contactor: Table 1 gives the common
symptoms their causes and remedies.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

103
Symptoms
Causes
Remedies
Humming or chattering noise.
Low voltage.
Feed the rated voltage.
Magnetic face between yoke
Clean the surfaces of yoke and
and armature is not clean.
armature.
Shading ring on iron core missing.
Provide shading ring in the iron core
B.I.S. symbols pertaining to contactor and machines
Objective: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• identify B.I.S. symbols pertaining to rotating machines and transformers (BIS 2032 Part IV), contactors,
switch, gear and mechanical controls (BIS 2032 Part VII, 2032 Part XXV and XXVII).
The table given below contains most of the important symbols used by an electrician. However, you are
advised to refer to the quoted B.I.S. standards for further additional information.
Table
S.No.
BIS
Description
          Symbol
Remarks
Code No.
BIS 2032
(Part XXV)-
1980
9
Switch gear, accessories
1
9.1
Switch, general symbol
2
9.1.1
Alternate symbol for switch.
3
9.2
Three-pole switch, single line representation.
4
9.2.1
Alternate symbol for three-pole switch, single
line representation.
5
9.3
Pressure switch
6
9.4
Thermostat
7
9.5
Circuit-breaker
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

104
S.No.
BIS
 Description
          Symbol
  Remarks
Code No.
8
9.5.1
Alternate symbol of circuit-breaker.
Note : The rectangle of symbol 9.5 should
contain some indication that a
circuit-breaker is connected.
9
9.5.2
Alternate symbol for circuit breaker.
10
9.5.3
Circuit-breaker with short circuit under voltage
and thermal overload releases.
11
9.5.4
Hand-operated circuit-breaker with short circuit,
thermal overload protection and no-volt tripping.
12
9.5.5
Motor - solenoid operated air circuit-breaker
with short circuit and no-volt tripping (triple
pole).
13
9.6
Change over contact, break before make.
NOTE : The fixed contacts may be placed at
any angle except at 60°. In order to facilitate
the work of the draughtsman, the contacts
may be arranged differently.
14
9.7
Two-way contact with neutral position
15
9.8
Make-before-break contact.
16
9.9
Contactor, normally open.
17
9.9.1
Contactor, normally closed.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

105
 S.No.
BIS
Description
             Symbol
   Remarks
Code No.
18
9.10
Push-button with normally open contact.
19
9.10.1
Push-button with normally closed contact.
20
9.11
Isolator.
21
9.12
Two-way isolator with interruption of circuit.
22
9.13
Two-way isolator without interruption of circuit.
23
9.14
Make contact, general symbol.
24
9.14.1
Alternate symbol for make contact, general
symbol.
25
9.14.2
Alternate symbol for make-contact.
26
9.14.3
Alternate symbol for make-contact.
27
9.14.4
Alternate symbol for make-contact.
28
9.14.5
Alternate symbol for make-contact.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

106
 S.No.
BIS
Description
      Symbol
Remarks
Code No.
29
9.14.6
Alternate symbol for make-contact.
30
9.14.7
Alternate symbol for make-contact.
31
9.14.8
Alternate symbol for make-contact.
32
9.14.9
Alternate symbol for make-contact.
33
9.15
Break-contact, general symbol.
34
9.15.1
Alternate symbol for break-contact.
35
9.15.2
Alternate symbol for break-contact.
36
9.15.3
Alternate symbol for break-contact.
37
9.15.4
Alternate symbol for break-contact.
38
9.15.5
Alternate symbol for break-contact.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

107
 S.No.
BIS
Description
    Symbol
Remarks
Code No.
39
9.16
Thermal overload contact.
40
9.17
Socket (female).
41
9.17.1
Alternate symbol for socket (female).
42
9.17.2
Socket with switch.
43
9.18
Plug (male).
44
9.18.1
Alternate symbol for plug (male).
45
9.19
Plug and socket (male and female).
46
9.19.1
Alternate symbol for plug and socket (male
and female).
47
9.20
Starter, general symbol.
48
9.21
Starter by steps (Example: 5 steps).
49
9.22
Star-delta starter.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

108
 S.No.
BIS
Description
 Symbol
Remarks
Code No.
50
9.23
Auto-transformer starter.
51
9.24
Pole-changing starter (Example, 8/4 poles).
52
9.25
Rheostatic starter.
53
9.26
Direct on-line starter.
54
9.27
Sliding contact, general symbol.
55
9.27.1
Resistor with moving contact, general symbol.
56
9.28
Combined control panel for two motors
(multiple speed and reversible).
57
9.29
Fuse.
58
9.29.1
Alternate symbol for fuse.
59
9.29.2
Alternate symbol for fuse where supply side is
indicated by a thick line.
60
9.29.3
Alternate symbol for fuse where supply side is
indicated by a thick line.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

109
 S.No.
BIS
Description
  Symbol
Remarks
Code No.
61
9.30
Isolating fuse-switch, switching on load.
62
9.31
Isolating fuse-switch.
BIS 2032
Contactors
Part(XXV11)
1932
3.2
Qualifying symbols
63
3.2.1
Contactor function.
64
3.2.2
Circuit-breaker function.
65
3.2.3
Disconnector (isolator) function.
66
3.2.4
Switch-disconnector (isolator switch) function.
67
3.2.5
Automatic release function.
68
3.2.6
Delayed action. Convention - delayed action
in direction of movement from the arc towards
its centre.
Note: This symbol must be linked by a
double line to the symbol of the device,
the action of which is delayed.
69
3.2.6.1
Delayed action convention - delayed action in
the direction of movement of the arrow mark.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

110
 S.No.
BIS
Description
Symbol
Remarks
Code No.
70
3.2.7
Non-spring return (stay put) function.
NOTE : The symbols shown above may be
used to indicate spring-return and stay-put
contacts. When this convention is invoked, its
use should be appropriately referenced. These
symbols should not be used together with the
qualifying symbols Nos. 3.1 to 3.4.
71
3.2.8
Hand reset.
72
3.3.7
Contact with two makes.
73
3.3.8
Contact with two breaks.
74
3.3.9
Three-point contact.
75
3.3.10
Make contact-hand reset.
IR
76
3.3.11
Break contact-hand reset.
IR
77
3.3.19
Make-contact delayed when operating.
78
3.3.20
Break-contact delayed when operating.
79
3.3.21
Break-contact delayed when releasing.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

111
 S.No.
BIS
Description
Symbol
Remarks
Code No.
80
3.3.22
Make-contact delayed when operating and
releasing.
81
3.3.23
Contact assembly with one make-contact not
delayed.  One make contact delayed when
operating and one  break-contact delayed
when releasing.
82
3.3.24
Make-contact with spring return.
83
3.3.25
Make-contact without spring return (stay-put)                                                 SR
84
3.3.26
Break-contact with spring return.
                   SR
85
3.3.27
Two-way contact with centre off position with
spring.  Return from the left-hand position but
not from the right hand one (stay-put).
86
3.3.28
Temperature-sensitive make-contact.
Note: May be replaced by the value of the
operating temperature conditions.
87
3.3.29
Temperature sensitive break-contact.
NOTE : may be replaced by the value of the
operating temperature conditons.
88
3.3.30
Self-operating thermal-break contact.
NOTE : It is important to distinguish between
a contact as shown and a contact of a thermal
relay, which in detached representation is
shown in the example below.
Example: Break contact of a thermal relay.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

112
  S.No.
BIS
Description
Symbol
Remarks
Code No.
89
3.3.32
Blow-out magnetic make-contact.
90
3.3.33
Blow-out magnetic break-contact.
 BIS:2032
Mechanical controls
 (PART VII)
   1974
91
8.4
Mechanical interlock
92
8.5
Reset
a
 Automatic reset
b
 Non-automatic reset
Note : These symbols should be used only
if it is essential to indicate the type of
reset.
 BIS:2032
Classification
  (Part IV)
    1964
In this standard, more than one symbol have
been used to designate the same type of
rotating machine or transformer depending on
the type and class of drawing involved. For the
same type of rotating machines, in simplified
as well as in the complete, multi-line symbols
have been specified. In the case of
transformers, symbols for single line and
multi-line representation have been given
separately.
Wherever single line representation is required
for rotating machines, reference may be made
to IS:2032(Part II)-1962.
Elements of symbols
93
3.14
Winding
Note: The number of half circles is not fixed,
but if desired a distinction might be made for
the different windings of a machine as specified
in 3.2,3.3 and 3.4.
94
3.24
Commutating or compensating winding.
95
3.34
Series winding.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

113
 S.No.
BIS
Description
Symbol
Remarks
Code No.
96
3.44
Shunt winding or separate winding.
97
3.54
Brush or slip-ring.
98
3.64
Brush on commutator.
99
3.74
Supplementary indications, numerical
data.
Supplementary indications (method of
connecting windings, letter M, G or C and
numerical data) are shown only on one
symbol for each class of machine, as an
example.
4
Rotating machines
4.1
General symbols
100
4.1.14
Generator
101
4.1.2
Motor
102
4.1.3
Machine capable of use as generator or motor.
103
4.1.4
Mechanically coupled machines.
Note: Other special types of coupling, that
is, monobloc construction, shall be
suitably indicated wherever necessary.
4.2
Direct current machine
104
4.2.1
Direct current generator, general symbol.
105
4.2.2
Direct current motor, general symbol.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

114
 S.No.
BIS
Description
Symbol
Remarks
Code No.
106
4.2.3
DC 2-wire permanent magnet generator(G) or
motor (M).
Simplified
Complete
multiline
multiline
representation
representation
107
4.2.4
DC 2-wire series generator (G) or motor (M).
108
4.2.5
DC 2-wire generator (G) or motor (M) separately
excited.
109
4.2.6
DC 2-wire shunt generator (G) or motor (M).
110
4.2.7
DC 2-wire generator (G) or motor (M),
compound-excited, short shunt.
111
4.2.8
Symbol showing terminals, brushes and
numerical data.
Example : DC 2-wire generator compound
excited short shunt, 240 V, 30 KW.
4.3
Alternating current machines
112
4.3.1
AC generator, general symbol.
113
4.3.2
AC motor, general symbol.
4.4
Alternating current
Commutator machines.
Simplified
Complete
multiline
multiline
representation representation
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

115
 S.No.
BIS
Description
Symbol
Remarks
Code No.
114
4.4.1
AC series motor,  single phase.
115
4.4.2
Repulsion motor,  single phase.
116
4.4.3
AC series motor, single phase, Deri type.
4.5
Synchronous machines
117
4.5.1
Synchronous generator, general symbol.
118
4.5.2
Synchronous motor - general symbol.
119
4.5.3
Permanent magnet synchronous generator
(GS) or synchronous motor (MS), three-phase.
  Simplified
         Complete
 multiline
         multiline
     representation    representation
120
4.5.4
Synchronous generator (GS) or synchronous
motor (MS) single-phase.
121
4.5.5
Synchronous generator (GS) or synchronous
motor (MS) three-phase, star-connected,
neutral not brought out.
122
4.5.6
Synchronous generator (GS) or synchronous
motor (MS) three-phase star-connected with
neutral brought out.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

116
 S.No.
BIS
Description
Symbol
Remarks
Code No.
4.6
Induction Machines
Note : In symbols 4.6.1 to 4.6.9 groups of
conductors may be placed in another
manner than generally shown below. For
example, symbol 4.6.6.
123
4.6.1
Induction motor, with short-circuited rotor,
general symbol.
124
4.6.2
Induction motor, with wound rotor, general
symbol.
125
4.6.3
Induction motor, single phase, squirrel-cage.
126
4.6.4
Induction motor, single phase, squirrel cage,
leads of split-phase brought out.
Simplified
Complete
multiline
multiline
   representation
representation
127
4.6.5
Induction motor, three-phase, squirrel-cage.
128
4.6.6
Induction motor, three-phase, squirrel cage,
both leads of each phase brought out.
129
4.6.7
Induction motor, three-phase, with wound rotor.
130
4.6.8
Induction motor, three-phase, star-connected,
with automatic starter in the rotor.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

117
  S.No.
BIS
Description
Symbol
Remarks
    Code No.
131
4.6.9
Symbol showing terminals, brushes and
numerical data.
Example : Induction motor, three-phase, with
wound rotor 415V, 22 kW, 50 c/s.
4.7
Synchronous converters.
132
4.7.1
Synchronous converter, general symbol.
133
4.7.2
Three-phase synchronous converter, shunt
excited. 72
134
4.7.3
Symbol showing terminals, brushes and
numerical data.
Example : Three-phase synchronous
converter, shunt excited 600 V, 1000 kW, 50
c/s.
5
Transformers
5.1
General symbols
135
5.1.1
Transformer with two separate windings.
Simplified
Complete
multiline
multiline
   representation
representation
136
5.1.2
Transformer with three separate windings.
137
5.1.3
Auto-transformers
5.2
Transformers with two or three Windings.
138
5.2.1
Single-phase transformer with two separate
windings.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

118
 S.No.
BIS
Description
Symbol
Remarks
    Code No.
139
5.2.4
Three-phase transformer with two separate
windings.
Connection: star zig-zag.
140
5.2.5
Three-phase transformer with two separate
windings.
Connection: delta 6-phase fork.
141
5.2.6
Three-phase transformer with three separate
windings.
Connection: star, star-delta.
Simplified
Complete
multiline
multiline
  representation
representation
142
5.2.7
Three-phase bank of single-phase transformers
with three separate windings.
Connection : star, star-delta.
5.3
Auto-transformers
143
5.3.1
Auto-transformer, single-phase.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

119
 S.No.
BIS
Description
Symbol
Remarks
    Code No.
144
5.3.2
Auto-transformer, three-phase.
Connection:star.
145
5.3.3
Single-phase auto-transformer with continuous
voltage regulation.
D.O.L. starter
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the specification of a D.O.L. starter, explain its construction, operation and application
• explain the necessity of a back-up fuse and its rating according to the motor rating.
A D.O.L. starter is one in which a contactor with no-volt
relay, ON and OFF buttons, and overload relay are
incorporated in an enclosure.
Construction and operation: A push-button type, direct
on-line starter, which is in common use, is shown in
Fig 1. It is a simple starter which is inexpensive and easy
to install and maintain.
There is no difference between the complete contactor
circuit explained in Exercise 3.1.04 and the D.O.L.starter,
except that the D.O.L. starter is enclosed in a metal or
PVC case, and in most cases, the no-volt coil is rated for
415V and is to be connected across two phases as shown
in Fig 1. Further the overload relay can be situated
between ICTP switch and contactor,or between the
contactor and motor as shown in Fig 1, depending upon
the starter design. Trainees are advised to write the
working of the D.O.L. starter on their own
Specification of D.O.L. starters: While giving specification,
the following data are to be given.
D.O.L. STARTER
Phases - single or three.
Voltage 240 or 415V.
Current rating 10, 16, 32, 40, 63, 125 or 300 amps.
No-volt coil voltage rating AC or DC 12, 24, 36, 48, 110,
230/250, 360, 380 or 400/440 volts.
Number of main contacts 2, 3 or 4 which are normally
open.
Number of auxiliary contacts 2 or 3. 1 NC + 1 NO or 2
NC + 1 NO respectively.
Push-button - one `ON' and one `OFF' buttons.
Overload from setting – amp-to-amp. Enclosure - metal
sheet or PVC.
Applications: In an induction motor with a D.O.L. starter,
the starting current will be about 6 to 7 times the full load
current. As such, D.O.L. starters are recommended to be
used only up to 3 HP squirrel cage induction motors, and
up to 1.5 kW double cage rotor motors.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

120
Necessity of back-up fuses: Motor starters must never
be used without back-up fuses. The sensitive thermal
relay mechanism is designed and calibrated to provide
effective protection against overloads only. When sudden
short circuits take place in a motor circuit, the overload
relays, due to their inherent operating mechanism, take a
longer time to operate and open the circuit. Such delays
will be sufficient to damage the starter motor and connected
circuits due to heavy in-rush of short circuit currents. This
could be avoided by using quick-action, high-rupturing
capacity fuses which, when used in the motor circuit,
operate at a faster rate and open the circuit. Hence H.R.C.
diazed (DZ) type fuses are recommended for protecting
the installation as well as the thermal overload relay of the
motor starter against short circuits. In case of short
circuits, the back-up fuses melt and open the circuit
quickly. A reference table indicating fuse ratings for
different motor ratings is given.
It is recommended that the use of semi-enclosed, rewirable,
tinned copper fuses may be avoided as for as possible.
The given full load currents apply in the case
of single phase, capactor-start type motors,
and in the case of 3-phase, squirrel cage type
induction motors at full load having average
power factor and efficiency. The motors should
have speeds not less than 750 r.p.m.
Fuses upto and including 63 A are DZ type
fuses.   Fuses from 100 A and above are IS type
fuses (type HM).
Table of relay ranges and back-up fuses for motor protection
Sl.
Motor ratings
Motor ratings
Relay range
Nominal  back-up
No.
240V 1-phase
415V 3-phase
A
 fuse recommended
hp
kW
Full load
hp
kW
Full load
a
c
current
current
1
0.05
0.04
0.175
0.15 -
0.5
1A
2
0.05
0.04
0.1
0.075
0.28
0.25 -
0.4
2A
3
0.25
0.19
0.70
0.6 -
1.0
6A
4
0.125 0.11
0.50
0.37
1.2
1.0  -
1.6
6A
5
0.5
0.18
2.0
1.0
0.75
1.8
1.5 -
2.5
6A
6
0.5
0.4
3.6
1.5
1.1
2.6
2.5 -
4.0
10A
7
2.0
1.5
3.5
2.5  -
4.0
15A
8
0.75
0.55
2.5
1.8
4.8
4.0  -
6.5
15A
9
3.0
2.2
5.0
4.0 -
6.5
15A
10
1.0
0.75
7.5
5.0
3.7
7.5
6.0 - 10
20A
11
2.0
1.5
9.5
7.5
5.5
11.0
9.0 - 14.0
25A
12
3.0
2.25
14
10.0
7.5
14
10.0 - 16.0
35A
Numerical problems in ac 3-phase induction motors
Objective: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• solve the numerical problems in 3 phase induction motor.
On very many occasions, an electrician may be asked to
wire up a workshop well before the proposed machine is
installed, having been provided with information only
regarding the voltage rating and horsepower of the
Powermotor.
While planning the wiring, the cable sizes need to be
selected, based upon the full load current of the motor
which could be calculated when sufficient data is available.
The examples given below illustrate the method of
determining the full-load current when other data are
provided or vice versa.
To illustrate:
The output of the motor is given in metric horsepower.
Output of the motor  = Metric HP x 735.6 watts.
Input of the motor =  
θ
Cos
I
E
3
L
L
 watts
where
EL is the line voltage
IL is the line current
Cos θ is the power factor
Also input = output + losses
=
output + copper loss + iron loss + mechanical losses
like windage, friction etc.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

121
Efficiency of the motor = 
100
 x 
Input
Output
= 
θ
Cos
 
 
E
3
735.5
 x 
horsepower
 
Metric
L
L I
Example 1
A 3-phase, 6000 volts, star-connected induction motor
develops 200 HP (Metric). Calculate the full load current
per phase if the efficiency of the motor is 85% and the
power factor is 0.8.
Input=  
Efficiency
100
 x 
Output
 
θ
=
Cos
I
E
3
L
L
Line current IL  = 
3
x
Output
θ

   


  

0.8
 x 
6000
 x 
3
 
x
85
.
0
735.5
 x 
200
=
= 20.81A
In star, as the line current is equal to the phase current, we
have the phase current at full load - 20.9 amps.
Example 2
A 3-phase, induction motor takes a current of 100 amps
from 400V 50 HZ supply. Determine the power factor if the
output of the motor is 70 HP (metric) and the efficiency is
90%.
Input= Efficiency
Output
3 EL IL Cos θ  = 
100
90
735.5
 x 
70
Cos θ =  
100
 x 
400
 x 
3
 x 
90
100
 x 
735.5
 x 
70
Power  factor = 0.82.
Example 3
A 3-phase, 400V, 50 HZ, delta-connected induction motor
draws a line current of 150 amps with a P.F. of 0.85 and
is delivering an output of 100 (Metric) HP. Calculate the
efficiency.
% of efficiency =
Input
100
 x 
Output
=
0.85
 x 
150
 x 
400
 x 
3
100
 x 
735.5
 x 
100
=
83.3 %
Example 4
A 3-phase, 400 V, induction motor takes a line current of
30 amperes with a power factor of 0.9. The efficiency of the
motor is 80%. Calculate the output in metric horsepower.
Output in watts =
Input x Efficiency
=
 
100
80
 x 
0.9
 x 
30
 x 
400
x
3
Output in metric HP =  
735.5
 watts
in
 
Output
=
735.5
 x 
100
80
 x 
0.9
 x 
30
 x 
400
 x 
3
= 20.3 HP.
Jogging (inching) control circuits for motors
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• define the process of jogging/inching control
• state the purpose of jogging/inching control
• describe the operation of a jogging control using a selector switch
• describe the operation of a jogging control using a push-button station
• describe the operation of a jogging control using a control relay.
Jogging (inching):  In some industrial applications, the
rotating part of a machine may have to be moved in small
increments. This could be done by a control system called
jogging (inching). Jogging is defined as the repeated
closure of the circuit to start a motor from rest, producing
small movements in the driven machine. By pressing the
jog push-button the magnetic starter is energised and the
motor runs; when the jog push-button is released, the
motor stops.
When a jogging circuit is used, the motor can be energised
only as long as the jog-button is depressed. This means
the operator has instantaneous control of the motor drive.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

122
Purpose of jogging/inching controls: Normally jogging
(inching) controls are incorporated in the following machines
for operational convenience shown against each.
•
Lathe machine controls - for checking the trueness of
the job and setting the tool initially.
•
Milling machine controls - for checking the concentric
running of the cutter at initial setting and also to set the
graduated collar for depth of feed of the cutter.
•
Grinding machine controls - for checking proper
mounting of the wheel.
•
Paper cutting machine - for adjusting the cut.
Apart from the above, the inch control is the prime control
in cranes, hoists and conveyor belt mechanism so that
incremental movements either vertically or horizontally
could be achieved in the driven machinery.
Jogging may be accomplished by the following methods.
•
Selector switch
•
Push-button
•
Push-button with a jog relay
Jogging control using a selector switch: By using a
selector switch, the existing start button can be used as
a jogging push-button in addition to its function as a
starting push-button. The holding contacts of the contactor
which are in parallel to the start-button are disconnected
and the selector switch is placed in the jog position as
shown by the circuit in Fig 1 and the panel layout in
Fig 2.
The motor can be started or stopped by jogging/inching
the start button. The motor will operate as long as the
start-button is held pressed.
Jogging control using a push-button: Fig 3 shows the
control circuit of a D.O.L. starter connected to a
start-jog-stop push-button station. When the `ON'
push-button is pressed, coil K is energised as the no-volt
coil circuit is complete through the normally closed `jog'
button contacts 30 & 31, thereby closing the main contactor,
and the motor runs. The self-holding auxiliary contact K1
between terminals 13 and 14 gets closed, and keeps the
no-volt coil circuit in function though the `ON' button is
released. As soon as the jog push-button is pushed, as
the circuit of the no-volt coil opens initially, the contactor
is de-energised and the motor stops if it is running. Then
the jog-button closes the bottom contacts 32 & 33,
thereby the no-volt coil circuit closes and  the motor runs
as long as the jog-button is held pressed. By pushing and
releasing the jog-button repeatedly, the motor starts and
stops causing the driven machinery to `inch' forward to the
desired position. On the other hand, pressing the
start-button will make the motor to run normally.
Jogging control using a relay: Fig 4 shows the control
circuit of a D.O.L. starter connected to a control relay with
the other usual components. When the start button is
pressed, the control relay coil CR is energised and closes
the contacts R1 and R2, thereby momentarily completing
the no-volt coil `K' circuit through relay contact R2. This in
turn closes the self-holding auxiliary contact K1 of the
no-volt coil relay K, and the motor runs continuously even
though the pressure on the start-button is released.
When the motor is not running, if the jog-button is pressed
the no-volt coil, K circuit, is completed, and the motor runs
only as long as the jog-button is held pressed as the
holding circuit through R1 is not completed for the starter
coil as the control relay CR is not energised.
For a 3-phase, D.O.L. starter having the jog control
through relay, four normally open contacts (3 for main and
1 for auxiliary) are required and the control relay should
have two normally open contacts as shown in Fig 4.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

123
Rotary type switches
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the type of rotary switches - specifications like voltage rating, current rating, poles, function, position,
type of mounting, type of handle, number of operations per hour and special requirement,
• explain the schematic diagram of rotary switches along with connection diagram of motors for ON/OFF
three-pole switch, forward, stop and reverse three-pole switch, star-delta switch and pole changing switch.
Rotary switches are most commonly used in lathes,
milling and drilling machines due to their exact visual
position and easiness in operation. These switches are
operated by levers or knobs which in turn operate cams
inside the switch to contact various terminals in sequence
by the internal contact blocks. These cams and blocks are
made of hard P.V.C. and are designed to withstand  many
operations. It is possible to get many circuit combinations
by combining various cams and contact blocks.  As the
contact blocks, terminals and cams are spring-loaded,
these switches should not be opened by inexperienced
persons for repairs.
These rotary switches are classified according to
•
poles
•
function
•
position
•
mounting type
•
handle design, and
•
frequency of operations.
Poles: According to the number of independent connecting
terminals and operation, they are called 2-pole (single
phase, refer to Fig 1) or 3-pole (3-phase, refer to Fig 2)
switches.
Function: Rotary switches can do a number of functions
depending upon the cam and contact block combinations.
Accordingly they can be
•
ON/OFF switches (Fig 2)
•
manual forward/reversing switches (Fig 3)
•
manual star-delta switches (Fig 4)
•
pole changing switches for speed control. (Fig 5)
In addition to the above voltmeter/ammeter selector
switches, 4-position, air-conditioner switches are also
available.
Position: Selector switches of rotary type are available in
two (Fig 2), three (Figs 1, 3 and 4) and four positions. They
provide maintained or spring-return (momentary) control
operation. Two-position and three-position switches can
be either maintained or spring-returned whereas
four-position switches are maintained in all four positions.
Mounting type: According to requirement, we may select
any one of the following types for mounting.
•
Surface mounting type
•
Flush mounting type (Fig 1)
•
Box mounting type (Fig 4)
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

124
Handle design: According to the nature of operation it
could be done by
•
a knob (Fig 2c)
•
a lever (Fig 5d)
•
a coin slot (Fig 1)
•
key operation. (Fig 3c)
Frequency of operation: The number of operations of
these switches per hour is specified in B.I.S. 10118 (Part
II) 1982. The details given below are taken from the B.I.S.
as per the reference cited.
Sl.
Description
Operations
No.
per hour
1
On-off and system
Up to 150 times
selector switch
2
 Pole-changing switch
Up to 150 times
3
 Manual star-delta switch
Up to 30 times
4
 Speed control switch
Up to 150 times
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

125
Specification: Specification of rotary switches should
contain the following information, for procurement in the
market.
•
Working voltage and kind of operation - AC or DC
•
Load current
•
Poles
•
Function
•
Position of operation
•
Type of mounting
•
Desired handle type
•
Frequency of operation
•
Accepted maximum dimensions
•
Type of casing
Schematic diagram of rotary switches
ON/OFF switch: These switches are used for a 3-phase
squirrel cage motor for direct starting, which is symbolically
represented in Fig 2a. The complete connection diagram
shown in Fig 2b and Fig 2c shows the normal appearance
of such a switch, with a knob type handle, having a box
mounting type body.
Fig 2d shows the manufacturer's catalogue representation
of an ON/OFF switch.
Manual forward/reversing switch: These switches are
used for forward and reverse running operation of the
squirrel cage induction motors. A symbolic representation
is shown in Fig 3a. The complete diagram is shown in
Fig 3b and Fig 3c shows the normal appearance of such
a switch with a key operated type switch, having box-type
enclosure mounting.
Fig 3d shows the manufacturer's catalogue representation
of a forward|reversing rotary switch.
Manual star-delta starter switch: These switches are
used for starting a 3-phase squirrel cage induction motor
in star position and to run it in delta position.
Fig 4a shows the symbolic representation of the star-delta
manual switch, the complete diagram of connection to the
3-phase induction motor is shown in Fig 4b, and Fig 4c
shows the normal appearance of such a starter switch with
knob operation having a box-type body. Fig 4d shows the
manufacturer's catalogue representation of a manual
star-delta rotary switch.
Pole-changing rotary switch: This is used for changing
the speed of a three-phase squirrel cage induction motor
from one speed to another with the help of either two
separate windings or by six windings arranged for series
delta (low speed) or parallel star (high speed) connection.
(Fig 5)
Fig 5a shows the symbolic representation of the
pole-changing rotary switch, Figs 5b and 5c show the
complete connection diagram of the pole-changing switch
with motor connection, and Fig 5d shows the normal
appearance of such a switch with lever operation.
Fig 5e shows the manufacturer's catalogue representation
of the pole-changing rotary switch shown in Figs 5a,
b and c.
Manual star-delta starter
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the necessity of a star-delta starter for a 3-phase squirrel cage induction motor
• explain the construction, connection and working of a star-delta switch and starter
• specify the back-up rating of the fuse in the motor circuit.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

126
Necessity of star-delta starter for 3-phase squirrel
cage motor: If a 3-phase squirrel cage motor is started
directly, it takes about 5-6 times the full load current for a
few seconds, and then the current reduces to normal value
once the speed accelerates to its rated value. As the
motor is of rugged construction and the starting current
remains for a few seconds, the squirrel cage induction
motor will not get damaged by this high starting current.
However with large capacity motors, the starting current
will cause too much voltage fluctuations in the power lines
and disturb the other loads. On the other hand, if all the
squirrel cage motors connected to the power lines are
started at the same time, they may momentarily overload
the power lines, transformers and even the alternators.
Because of these reasons, the applied voltage to the
squirrel cage motor needs to be reduced during the
starting periods, and regular supply could be given when
the motor picks up its speed.
Following are the methods of reducing the applied voltage
to the squirrel cage motor at the start.
•
Star-delta switch or starter
•
Auto-transformer starter
•
Step-down transformer starter
Star-delta starter: A star-delta switch is a simple
arrangement of a cam switch which does not have any
additional protective devices like overload or under-voltage
relay except fuse protection through circuit fuses, whereas
the star-delta starter may have overload relay and under
voltage protection in addition to fuse protection. In a
star-delta switch/starter, at the time of starting, the
squirrel cage motor is connected in star so that the phase
voltage is reduced to 
3
1
 times the line voltage, and then
when the motor picks up its speed, the windings are
connected in delta so that the phase voltage is the same
as the line voltage. To connect a star-delta switch/starter
to a 3-phase squirrel cage motor, all the six terminals of
the three-phase winding must be available.
As shown in Fig 1a, the star-delta switch connection
enables the 3 windings of the squirrel cage motor to be
connected in star, and then in delta. In star position, the
line supply L1, L2 and L3 are connected to the beginning of
windings U1, W1 and V1 respectively by the larger links,
whereas the short links, which connect V2 U2 and W2, are
shorted by the shorting cable to form the star point. This
connection is shown as a schematic diagram. (Fig 1b)
When  the switch handle is changed over to delta position,
the line supply L1, L2 and L3 are connected to terminals U1
V2, W1 U2 and V1 W2 respectively by the extra large links
to form a delta connection. (Fig 1c)
Manual star-delta starter: Fig 2a shows the conventional
manual star-delta starter. As the insulated handle is
spring-loaded, it will come back to OFF position from any
position unless and until the no-volt (hold-on ) coil is
energised. When the hold-on coil circuit is closed through
the supply taken from U2 and W2, the coil is energised and
it holds the plunger, and thereby the handle is held in delta
position against the spring tension by the lever plate
mechanism. When the hold-on coil is de-energised the
plunger falls and operates the lever plate mechanism so as
to make the handle to be thrown to the off position due to
spring tension. The handle also has a mechanism (not
shown in Fig) which makes it impossible for the operator
to put the handle in delta position in the first moment. It is
only when the handle is brought to star position first, and
then when the motor picks up speed, the handle is pushed
to delta position.
The handle has a set of baffles insulated from each other
and also from the handle. When the handle is thrown to
star position, the baffles connect the supply lines L1, L2 and
L3 to beginning of the 3-phase winding W1, V1 and U1
respectively. At the same time the small baffles connect
V2, W2 and U2 through the shorting cable to form the star
point. (Fig 2b)
When the handle is thrown to delta position, the larger end
of the baffles connect the main supply line L1, L2 and L3 to
the winding terminals W1U2, V1W2 and U1V2 respectively to
form the delta connection. (Fig 2c)
The overload relay current setting could be adjusted by the
worm gear mechanism of the insulated rod. When the load
current exceeds a stipulated value, the heat developed in
the relay heater element pushes the rod to open the
hold-on coil circuit, and thereby the coil is de-energised,
and the handle returns to the off position due to the spring
tension.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

127
The motor also could be stopped by operating the stop
button which in turn de-energises the hold-on coil.
Back-up fuse protection: Fuse protection is necessary
in the star-delta started motor circuit against short circuits.
In general, as a thumb rule for 415V, 3-phase squirrel cage
motors, the full load current can be taken as 1.5 times the
H.P. rating. For example, a 10 HP 3-phase 415V motor will
have approximately 15 amps as its full load current.
To avoid frequent blowing of the fuse and at the same time
for proper protection, the fuse wire rating should be 1.5
times the full load current rating of the motor. Hence for 10
HP, 15 amps motor, the fuse rating will be 23 amps, or say
25 amps.
Comparison of impact of star and delta connections
on starting current and torque of the induction motor:
When the three-phase windings of the squirrel cage motor
are connected in star by the    starter, the phase voltage
across each winding is reduced by a factor of 
3
1
of the
applied line voltage (58%), and hence the starting current
reduces to 1/3 of that current which would have been drawn
if the motor were directly started in delta. This reduction in
starting current also reduces the starting torque to 1/3 of
the starting torque which would  have been produced in the
motor, if it were started directly in delta.
The above statement could be explained through the
following example.
Example
Three similar coils of a 3-phase winding of a squirrel cage
induction motor, each having a resistance of 20 ohms and
inductive reactance of 15 ohms, are connected in (a) star
(b) delta through a star-delta starter to a 3-phase 400V 50
Hz supply mains.
Calculate the line current and total power absorbed in each
case. Compare the torque developed in each case.
Solution
Impedence per phase
Zph =
2
2
X
 
 
R
+
= 
2
2
15
 
 
20
+
= 25Ω
Star connection
EPh
= 
volts
 
231
 
 
3
400
 
 
3
EL
=
=
IPh =
9.24amps
 
 
25
231
 
 
Z
E
ph
ph
=
=
IL = Ish = 9.24amps.
Power absorbed =  3 EL ILCos θ
= 
3  x 400 x 9.24 x 1
Assuming PF = 1, we have = 6401 watts.
Delta connection
Eph
=  EL = 400V
IPh
= 
16A
 
 
25
400
 
 
Z
E
ph
ph
=
=
IL
= 
3 Iph =1.732 x16 = 27.7 A
Power absorbed  = 3  ELILCos θ
(assume PF = 1)
= 
3 x 400 x 27.7 x 1
=  19190 W. (19.19W)
The torque developed is proportional to the square of the
voltage across the winding.
In the case of star, the voltage across the winding Eph
Eph  = 
3
EL
= 
star
 
in
K 
 
3
E L
2
In the case of delta, the voltage across the Eph winding
Eph = EL.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

128
Hence torque
(EL)2 K = E2
L
 K.
By comparison the torque developed in star connection at
the time of starting is 1/3 of the torque developed in a delta
connection (running).
As the torque is 3 times less in starting due to the star
connection, whenever a motor has to be started with heavy
loads, the star-delta starter is not used. Instead an
auto-transformer or step-down transformer starter could
be used as the voltage tapping can be changed to more
than 58% of the line voltage to suit the torque requirement.
Semi-automatic star-delta starter
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the wiring diagram of semi-automatic star-delta starter
• describe the operation of semi-automatic star-delta starter.
The standard squirrel cage induction motors with both
ends of each of the three windings brought out (six
terminals) are known as star-delta motors.  If the starter
used has the required number of properly wired contactors,
the motor can be started in star and run in delta.
The proper use of manual star-delta starter demands a
special skill in handling the starter.  The sluggish operation
of the manual lever often causes damage to the moving
and fixed contacts in a manual star-delta starter.
The contactors are employed for making and breaking the
main line connections. Fig 1 shows the wiring diagram and
Fig 2 shows the line diagram of power circuit and the
control circuit.
Operation: Refer to the control circuit and power circuit
diagrams shown in Fig 2.  When the start button S2 is
pressed the contactor coil K3 energises through P4, P3 and
K1 normally closed contact 12 and 11.  When K3 closes,
it opens the normally closed contact K3 between 11 and 12
and makes contact between 10 and 9 of K3.  The mains
contactor K1 energies through P4, 10 and 9 of K3.  Once K1
energises the NO contact of K1 point 8 and 7 establishes
a parallel path to K3 terminals 10 and 9.
The star contactor K3 remains energised so long as the
start button is kept pressed.  Once the start button is
released, the K3 coil gets de-energised.  The K3 contact
cannot be operated because of the Powerinterlock of K1
and normally closed contacts between terminals 12 and
11.
When the K3 contactor get de-energised the normally
closed contact of K3 between terminals 11 and 12
establishes contact in the contactor K2 - coil circuit.  The
delta contactor K2 closes.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

129
The operator has to observe the motor starting and
reaching  about 70% of the synchronous speed for
satisfactory starting and running of the induction motor.
Figure 2c shows the alternative form of drawing control
circuit.
Automatic star-delta starter
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the applications of automatic star-delta and overload relay setting
• describe the operations of automatic star-delta starter.
Applications : The primary application of star-delta motors
is for driving centrifugal chillers of large central air-
conditioning units for loads such as fans, blowers, pumps
or centrifuges, and for situations where a reduced starting
torque is necessary.  A star-delta motor is also used
where a reduced starting current is required.
In star-delta motors all the winding is used and there are
no limiting devices such as resistors or auto-transformers.
Star-delta motors are widely used on loads having high
inertia and a long acceleration period.
Overload relay settings : Three overload relays are
provided on star-delta starters.  These relays are used so
that they carry the motor winding current.  This means that
the relay units must be selected on the basis of the
winding current, and not the delta connected full load
current.  The motor name-plate indicates only the delta
connected full load current, divide this value by 1.73 to
obtain the winding current.  Use this winding current as the
basis for selecting and setting the motor winding protection
relay.
Operation : Fig 1 shows the line diagram of the power
circuit and the control circuit of the automatic star-delta
starter.  Pressing the start button S-energises the star
contactor K3.  (Current flows through K4 T NC terminals 15
& 16 and K2 NC terminals 11 & 12).  Once K3 energises the
K3 NO contact closes (terminals 23 & 24) and provide path
for the current to close the contactor K1.  The closing of
contactor K1 establishes a parallel path to start button via
K1 NO terminals 23 & 24.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

130
Fig 2 shows the current direction and closing of contacts
as explained above.
Similarly Fig 3 shows the action taking place after the
timer relay operating the contact K4T.
Time delay contact changes opening star contact.
Fig 4 shows the connections established while the motor
is running in delta with the contactors K1 and K2 closed.
Delta contact closes.
Three-phase, slip-ring induction motor
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain briefly the construction and working of a three-phase, slip-ring induction motor
• explain how the starting torque is high due to insertion of rotor resistance
• state the characteristic of the slip-ring induction motor
• compare the slip-ring induction motor with the squirrel cage induction motor.
Construction : The slip-ring induction motor could be
used for industrial drives where variable speed and high
starting torque are prime requirements.  The stator of the
slip-ring induction motor is very much the same as that for
a squirrel cage motor but the construction of its rotor is
very much different.  Stator windings can be either star or
delta connected depending upon the design.  The rotor
consists of three-phase windings to form the same number
of poles as in a stator.  The rotor winding is connected in
star and the open ends are connected to three slip-rings
mounted in the rotor shaft, as shown in Fig 1.  The rotor
circuit is, in turn, connected to the external star-connected
resistances through the brushes, as shown in Fig 2.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

131
Working : When the stator-winding of the slip-ring motor
is connected to the 3-phase supply, it produces a rotating
magnetic field in the same way as a squirrel cage motor.
This rotating magnetic field induces voltages in the rotor
windings, and a rotor current will flow through the closed
circuit, formed by the rotor winding, the slip-rings, the
brushes and the star-connected external resistors.
At the time of starting, the external resistors are set for
their maximum value.  As such, the rotor resistance is high
enabling the starting current to be low.  At the same time,
the high resistance rotor circuit increases the rotor power
factor, and thereby, the torque developed at the start
becomes much higher than the torque developed in
squirrel cage motors.
As the motor speeds up, the external resistance is slowly
reduced, and the rotor winding is made to be short-
circuited at the slip-ring ends.  Because of the reduced
rotor resistance, the motor operates with low slip and high
operating efficiency.  The motor could be started for heavy
loads with higher resistance or vice versa.  However at
increased rotor resistance, the motor’s slip will be greater,
the speed regulation poorer and it will have low efficiency.
The resistance in the external circuit could be designed
and varied to change the speed of the slip-ring motor
between 50 to 100 percent of the rated speed.  However,
the I2R losses in the rotor due to increased resistance is
inevitable.
Starting torque :   The torque developed by the motor at
the instant of starting is called the starting torque.  In some
cases it is greater than the normal running torque whereas
in some other cases it is somewhat less.
Let  E2 be the rotor emf per phase at standstill
X2 be the rotor reactance per phase at standstill and R2 be
the rotor resistance per phase.
Therefore Z2 =  (
)
(
)2
2
2
2
X
 
 
R
+
= rotor impedance per
phase at standstill.
2
2
2
2
2
2
Z
R
 
 
θ 
cos
 ,
Z
E
 
 
Then
=
=
I
Standstill or starting torque Tst = K1 E2 I2 cos q2      or
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
st
X
R
R
 x 
X
R
E
 x
E
K
 
T
+
+
=
If the supply voltage V is constant, then the flux, f and
hence E2 is constant.
Therefore Tst =  
2
2
2 Z
R
 
K
 where K2 is another constant.
The starting torque of such a motor is increased by adding
external resistance in the rotor circuit.  The resistance is
progressively cut out as the motor gain speed.
Rotor emf and reactance under running condition : When
the starter is stationary i.e. S = 1, the frequency of the rotor
emf is the same as that of the stator supply frequency.  The
value of emf induced in the rotor at standstill is maximum
because the relative speed between the rotor and the
rotating stator flux is maximum.
When the rotor starts running, the relative speed between
the rotor and the rotating stator flux is decreased.  Hence
the rotor induced emf is also decreased.  The rotor emf
become zero if the rotor speed become equal to the speed
of stator rotating flux.
Hence, for a slip (s), the rotor induced emf will be s times
the induced emf at standstill.
Therefore, under running condition Er = sE2.
The frequency of induced emf will likewise become fr = sf2
where f2 is the rotor current frequency at standstill.
Due to decrease in frequency of the rotor emf, the rotor
reactance will also decrease.
Therefore Xr = sX2.
Characteristic and application of slip-ring induction
motor: Insertion of higher, external resistance alters the
starting torque to a higher value, as shown in Fig 3, by the
torque speed characteristic.
By inserting the suitable value rotor resistance, the speed
of the slip ring motor could be controlled inspite of power
loss in resistance.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

132
As shown in the curve, higher, external resistance improves
the starting torque to a higher value.  However the maximum
torque remains constant for the variation of the rotor
resistance.
By these curves, it is clear that the slip-ring motor could
be used to start heavy loads by insertion of high resistance
in the rotor to facilitate higher starting torque.  At the same
time the running efficiency of the motor could be achieved
by cutting out the external resistance when the motor
picks up its speed.
This motor could be used for drive which demands a higher
starting torque and also a variable speed control -  like
compressors, conveyors, cranes, hoists, steel mills and
printing presses.
Comparison between squirrel cage and slip-ring induction
motors is given below:
Sl. Property
Squirrel cage
Slip-ring motor
No.
1
Rotor
Bars are used
Winding wire is
construction
in rotor.
used.
Squirrel cage
Wound rotor
rotor is very
requires
simple, rugged
attention
and long lasting.
No slip-rings.
Slip-ring and
brush gear need
frequent main-
tenance.
2
Starting
Can be started
Rotor resistance
byDOL star-delta, starter is required
auto-transformer
starters.
3
Starting
Low
Very high
torque
4
Starting
High
Low
current
Sl. Property
Squirrel cage
Slip-ring motor
No.
5
Speed
Not easy, but
Easy to vary
variation
could be varied in
speed,but speed
larger steps by
change through
pole-changing or
pole-changing is
smaller incre-
not possible.
-mental steps
through thyristors
or by frequency
variation.
Speed change
possible by
- insertion of rotor
  resistance
- using thyristors
- using frequency
  variation
- injecting emf in
  the rotor circuit
- cascading
6
Acceleration Just satisfactory
Very good
on load
7
Maintenance Almost nil
Requires
frequent
maintenance
8
Cost
Low
Comparatively
high
Fig 4 shows the exploded view of the slip ring induction
motor.
Resistance starter for 3-phase, slip-ring induction motor
Objective: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the rotor resistance starters used for a 3-phase, slip-ring induction motor.
Slip-ring induction motors are started with full-line voltage
across the stator winding.  However, to reduce the heavy
rush of the starting current, a star-connected external
resistance is added in the rotor circuit as shown in Fig 1.
The external resistances are cut out, and the rotor winding
ends are shorted once the motor picks up its speed.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

133
If such a manual starter is used, there is a possibility that
someone may apply full voltage to the stator when the rotor
resistance is in a completely cut-out position, resulting in
heavy rush of the starting current and poor starting torque.
This could be eliminated by the use of a protective circuit
in the resistance starter; thereby motor cannot be started
until and unless all the rotor resistances are included in the
rotor winding.  Such a semi-automatic starter is shown in
Fig 2.
By pressing the ‘ON’ button, the contactor will close, only
when the shorting point ‘A’ at the rotor resistance is in a
closed position.  This is possible only when the handle is
in the start position.  Once the motor starts running, the
handle of the rotor resistance should be brought to ‘run’
position to cutout the rotor resistance.
The position of the handle clearly indicates that at the start
position, the contact ‘A’ is in the closed position, and at
the run position, contact ‘B’ is in the closed position, but
both cannot close at the same time.  The ‘ON’ push-button
needs to be held in the pushed-position till the handle is
brought to the run-position.  During the run-position, the
handle contact ‘B’ closes the no-volt coil circuit, and the
pressure on the ‘ON’ button can be released.
In general, for small machines, the rotor resistance is air-
cooled to dissipate the heat developed during starting.  For
larger machines, the rotor resistance is kept in an insulating
oil tank for cooling.  The starter shown is intended to start
the motor only.  As speed regulation through the rotor
resistance needs intermediate positions, they are specially
designed and always oil-cooled.
Method of measurement of slip in induction motor
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the method of measurement of slip by actual motor speed
• describe the method of measurement of slip by comparing motor and starter frequencies
• explain the method of measurement of slip by stroboscope method.
Measurement of slip
Following are the methods used for finding the slip of an
induction motor
(i) By actual measurement of motor speed: This
method requires measurement of actual motor speed N
and calculation of synchronous speed Ns. N is measured
with the help of a speedometer and Ns calculated from
the knowledge of supply frequency and the number of
poles of the motor (Since an induction motor does not
have salient poles, the number of poles is usually inferred
from the no-load speed or from the rated speed of the
motor). Then slip can be calculated by using the equation
S = (Ns - N) x 100 / Ns
(ii) By comparing rotor and stator supply frequencies:
This method is based on the fact that s = ƒr/ƒ. Since f is
generally known, s can be found if frequency of rotor
current can be measured by some method. In the usual
case, where ƒ is 50 Hz, ƒr is so low that individual cycles
can be easily counted. For this purpose, a DC moving
coil  preferably of centre-zero milli-voltmeter, is employed
as described below:
a) In the case of a slip-ring motor, the leads of the centre
zero milli-ammeter is connected to adjacent slip-rings
as they revolve (Fig 1). Usually, there is sufficient
voltage drop in the burshes and their short-circuiting
strap to provide an indication on the milli-ammeter.
The current in the milli-ammeter follows the variations
of the rotor current and hence the pointer oscillates
about its mean zero position. The number of complete
cycles made by the pointer per second can be easily
counted (it is worth remembering that one cycle
consists of a movement from zero to a maximum to
the right, back to zero and on to a maximum to the
left and then back to zero).
As an example, consider the case of a 4-pole motor
fed from a 50-Hz supply and running at 1,425 rpm.
Since Ns = 1,500 rpm its slip is 5% or 0.05. The
frequency of the rotor current would be ƒr = Sƒ = 0.05
x 50 = 2.5 Hz which (being slow enough) can be easily
counted.
b) For squirrel-cage motors (which do not have slip-rings)
it is not possible to employ the centre zero milli
ammeter.
iii) By Stroboscopic Method: In this method, a circular
metallic disc is taken and painted with alternately black
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

134
and white segments. The number of segments (both
black and white) is equal to the number of poles of the
motor. For a 6-pole motor, there will be six segments,
three black and three white, as shown in Fig 2a.
The painted disc is mounted on the end of the shaft and
illuminated by means of a neon-filled stroboscopic lamp,
which may be supplied preferably with a combined d.c.
and a.c. supply although only a.c. supply will do (When
combined d.c. and a.c. supply is used, the lamp should
be tried both ways in its socket to see which way it gives
better light.). The connections for combined supply are
shown in Fig 3 whereas Fig 2b shows the connections for
single supply only. It must be noted that with combined
d.c. and a.c. supply, the lamp will flash once per cycle (It
will flash only when the two voltages add and remain
extinguished when they oppose). But with a.c. supply, it
will flash twice per cycle.
Consider the case when the revolving disc is seen in the
flash light of the bulb which is fed by the combined d.c.
and a.c. supply.
If the disc were to rotate at synchronous speed, it would
appear to be stationary, Since in actual practice, its speed
is slightly less than the synchronous speed, it appears
to rotate slowly backwards.
Efficiency - characteristics of induction motor- no load test - blocked rotor test
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the power flow diagram of an induction motor indicating the losses
• calculate the efficiency from the given data.
When the three-phase induction motor is running at no-
load, the slip has a value very close to zero.  The torque
developed in the rotor is to overcome the rotational losses
consisting of friction and windage.  The input power to the
motor is to overcome stator iron loss and stator copper
loss.  The stator iron loss (consisting of eddy current and
hysteresis) depends on the supply frequency and the flux
density in the iron core.  It is practically constant.  The iron
loss of the rotor is, however, negligible because the
frequency of the rotor currents under normal condition is
always small.
If a mechanical load is then applied to the motor shaft, the
initial reaction is for the shaft load to drop the motor speed
slightly, thereby increasing the slip.  The increased slip
subsequently causes I2 to increase to that value which,
when inserted into the equation for torque calculation (i.e
T = Kφs I2 cos φs), yields sufficient torque to provide a
balance of power to the load.  Thus an equilibrium is
established and the operation proceeds at a particular
value of slip.  In fact, for each value of load horsepower
requirement, there is a unique value of slip.  Once slip is
specified then the power input, the rotor current, the
developed torque, the power output and the efficiency are
all determined.  The power flow diagram in a statement
form is shown in Fig 1.  Note that the loss quantities are
placed on the left side of the flow point.  Fig 2  is the same
power flow diagram but now expressed in terms of all the
appropriate relationships needed to compute the
performance.
Torque, Mechanical power and Rotor output : Stator
input Pi = stator output + stator losses.
The stator output is transferred fully inductively to the rotor
circuit.
Obviously, rotor input Pg = stator output.
Rotor gross output, Pm = rotor input Pg - rotor cu. losses.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

135
This rotor output is converted into mechanical energy and
gives rise to the gross torque T.  Out of this gross torque
developed, some is lost due to windage and friction losses
in the rotor, and the rest appear are useful torque To.
Let n r.p.s be the actual speed of the rotor and if it is in Nm,
then
T x 2πn = rotor gross output in watts, Pm.
N.m
 
n 
2
P
 
 watts,
in
 
output
 
gross
 
rotor
 
 
T
 
Therefore,
m
π
=
The value of gross torque in kg.m is given by
m
 
Kg
 
n 
2
 x 
9.81
P
 
m
 
Kg
 
n 
2
 x 
9.81
 watts
in
 
output
 
gross
 
rotor
 
 
T
m
π
π
=
=
If there were no copper losses in the rotor, the rotor output
will equal the rotor input and the rotor will run at synchronous
speed.
s
g
n 
 2
P
 
input
 
rotor
 
 
T
 
Therefore,
π
=
From the above two equation we get,
Rotor gross output = Pm = Tw = T x 2πn
Rotor input = Pg = TWs = T x 2πns
The difference between the two equals the rotor copper
loss.
Therefore, rotor copper loss = s x rotor input
    = s x power across air gap
    = sPg.
s
loss
 
copper
 
rotor
 
 
P
 
input,
 
rotor
 
Also
g =
Rotor gross output Pm
 = Input Pg - rotor cu.loss
 = (1 - s) Pg
s - 1 
  
p 
input,
 
rotor
p 
output,
 
gross
 
rotor
 
or
g
m =
rotor gross output. Pm = (1 - s)Pg
s
n
n
 
 
efficiency
 
rotor
 
Therefore
=
Example
The power input to a 4-pole, 3-phase, 50 Hz. induction
motor is 50kW, the slip is 5%.  The stator losses are 1.2
kW and the windage and friction losses are 0.2 kW.  Find
(i) the rotor speed, (ii) the rotor copper loss, (iii) the
efficiency.
Data given
No. of poles
P = 4
Frequency
f = 50 Hz
Phases
= 3
Input power
= 50kW
% Slip
s = 5%
Stator losses
= 1.2 kW
Friction & Windage losses
= 0.2 kW
Find:
Rotor speed
= N
Rotor copper loss
= s x input power to rotor
efficiency
= η
SOLUTION
r
r
s
r
s
s
N
 - 
1500
 
 
75
 
1500
N
 - 
1500
 
 
100
5
N
N
 - 
N
 
 s 
 
slip
 
Fractional
rpm
 
1500
 
 
4
6000
 
 
p
120f
 
 
N
 
 
speed
  
s
Synchronou
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
Therefore, rotor speed, Nr = 1500 - 75 = 1425 rpm.
Input power to rotor
= (50 - 1.2)kW
Rotor copper loss
= s x input power to rotor
= 0.05 x 48.8
= 2.44 kW.
Rotor output = Rotor input - (Friction and windage loss +
           rotor cu.loss)
       = 48.8 - (0.2 + 2.44)
       = 46.16 kW
92.32%.
 
 
50
100
 x 
44.56
 
 
Input
Output
 
 
Efficiency
=
=
=
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

136
Characteristics of squirrel cage induction motor
Objective: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• describe the characteristics and application of a 3-phase squirrel cage induction motor.
The most important characteristic of the induction motor
is the speed torque characteristic which is also called the
mechanical characteristic.  A study of this characteristic
will give an idea about the behaviour of the motor in load
conditions.  As the torque of the motor is also dependent
on the slip, it will be interesting to study the characteristic
of the squirrel cage induction motor to find the relationship
between load, speed, torque and slip.
Speed, torque and slip characteristics : It has already
been made clear that the rotor speed of a squirrel cage
motor will always lag behind the synchronous speed of the
stator field.  The rotor slip is necessary in order to induce
the rotor currents required for the motor torque.  At no load,
only a small torque is required to overcome the motor’s
mechanical losses, and the rotor slip will be very small,
say about two percent.  As the mechanical load is
increased, however, the rotor speed will decrease, and
hence, the slip will increase.  This increase in slip inturn
increases the induced rotor currents, and the increased
rotor current in turn, will produce a higher torque to meet
the increased load.
Fig 1 shows the typical speed torque and slip characteristic
curves for a standard squirrel cage motor.  The speed curve
shows that a standard squirrel cage motor will operate at
a relatively constant speed from no load to full load.
Since the squirrel cage rotor is constructed basically of
heavy copper/aluminium bars, shorted by two end rings,
the rotor impedance will be relatively, low and hence, a
small increase in the rotor induced voltage will produce a
relatively large increase in the rotor current.  Therefore, as
the squirrel cage motor is loaded, from no-load to full load,
a small decrease in speed is required to cause a relative
increase in the rotor current.  For this reason, regulation
of a squirrel cage motor is very good.  But the motor is often
classified as a constant speed device.
The slip curve shows that the percentage slip is less than
5%  load, and is a straight line.
Since the torque will increase in almost direct proportion
to the rotor slip, the torque graph is similar to the slip graph
which also has a straight line characteristic as shown in
Fig 1.
Relationship between torque, slip rotor resistance
and rotor inductive reactance : It was stated earlier that
torque is produced in an induction motor by the interaction
of the stator and the rotor fluxes.  The amount of torque
produced is dependent on the strength of these two fields
and the phase relation between them.  This may be
expressed mathematically as
T = K φsIR Cosφ
where T = torque in Newton metre
K = a constant
φs = stator flux in weber
IR = rotor current in ampere
Cos φ = rotor power factor
From no load to full load, the torque constant (K), the stator
flux (φs) and the rotor power factor (Cos φ) for a squirrel cage
motor will be practically constant.  Hence the motor’s
torque will vary almost directly with the induced rotor
current (IR) since the rotor current inturn will vary almost
directly with its slip.  Variation of the torque of a squirrel
cage motor is often plotted against its rotor slip as shown
in Fig 2.
The increase in the rotor current, and hence, the increase
in the rotor torque for a given increase in the rotor slip is
dependent on the rotor power factor.  The rotor resistance
for a squirrel cage motor will be constant.  However, an
increase in slip will increase the rotor frequency, and the
resulting inductive reactance of the rotor from no load to full
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

137
load and even upto 125 percent of rated load, the amount
of rotor slip for a standard squirrel cage motor is relatively
small and the rotor frequency will seldom exceed 2 to 5 Hz.
Therefore, for the above range of load the effect of frequency
change on impedance will be negligible, and as shown in
Fig 2, the rotor torque will increase in almost a straight
relationship with the slip.
Inbetween 10 to 25 percent slip the squirrel cage motor will
attain its maximum possible torque.  This torque is
referred to as the maximum breakdown torque, and it may
reach between 200 and 300 percent of the rated torque as
shown in Fig 2.  At the maximum torque, the rotor’s
inductive reactance will be equal to its resistance.
However, when the load and the resulting slip are increased
much beyond the rated full load values, the increase in
rotor frequency, and hence, the increase in rotor reactance
and impedance become appreciable.  This increase in
rotor inductive reactance and the resulting decrease in
rotor power factor will have two effects; first, the increase
in impedance will cause a decrease in the rate at which the
rotor current increases with an increase in slip, and
second, the lagging rotor power factor will increase; that
means, the rotor flux will reach its maximum sometime
after the stator peak flux has been swept by it.  The out-
of-phase relationship between these two fields will reduce
their interaction and their resulting torque.  Hence, if the
motor load is increased beyond the breakdown torque
value, the torque falls rapidly due to the above two effects
and the motor operation becomes unstable, and the motor
will stall.
Effect of rotor resistance upon the torque/slip
relationship: Fig 3 shows the relationship between torque
and slip when the rotor resistance is changed.  The shaded
portion of the curve shows the actual operating area.  Curve
A for an induction motor with low rotor resistance, say 1
ohm, Curve B is for 2 ohm, Curve C is for 4 ohm and Curve
D for 8 ohm.
Breakdown torque : In all these cases the standstill
inductive reactance of the rotor is the same, say 8 ohm.
From the curves it is clear that the maximum (breakdown)
torque is the same for the four values of R.  Further it is also
clear that the maximum torque occurs at greater slip for
higher resistance.
Starting torque : At the time of starting, the fractional slip
is 1, and the starting torque is about 300% of the full load
torque for the rotor having maximum resistance as shown
by curve D of Fig 3, and at the same time the rotor having
low resistance will produce a starting torque of 75% of the
full load torque only, as shown by curve A of Fig 3.  Hence,
we can say that an induction motor having high rotor
resistance will develop a high torque at the time of starting.
Running torque : While looking at the normal operating
region in the shaded portion of the graph, it will be found
the torque at running is appreciably high for low resistance
rotor motors and will be conspicuously less for high
resistance rotor motors.
As squirrel cage induction motors will have less rotor
resistance, their starting torque is low but running torque
is quite satisfactory.  This is partly compensated by the
double squirrel cage motors which produce high starting
and normal running torque.  On the other hand, the slip ring
induction motor, due to its wound rotor, has the possibility
of inclusion of resistance at the time of starting and
reducing the same while running.
Application of squirrel cage induction motor : Single
squirrel cage motors are used widely in industries and in
irrigation pump sets where fairly constant speed is required.
This motor has fairly high efficiency, costs less and is
found to be robust in construction.
Double squirrel cage induction motors are used in textile
mills and metal cutting tool operations where high starting
torque is essential.
No-load test of induction motor
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• determine the constant (mechanical and iron losses of induction motor) by no-load test
• calculate the total equivalent resistance per phase.
No-load test
The induction motor is connected to the supply through a
3-phase auto-transformer (Fig 1). The 3-phase auto-trans-
former is used to regulate the starting current by applying
low voltage at the start, and then gradually increased to
rated voltage. The ammeter and voltmeters are selected
based upon the motor specification. The no-load current of
the motor will be very low, up to 30% of full load.
As the power factor of the motor on no-load is very low, in
the range of 0.1 to 0.2, the wattmeters selected are such
as to give a current reading at low power factor. The
wattmeter full scale reading will be approximate equal to
the product of the ammeter and voltmeter full scale
deflection values.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

138
The calculation is done as follows to determine the
constant losses of the induction motor.
At no-load, the output delivered by the motor is zero. All
the mechanical power developed in the rotor is used to
maintain the rotor running at its rated speed. Hence the
input power is equal to the no-load copper loss plus iron
losses and mechanical losses.
Calculation
VNL is  ®  line stator voltage
INL  is  ®  line current
PNL is  ® Three-phase power input.
The input power consists of the core loss Pc, friction and
windage loss P(rot), and the stator copper loss.
PNL = Pc + Prot + 3 I2
NL RS
This permits the sum of rotational loss to be evaluated.
Prot + C = PNL - 3 I2
NL RS
where the stator resistance Rs per phase obtained from a
resistance measurement at the stator terminal.
In star connection RS = R/2.
Delta connection  RS = 2/3 R.
Blocked rotor test
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• determine the full load copper loss of a 3-phase induction motor by blocked rotor test
• calculate the total equivalent resistance per phase and efficiency.
The connections are made similar to that of the no-load
test. In this case the ammeter is selected to carry the full
load current of the motor. Wattmeters will be of a suitable
range and its power factor is 0.5 to unity.
An auto-transformer is used to give a much lower
percentage of the rated voltage. The rotor is locked by a
suitable arrangement such that it cannot rotate even if the
supply is given to the motor. One such arrangement is
shown in Fig 1. The belt is over-tightened on the pulley to
prevent rotation.
As the rotor is in a locked condition it is equivalent to the
short circuit secondary of a transformer. Therefore, a small
induced voltage in the rotor cage winding will be sufficient
to cause a large current to flow in the cage.
It is very essential to limit the supply voltage to a value less
than 5% at start and then gradually increase until the
starter current is equal to the full load current. The
frequency of the starter supply voltage is maintained at
normal rated supply frequency.
The method of calculating the copper losses from the
result is illustrated through the example given below.
Example
A 5 HP 400V, 50 Hz, four-pole, three-phase induction
motor was tested and the following data were obtained.
Blocked rotor test: Vs = 54. Ps = 430, Is = 7.5 A.
The resistance of the stator winding gives a 4 V drop
between the terminals’ rated DC current flowing.
Find the power factor at short circuit and Re and Xe and full
load copper loss.
Given:
Output
= 5 HP
Voltage
= 400 V
Frequency
= 50 Hz.
Blocked rotor voltage, VS
= 54 V
Power PS,
= 430 W
Current, IS
= 7.5 A
Find:
Power factor at short circuit
= Cos θS
Equivalent resistance, Re/phase
Equivalent reactance Xe/phase
Full load copper loss
= 3I2 Re.
Known:
WS = 
3 VSIS   Cos ∅ S
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

139
2
e
2
e
s
e
X
 
 
R
 
 
3
V
 
 
Z
 
impedance
 
Equivalent
s
+
=
=
I
 
3
P
 
 
resistance
 
equivalent
 
 
R
2
s
s
e
I
=
=
2
e
2
e
e
R
 - 
Z
 
 
reactance
 
equivalent
 
 
X
=
=
Solution:
WS = 
3 VSIS   Cos ∅ S
s
s
s
s
 V
3
W
 
 
Cos
I
=
φ
0.61
 
  
          
696.6
430
 
  
          
7.5
 x 
54
 x 
1.72
430
 
 
 
Cos
S
=
=
=
φ
Ω
=
=
=
=
2.5
 
 
168.75
430
 
  
          
          
          
          
          
(7.5)
 x 
3
430
 
  
          
          
          
          
          
 
X
 
3
P
 
 
/phase
R
 
resistance
 
Equivalent
2
s
e
2
s
I
.
3.24
 
 
10.56
 
    
          
          
6.25
 - 
16.81
 
 
2.5
 - 
4.1
 
X
         
          
.
 
4.1
 
 
12.90
54
 
 
7.5
 x 
3
54
 
 
Z
         
          
R
 - 
Z
 
 
phase
reactance/
 
equivalent
 
 
X
2
2
e
e
2
e
2
e
e
Ω
=
=
=
=
Ω
=
=
=
=
=
Full load copper loss
= 3 I2 Re
= 3 x 7.52 x 2.5 = 421.875 watts
Answer
i
cos φ
s = 0.61
ii
Equivalent resistance Re
 /phase = 2.5 Ω
iii Equivalent reactance Xe/phase = 3.24 Ω
iv
Full load copper loss = 421.875 watts
Efficiency from no-load and blocked rotor test
Objective: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• determine the efficiency at full load.
Example
A 5 HP 220V, 50 Hz four-pole, three-phase induction
motor was tested and the following data were obtained.
No load test = VNL = 220V, PNL = 340 W, INL = 6.2 A
Blocked rotor test = VBR = 54V, PBR = 430W,
IBR = 15.2 A
Application 4V DC across two stator terminals causes the
rated current flow with stator (assume star connection).
Determine the efficiency at full load.
Assuming star connection DC resistance/phase = R/2
SOLUTION:
R1 + R2 = 4/15.2 = 0.263 W
Resistance/phase = 0.263/2 = 0.1315 Ω
Effective AC resistance Rs = 1.4 Rph
= 1.4 x 0.1315
= 0.1841 Ω
R(rot + c)
= PNL - 3I2
NL Rs
= 340 - 3 x 6.22 x 0.1841
= 340 - 21.23
= 318.77 W(constant loss)
Copper loss
= 3I2 Re = 430 W
Output
= 5 x 735.5 = 3677.5 W
4426.2
3677.5
 
 
430
 
 
318.77
 
 
3677.5
3677.5
 
 
Efficiency
=
+
+
=
=  0.830
% efficiency
=  0.830 x 100
    i.e.
=  83%.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

140
Effect of external resistance in slip ring motor rotor circuit
Objective: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the effect of introducing additional rotor resistance in an induction motor.
We have seen that the slip-ring induction motor is started
by controlling resistance in the form of a rheostat connected
in star.  By increasing the rotor resistance, the rotor
current is reduced at starting.  Hence the starter current
is also reduced.  The starting torque is high because of
improvement in the rotor power factor.
The introduction of external resistance in the rotor circuit
is applicable to slip-ring motors only.  The motor speed is
reduced by introducing an external resistance in the rotor
circuit.
We know that the torque under running condition is
T α Er Ir cos φ2
or T α φ Ir cos φ2 because Er  α φ
where Er = rotor emf/phase under running condition
Ir = rotor current / phase under running condition
Er = s E2
Therefore
At normal speeds close to synchronous speed, the sX2 is
small and hence negligible with respect to the value of R2.
Hence T as/R2
It is obvious that for a given torque, slip can be increased,
that is, speed can be decreased by increasing the rotor
resistance.  This method is used to control the speed of
a slip-ring motor.
One serious disadvantage of this method of speed control
is that with the increase in rotor circuit resistance, I2R
losses also increases.  Thus the operating efficiency of the
motor decreases.  This method of speed change is used
only where such changes are needed for short periods
only.
Auto-transformer starter
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the construction and operation of auto-transformer starter
• explain power circuit and control circuit of auto-transformer starter.
Auto-transformer starter
By connecting series resistances reduced voltage is
obtained at the motor leads.  It is simple and cheap, but
more power is wasted in the external series resistances.
In auto transformer starting method the reduced voltage is
obtained by taking tappings at suitable points from a three
phase auto -transformer as shown in Fig 1.  The auto
transformers are generally tapped at 55, 65, 75 percent
points.  So that the adjustment at these voltages may be
made for proper starting torque requirements. Since the
contacts frequently break, large value of current acting
some time quenched effectively by having the auto-
transformer coils immersed in the oil bath.
The power circuit of the auto-transformer is shown in
Fig 2a and control circuit of auto-transformer is shown in
Fig 2b.
Auto-transformer starter - operation
In this type of starter reduced voltage for starting the motor
is obtained from a three-phase star connected auto-
transformer. While starting, the voltage is reduced by
selecting suitable tappings from the auto-transformer.
Once the motor starts rotating 75% of its synchronous
speed, full line voltage is applied across the motor and the
auto-transformer is cut off from the motor circuit.
Fig 3 shows the connection of an auto-transformer starter.
To start the motor the handle of the starter is turned
downward and the motor gets a reduced voltage from the
auto-transformer tappings.  When the motor attains about
75% of its rated speed the starter handle is moved upward
and the motor gets full voltage.  The auto-transformer gets
disconnected from the motor circuit.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

141
Single phasing preventer/phase failure relay
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• define single phasing
• state the effects of single phasing
• explain the necessity of a single phasing preventer
• classify the single phasing preventers
• explain the installation procedure
• explain the procedure for troubleshooting and servicing of single phasing preventer.
Single phasing preventer/phase failure relay : When
one of the three lines of a three-phase supply system fails
or opens, the load current flows between the other two
lines only and the fault is known as single phasing.
Effect of single phasing: The effect of single phasing is
different with different types of loads as follows
•
In 3-phase heating loads, the heat produced decreases
to around 50%; at the same time it does not harm the
equipment.
•
In three-phase motors, the effect of single phasing is
different on different occasions. i) During starting, if
single phasing occurs, the motor fails to start or stalls
as proper rotating magnetic field is not created. But the
motor draws a very large current and motor windings
gets heated up. ii) During running, if single phasing
occurs, the motor may or may not run depending  upon
the load condition and the phase in which supply is
available will draw a large current and the winding is
likely to burn out due to overheating.
Necessity of single phasing preventor/phase failure
relay: If two phases of the supply to a three-phase
induction motor are interchanged, the motor will reverse its
direction of rotation. This action is called phase reversal.
In the operation of elevators and in many industrial
applications, phase reversal may result in serious damage
to the equipment and injury to people using the equipment.
In other situations, if a fuse blows or a wire connected to
the motor breaks while the motor is running, the motor will
continue to operate on two phase but will experience
serious overheating. To protect motors against these
conditions of phase failure, a sinlge phase preventor is
used.
Types of preventors: Single phasing preventors are
available in three types.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139
Hand operated auto-transformer starters are suitable for
motors from 20 to 150 hp whereas automatic auto-
transformer starters are used with large horse-power
motors upto 425 hp.

142
•
Mechanical
•
Current sensing
•
Voltage sensing
Single phasing preventor - mechanical type : One
type of single phasing preventor is incorporated with
bimetal relays which opens the NVC circuit similar to that
of normal OLR. This type of single phasing preventor is
slow in operation and, also not fully reliable, and hence,
not preferred nowadays.
The second type of mechanical phase failure relay uses
coils connected to two lines of the three-phase supply.
The currents in these coils set up a rotating magnetic field
that tends to turn a copper disc clockwise. This clockwise
torque actually is the resultant of two torques acting in
opposite direction. Out of two torques, one polyphase
torque tends to turn the disc clockwise, and one single-
phase torque tends to turn the disc anti-clockwise.
The disc is kept from turning in the clockwise direction by
a projection resting against a stop. However, if the disc
begins to rotate in the anti-clockwise direction, the projecting
arm will move a toggle mechanism to open the starter and
disconnect the motor from the line. In other words, if one
line is opened, the poly-phase torque disappears and the
remaining single-phase torque rotates the disc in anti-
clockwise direction. As a result, the motor is disconnected
from the line. In the case of phase reversal, the poly-phase
torque helps the single-phase torque to turn the disc anti-
clockwise, and again, the motor is disconnected from the
line.
Single phasing preventers - current sensing : It
operates on the principle of equal currents with balanced
loads developing secondary voltage on current
transformers. These secondary voltages are so connected
so as to add and the added voltage is rectified, filtered and
sensed and applied to operate a relay which operate to
close the  NVC circuit of the starter.
Fig 1 shows the block diagram of a current sensing single
phasing preventor.
Fig 2 shows a typical circuit diagram of current sensing
single phase preventor. The terminals 1 and 2 are used if
any time delay circuit is to be introduced. Otherwise they
are kept shorted.
Terminals 3 and 4 are connected in series with the NVC
circuit of starter. The relay will not operate if the motor
draws a current lesser than the specified value or the
circuit is unbalanced thereby keeps the motor off.
This type of single phasing preventors are suitable only
where the motors run with a constant load such as pump
motors, compressor motors etc. It also serves as dry run
protection unit as and when the motor is out of load, such
as a pump running without water, the load current
decreases and the circuit senses and trips the motor
circuit.
Single phasing preventer -  voltage sensing : In an AC
three-phase supply the order in which three -phase voltages
reach the maximum value is known as phase sequence.
The phase voltage reaches their maximum positive value
one after another at 120o in clockwise known as positive
phase sequence and in anti-clock wise known as negative
phase sequence. In the case of phase reversal or
unbalanced voltages or no voltage in a line it results in a
super-imposition of negative phase sequence over the
normal positive phase sequence of supply voltages. This
negative sequence is filtered by a resistance capacitance
or resistance, capacitance and inductor network and de-
energise the relay in the voltage the sensing single
phasing preventor.
Fig 3 and Fig 4 shows the block diagram and circuit
diagram of a typical voltage sensing single phasing
preventor. In this a resistance, capacitance network is
utilized to sense the negative phase sequence. When
phase sequences and voltages are correct, no voltage will
be generated across the filtered output i.e. across
capacitor. C4 in the circuit which drives the  transistor Q1
to cut off  transistor Q2 to drive the relay.
When the negative sequence occurs due to unbalanced
supply voltage or phase reversal, a voltage is developed
across the capacitor C4 which drives the transistor Q1 to
saturation and transistor Q2 to cut off. This results in
switching off the relay circuit.
Some of the single phasing preventors are provided with
the facility to adjust unbalanced settings. For example
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

143
when the relay is found to operate very frequently for the
set value, the unbalanced pre-set can be changed by
operating the pre-set P5 in Fig 4.
Single phasing preventor with over-voltage and
under voltage cut off (Total motor protection) : When a
motor is fed with reduced voltage, the motor draws excess
current to drive the load and with an over -voltage, also it
draws excess current. To protect the motor from under-
voltage or over-voltage and also from single phasing a
preventor with over and under voltage protection is used for
total motor protection.
Fig 5 shows an arrangement of over-voltage and under -
voltage cut off circuit along with single phasing preventor.
In the circuit transistor Q1 serves as over-voltage cut off and
transistor Q2 serves as under-voltage cut off where- as
transistor Q3 serves as single phasing preventor.
Installation of single phasing preventor : Installation
and connection of single phasing preventor shall be done
as recommended by the manufacturer. Preferably single
phasing preventors shall be located nearer to the equipment
and not subjected to abnormal vibration. Care should be
taken to locate the unit away from a heat generating
source such as oven, furnace etc.
A single phase preventor shall be connected with the
supply line and starter to the appropriate terminals and
circuits.
Some of the commonly used single phasing preventors
and their connection with starter are shown in Figs 6 & 7
for your reference.
Troubleshooting and maintenance of single phasing
preventor : The arrangement of components and their
circuits of single phasing preventors vary from one make
to another make as well as from one type to another type.
It is preferred to follow the manufacturer’s recommendations
for troubleshooting and maintenance of single phase
preventors. A few general guide lines for troubleshooting of
single phase preventors are given in the Table-1.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

144
Table 1
S.No.
  Symptoms
Possible causes
Remedy
1.
Starter with single phase
No supply.
Check and resume supply.
preventor does not start.
Low supply voltage.
Verify and correct the voltage.
Unbalanced line voltages.
Verify and correct.
Improper phase sequence.
Reverse the phase sequence by
interchanging any two incoming lines.
Single phasing
Check and rectify.
No control circuit voltage.
Check and rectify.
2.
Starter with single phase
Low supply voltage.
Verify and correct.
preventor does not hold on.
Unbalanced line voltages.
Verify and correct.
Single phasing.
Verify and correct.
Improper phase sequence.
Reverse the phase sequence.
Defect in single phase preventor
Check, repair or replace.
electronic circuit.
Relay of single phase preventor
Check, rectify or replace.
is not energised.
Improper function of
relay contacts.
Check, rectify or replace.
Open in holding circuit.
Check and correct.
3.
Starter with single phase
Abnormal fluctuations in line
Check and rectify.
preventor trips frequently.
voltages.
Improper settings or unbalanced
Adjust the unbalanced settings.
settings.
Loose contact in supply lines/
Check and rectify.
control circuit.
Braking system of motors
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the necessity of braking system for motors
• list and explain each type of braking system.
Necessity of braking system
The term braking comes from the term brake. The brake
is an equipment to reduce the speed of any moving or
rotating equipment, like vehicles, locomotives etc. The
process of applying brakes can be termed as braking.
The term braking in two parts i) Mechanical braking
and the ii) Powerbraking. In mechanical braking the
speed of the machine is reduced solely by mechanical
process but in Powerbraking the whole process is
depended on the flux and torque directions. Each type of
Powerbraking is the reversal of the direction of the flux.
Braking is the process of reducing speed of any rotating
machine. The application of braking is in factories,
industrial areas or be it in locomotives or vehicles.
Everywhere the use of mechanical and Powerbrakes is
inevitable.
Types of braking
Brakes are used to reduce or cease the speed of motors.
There are various types of motors available (DC motors,
induction motors, synchronous motors, single phase
motors etc.) and the specialty and properties of these
motors are different from each other, hence this braking
methods also differs from each other. Braking can be
divided in to three methods mainly, which are applicable
for almost every type of motors.
1
Plugging type braking
2
Regenerative Braking
3
Dynamic braking.
1
Plugging type braking: In this method the terminals
of supply are reversed, as a result the generator torque
also reverses which resists the normal rotation of the
motor and as a result the speed decreases. During
plugging external resistance is also introduced into
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

145
the circuit to limit the flowing current. The main
disadvantage of this method is that here power is
wasted.
2
Regenerative braking: Regenerative braking takes
place whenever the speed of the motor exceeds the
synchronous speed. This braking method is called
regenerative braking because here the motor works
as generator and supply itself is given power from the
load, i.e. motors. The main criteria for regenerative
braking is that the rotor has to rotate at a speed higher
than synchronous speed, only then the motor will act
as a generator and the direction of  current  flow through
the circuit and direction of the torque reverses and
braking takes place. The only disadvantage of this type
of braking is that the motor has to run at super
synchronous speed which may damage the motor
mechanically and electrically, but regenerative braking
can be done at sub synchronous speed if the variable
frequency source is available.
3
Dynamic braking: Another method of reversing the
direction of torque and braking the motor is dynamic
braking. In this method of braking the motor which is
at a running condition is disconnected from the source
and connected across a resistance. When the motor
is disconnected from the source, the rotor keeps
rotating due to inertia and it works as a self -excited
generator. When the motor works as a generator the
flow of the  current  and torque reverses.
Method of speed control of 3 phase induction motor
Objectives: At the end of this exercise you shall be able to
• list the speed control methods from stator and rotor side
• explain the speed control methods of 3 phase induction motor.
In 3 phase induction motor, speed can be controlled from
both stator and rotor side
1
Speed control methods from stator side
•
By changing the applied voltage
•
By changing the applied frequency
•
By changing the number of stator poles
2
Speed control from rotor side
•
Rotor rheostat control
•
Cascade operation
•
By injecting EMF in rotor circuit
1. Speed control from stator side
a) By changing the applied voltage: Torque equation
of induction motor is
(
)
(
)2
2
2
2
2
2
2
s
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
X
s
R
R
sE
N
2
3
X
s
R
R
sE
k
T
+
π
=
+
=
Rotor resistance R2 is constant and if slip s is small then
sX2 is so small that it can be neglected. Therefore, T α
 sE2
2 where E2 is rotor induced emf and E2 α V
And hence T α V2, thus if supplied voltage is decreased,
torque decreases and hence the speed decreases.
This method is the easiest and cheapest, still rarely used
because-
1
A large change in supply voltage is required for
relatively small change in speed.
2
Large change in supply voltage will result in large
change in flux density, hence disturbing the magnetic
conditions of the motor.
b) By changing the applied frequency: Synchronous
speed (Ns)of the rotating magnetic field of induction
motor is given by,
rpm
P
f
120
Ns =
where, f = frequency of the supply and P = number of
stator poles.
Thus, synchronous speed changes with change in supply
frequency, and thus running speed also changes. However,
this method is not widely used. This method is used where,
only the induction motor is supplied by a generator (so
that frequency can be easily changed by changing the
speed of prime mover).
c) Changing the number of stator poles: From the
above equation, it can be also seen that synchronous
speed (and hence, running speed) can be changed by
changing the number of stator poles. This method is
generally used for squirrel cage induction motors, as
squirrel cage rotor adapts itself for any number of stator
poles. Change in stator poles is achieved by two or
more independent stator windings wound for different
number of poles in same slots.
For example, a stator is wound with two 3phase windings,
one for 4 poles and other for 6 poles.
for supply frequency of 50 Hz
i)
Synchronous speed when 4 pole winding is connected,
Ns = 120 x (50/4) = 1500 RPM
ii) Synchronous speed when 6 pole winding is connected,
Ns = 120 x (50/6) = 1000 RPM
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

146
2
Speed control from rotor side
a) Rotor rheostat control: This method is similar to that
of  armature rheostat control of DC shunt motor. But
this method is only applicable to slip ring motors, as
addition of external resistance in the rotor of squirrel
cage motors is not possible.
b) Cascade operation: In this method of speed control,
two motors are used. Both are mounted on a same
shaft so that both run at same speed. One motor is
fed from a 3phase supply and other motor is fed from
the induced emf in first motor via slip-rings. The
arrangement is as shown in Fig 1.
Motor A is called main motor and motor B is called
auxiliary motor.
Let, Ns1 = frequency of motor A
       Ns2 = frequency of motor B
       P1 = number of poles stator of motor A
       P2 = number of stator poles of motor B
       N = speed of the set and same for both motors
       f = frequency of the supply
Now, slip of motor A, S1 = (Ns1 - N) / Ns1.
Frequency of the rotor induced emf in motor A, f1 = S1f.
Now, auxiliary motor B is supplied with the rotor induce
emf therefore,  Ns2 = (120f1) / P2  =  (120S1f) / P2. Now
putting the value of  S1 = (Ns1 - N) / Ns1
Ns2 = 120f Ns1 −N
P2Ns1
 )
(
At no load, speed of the auxiliary rotor is almost same as
its synchronous speed. i.e. N = Ns2. From the above
equations, it can be obtained that
N = 120f
P1 + P2
 
With this method, four different speeds can be obtained
1
When only motor A works, corresponding speed = Ns1
= 120f / P1
2
When only motor B works, corresponding speed = Ns2
= 120f / P2
3
If cumulative cascading is done, speed of the set = N
= 120f / (P1 + P2)
4
If differential cascading is done, speed of the set = N
= 120f (P1 - P2)
c) By injecting EMF in rotor circuit: In this method,
speed of induction motor is controlled by injecting a
voltage in rotor circuit. It is necessary that voltage (emf)
being injected must have same frequency as of slip
frequency. However, there is no restriction to the phase
of injected emf. If we inject emf which is in opposite
phase with the rotor induced emf, rotor resistance will
be increased. If we inject emf which is in phase with
rotor induced emf, rotor resistance will decrease. Thus,
by changing the phase of injected emf, speed can be
controlled. The main advantage of this method is a
wide range of speed control (above normal as well as
below normal) can be achieved. The emf can be injected
by various methods such as Kramer system, Scherbius
system etc.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.131 to 3.3.139

147
Power
Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140
Electrician - AC Three Phase Motor
Fundamental terms used in AC winding
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the terms used in AC winding
• explain the different types of AC winding.
Fundamental terms used in AC Winding: Before taking
up AC winding, the trainee should be familiar with the
terms used in AC winding as explained in the following
paragraphs.
Coil :  A number of turns connected in series is called a
coil. A coil has two active sides and two inactive sides.
Turn:  It is the closed path of the conductor which is
formed by connecting the two inductors under two dissimilar
poles N and S. (Fig 1)
Active side of a coil : It is that part of the coil which lies
in the slots of the core. It is also known as an inductor.
(Fig 1)
Inactive side of a coil : It is the portion of the coil which
joins the two active sides of a coil. (Fig 1)
Leads of a coil : These are the two ends of a coil which
are used for the connection. Leads are also known as
jumpers which may be  symmetrical  or  unsymmetrical  as
shown  in Fig 2.
Pole pitch : The distance between the centre of two
adjacent opposite poles is called the pole pitch. Pole pitch
is measured in terms of slots or coil sides.
poles
 
of
 
No.
stator
 
the
 
in
 
slots
 
of
 
No.
 
 
pitch
 
Pole
=
Coil pitch/span and coil throw :  The distance between
the two active sides of a coil under adjacent dissimilar
poles is called coil pitch/span. Fig 3 shows the coil pitch/
span and coil throw (i.e. coil pitch/span = 4 and coil throw
is 1-5).
Pitch factor : Winding pitch need not be equal to the pole
pitch. If the pole pitch and winding pitch are equal, the
winding is called full pitched winding. If the winding pitch
is less than the pole pitch, the winding is called fractional
pitch winding or short pitch winding. While rewinding, the
original winding pitch should not be changed. The machine
designer would have chosen the winding pitch after
considering the different factors required for the better
performance of the machine. Any change in the original
winding pitch of a machine will affect the performance of
that machine. If the winding pitch is 4, then the coil throw
is 1 to 5, and one side of the coil is placed in slot No.1 and
the other side of the coil is inserted in slot No.5 as shown
in Fig 3. Then the winding pitch is 5-1 = 4. The ratio
between the winding pitch and pole pitch is called  the
pitch factor.
pitch
 
Pole
pitch
 
Winding
 
 
factor
 
Pitch
=
Short pitch winding is usually used in almost all machines
except variable speed motors. The reasons for adopting
short pitch winding are given below.
1
Winding requires less copper.
2
Copper loss is less.
3
Efficiency of the machine is increased.
4
Winding occupies less space.
5
In alternators, the winding produces uniform sine wave.

148
Coil group : When you observe the direction of the current
flow in a coil, you will see current in the two coil sides have
opposite directions as shown in Fig 4(a).
Accordingly the current in a single coil produces two
dissimilar poles. In an ordinary winding, according to the
design, one or more coils may be connected in series to
form a group as shown in Fig 4(b).(Three coils form one
group) The total number of coil groups in a winding is equal
to the number of phases multiplied by the number of poles.
Total No.of coil groups = No. of phases x No. of poles
phases
 
of
 
No.
groups
 
coil
 
of
 
No.
 
Total
 
  
phase
 
per
 
group
 
Coil
=
poles
of
No.
 x
phases
 
of
 
No.
groups
 
coil
 
of
 
No.
 
Total
 
          
          
          
 
 
pole
 
per
 
phase
 
per
 
group
 
Coil
=
Further the number of coils in a group per phase per pole
 
groups
 
of
 
number
 
Total
coils
 
of
 
number
 
Total
 
 
poles
 
of
 
No.
 x 
phases
 
of
 
No.
coils
 
of
 
number
 
Total
 
=
=
Coil connections : The connection which joins a coil lead
of one coil to the other coil lead of the same coil group is
called ‘coil connection’ and is shown in Fig 5.
Pole connection : The connection which joins a coil
group of one phase to another coil group of the same phase
of the winding is called pole connection or group connection,
and is shown in Fig 5.
Whole-coil winding:  A whole coil winding is one in which
the number of coils per phase is equal to the number of
poles in the machine. Refer to Fig 6.
Half coil winding : A half coil winding is one in which the
number of coils per phase is equal to half the number of
poles in the machines. Half coil winding is generally done
in the winding of ceiling fans, double speed motors etc.
Refer to Fig 7.
Single layer winding :  In single layer winding each slot
contains only one coil side as shown in Fig 8 and the
number of coils in the machine is equal to half the number
of slots in the stator or armature. In single layer winding the
coil pitch is usually taken in odd numbers.
Double layer winding :  In double layer winding each slot
contains two coil sides (i.e.one upper and one lower) as
shown in Fig 9 and the number of coils is equal to the
number of slots in the stator.
Balanced winding : When the coil groups contain the
same number of coils per phase per pole the winding is
termed as ‘balanced winding’. It is also known as ‘Even
Group’ winding and is shown in Fig 10.
Unbalanced winding : If the coil group contains an
unequal number of coils per phase per pole then the
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

149
winding is called ‘unbalanced winding’. It is also sometimes
called ‘odd group’ winding and is shown in Fig 11.
It is important that there must be an equal number of coils
in each phase whether the winding is balanced or
unbalanced as shown in Figs 10 and 11.
Partially distributed winding:  In this winding the coil
sides do not occupy all the slots, but some slots remain
empty and they are called  dummy slots.
Fully distributed winding : It is a winding in which not a
single slot remain empty.
Different types of AC Windings
The types of AC windings according to shape are as
follows.
a
Basket winding
b
Concentric winding
c
Skein winding
d
Flat loop Non-overlapped winding
e
Flat loop overlapped or chain winding
f
Skew winding
g
Diamond coil winding
h
Involute coil winding
Basket winding : After the completion of the winding, the
ends of the winding resemble the weaving of a basket and
hence it is known as basket winding. Basket winding is of
two types. a) Single layer basket winding as shown in Fig
12a, double  layer  basket  winding  as  shown  in  Fig 12b.
Concentrated winding :  If in any winding the number of
coils/pole/phase is one, then the winding is known as
‘concentrated winding’. In this winding each coil side
occupies one slot.
Distributed winding : In this winding the number of coil/
pole/phase is more than one - arranged in different slots.
In this case each coil has the same pole pitch.
Concentric (or box type) winding :  This winding has
two or more than two coils in a group, and the coils in each
group have the same centre. In each group, the coil pitch
is not equal, and, therefore, do not overlap each other.
In this winding the coil pitches are not equal and each coil
of the group has a difference of 2 slots in its pitch. Though
it requires more labour to insert coils due to different coil
spans, the design allows more cooling space. This winding
is usually provided in single phase motor winding. This is
shown in Fig 13.
Skein winding :  In skein winding, a long coil of sufficient
length is first wound and then inserted in one slot. The
remainder of the length is turned and inserted in the
adjacent slots as shown in Fig 14.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

150
Flat loop non-overlapped winding :  The coils of this
winding do not overlap each other, and hence is known as
‘flat loop non-overlap winding’. In such a winding each
group has only one coil as shown in Fig 15.
Flat loop overlapped or chain winding : In this
winding, the number of coil/pole/phase is more than one
having different pitches and the coils overlap each other in
the form of a chain as shown in Fig 16.
Skew winding :  The coil sides of this winding are unequal
and as such allows greater space for heat radiation. This
winding is shown in Fig 17.
Diamond coil winding : The shape of the coil used in this
winding is just like a diamond as shown in Fig 18 and the
coil occupies more space.
Involute coil winding : This type of coil is first made in
the shape of a diamond coil and then it is pressed at
inactive coil sides to attain a shape of involute coil as
shown in Fig 19.
Powerdegrees:  A pair of poles contain 360o
Powerdegrees. That is each pole has 180o. As such the
number of Powerdegrees in a motor depends upon the
number of poles.
For 2 poles - 360o  Powerdegrees
For 4 poles - 720o  Powerdegrees
For 6 poles - 1080o Powerdegrees
The slot angle could be calculated by the formula
Alternatively,
slots
 
of
 
No.
  
Total
poles
 
of
 
pair
 x 
360
 
 
angle
 
Slot
=
Phase dispalcement :  For a single phase, the starting
winding and running winding should be displaced by 90o.
For example if the slot angle is 30o, the starting winding will
be started in say, first slot and the running winding will be
started in the fourth slot.
Example : The following is the insulation specification
for Class ‘B’ motors.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

151
Slot liner : One layer of 0.175 mm thick press paper with
0.25 mm thick fibre glass backed mica are used as a slot
liner. This shall extend 10 mm beyond each end of the
core.
Coil separator : In the case of multi-layer winding 0.375
mm thick press paper and fibre glass mica in combination
are to be used and this should extend 10 mm beyond each
end of the cores.
Wedge separator/packing strip : 0.375 mm thick
melanex is used in between the slot liner and wedge. This
should extend 10 mm beyond each end of the core.
Wedge : 2 mm or 3 mm vulcanised fibre is used. This
should extend 6 mm beyond each end of the core.
Over hang inter-phase insulation : 0.25 mm varnished
fibre glass cloth in the form of half moon is used as inter-
phase insulation between coils of different phases. The
separators after insulation should be bound with the coils
by 0.15 mm varnished fibre glass chord.
Hand winding process
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the advantages of hand winding
• explain the method of hand winding.
Hand winding may be used in split phase motors for both
the starting and running winding. In this method, the
winding wires  are inserted in the slots, one turn at a time,
starting with the inner coils until the winding operation is
completed.
There are two main advantages in this method of winding.
1
A tight winding is possible, where the slot room is
limited.
2
A winding former is not necessary.
The stator to be wound and the spool of winding wire are
to be arranged as shown in  Fig 1.
Assuming that the slots are properly insulated, the side of
the stator where the connection end is to be placed is
located and guide paper is placed in the respective slots.
The procedure for hand winding is as given below.
1
Set up the reel of selected size winding wire on a reel
rack with a suitable tensioning device.
2
Insert the winding wire into a slot for the start of the
inner coil having a smaller pitch.
3
Lace the winding wire through the identified slots
according to the data, maintaining the tension.
4
After winding the designated turns in the first coil,
continue the winding for the next larger coil according
to the selected pole pitch.
5
After winding the designated turns in the second coil,
continue the winding for the next larger coil according
to the selected pole pitch.
Complete the entire pole winding and take out
the end connections.
6
Place wooden dowels as shown in Fig 2 in the empty
slots to hold coils in position while winding.
7
Cut the wire and wedge the winding permanently in
place if  the slot contains only one coil side.
8
If the bottom coil side only is placed in the slots of the
double layer winding, push temporary loose fitting
wooden or fibre wedges in place for each slot until the
stator is completed.
9
Remove the dowels.
10 Continue steps 2 to 9 for every pole until the bottom
(main) winding of the stator is wound.
11 Set up a reel of the required size winding wire for the top
(starting) winding.
12 Proceed to rewind the starting winding according to the
collected data, following the above steps.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

152
3 phase squirrel cage induction motor winding (single layer distributed
winding)
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the winding terms and calculations pertaining to single layer distributed type winding
• explain how to draw the end and coil connection diagrams
• state how to draw the ring and developed diagrams.
Distributed type winding:  The most common type of
winding found in 3-phase motors is the distributed type
winding. A distributed type winding is one in which the size
of all the coils, coil pitch and shape will be the same as
these coils are normally former wound. By virtue of the
arrangement of these coils in slots, the coils overlap each
other. Distributed winding may be of single or double layer
type.
Single layer winding : Single layer winding is one in
which there will be as many coils as half the number of
slots. For example 6 coils in the case of 12 slots, 12 coils
in case of 24 slots, 18 coils in the case of 36 slots and so
on. In short, there will be only one coil side per slot.
Calculation for single layer distributed winding : The
winding data of the distributed single layer winding will be
within the following limitation. (As an example 3- phase, 24
slots, 12 coils, 4 poles is illustrated below).
I
Grouping
phases
 
of
 
No.
coils
 
of
 
No.
 
Total
 
 e
coils/phas
 
of
 
No.
 i)
=
As in the example
No. of coils per phase = 12/3 = 4 coils/phase.
ii
For whole coil connection
poles
 
of
 
No.
 x 
phases
 
of
 
No.
coils
 
of
 
No.
 
Total
 
 
e/pole
coils/phas
 
of
 
No.
=
As in the example
/pole
coil/phase
 1 
 
4
 x 
3
12
e/pole
coils/phas
 
of
 
No.
=
=
iii) For half coil connection
poles
 
of
 
pair
 x 
phases
 
of
 
No.
coils
 
of
 
No.
 
Total
 
    
          
          
          
 
poles
 
of
 
e/pair
coils/phas
 
of
 
No.
=
As in the example
poles
 
of
 
pair
 / 
phase
 / 
coils
 2 
        
          
          
2
 x 
3
12
 
 
poles
 
of
 
pair
 
and
 
phase
 
each
 
For
=
=
For the example taken, half coil connection is
possible for distributed winding by taking full
pitch and placing coil in alternate two slots.,
but it is not in practice. Hence whole coil
connection is taken as an example.
II
Pitch
poles
 
of
 
No.
slots
 
of
 
No.
 
Total
 
 
pitch
 
Pole
=
As in the example, pole pitch = 24/4 = 6 slots.
ii) Coil pitch
In AC winding the relation between the coil pitch and the
pole pitch is given below.
a) Coil pitch = Pole pitch
Then the winding is
called full pitch winding.
b) Coil pitch < Pole pitch
Then the winding is
called fractional pitch -
short chorded winding.
c) Coil pitch > Pole pitch
Then the winding is called as
fractional pitch - long chorded
winding.
Further, if the winding is double layer, all the above  ‘a’, ‘b’
and ‘c’ are possible. But for single layer distributed winding
as the coils should be placed in alternate slots only, the
coil pitch ought to be in odd number.
As in the example, coil pitch = pole pitch = 24/4 = 6 slots.
Here 6 is an even number and winding cannot be of full
pitch, so the next alternative is to select a fractional pitch.
Therefore the coil pitch can be taken either as 5 or 7.
Normally AC windings should either  have full pitch or short
chorded fractional pitch. Hence a suitable pitch is taken of
5 slots.
iii) Coil throw
The coil throw for coil pitch ‘5’ as in the example is 1 - 6.
III Powerdegrees
i)
Total Powerdegrees = 180o x No. of poles
(180o is the distance between poles)
ii)  
slots
 
of
 
No.
poles
 
of
 
No.
 x 
180
 
 
distance
 
Slot
0
=
As in the example:  Slot distance = (180x4)/24 = 30o
IV  Phase displacement
i)
For three-phase winding, displacement between the
phases should be  120o .
ii) Phase displacement in terms of slots = 120o/slot
distance
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

153
As in the example, 120o/30o = 4 slots
V Winding sequence
In three-phase winding the distance between the starting
end of one phase to the starting end of another phase
should have 120o Powerdegrees. Hence we should arrange
the winding such that
‘A’ phase starts from say 1st slot
‘B’ phase starts from 1st slot + 120o and
‘C’ phase starts from 1st slot + 120o + 120o.
As in the above example, ‘A’ phase starts from say 1st slot
‘B’ phase should start from 1+4 = 5th slot
‘C’ phase should start from 1+4+4 = 9th slot.
VI  Arrangement of coils
As the winding is in a single layer, the coil shall be placed
in alternate slots i.e. if one coil side of coil number one is
placed in slot number one which is an odd number, the
other coil side of the first coil should be laid in an even
number slot. Hence placement of coils should start in slot
numbers 1,3,5,7,9 and so on leaving the slot numbers
2,4,6,8 and so on to receive the other coil sides of the coils.
As in the example the 12 coils are to be laid in slots
(pitch = 5 slots)
1-6, 3-8, 5-10, 7-12, 9-14, 11-16, 13-18, 15-20,
17-22, 19-24, 21-26(2), 23-28(4).
VII  End connections
As discussed, for grouping of coils in normal practice, the
end connections shall be whole coil connection. As in the
example in Fig 1.
VIII  Coil connections
In whole coil connection, the connection of the coil group
shall be from finish to finish and start to start for the group
of coils.
There are several ways of connecting the coils in groups.
Fig 2 shows one method and Fig 3 shows another method.
However, you are advised to check the formation of the
poles with the help of a ring diagram and clock rule. The
procedure is explained in the subsequent paras.
XI Ring diagram
Cross check the end connections as follows. Write the
end connection table and mark the direction of current
using the clock rule. Note that when three-phase supply
is given to the windings, and if two phases carry current
inward , the third phase will carry current outward.
Referring to method 1 shown in Fig 2, the current direction
in the coil sides could be marked as shown in
Fig 4.
Now arrange the slots in the sequential order and mark the
direction of current in the slots accordingly by arrows
which ultimately shall represent production of the required
number of poles as shown in Fig 5.
Developed winding diagram: The development winding
diagram will give a clear picture of the coil sides in relevant
slots grouping, coil end connections and lead termination.
A 24 slots, 12 coil, 4 pole, 3 phase single layer distributed
winding development diagram is shown in Fig 6 for your
guidance.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

154
Method of placing coils in a basket or distributed winding
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the various methods employed to prepare gang or group of coils
• explain the method of placing coils in the single layer basket winding
• explain the method of placing coils in a double layer basket winding.
The procedure outlined below is common for single or
three-phase distributed winding. However this type of
basket (distributed) winding is very popular in three phase
motors.
The coils can be wound using a single former and then they
can be interconnected by coil connections as shown in
Fig 1. Most of the three-phase motors with the exception
of very large ones with formed windings, use coils wound
in groups as shown in Fig 2.
The number of coils in each group will depend on the
number of phases  and number of poles. This practice of
winding coils in groups is called group or gang winding.
In group winding several coils are wound before the wire is
cut. This saves time and space by eliminating the necessity
of connecting coils to one another then soldering them and
then insulating them.
Fig 3 shows a winding head mounted on a bench type coil
winding drive. The wire is wound around six wheels
mounted on a shaft. Other types of forms are also used.
Fig 4 shows a coil winder for producing oval or round coils.
Coils for small motors may be wound in rectangular form
and then two sides shaped into a diamond shape by
pulling at the centre of the opposite ends as shown in
Fig 5. Insertion of coils in single layer basket winding
(formed individual coils).
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

155
In single layer winding there are half the number of coils as
there are slots. For example a machine with 12 coils and
24 slots will have single layer winding. The appearance of
a single layer winding is shown in Fig 6 in which the coil
pitch is 1-6. While placing coils in a single layer we have
to place the coil sides in alternate slots only.
Let us take for example a 48 slot 24 coil 8 pole motor with
the coil pitch of 1 to 6. Fig 7 illustrates the way in which
the single layer winding is to be placed in the slot. This will
be noticed from the diagrams there is only one coil side per
slot. Fig 7 shows one coil side of the first coil placed in slot
number 1.
Generally any slot can be identified as slot 1 with the help
of chalk markings or a spot of paint. The other coil side of
the same coil is left out on the core. This coil is called a
throw coil. The left out coil side may lie in the right hand
side as shown in Fig 7 or left hand side of the stator, when
viewed from the connection end.  However this depends
upon the original winding  pattern. The coil overhanging
ends can be wrapped up to 2/3 of the length with a cotton
tape of 0.175 mm thickness. To avoid the inserted coil
turns from coming out of the slot while handling other coils,
it is preferred to wedge temporarily the slot using a foot
(Skill Information 1203) soon after the insertion of coil is
over. In single layer winding the coil sides  should be
placed in  alternate  slots  as shown  in Fig 8.
In Fig 8 coil 1 is placed in slot No.1 and the other coil side
of the same coil is left over the stampings. To avoid
damage to the left out coil side, a leatheroid paper of width
larger than the width of the core is placed between the core
and the coil as shown in Fig 8. After placing the coil side
in the slot use the awl to fold the insulation paper (slot liner)
one side over the other, slip the separator paper over the
folding and then slip the formed fibre or bamboo wedge over
the top of the coil. The wedge should extend about 3 to 6
mm beyond the slot liner.  The procedure is shown in
Fig 9.
Some prefer to wedge the slots temporarily till  all the coils
are inserted and the winding is tested for grounding. Once
the test results are o.k., then permanently wedge the
slots.
In the next step left coil side of coil 2 is placed in slot
number 47 (leaving slot No.48 which is adjacent to slot
No.1) and the right coil side of coil 2 is left in the core.
(Fig 8) Next place left side of the coil 3 in slot number 45
and leave the right side of the coil over the core. Remember
to extend the leatheroid paper insulation between the core
and the coil. By examination it will be found that the left out
(right) coil side of coil No.3 which has left coil side inserted
in slot No.45 should be inserted in slot 2 according to the
assigned coil pitch. Now insert the left out right coil side
of coil 3 in slot No.2 as shown in Fig 10.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

156
In general, unless the left out coil side of any coil falls,
according to the assigned pitch, next to the occupied slot,
proceed further to insert one coil side only. Again proceed
to insert the left coil side of coil 4 in slot No.43 and the right
coil side of coil 4 in slot No.48 as shown in Fig 11.
Table 1
Slot
Bottom
Top
1
 1
2
2
 3
4
3
 5
6
4
 7
8
5
 9
10
6
11
12
7
13
14
8
15
16
9
17
18
10
19
20
11
21
22
12
23
24
13
25
26
14
27
28
15
29
30
16
31
32
17
33
34
18
35
36
19
37
38
20
39
40
21
41
42
22
43
44
23
45
46
24
47
48
Proceed likewise to fill up the slots and complete the
insertion of coils in the slots.
Insertion of coils in double layer (lap) winding
Let us consider a 3-phase machine with 24 slots, 24 coils,
4 poles and having a slot pitch of 1-6 and a coil pitch 1-12
in terms of coil sides.
ASSUMPTION: Individual coils numbering 24
are former wound and kept ready . Procedure
given below is for the developed winding
diagram shown in Fig 12.
Accordingly Fig 13 shows the numbered slots. Table 1
shows the position of the coil sides in the slots. The coil
sides in the bottom are given odd numbers and the coil
sides of top are given even numbers.
Winding is arranged such that looking from the connection
end, the bottom coil is on the left side and the top coil sides
is in the right side as shown in Figs 13 and 14.
Further the connection end of the winding in the stator is
to be identified from the data with respect to the terminal
box.
Referring to the developed diagram (Fig 12) and Table 1,
if the bottom coil side 1 is inserted in slot 1, then the other
coil side of the same coil which is 12, should be inserted
in the slot number 6 as a top coil side. As such there
should be a certain approved procedure to start the
winding.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

157
Proceed as, first insert one coil in slot number 5 and leave
the other coil side on the core. Use a suitable fibre foot or
wedge for slot 5 to secure the winding. (Fig 15). To avoid
damage to the insulation in the process of winding, insert
a thick leatheroid paper of a width larger than the core
between the left out coil side and the core, as shown in Fig
8. Let the length of the leatheroid paper be sufficient
enough to cover 5 coil sides at a stretch.
Insert the coils in slot numbers 4,3,2 and 1 in sequence as
shown in Fig 13 and wedge them temporarily as shown in
Fig 15. Let the other coil side lie on the core with the
protected leatheroid paper between the coils and the core.
These coils are called throw coils. For the protection of
insulation of the throw coil you can tie the bunch of coil
sides together with a cotton tape and tie the whole lot to
the stator as shown in Fig 16. Remember to ensure the
leatheroid paper is well kept between the bunched coils
and the core.
Use of coil separation : Before inserting the top coil side
over the bottom coil side of the same slot it is necessary
to insulate the coil sides inside the slot by the use of coil
seperators. This is because each coil side within one slot
may belong to different phases and the voltage between
them may be high.
To insulate the coil sides from each other within the slot
follow the procedure shown in Fig 17 for both open and
semi-closed slots. A creased separator or insulation
paper of proper width, length and thickness (usually 0.25
to 0.375 mm) is used as insulation between the top and
bottom coil sides in the slot. Slide an awl over the bottom
coil side as shown in Fig 18a and press it over the bottom
coil and  slide the separator underneath the awl as shown
in Fig 18b. Let the separator project about 10mm beyond
the core on either side.
Method of overlapping : Now insert one coil side in slot
number 24 (coil side 47) and the other coil side of the same
coil (coil side 10) in slot number 5 as the top coil over the
bottom coil side 9. Likewise insert another coil side 45 of
a next coil in slot number 23 and the other coil side 7 of the
same coil in slot number 4. Proceed likewise till you reach
slot number 6. During this process as you reach near
about the 10th slot or much earlier you will feel the
hindrance of the throw coils which are tied to the stator. At
that time untie the cotton tape from the stator and tie the
bunch in the opposite side of the stator as shown in Fig 19
with a leatheroid paper in between the coils and the core.
While tieing the cotton tape see that the slot number 6 is
easily approchable without any difficulty. After inserting
the bottom coil side 11 in slot 6 insert the corresponding
other coil side 22 in slot 11 as the top coil side. After
inserting the top coil side fold the slot liners one side over
the other, insert the separator and the wedge.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

158
Now untie the throw coil bunch and release the free end of
the coil in slot 5 and insert the same as top coil side in slot
10. Proceed likewise to insert the coils from slots 4,3,2
and 1 in the corresponding slots.
Overhang Insulation : Now cut and prepare the leatheroid
paper to the shape of half moon as in the original which is
to be used as phase insulation between the overhanging
coils. According to the developed diagram coil sides 1 and
3 form the first phase, 5 and 7 the second phase and 9 and
11 form the 3rd phase. Identify these coils and start
inserting the leatheroid paper between 3 and 5 as well as
between 7 and 9.
Thus proceed to insert this phase insulation for the entire
winding as shown in Fig 20. If you find the space between
these coils is less, you may use a fibre wedge to prime the
coils to facilitate insertion of the leatheroid paper. Do not
use too much force which may crack the slot liner
insulation and result in grounding the coils with the stator
core.
End connections : There are three types of connections
to be made - first the coil connection for coil grouping,
second for connecting  the coil groups in one phase,  and
thirdly connecting the lead wires. Better to proceed one by
one in the above sequence. Any connection to be made in
winding the wires should start with proper identification of
the coil ends. For a beginner, it may be necessary to refer
to the developed diagram, connection diagram, as well as
the actual winding often to eradicate the confusion.
Three-phase induction motor  winding (single layer  - concentric type - half
coil connection)
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the general requirements pertaining to the  concentric type of winding in 3-phase motors
• state the merits and demerits of concentric  type winding
• explain the preparation of a winding table for concentric type winding
• explain how to draw the end and coil connection diagrams
• explain how to draw the developed and ring diagrams.
3-phase concentric winding : In general, concentric
winding is found in single phase motors, and occasionaly,
this type of winding is also used for 3-phase motors.
This concentric winding has to have two or more coils in
a group consisting of different pitches. Further in 3- phase
concentric winding, all the three phases consist of the
same number of coils, and produce similar concentric
poles.  Stepped formers are used to prepare coils for
concentric winding.
Merits and Demerits of concentric winding: This type
of winding has some merits and demerits also.
Merits
1
This type of winding has more space for cooling.
2
No need of raising (lifting) the coil sides to interleave
them during the winding.
3
It is easy to shape the coils uniformly.
4
Possible to save copper, because in distributed winding
all the coils are of the same size; on the other hand in
concentric winding, coil groups only will be uniform, but
coils of different pitches in concentric form are used.
5
As there is no interleaving of the coil sides, the winding
could be done by machine resulting in faster production.
6
It is easy to make the end connection.
7
Easy to wind, as there is no overlapping of coils.
Demerits
1
Skilled labour is required to insert the coils in the slots.
2
A stepped former is required.
3
Not as efficient as basket winding.
1  Grouping
The example given below will clarify the following:
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

159
a
whether concentric type of winding is possible for a
given stator
b
If yes, whether it should be half coil or whole coil
connnected winding.
Example
3-phase induction motor having 36 slots 12 coils 4 pole
stator
We have
e
coils/phas
 4
 
 
3
12
 
      
          
          
          
phases
 
of
 
No.
coils
 
of
 
No.
 
Total
 
 
phase
 
per
 
coils
 
of
 
No.
=
=
=
For whole coil connection
e/pole
coils/phas
 1 
 
4
4
 
       
          
          
          
 
poles
 
of
 
No.
e
coils/phas
 
of
 
No.
 
e/pole
coils/phas
 
of
 
No.
=
=
=
As such there will be only one coil in a group.  But
concentric winding should have two or more coils in a
group.  In this case concentric winding is not possible.
Alternatively grouping can be done for half-coil connection,
i.e.
coils
 2
 
 
2
 x 
3
12
 
example
 
the
 
per
 
   As
          
poles
 
of
 
pair
 
of
 
No.
 x 
phase
 
of
 
No.
coils
 
of
 
No.
 
Total
   
          
 
poles
 
of
 
e/pair
coils/phas
 
of
 
No.
=
=
i.e. 2 coils/phase/pair of poles.
As per the above example, only half-coil
connected concentric winding is possible
whereas for the following example having
data 48 slots, 24 coils, 4-pole, 3-phase stator
winding both whole coil and half coil
connections are possible. Hence it is necessary
to trace the group connection very carefully
before stripping the stator to determine whether
the winding connection is whole coil or half
coil.
2  Pitch
1
poles
of
.
No
slots
of
.
No
pitch
Pole
=
As per the example = 4
24
 6 slots
As the winding is concentric, there should be 2 or more
pitches normally. According to the above example 2
pitches for half-coil connections are required.
Further it is necessary to have the average pitch equal i.e.
to the pole pitch.
(i.e.) coil pitch   =  pole pitch  +1
As per the example  coil pitch is 6+1.
Therefore outer coil pitch     = 6 + 1 = 7
and inner coil pitch will be   = 6 - 1 = 5
(i.e.) Coil throw = 1 - 8  and 1 - 6 In practice it is written
as 1 - 8 and 2 - 7.
3
Powerdegrees
i
Total Powerdegrees = 180o x No. of poles.
 As per the example  = 180o x 4 = 720o.
ii
Slot distance in degrees  
No.of slots
4
x
180°
=
=
°
=
30°
 
 
24
 4
 x 
180
 
4
Phase displacement
i
For three-phase winding phase displacement should
be equal to 120o
ii
Phase displacement in terms of slots
 
 
 
slot distance in degrees
 
120°
 =
 4 slots
 
 
30°
120°
 
 
As per the example
=
=
5    Winding sequence
As per the example
A phase starts from 1st slot.
B phase starts from 1+4 = 5th slot and
C phase starts from 1+4+4 = 9th slot.
6   Arrangement of coils
As in the example 12 coils with pitches as 7 & 5 slots.
1-8,2-7; 5-12, 6-11; 9-16, 10-15; 13-20, 14-19; 17-24, 18-
23;  21-4, 22-3.
Grouping of coils
The coil should start from every alternate 2 slots (i.e.) 2
slots for top sides and two slots for bottom sides.  As per
the example, coils start from 1 & 2, 5 & 6, 9 & 10, 13 & 14,
17 & 18, 21 & 22.
As the connection is half-coil type, with the help of one
group of coils, 2 poles need to be created.  Hence grouping
is as follows:
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

160
A
B
C
1-8, 2-7
5-12, 6-11
9-16, 10-15
      13-20, 14-19
17-24, 18-23
 21-4,  22-3
In whole coil connection, the starting end
connection is from the alternative groups (i.e.)
if ‘A’ starts from the first group, ‘B’ starts from
third group and ‘C’ starts from fifth group.
Whereas in half-coil connection, the starting
ends will be from continous group, if ‘A’ starts
from the first group, ‘B’ starts from second
group and ‘C’ starts from the third group.  Refer
to the developed diagram given in Fig 49.
7
End connections  (Fig 1):  Half coil connection.(End
to start and start to end)
Coil connections : Half coil connection. (Fig 2)
In half coil connection, the connection of the coil group
shall be from the finish end to the start end and then from
the start end to the finish end of the group coils as shown
in Fig 2.
Development diagram :  Draw the development diagram
showing the coil group and end connection. As an example
a development diagram is shown  in Fig 3.
10 Ring diagram
Cross check the end connection with the help of the ring
diagram as explained below. Write the end connection
table and mark the direction of current using the clock rule.
Note that when a three-phase supply is given to the
windings at an instant, and if two phases carry current in
one direction, the third phase carries current in the
opposite direction as shown in Fig 4.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

161
Whenever you come across a 3-phase induction motor
having a single layer concentric type half coil winding
follow the above mentioned procedure and prepare the
winding table. Subsquently draw the end connection,
development and ring diagrams.
    PHASE
P1 & P2
P3 & P4
A phase
↑1 - 8↓
↑13 - 20↓
↑2 - 7↓
↑14 - 19↓
B phase
↑5 - 12↓
↑17 - 24↓
↑6 - 11↓
↑18 - 23↓
C phase
↓9 - 16↑
↓21 - 4↑
↓10 -15↑
↓22 - 3↑
Refer to Fig 4 in which at the instant shown in x-x we have
phases A and B as positive polarity and C has negative
polarity.
Mark the direction of current in the slot and it shall
represent production of the required number of poles as
per the example given below.
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
                    N
            S
               N
                                  S
3 phase squirrel cage induction motor - double layer distributed type winding
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the meaning of double layer winding
• explain the winding terms and calculations pertaining to double layer distributed type winding
• draw the end and coil connection diagrams
• draw the ring and developed diagrams.
There are different types of winding used in 3-phase AC
motors. Some of the 3-phase windings are double layer,
that is, there will be as many coils as the number of slots.
For example 12 coils in the case of 12 slots, 24 coils in the
case of 24 slots. 36 coils in the case of 36 slots, 48 coils
in the case 48 slots.Further in the case of distributed
winding the size of all the coils, pitch and shape will be the
same as these coils are normally former wound. By virtue
of the arrangement of these coils in slots, they overlap
each other just like in a woven basket. This is also a type
of distributed winding.
In double layer winding each slot contains two coil sides
i.e. the bottom half contains the left hand coil side while the
top half contains the right coil side of some other coil.
Calculations for double layer distributed winding :
The winding data of the distributed double layer winding
will be within the following limitations. As an example 3-
phase double layer distributed winding for an induction
motor having 36 slots 36 coils 4 poles is discussed below.
I   Grouping
1
,
mple
exa
the
per
As
phase
of
No.
coils
of
No.
Total
e
coils/phas
of
No.
=
 
 
coils per phase.
 
12
 
 
3
36
 
 
No. of coils/phase = 
  
=
e/pole
coils/phas
 3 
 
4
 x 
3
36
 
 
e/pole
coils/phas
 
of
 
No.
     
poles
 
of
 
No.
 x 
phase
 
of
 
No.
coils
 
of
 
no.
 
Total
   
          
          
          
          
 
pole
 
e/per
coils/phas
 
of
 
No.
  
2.
=
=
=
II   Pitch
1
poles
of
.
No
slots
of
.
No
 Pole pitch=
As per the example, pole pitch =
slots
9
4
36 =
2
Coil pitch : Similar to the single layer winding the coil
pitch can be short-chorded, long-chorded or equal to
the pole pitch. The pitch of the double layer distributed
winding may be odd or even number. As per the
example, the pole pitch is equal to 36/4 = 9 slots and
the no. of coils per group is 3. Hence the coil pitch may
vary from 9 + 3 that is 6,7 or 8 in the case of short corded
winding, 9 in the case of full pitch winding and 10,11 or
12 in the case of long chorded winding. Hence the
possible coil throws can be taken as
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

162
1 to 7  and  1 to 8   for short chorded winding
1 to 9  and  1 to 10  for full pitched winding
1 to 11, 1 to 12 and 1 to 13  for long chorded winding.
Normally the winding is designed for either short chorded
or full pitch. Occasionally a long chord is used by the
designer in double speed winding. The reason for not using
long chorded winding is, it requires more chord length
resulting in the requirement of more copper, and hence,
increased heat losses.
3
Coil throw : According to the above example the coil
throw for the coil pitch of 8 will be 1-9.
III   Powerdegrees :
Total Powerdegrees = 180o x No. of poles
[180o distance between poles]
Slot distance in degrees =
slots
of
.
No
poles
of
.
No
x
180°
=
°
= 20
36
4
x
180
example
the
per
As
IV Phase displacement
i.
For three-phase winding each phase winding should
be displaced by 120 Powerdegrees.
ii. Phase displacement in terms of slots =
Slot distance in degrees
)
Electrical
(
120°
slots
6
20
120
example
the
per
As
=
°
°
V  Winding sequence : In three-phase winding, the
starting end of one phase winding to the starting end of
the second phase winding should have a distance of
120 Powerdegrees.
Hence if  the ‘A’ phase  starts say in the Ist slot then the
‘B’ phase should start from the Ist slot+120o.
Further ‘C’ phase should start from the Ist slot+120o+120o.
As in the example ‘A’ phase starts from, say, 1st slot
‘B’ phase should start from 1+ 6     = 7th slot and
‘C’ phase should start from 1+ 6 + 6 = 13th slot.
VI   Placing of the coils in double layer winding: As
the winding is double layer, the laying of coils should
start in adjacent slots.
That is the coils should be placed in slot 1, slot 2, slot 3
and so on.
As in the above example the arrangement of coils for the
selected pitch 8 will be as given below:
Fractional pitch Short chorded winding
Pitch 8
Coil throw 1-9
Pole
A-Group
C-Group
B-Group
P1
1-9, 2-10, 3-11
4-12, 5-13, 6-14
  7-15, 8-16, 9-17
P2
10-18,  11-9, 12-20
13-21,14-22,15-23
16-24,17-25,18-26
P3
19-27, 20-28,21-29
22-30,23-31,24-32
25-33,26-34, 27-35
P4
28-36, 29-1,  30-2
31-3,   32-4,  33-5
34-6,  35-7, 36-8
Though the possible pitches are 6,7,8,9,10,11 and 12 the
above example is given for the pitch equal to 8 only.
Trainees are advised to write the table for other pitches  to
have a better understanding of the winding.
VII  End connections :  Draw the end connections as
shown in Fig 1.
VIII  Coil connections : In whole coil connection, the
connection of coil groups shall be from the finish end
to the finish end and the start end to the start end of
the group of coils of the same phase. Either of the
following two methods shown in Figs 2 and 3 could
be followed.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

163
METHOD 1
 METHOD 2
IX Cross check the end connections: Write the end
connections table as illustrated below in Fig 4 and
mark the direction of currents using the clock rule.
When three phase supply is given to the
3-phase winding, if two phases carry current
inwards, the third phase will carry current
outwards.
As per the above ring diagram, in all 4 poles are produced.
One pole is produced at each of the area contained by the
eight slots. In slots 9,18,27 and 36 coil sides carry current
in the opposite directions and hence, the flux in those slots
gets neutralized. This happens in the short chorded
winding. Based on the above information draw the developed
diagram.
XI  Developed diagram
A developed diagram is shown in Fig 6 in which the
connections are  shown for the  method 1  referring to
Fig 2.
XII Fractional pitches
After the group and lead connections are over, the sleeved
joints are to be tied with the overhang with the help of hemp
threads. Follow the instructions contained in  Ex.3.2.03 to
complete the job.
Winding is then to be tested and varnished.
The motor is then to be assembled and test run for atleast
eight hours to check its performance on no load. Wherever
loading facilities are availabe the newly wound motor can
be checked for its load performance.
X   Ring diagram
Mark the direction of current in the respective slots and
then check the production of the required number of poles
as shown with ring diagram. (Fig 5)
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

164
Testing of windings
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• test the rewound motor for continuity and measure the coil resistance
• test the coils of the winding for short circuit using internal growler or voltmeter or ohmmeter
• test the winding for ground and insulation resistance
• test the winding for correct magnetic polarity using a magnetic compass or screwdriver or a search coil
• test the 3-phase winding for equal value of phase currents
• test the newly wound motor under no-load.
After the motor is rewound the following tests are carried
out in the windings.
1
Continuity test/resistance test.
2
Short circuit test/growler test.
3
Insulation resistance test.
4
Polarity test.
5
Unbalanced current test - for 3-phase winding.
6
No-load test.
Continuity test/resistance test : This test is done to
check up the continuity of each winding. If there is any
open in the winding, it is to be rectified.
The usual cause of an open circuit in a winding is loose
connection or break in the winding wire. The open circuit
may be located by connecting one lead of the test lamp to
one end of the winding and touching the other lead to the
end of each coil end in sequence in the same phase.
Refering to Fig 1, if the lamp does not glow at point 3 but
glows at point 2 then the third coil is faulty. If the lamp
glows at 2 and 3 but not at 4 then the fourth coil is faulty.
By repeating this process the coil which has the open
circuit, can be identified.
Similarly, the other winding can also be tested for open
circuit.
The resistance of each coil may be measured by a low
range ohmmeter. The resistance of each coil must be the
same. The high value of resistance or infinity value indicates
open in the windings.
If there is any open in one coil, that coil can be
bypassed and left out in the chain of windings.
Then the motor can run, but if the open is in
more than one coil, bypassing of the coil is not
possible. This type of repairing is possible for
small capacity motors where the winding has
a large number of coils. Ex: Ceiling fans. But
this procedure should be avoided as far as
possible.
If the polarity of one or two coils in a multiple
pole fan motor is changed the fan will run
slowly and produces more heat.
Short circuit test/growler test : Two or more turns that
contact each other electrically will cause a short circuit in
the winding. This short circuit will cause excessive heat to
be developed during the operation of the machine.
Short circuit can be detected by any one of the following
methods.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

165
a
Internal growler method
b
Voltage drop test
c
Ohmmeter method.
Internal growler method : The internal growler consists
of a coil of wire wound on a laminated iron core and
connected to 240V AC supply. After the stator is removed
the growler is placed on the core of the stator and moved
from slot to slot as shown in Fig 2. A shorted coil will be
indicated by rapid vibration of a metal blade provided with
the growler and in some types of internal growlers, glow of
the neon lamp provided with the growler indicates short in
winding.
Voltage drop method : In this method the winding is
connected to a low voltage DC supply as shown in Fig 3
and the voltage drop is measured across each coil by a
millivoltmeter. The voltage drop across good coils will be
the same whereas voltage drop across shorted coils will
be low.
Ohmmeter method : For this method, measure the
resistance of the each coil by a low range ohmmeter or
Kelvin bridge or Post Office Box. All the coils should read
the same value of resistance. The coil which reads lower
resistance than the other coils or that which reads zero
resistance is assumed to be shorted and needs
replacement. On the other hand the coil which reads high
resistance when compared to similar coils or which reads
infinite value of resistance indicates open in that particular
coil.
Ground test and insulation/resistance test : Grounded
winding may cause a fuse to blow up or it may cause the
winding to smoke, depending on the extent of the ground.
It may give shock to persons when they come in contact
with the frame which is not properly earthed.
The aim of this test is to check any direct connection
between windings and earth(ground). For this, the neutral
of the supply is connected to the body of the machine and
the phase wire is connected through a series test lamp.
The open end of the test lamp is touched to each end of
the winding in sequence. If the lamp remains dark it means
winding is not grounded and if it glows, the winding is
earthed. This is a fast, rough practical method.
If a Megger is used for testing the grounded winding, one
terminal of the Megger is connected to the body and other
to the windings as shown in Fig 4. If the pointer of the
Megger shows infinity, the winding is correct and there is
no connection between the windings and the body.
Insulation resistance between windings and the body of
the machine is measured by a 500 volts Megger and the
readings so obtained shall not be less than 1 Megohm in
the case of 3-phase and single phase motors. For additional
safety  2 megohms are necessary in the case  of ceiling
and table fans.
Polarity Test:  Correct coil group connection in the
winding ensures  correct polarity. If there is any confusion
in the coil group connections  then the polarity test is
necessary to be carried out to check proper polarity.
There are three methods recommended as explained
below.
a
Magnetic compass method
b
Two screwdrivers method
c
Search coil method
Magnetic compass method :  In this method, the stator
is placed in a horizontal position and a low DC voltage is
applied to the winding. The compass needle is then held
inside the stator and moved slowly from one pole area to
another pole area as shown in Fig 5. The compass needle
will reverse itself on each pole if the winding is correctly
connected. If there is same direction of indication between
two adjacent poles, a reverse pole is indicated.
Two screwdrivers method :  In this method, the stator
is placed in vertical position and a low voltage DC is applied
to winding in case of 3-phase to individual phase. A
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

166
screwdriver is placed on the core at the centre of one pole
area, and another on the next pole area centre. If in
adjacent poles the polarity is correct the screwdrivers will
be attracted as shown in Fig 6. If the polarity is incorrect
the screwdrivers will repel each other. If it is found that one
pole has wrong polarity, that can be corrected by reversing
two lead connections of that coil group.
Polarity test by search coil method (Fig 7) : The search coil
consists of a coil of 1000 to 2000 -turns. The iron core
should have one end rounded. This coil is used for testing
the polarity of the poles of the rewound stator.
A more reliable way is to use the search coil in conjunction
with a centre-zero milli-voltmeter or galvanometer. (Fig 8)
If the search coil is so made that one end of the core
projects beyond the windings it can be used to polarise
very small stators by placing the projecting end on each
pole in turn without the coil itself entering the stator.
With the search coil core making contact with a pole, the
switch is closed (Fig 8) and the galvanometer will give a
kick either to the right or the left at the moment, the circuit
is made. Mark the pole thus treated either R or L as the
case may be with chalk.
The next pole is marked in the same way according to the
direction of the kick. It must be emphasised that all
readings must be taken when the switch is made, because
a reverse kick is seen when the switch is opened.
Unbalanced current test: In the case of three-phase
winding reduced voltage is applied from a 3-phase auto-
transformer to get nearly full load current as shown in
Fig 9. In this test all the three phase currents measured
should be the same. Even if the windings are good, +3%
variation of the current is permissible.
No-load test :  After impregnation and assembly of motor,
check the rotor for free rotation. Connect the motor to the
rated supply voltage. Run the motor at no load and record
the no-load voltage, current and speed of the motor. In no
case these readings increase beyond name-plate values.
Inspect the bearing sound and vibration. Normal sound
without vibration is an indication of a  good job. However,
the perfection of the winding job could be ascertained only
through a load test.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

167
Insulating varnish and varnishing process in electric machines
Objectives:  At the end of this lesson the you shall be able to
• state the importance of varnishing the winding of a machine
• state the types of varnish, their characteristics and uses
• state the use of thinners
• explain the methods employed in preheating the winding
• explain the process of varnishing a winding.
Importance of insulating varnish to the
Powermachines :  The hygroscopic (absorbing moisture)
nature of many of the solid insulating materials used for
general insulation has to be neutralised by varnish
impregnation. Varnish will not allow the ingress of moisture
to enter inside the winding layers by forming a cover and
in many cases, works against the action of oils, acids,
alkalies and heat.  Insulating varnish is also necessary to
bond conductors together especially in rotating machines.
Heat dessipation from the windings is improved by the
displacement of air by solid varnish between the conductors.
Types of Varnish: Four types of varnishes are commonly
available to use with Powerwindings.  They are:
1
air-drying varnishes
2
baking varnishes
3
thermosetting varnishes
4
solventless varnishes.
Air drying varnish : This varnish consists of solid
particles and a solvent.  The varnish is dried by vaporisation
of the solvent without heating. In comparison with baking
varnishes, air-drying varnishes have low strength and high
porosity(having too many small holes) because their films
do not flow well enough to seal up the voids (gaps) left by
the drying out of the solvent.  Furthermore, they tend to
deteriorate rather rapidly in the dip tank and during
storage.  The fastest drying types have a shellac spirit
base and may be either clear or black.  These can be used
for emergency repair jobs or for touch-up work.  Black
asphalt-base varnishes are available, but these have only
fair resistance to oil.
A number of oleoresinous (oil and resin base) varnishes,
both black and clear, are available in the market. These
varnishes dry by loss of the solvent and by oxidation and
are more oil-resistant than the asphalt-base varnishes.
Synthetic based air-drying varnishes are also used to
some extent.
Baking varnishes - oleoresinous : Baking varnish also
consists of solid particles and solvents.  Varnishes of this
type were more widely used before thermosetting varnishes
were developed.  They dry partly by polymerization and
partly by oxidation, depending upon the drying oils they
contain.  Linseed oil varnishes dry almost entirely by
oxidation; tung-oil varnishes dry both by oxidation and
polymerization.  Drying by oxidation causes a hard surface
to form while the varnish is still wet underneath.  This  is
the disadvantage of this type of varnish particularly in deep
coils.
Thermosetting varnishes : These are heat-hardening,
clear, synthetic varnishes which represent a vast
improvement over ordinary baking varnishes, which depend
upon oxidation for hardening.  These varnishes are suitable
for use either with Class B or Class E insulation.
Solventless varnishes : Recent developments indicate
that in a few years satisfactory solventless varnishes (100
percent solids) may be commercially available; and these
will be free of the poor shelf life characteristic and tank
deterioration of the present solventless varnishes.
Varnish thinners: Thinners are used to adjust the viscosity
and solid content of varnish to the desired amount.
Addition of thinners should be done slowly, accompanied
with rapid agitation of the varnish to obtain thorough
mixing.  In selection of thinners - specific recommendations
for particular types of varnish should be obtained from the
varnish manufacturer.  The contents of thinners on the
varnish should not exceed 60%.
Preheating : Preheating of winding before varnishing is
done mainly to drive out the moisture in between the
winding layers.
The winding should be completely dried before applying
the varnish by any one of the following methods.
1
By applying a low voltage, about 20% of normal to the
stator terminals through a 3-phase auto- transformer
as shown in Fig 1 so that a current not greater than full
load flows in the winding.  The motor may be heated for
8 to 10 hours.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

168
Close supervision is necessary as the heat
generated by the winding is not easily
dissipated.
2
The motor can be placed in an oven, as shown in
Fig 2 but the temperature should not be allowed to
exceed 90oC.
3
Hot air may be blown into the windings which is kept in
a closed chamber as shown in Fig 3 but the air should
be clean and dry and at a temperature of not more than
90oC.
4
Coke braziers or electric radiators may be placed
around the machine as shown in Fig 4.
5
Carbon filament lamps, placed inside the machine as
shown in Fig 5, may be employed quite satisfactorily,
but care should be taken that the hot bulb is not in
contact with any part of the windings. If it is not possible
to reach a sufficiently high temperature, the ventilation
may be reduced by covering the stator with a tarpaulin.
The method of heating employed for drying out should be
continuous and the process should be carefully watched
to ensure that the windings do not attain a temperature
sufficiently high to damage the insulation.  The maximum
safe temperature of the windings measured by thermometer
is 90oC.  At the same time the temperature should not be
allowed to fall too low as this will cause re-absorption of
moisture.
The insulation resistance is found to drop considerably  as
the motor warms up, the insulation resistance reaches the
minimum, and then remain constant for some time,
depending upon the dampness of the machine. As the
drying process progresses further, the insulation resistance
will gradually rise.  The drying out should be continued as
long as the insulation resistance rises, or until a sufficiently
high value, i.e. not less than one megohm per 1000 volts
at 75oC has been reached.
During the drying out period, reading of temperature and
insulation resistance should be taken at least once an
hour, in order to see how the drying out is progressing.  The
temperature of the motor should be kept constant as far as
possible; otherwise the readings may be misleading.
After the winding is preheated, cool the job to a temperature
of about 60oC before applying the varnish.  This is important
because the higher temperature would tend to seal the
outer side with the varnish layer.
Varnishing process : Varnish is applied to the windings
either by immersing the whole (wound) stator in the varnish
tank or by pouring the varnish on the windings. In some
cases varnish can also be applied with a painting brush.
Air-dry varnishes are natural drying; so allow
the job to set at normal temperature atleast for
6 hours.
Impregnation : For impregnation follow the procedure
recommended by the manufacturer of the varnish.
Impregnation process  :  The following is the impregnation
procedure of class E motors. Use Class E impregnation
varnish.
1
Preheat the job for eight hours in an oven at 85-100oC
and measure the insulation resistance.  If the insulation
resistance is less than infinity continue the preheating
process till the insulation resistance is infinity.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

169
2
After preheating, allow the job to cool down to 60oC and
dip it in the varnish tank.  Dip the hot winding in vertical
position in the varnish for one hour or for sufficient time
for all the air bubbles to escape.
3
Drain the varnish from the job by lifting it over the tank
in a cradle for about one hour till the varnish drains
completely.
4
After draining, heat the job to 120oC for two hours and
140oC for a minimum of ten hours.
5
Measure the insulation resistance immediately after
baking, and the value should not be less than 2 meg-
ohms.
6
For second impregnation cool the job to 70oC after
baking and repeat steps 2,3 and 4 as above.
In case there is no varnish tank to use, place the stator on
a container filled with varnish and pour the varnish on it with
a spoon as shown in Fig 6.   In this case, pour the varnish
sufficiently on it from the connection side and opposite of
the connection side alternately by changing the position
of the stator.
Varnish stripping : After the winding has been dipped and
baked, it is often necessary to remove the excess varnish
from such places as air gap surfaces or the end-shield fits,
since there are no practical means for preventing the
varnish from accumulating there.  A rag saturated with the
correct solvent for the varnish to be removed can be used
to wipe off excess accumulation of the wet varnish.  Baked
varnish coatings can readily be stripped off from metallic
surfaces if these surfaces are treated with a suitable
masking compound before dipping.  This compound is
thinned with acetone for spraying or is maintained at a
heavy molasses like consistency if it is to be applied by
dipping or by brushing.  After the thin coating has been
dried for half an hour, the apparatus may be given the
normal varnish impregnation and baked.  After baking the
masking compound will strip cleanly from the bare metal
merely by inserting a knife or finer nail under it at one point.
Both the varnish and the masking compound can be
removed as a single intact film by peeling off the layer.
Method of connecting end connection, group connection, terminal leads,
binding and forming the overhangs
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the type of connections in winding
• explain the method of making coil end connections
• explain the method of making group (jumper) connections
• explain the method of connecting terminal leads
• explain the method of binding the end/terminal/lead connections with the winding
• explain the method of forming the overhangs.
The procedure explained below is common for any winding.
End connections : There are three types of connections
to be made in the windings. First for coil connection for coil
group as shown by X, second for connecting  the coil
groups (jumper connection) in one phase as shown by Y
and third by connecting the lead wires as shown by Z in
Fig 1. Better to proceed one by one in the above stated
sequence while winding.
Any connection to be made in winding wires should start
with a proper identification of the coil ends. For a beginner,
it may be necessary to refer alternatively to the developed
diagram, connection diagram as well as the actual winding
often to eradicate the confusion.After identifying the coil
ends simply twist the ends to be joined temporarily as
shown in Fig  2 and recheck the connection with respect
to the developed diagram and the connection diagram.
After ascertaining the connections are correct, remove the
enamel insulation with the help of sandpaper or a knife or
by an electrically operated insulation remover. In all
methods see that the wire is not nicked or bent often to
avoid damage.
Method of coil connections : Check whether the enamel
insulation is completely removed. Twist the wire together
to a length of 20-25 mm and insert the PVC or empire
sleeve as shown in Fig 3. Bend the joint towards the coil
bunch and tie with a twine.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

170
Method of group connections (jumper connections):
Place the wire to be joined overlaping each other for 40
mm. Cut the extra length as shown in Fig 4a. Remove the
enamel insulation to a length of 40 mm in the winding
wires.
Insert a suitable PVC or empire sleeve of sufficient length
inside the two wires to be joined as shown in Fig 4b. Over
one of the sleeves insert another sleeve of larger size as
shown in Fig 4c. Twist the wires together as shown in Fig
4d. Bend the joint on the wires and pull the 2nd sleeve
insulation over the joint as shown in Fig 4e.
Method of lead connections : To connect the lead wire,
strip the insulation of the cable to a length of about 25 mm
and also remove the enamel insulation from the winding
wire  to that length. Clean both the wires and wind atleast
10 times of the winding  wire  over  the  lead  wire  tightly
as  shown  in Fig 5.
Use the PVC or empire sleeve to insulate the joint as
shown in Fig 5.
After testing the winding for correctness as outlined earlier
in the end all the connections earlier made need to be
soldered as shown in Fig 6 and then insulated by the
sleeves.
Shaping and binding the overhangs : After soldering
and sleeving all the end connections, lay the jumper wires
and lead wires in a symmetrical manner so that uniformity
is maintained and the overhang looks neat. By a wooden
or nylon mallet, gently tap the coil overhangs on both the
sides into concentric ring. Use wooden or fibre roller for
this as shown in Fig 7. At intervals check the overhang
dimensions with the data taken earlier.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

171
Bind the end connections, jumper and lead connections
with the coil tightly with binding thread with  suitable tape
as in the original. (Fig 8)
After binding the connection leads with the overhangs,
once again finally shape both the overhangs into concentric
rings, so that they spread uniformly and do not touch the
rotor.  During the process check often whether sufficient
gap is provided between the frame and end covers as in the
original. (Fig 9)
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.140

172
Power                                                     Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.141
Electrician - AC Three Phase Motor
Maintenance, service and troubleshooting in AC 3 phase squirrel cage
induction motor and starters
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• list and state about the maintenance schedule of AC 3 phase motor
• list out the possible faults, causes and remedies in 3 phase motors
• explain the mechanical problems in motor, bearings and their remedies
• state the lubrication techniques on learning
• explain the troubleshooting of AC motor starters and maintenance of starters.
Generally due to the rugged construction of the AC squirrel
cage induction motor, it requires less maintenance. However
to get trouble-free service and maximum efficiency, this
motor needs a scheduled routine maintenance. As found
in most of the industries the AC squirrel cage motor is
subjected to full load for 24 hours a day and 365 days a
year. Therefore the maintenance should be scheduled to
have periodic maintenance for a selected area on daily,
weekly, monthly, half yearly and yearly periods for
increasing the working life of the motor and to reduce the
break down time.
Maintenance schedule: Suggested maintenance
schedule for the AC squirrel cage induction motor is given
below as a guide.
Daily maintenance
•
Examine earth connections and motor leads.
•
Check motor windings for overheating. (Note that the
permissible maximum temperature is above that which
can be comfortably felt by hand.)
•
Examine the control equipment.
In the case of oil ring lubricated machines
i)
examine bearings to see that oil rings are working
ii) note the temperature of the bearings
iii) add oil if necessary
iv) check end play.
Weekly maintenance
•
Check belt tension. In a case where this is excessive
it should immediately be reduced and in the case of
sleeve bearing machines, the air gap betweeen the
rotor and stator should be checked.
•
Blow out the dust from the windings of protected type
motors, situated in dusty locations.
•
Examine the starting equipment for burnt contacts
where motor is started and stopped frequently.
•
Examine oil in the case of oil-ring lubricated bearings
for contamination by dust, dirt etc. (This can be roughly
ascertained on inspection by the colour of the oil).
Monthly maintenance
•
Overhaul the controllers.
•
Inspect and clean the oil circuit breakers.
•
Renew oil in high speed bearings in damp and dusty
locations.
•
Wipe brush holders and check the bedding of brushes
of slip-ring motors.
•
Check the condition of the grease.
Half-yearly maintenance
•
Clean the winding of the motors which are subjected to
corrosive or other such elements. Also bake and
varnish if necessary.
•
In the case of slip ring motors check slip rings for
grooving or unusual wear.
•
Renew  grease in ball and roller bearings.
•
Drain all oil bearings, wash with kerosene, flush with
lubricating oil and refill with clean oil.
Annual maintenance
•
Check all high speed bearings and renew if necessary.
•
Blow out  clean dry air over the windings of the motor
thoroughly. Make sure that the pressure is not so high
as to damage the insulation.
•
Clean and varnish dirty and oily windings.
•
Overhaul motors that are subject to severe operating
conditions.
•
In the case of slip ring motors, check the slip ring for
pittings and the brush for wear. Badly pitted slip rings
and worn out brushes should be replaced.
•
Renew switch and fuse contacts if badly pitted.
•
Renew oil in starters that are subjected to damp or
corrosive elements.
•
Check insulation resistance to earth and between
phases of motor windings, control gear and wiring.
•
Check resistance of earth connections.
•
Check air gaps.

173
Records : Maintain independent cards or a register (as per
specimen shown in trade practical) giving a few pages for
each machine and record therein all important inspections
and maintenance works carried out from time to time.
These records shall show past performance, normal
insulation level, gap measurements, nature of repairs and
time between previous repairs, and other important
information which would be of help for good performance
and maintenance.
Faults which occur in AC 3-phase squirrel cage motor can
be broadly divided into two groups
They are
1. Powerfaults
2. Mechanical faults.
In most of the cases both the faults may be individually
present or both may be present, as one type of fault
creates the other fault. The following charts give the cause,
the test to be carried out and possible remedy.
Chart 1
Motor fails to start
S.No           Cause
Test
Remedy
1
Overload relay tripped.
Wait for overload coils to cool.
If motor could not be started check
Push the reset button if  separately
the motor circuit for other causes
provided. In some starters the stop
as outlined in this chart.
button has to be pushed to reset
the overload relay.
2
Failure of power supply.
Test the power supply at the starter
If the supply is present in the incoming
incoming terminals.
terminals of the starter, check the
starter for fault.  If not, check the main
switch and fuses. Replace the fuses if
necessary or restore power supply.
3
Low voltage.
Measure the voltage at the mains
Restore normal supply or check
and compare with the name-plate
the cables for underrating.
rating.
4
Wrong connection.
Compare the connection with the
Still if motor does not start, reconnect,
original diagram of the motor.
after disconnecting the  connection of
the motor.
5
Overload.
Measure the starting torque
Reduce load, raise tapping on auto-
required by load.
transformer, install a motor of a higher
output.
6
Damaged bearings.
Open the motor and check the
Replace if required.
play of bearings.
7
Faulty stator winding.
Measure current  per phase and
Repair the fault if possible or rewind
they should be equal, if required
stator.
measure resistance  per phase;
check insulation resistance between
winding and earth.
8
Wrong control
Check the control circuit and
Reconnect the control circuit accord-
connections.
compare it with the circuit diagram.
ing to the manufacturer’s circuit
diagram.
9
Loose terminal con-
Check the terminal connection of
Tighten the terminals.
nections at mains or
the main switch, starter and motor
at starter or at motor.
for discolouring and loose nuts.
10
Driven machine is
Disconnect the motor from the load.
If the motor starts satisfactorily check
locked.
the driven machine and rectify the
defect.
11
Open circuit in stator
Check visually and then with
Rectify the defect or wind.
or rotor.
multimeter/megger.
12
Short circuit in
Check the phases and coil groups
Repair the winding or rewind.
stator winding.
with the help of an ohmmeter or
use internal growler.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.141

174
S.No           Cause
Test
Remedy
13
Winding is grounded.
Test with a Megger or test lamp.
If the fault is found, repair or rewind.
14
Bearing stiff.
Rotate the rotor by hand.
If the rotor is stalled, dismantle the
motor and rectify the defect.
15
Overload.
Check the load and belt tension.
Reduce the load or loosen the
tight belts.
Chart 2
Motor starts but does not share load (Runs at low speed when loaded.)
S.No          Cause
Test
Remedy
1
Too low a voltage.
Measure voltage at the motor
Renew bad fuses; repair circuit and
terminals and verify it with the
remove the cause of low voltage, like
name-plate.
loose or bad contacts in starter,
switches, distribution box,etc.
2
Bad connection.
Check the connection and contact
Remove the fault as required.
of starter for loose contact.
3
Too low or high tension
Measure the tension and verify it
Adjust the belt tension.
on driving belt.
with the instruction of the
manufacturer.
4
Open circuit in rotor
Examine the rotor bars and joints.
Re-solder the rotor bars.
winding.
5
Faulty stator winding.
Check for continuity, short circuit
Repair the circuit if possible or
and leakage.
rewind the stator.
6
Defective bearings.
Examine bearings for play.
Replace the bearings.
7
Excessively loaded.
Measure the line current of the
Reduce the mechanical load on
motor and compare it with its
the motor.
rated current.
8
Low frequency.
Measure the line frequency with a
If the line frequency is low inform the
frequency meter.
supply authorities and get it corrected.
Chart 3
Motor blows off fuses
S.No            Cause
Test
Remedy
1
Incorrect size of fuses
Check the size of the fuse wire (it
Replace the fuse wire if necessary;
should be rated for 1½  times its
repair the motor if it is due to
normal current); connect the
Powerfault of stator or rotor.
ammeter in the circuit and test for
excess load current.
2
Low voltage
Measure the line voltage.
Remove the cause of low voltage.
3
Excessively loaded
Measure the line current and
Rectify the cause of overload or install
compare it with its rated current.
a motor of higher output rating.
4
Faulty stator winding
Check for open circuit, short circuit
Repair the fault; if not possible
or leakage of the stator as explained
then rewind the stator.
earlier.
5
Loose connection in
Check for loose or bad connection
Rectify the loose connection; loose
starter
in the starter because it may cause
all the contact points of the starter
unbalancing of current.
with sandpaper and align the contacts.
6
Wrong connection
Check the connection with the
Reconnect the motor if it still
original diagram.
does not start.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.141

175
Chart 4
Over Heating of the motor
S.No.           Cause
Test
Remedy
1
Too high or low voltage
Check the voltage and frequency
Rectify the cause of low or high volt-
or frequency.
at the terminal of the motor.
age or frequency as the case may be.
2
Wrong connection.
Compare the connection with the
Reconnect the connection if
given circuit diagram.
required.
3
Open circuit in rotor.
Loose joints of rotor bars causeheat.
Resolder the joints of rotor bars and
end rings.
4
Faulty stator winding.
Check for continuity, short circuit
Remove the fault if possible; otherwise
and leakage as stated before.
rewind the stator winding. Remove
dirt and dust from them if any.
5
Dirt in ventilation ducts.
Inspect ventilation ducts for any
Reduce the load or loosen the belt.
dust or dirt in them.
Rectify the single phasing defect.
6
Overload.
Check the load and the belt.
If the defect is with the driven machine
repair it.  If the problem is with the
bearing, investigate and repair or
replace with new one.
7
Unbalanced electrical
Check the voltage for single phasing.
If required replace the motor
supply.
Check the connections and fuses.
designed for this purpose.
Remove the load and check the rotor
for free rotation.
8
Motor stalled by driven
Check the motor - starter
Loose the machine bearing or grease
machine or tight bearing.
contactor
the bearing or replace the bearing.
9
Motor when used for
Check the connection
Check the manufacturer’s
reversing heats up.
instructions.
Mechanical problems in the motor: In general the
squirrel cage induction motor is found to develop more
mechanical troubles rather than Powertroubles. A thorough
knowledge about the bearing and lubrication is a must for
every electrician. As most of the faults which developed
later in the squirrel cage motor are due to wrong selection
of bearings, improper fittings of bearings and inefficient
lubrication, it is essential that the electrician should have
some knowledge with respect to the types of bearings,
method of fitting or removal of the bearings and type of
lubricants available in the market as explained below.
Ball or roller bearings : The electric motor is fitted with
either a ball (Fig 1) or roller (Fig 2) bearing for easy rotation
of the shaft.
As shown in Figs 1 & 2 these bearings have balls or rollers
which prevent sliding friction by rolling between the races.
As bearings are used between stationary and revolving
machine parts, such bearings have a stationary and a
revolving  race.
Handling the bearings : Bearings are precision-made of
hard, brittle materials. But the working surfaces of bearings
are either honed or very soft. If these surfaces are damaged,
the bearing is ruined, therefore:
•
handle the bearings carefully to prevent damage
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.141

176
•
keep the bearings wrapped until fitted, to keep out dirt
•
protect the bearings against corrosion during storage,
e.g. steel bearings must be oiled.
Installing bearings : Before any bearing is fitted:
•
clean the journal or housing thoroughly and the seatings
of the locating devices. (Fig 3)
•
inspect the surfaces for damage; do not fit the  bearings
to damaged surfaces.
•
Then coat the journal or housing with clean, light oil.
Take care to keep the oil clear of slip rings, brushes and
the control gear of a motor.
While fitting the bearings to the shaft sufficient force has
to be applied on the bearing. During the process to avoid
damage to the bearings follow the procedure given below.
a) Force through arbor press.
Apply force through an arbor press to the inner race which
is in contact with the housing as shown in Fig 4 by using
a pipe and solid block of wood.
This is the best method, since the bearing can more easily
be kept square to its seating.
b) Tapping bearings into place using a drift. (Fig 5)
Bearings should only be tapped into place when
they cannot be pressed into position. Decide
which is the most appropriate method.
Tap evenly around the race being fitted. Take
care to keep the bearing square to seating. The
method is useful when the seating is in an
awkward situation. Take care to prevent foreign
matter from entering the bearing.
Tap the bearing home gently, stopping frequently to check
that it is square.
Bearing removal techniques
a) Using an arbor press. (Fig 6)
Decide which is the best way to set the job up on the
press. Apply the force evenly to remove the bearing.
b) Using bearing puller. (Fig 7)
When using bearing pullers take care to keep the
bearing square to the shaft. Screw-pullers are suitable
for most purposes; take care to keep the puller square
when turning the screw.
Locating faults in bearings : For checking any bearing,
it should be cleaned well.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.141

177
Ball bearings : Normally the ball bearings cannot be
readily dismantled for close examination.
Wear : Check the wear of the ball bearing by holding the
inner ring between the thumb and fore finger of one hand
and holding the outer ring with the other hand . Holding the
ball bearing twist the rings to and fro as indicated in Fig 8.
Any sign of movement indicates wear and the bearing
needs to be replaced with a ball bearing of the same
specification.
Break : Check the bearing for broken inner and outer rings
which also indicate poor fitting, excessive load or wrong
choice of bearing. (Fig 9)
Stains : Check the inner bore and the outer surface for the
characteristic brown and black stains on a generally
smooth and bright surface. (Fig 10) These marks indicate
that movement has been taking place between the bearing,
shaft and the housing due to poor fitting.
Roller bearing : After cleaning the bearing remove the
inner ring and roller assembly from the outer ring.
Check the inner surface of the outer ring. The surface
should be smooth and polished with no regular marks of
roughness or indentations.
The presence of score marks across the track at intervals
corresponding to the pitch of the rollers as shown in Fig 11
indicates faulty initial fitting.
These roller bearings with score mark indicate excessive
wear and produce noise.
Rough patches on the track as shown in Fig 12 indicate
the wear caused by out-of-balance vibration or fatigue
effects. The hard surface flakes off.
Check the general wear of the bearing by using both the
hands as described for ball bearings.General wear
sometimes causes a loss of brightness of the track, the
shine being replaced by a dull surface.
Heavy general wear may produce a distinct groove around
the track.
Static Powerdischarges may also cause blackened
surface pitting of bearing on certain machines. Where this
is suspected check the rotor earthing arrangements.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.141

178
General pitting may be due to rusting caused by inadequate
lubrication or damp service conditions.
Examine the cage rings for signs of wear somewhere
around the inner circumference. Localized wear of a brass
ring may be accompanied by a brassy discolouration of
the track, as the minute particles of brass are ground into
the surface.
A worn out ring indicates a worn  out bearing. Replace it.
Lubrication : Many a time it is detected that the
mechanical faults found in the motor is due to imperfect
lubrication. A thorough knowledge about lubricatioin is
required for the service technician. Most of the motor
manufacturers recommend a certain type and grade of
lubricant for efficient operation of the motor. It is
recommended that the same type and grade should be
used to get optimum efficiency of the motor and the
specified grade of lubricant should be painted on the
motors for guidance.
There are several methods of lubricating motors. Small
motors with sleeve bearings have oil holes with spring
covers. These motors should be oiled periodically with a
good grade of mineral oil as recommended by the
manufacturer.
The bearings of larger motors often are provided with an oil
ring which fits loosely in a slot in the bearing. The oil ring
picks up the oil from a reservoir located directly under the
ring. Under normal operating conditions, the oil should be
replaced in the motor at least once a year.  More frequent
oil replacement may be necessary in motors operating
under adverse conditions. In all cases, avoid excessive
oiling; insufficient oil can ruin a bearing but excessive oil
can cause deterioration of the insulation of a winding.
Many motors are lubricated with grease. Periodic
replacement of the grease is recommended. In general,
the grease should be replaced whenever a general overhaul
is indicated, or sooner if the motor is operated under
severe operating conditions.
Grease can be removed by using a light mineral oil heated
to 165oF or a solvent. Any grease-removing solvent should
be used in a well-ventilated work area.
Bearing troubles and the possible remedies are given in
Chart 5.The following Do’s and Don’ts instruction is
pertaining to ball-bearing. Follow it for avoiding bearing
problems.
Do ‘s and Don’ts for ball-bearing assembly, maintenance, inspection and lubrication
Do’s
Don’ts
Do work with clean tools, in clean surroundings.
Don’t work under the handicap of poor tools, rough
bench, or dirty surroundings.
Do remove all outside dirt from housing before
Don’t use dirty, brittle or chipped tools.
exposing the bearing.
Do treat an used bearing as carefully as a new one.
Don’t handle bearings with dirty, moist hands.
Do use clean solvents and flushing oils.
Don’t spin uncleaned bearing.
Do lay bearings out on clean paper.
Don’t spin any bearings with compressed air.
Do protect disassembled bearings from dirt and
Don’t use the same container for cleaning  the of
rinse of moisture.
bearings.
Do use clean, lint-free rags to wipe the bearings.
Don’t scratch or nick bearing surfaces.
Do keep the bearing lubricants clean when applying
Don’t remove grease or oil from new bearings.
and cover containers when not in use.
Do  clean outside of housing before replacing bearings.
Don’t use incorrect kind or amount of  lubricant.
Do keep bearing lubricants clean when applying and
Don’t use a bearing as a gauge to check
cover containers when not in use.
either the housing bore or the shaft fit.
Be sure the shaft size is within specified tolerances
Don’t install a bearing on a shaft that shows excessive
recommended for the bearing.
wear.
Do store the bearing in original unopened cartons
Don’t open the carton until bearing is ready to replace.
in dry for installation.
Do use a clean, short-bristle brush with firmly
Don’t judge the condition of a bearing until
embedded bristles to remove dirt, scale or chips.
after it has been cleaned.
Be certain that, when installed, the bearing is square
Don’t pound directly on a bearing or ring, when instal-
with and held firmly against the shaft shoulder.
ling,as this may cause damage  to the shaft and
bearing.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.141

179
Do’s
Don’ts
Do follow lubricating instructions supplied with the
Don’t overfill when lubricating. Excess greases and  oil
machinery. Use only grease where grease is specified.
will ooze out of the over-filled  housings past seals and
Use only oil where oil is specified. Be sure to use the
closures, collect dirt and cause trouble.  Too much
exact kind of lubricant called for.
lubricant will also cause over heating, particularly where
bearings operate at high speeds.
Do handle grease with clean paddles or grease guns.
Don’t permit any machine to stand inoperative for
Store grease in clean containers. Keep the grease
months without running it over periodically. This
containers covered.
prevents moisture which may condense in a standing
bearing from causing corrosion.
In addition to the bearing faults the motor may develop
certain troubles like vibration and noise which may be due
to Poweror machancial faults.
Troubleshooting Chart 6 given here illustrates the possible
causes, areas of fault and remedies for the faults like
vibration and noise.
Chart 6
Vibration and noise in motors
S.No.
Cause
Test
Remedy
1
Loose foundation
Inspect nuts and bolts of foundation for
Tighten the foundation nuts.
bolts or nuts.
loose fittings.
2
Wrong alignment
Check alignment with a spirit level
Realign the coupling.
of coupling.
through dial test indicator.
3
Faulty magnetic
Measure the current in each phase and
Repair fault if possible or rewind
circuit of stator
they should be equal. Check also per-
the motor.
or rotor.
phase resistance and they should be
equal. Check the insulation resistance
between the windings and the frame.
In a newly  wound motor there may be
reversed coils in a pole-phase group
which can be detected by the compass
test.
4
Motor running on
Stop the motor, then try to start. ( It will
Rectify the supply.
single phase.
not start on single phase). Check for
open in one of the lines or circuits.
5
Noisy ball bearing.
Check the lubrication for correct grade
If found, replace the lubricant or
and low noise in the bearing.
replace the bearing.
6
Loose punching or
Check the parts visually.
Tighten all the holding bolts.
loose rotor on shaft.
7
Rotor rubbing on
Check for rubbing marks on the stator
If found, realign the shaft to centre
the stator.
and rotor.
it or replace the bearings.
8
Improper fitting
Measure the air gap at four different
Open the screws of the side covers, and
of end-covers.
points for uneven position of rotor
then tighten one by one. If trouble still
covers.
persists, remove the end cover, shift for
next position and tighten the screws
again.
9
Foreign material
Examine the air-gap.
File or clean out air-gap.
in air-gap.
10
Loose fan or
Check looseness of the fan screw or
Tighten the fan screws or refit
bearings.
bearings.
new bearings, if necessary.
11
Slackness in
Remove the bearings and inspect the
Send the motor to the repair shop
bearing on shaft
inner looseness of the race on the
for removing the looseness of the
or in housing.
shaft and outer race in the housing.
shaft and housing, if any.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.141

180
S.No.
Cause
Test
Remedy
 12
Improper fitting of
Remove the end-covers and examine
Refit the bearings on the shaft or
bearings.
the assembly of bearings on the shaft
in the housing.
 or in the housing.
13
Minor bend in shaft.
Check for alignment on the lathe.
Remove the bend or replace the
shaft, if required.
Troubleshooting of motor starters
Objectives : At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the troubles in the D.O.L. starter, their cause and their remedy
• check out the troubles in the mini manual starter, their cause and their remedy.
Introduction : The D.O.L. starter consists of the fixed
contacts, movable contacts, no-volt coil, overload relay
and start button which is in green colour and a stop button
in red colour with a locking arrangement. Analyse the
D.O.L. starter available in the workshop. The main purpose
of the contactor is to make and break the motor circuit.
These contacts in the contactor suffer maximum wear,
due to frequent use and hence these contacts are made
of silver alloy material.
A no-volt coil acts as under-voltage release mechanism
disconnecting supply to the motor when the supply voltage
fails or is lower than the stipulated value. Thus the motor
will be disconnected from supply under these conditions.
The no-volt coil magnetic system consists of a laminated
iron core for minimising the eddy current and hysterisis
losses. Shading rings are provided on the pole faces of
the magnetic core to reduce the hum level and chattering
which is present due to A.C. supply.
A thermal overload relay unit is provided for the protection
of the motor. This unit consists of a triple pole, bimetallic
relay housed in a sealed bimetallic enclosure. This is
provided with a current setting arrangement. After tripping
on overload, the relay has to be reset by pressing the
stop button. The relay can be reset only after bimetalic
strips get cooled sufficiently.
In case the motor does not start even though the start
button is pressed, observe whether the stop button is
locked with a metallic locking piece provided near the
stop button. Release it and press the start button, then
observe the functioning of the motor. Even then if the motor
does not start check up the 3 phase supply. If the supply
is found available at the incoming terminals of the starter,
then switch off the supply and rectify the defect in the
starter.
Suppose the three phase supply is available and starter
NVC is energising but the motor does not start, check for
any foreign material in  between the contact points.
Remove it and test the starter again. Visually observe
whether the contacts are closing properly.
If any contact is not closing properly or any burns and
pittings are noticed on the contact surface, then remove
the contact strips. Dress up properly with zero number
sandpaper or with a smooth file or replace it if necessary.
Some manufacturers suggest that the contact points
made out of silver alloy need to be cleaned with cloth only.
It needs no filing or sandpaper rubbing. However, unless
the contacts are found to have too much pittings, the filing
or dressing with sandpaper is not recommended. Further
badly shaped or disfigured contacts need to be replaced
with a good ones. See that  there is proper spring tension
over the contacts. Likewise check all the contact strips of
the contactor and clean them with an  approved contact
cleaner.
When the no-volt coil is activated by the start
button, the auxiliary contact of the starter
should close to complete the NVC circuit and
should remain in the closed position even after
the start button is released.
If the overload relay is not functioning properly i.e. not
tripping the motor as per setting of the current rating, then
replace it with a new one as per with the original specification
of the manufacturer.
If a humming and chattering noise is observed in the starter
then check for the rated voltage. If the voltage is okay, then
check for any gummy material adhered to the pole faces.
If found, clean it properly. See whether the shading ring
over the pole faces of the NVC is loose. Tighten it properly
and also check the spring tension of NVC housing.
Suppose the starter trips often then, check up the load on
the motor. (Might be due to overload or over tension of the
belt) Reduce the load or tension of the belt. Further check
up the motor current in each phase. If the motor takes
higher current than specified even though the load is
normal, then the fault is with the motor and not with the
starter. After attending to the faults and rectifying them,
reassemble the starter,connect it to the motor for proper
functioning.
Starter check - chart given below could be used to locate
trouble in a D.O.L. starter.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.141

181
Maintenance of DOL starters
Trouble
Cause
Remedy
I
Starter check chart
1 Contacts chatter
Low voltage, coil is not picking up
Correct the voltage condition. In case there is
properly.
persistent low voltage,
Broken pole shading ring.
check the supply of the transformer tapping.
Poor contact between the pole
Replace.
faces of the magnet.
Clean the pole faces.
Poor contact between fixed and
Clean contacts and adjust, if necessary.
movable contacts.
2 Welding or
Low voltage preventing magnet
Correct the voltage condition. In case of persistent
   overheating.
from sealing.
low voltage, which is accepted normal change
Abnormal in rush current.
the NVC to lower voltage coil. Check excessive
Short circuit in the motor.
load current or use larger contactor. Remove the
Foreign matter preventing
fault and check to ensure that the fuse rating is
contacts from closing.
correct. Clean contacts with suitable solvent.
Rapid inching.
Install larger device or caution the  operator not to
operate the inch button too quickly.
3 Short life of contact
Weak contact pressure.
Adjust or replace contact springs.
points
4 Noisy magnets
Broken shading coil.
Replace magnet.
Magnet faces not mating.
Align or replace magnet assembly.
Dirt or rust on magnet faces.
Clean with suitable solvents.
5 Failure to pick up
Low voltage.
Check system voltage. In case persistent low
and seal the contacts.
voltage, change to a lower voltage coil.
Coil open or short-circuited.
Replace the coil.
Mechanical obstruction for the
Clean and check for free movement of
moving parts.
contact assembly.
6 Failure of moving
Voltage not removed.
Check wiring in the NVC coil circuit.
mechanism to
Worn or rusted parts causing
Replace parts.
drop out.
binding.Residual magnetism due
Replace worn out magnet parts
to lack of air gap in magnet path.
or demagnetise the parts.
Gummy substance on pole faces
Clean with suitable solvent.
causing binding.
7 Overheating of coil
Over-voltage.
Check and correct terminal voltage.
Short circuited turns in coils
Replace coil.
caused by mechanical damage
or corrosion.
High ambient temperature.
Relocate starter in a more suitable
area or use a fan.
Dirt or rust on pole faces
Clean pole faces.
increasing the air gap.
II Overload relays/
release
1 Starter is tripping often. Incorrect setting of over load relay.
Reset properly.
Sustained overload.
Check for faults/excessive motor currents.
2 Failure to trip
Wrong setting of O.L relay.
Check O.L relay ratings and set a proper relay.
(causing motor burn
Mechanical binding due to dirt,
Clean or replace. Incorrect control wiring.
    out).
corrosion etc.
Check the circuit and correct it.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.141

182
Trouble
Cause
Remedy
III Fuses
1 Constant blowing
Short circuit or poor insulation in
Check the motor and the circuit
of fuses
winding/wiring.
for insulation resistance.
2 Fuse not blowing under Fuse rating too high.
Replace with suitable fuse.
short circuit condition.
3 Fuse blowing off
Fuse rating too low.
Replace with suitable fuse.
    frequently.
Overloading of feeder.
Check for over-current, leakage and short circuit.
Mini Manual Starter (Refer Fig 1): This starter unit
comprises of a double brake 3-pole on load switch operated
by means of a toggle mechanism. Adjustable bimetal
thermal overload strips are included in it which can be set
for the correct load current of the motor.
The stop push-button and overload trips act on the toggle
switch mechanism to trip the starter.
The fixed contacts are formed of silver tips on heavy
terminal blocks with clamp type terminals. The moving
contacts are of copper with silver coating.
In general the manual starters are possessing the toggle
switch anchor mechanism. Due to frequent use, the spring
tension becomes weak and it will not hold the contacts in
the closed position. In such case the lever mechanism
should be replaced? If the starter trips often check up the
overload thermal strips. If they are defective replace them.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.3.141

183
Power
Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 150
Electrician - AC Single Phase Motor
Single phase motors - split phase induction motor - induction-start,
induction-run motor
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain briefly the types of AC single phase motors
• explain the necessity and methods of split-phasing the single phase to obtain a rotating magnetic field
• explain the principle, construction, operation characteristic and application of single phase resistance /
induction-start / induction-run motors.
Single phase motors perform a great variety of useful
services at home, office, farm, factory, and in business
establishments. These motors are generally referred to as
fractional horsepower motors with a rating of less than 1
H.P. Most single phase motors fall into this category.
Single phase motors are also manufactured in 1.5,2,3 and
up to 10 H.P. as a special requirement.
Single phase motors may be broadly classified as
split-phase induction motors and commutator motors
according to their construction and method of starting.
Split-phase induction motors can be further classified as:
•
resistance-start, induction-run motors
•
induction-start, induction-run motors
•
permanent capacitor motors
•
capacitor-start, induction-run motors
•
capacitor-start, capacitor-run motors
•
shaded pole motors.
•
stepper motor
Commutator motors can be classified as:
•
repulsion motors
•
series motors.
The basic principle of operation of a split-phase induction
motor is similar to that of a polyphase induction motor. The
main difference is that the single phase motor does not
produce a rotating magnetic field but produces only a
pulsating field. Hence to produce the rotating magnetic
field, phase-spliting is to be done to make the motor to
work as a two-phase motor for starting.
First, let us examine the behaviour of the magnetic field as
set up by an AC current in a sinlge-phase field winding.
With reference to Fig 1, at a particular instant, the current
flowing in the field winding produces the magnetic field as
shown in Fig 1a. Since the produced magnetic field is
varying, it will induce currents in the rotor bars which in turn
will create a rotor flux. This stator-induced flux, according
to Lenz's law, opposes  that of the main field. By applying
this principle, the current direction in the rotor bars can be
determined as shown in Fig 1a, as well as the torque
created between the field and rotor currents. It is apparent
that the downward torque produced by the upper rotor
conductors is counteracted by the upward torque produced
by the lower rotor conductors; hence no rotation results.
In the next instant, as shown in Fig 1b, the voltage in the
input supply changes its polarity, creating a main field with
a  change in direction. This main field produces  a torque,
downward in upper conductors, and upwards in bottom
conductors resulting in the cancellation of torque with no
movement of the rotor, in this case also. Since the field is
pulsating, the torque is pulsating although no net torque is
produced over a full cycle.
If the rotor is given a small jerk in any direction in the above
mentioned cases, it will go on revolving, and will develop
a torque in that particular direction due to interaction
between the rotor and stator fluxes. Because of this effect,
the split-phase motor, once started, needs only one
winding to be connected to the supply for running. It is
clear that a single phase induction motor, when having
only one winding, is not self-starting. If the main field is

184
made revolving instead of pulsating, a rotational torque
could be produced in the rotor.
Producing a rotating field from two 90° out-of-phase
fields: One of the methods of producing a rotating magnetic
field is by split-phasing. This could be done by providing a
second set of winding in the stator called the starting
winding. This winding should be kept physically at 90
Powerdegrees from the main winding, and should carry a
current out of phase from the main winding. This, out of
phase current, could be achieved by making the reactance
of the starting winding being different from that of the main
winding. In case both the windings have similar reactance
and impedance, the resulting field, created by the main
and starting windings, will alternate but will not revolve and
the motor will not start.
By split-phasing, the two (main and starting) fields would
combine to produce a rotating magnetic field as stated
below.
Fig 2 shows that the main (1,1') and starting (2,2') windings
are kept in the stator at 90° to each other. For consideration,
only, one half cycle is shown with the effects at 450
increments.
At position `A', only the main winding is producing flux, and
the net flux will be in a vertical direction, as shown in the
stator diagram. At instant `B', 45° later, both windings are
producing flux, and the net flux direction will also have
rotated 45°. At position `C', the maximum flux is now in a
horizontal direction because only the starting winding is
producing flux. At instant `D', the current from the main
winding is building up again, but in a new direction, while
that from starting winding is now decreasing. Therefore,
the net flux at this instant will be as shown in position D.
At position `E', the maximum flux is just the opposite of
what it was at instant `A'. It should now be evident that the
two out-of-phase fields are combining to produce a net
rotating field effect.
Working of split-phase motor: At the time of starting,
both the main and starting windings should be connected
across the supply to produce the rotating magnetic field.
The rotor is of a squirrel cage type, and the revolving
magnetic field sweeps past the stationary rotor, inducing
an emf in the rotor. As the rotor bars are short-circuited,
a current flows through them producing a magnetic field.
This magnetic field opposes the revolving magnetic field
and will combine with the main field to produce a revolving
field. By this action, the rotor starts revolving in the same
direction of the rotating magnetic field as in the case of a
squirrel cage induction motor, which was explained earlier.
Hence, once the rotor starts rotating, the starting winding
can be disconnected from the supply by some mechanical
means as the rotor and stator fields form a revolving
magnetic field.
Resistance-start, induction-run motor: As the starting
torque of this type of motor is relatively small and its
starting current is high, these motors are most commonly
used for rating up to 0.5 HP where the load could be started
easily.
The essential parts are as shown in Fig 3a.
•
Main winding or running winding
•
Auxiliary winding or starting winding
•
Squirrel cage type rotor
•
Centrifugal switch
The starting winding is designed to have a higher resistance
and lower reactance than the main winding. This is
achieved by using smaller conductors in the auxiliary
winding than in the main winding. The main winding will
have higher inductance when surrounded by more iron,
which could be made possible by placing it deeper into the
stator slots. It is obvious that the current would split as
shown in Fig 3b. The starting current `I start' will lag the
main supply voltage `V' line' by 15° and the main winding
current. `I main' lags the main voltage by about 40°.
Therefore, these currents will differ in time phase and their
magnetic fields will combine to produce a rotating magnetic
field.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

185
When the motor has come up to about 75 to 80% of
synchronous speed, the starting winding is opened by a
centrifugal switch, and the motor will continue to operate
as a single phase motor. At the point where the starting
winding is disconnected, the motor develops nearly as
much torque with the main winding alone as with both
windings connected. This can be onserved from the typical
torque-speed characteristics of this motor, as shown in
Fig 4.
The direction of rotation of a split-phase motor is determined
by the way the main and auxiliary windings are connected.
Hence, either by changing the main winding terminals or
by changing the starting winding terminals, the reversal of
direction of rotation could be obtained. Rotation will be,
say counter-clockwise, if  Z1 is joined to U1 and Z2 is joined
to U2 as per Fig 5a. If  Z1 is joined to U2 and Z2 is joined to
U1, then the rotation will be clockwise, as shown in Fig 5b.
Application of resistance-start, induction-run motor:
As the starting torque of this type of motors is relatively
small and its starting current is high, these are manufactured
for a rating up to 0.5 HP where the starting load is light.
These motors are used for driving fans, grinders, washing
machines and wood working tools.
Induction-start, induction-run motor: Instead of
resistance start, inductance can be used to start the
motor through a highly inductive starting winding. In such
a case, the starting winding will have more number of
turns, and will be imbedded in the inner areas of the stator
slots so as to have high inductance due to more number
of turns, and the area will be surrounded by more iron. As
the starting and main windings in most of the cases are
made from the same gauge winding wire, resistance
measurement has to be done to identify the windings. This
motor will have a low starting torque, higher starting
current and lower power factor.
Centrifugal switch
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the working, the method of maintenance and testing of a centrifugal switch
• explain the necessity of a manual D.O.L. starter and its working
• explain the operation of overload relays.
The centrifugal switch: The centrifugal switch is located
inside the motor and is connected in series with the
starting winding in the case of capacitor-start, induction-run
motors, and for disconnecting the starting capacitor in the
case of a two value, capacitor-start, capacitor-run motor.
Its function is to disconnect the starting winding after the
rotor has reached 75 to 80% of the rated speed. The usual
type consists of two main parts. Namely, a stationary part
as shown in Fig 1, and a rotating part as shown in Fig 2.
The stationary part is usually located on the front-end plate
of the motor and has two contacts, so that it is similar in
action to a single-pole, single-throw switch. When the
rotating part is fitted in the rotor, it rotates along with it.
When the rotor is stationary, the insulator ring of the
rotating part is in an inward position due to spring tension.
This inward movement of the insulator ring allows the
stationary switch contacts to be closed which is due to the
movable lever pressure against the leaf-spring tension in
the switch.
When the rotor attains about 75% of the rated speed, due
to centrifugal force, the governor weights fly out, and this
makes the insulator ring to come outward. Due to this
forward movement of the insulated ring, it presses the
movable lever, and the contacts connected through
terminals CS1 and CS2 open the starting winding.
In older types of centrifugal switches, the stationary part
consists of two copper, semicircular segments. These are
insulated from each other and mounted inside the front-end
plate. The centrifugal switch connections are given to
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

186
tumbler switch to the rated supply as shown in Fig 4, and
keep the tumbler switch in the `ON' position.
these segments. The rotating part is composed of three
copper fingers that ride around the stationary segments,
while the motor is at rest or running at lower than 75% of
the rated speed. These parts are illustrated in Fig 3.
At the time of starting, the segments are shorted by the
copper fingers, thus causing the starting winding to be
included in the motor circuit. At approximately 75 percent
of the full speed, the centrifugal force causes the fingers
to be lifted from the segments, thereby disconnecting the
starting winding from the circuit.
Maintenance of centrifugal switch: Access to the
centrifugal switch could be had by removing the inspection
plate, located in the end covers of the motor. In very many
cases, the switch is accessible only when the end plate
is removed. These switches need to be checked atleast
once in six months to ensure their proper operation. Look
for broken or weak springs, for improper movement, for dirt
or corrosion or pittings in the contact points. Make sure all
parts work freely without binding. Replace the switch, if
found defective.
Testing the operation of a centrifugal switch: Though
the centrifugal switch could be tested in a static condition,
it will be very difficult to assess its operation at dynamic
condition. As most of these switches cannot be checked
without opening the end plate, the procedure becomes
lengthy and cumbersome. To check the dynamic operation
of the switch the following method is suggested. Disconnect
the interconnecting terminals of the centrifugal switch
from the supply and the starting winding. Connect the
starting (auxiliary) winding through a 15 amps, single-pole,
Connect the terminals of the centrifugal switch, through a
lamp as shown in Fig 4. Switch `ON' the motor. When the
centrifugal switch is in the closed position, the lamp will
light. As the motor picks up speed, say in about 20
seconds, open the tumbler switch to disconnect the
starting winding. When the speed of the motor attains
about 75% of the rated value, the centrifugal switch, if it
operates correctly, will open its contacts which could be
observed from the lamp going `off'. Soon after switching
`on' the main supply, if the lamp is not lighted, or if it lights
up but does not go out after 30-40 seconds (75 % of the
rated speed) then the centrifugal switch is deemed to be
not working, and should be repaired or replaced.
Manual D.O.L. starter: A starter is necessary for starting
and stopping the motor, and for providing overload
protection.
A manual starter, as it appears, is shown in Fig 5, an open
view of the starter is shown in Fig 6, and the internal parts
are shown in Fig 7, as a schematic diagram. A manual
starter is a motor controller with a contact mechanism
operated by hand. A push-button operates the mechanism
through a mechanical linkage. As shown in Figs 6 & 7, the
starter may have both a thermal overload relay and a
magnetic overload relay for overload protection and short
circuit protection respectively. Both the relays are made
to operate independently, in case of overload or short
circuit, to release the start-button for disconnecting the
motor from supply. Most of the present day, manual
starters have either of the two relays only. Basically, a
manual starter is an ON-OFF switch with overload relay
only.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

187
Manual starters are simple and they provide quiet operation.
Operation: Pushing the `ON' button closes the contacts.
The contacts remain closed until the STOP button is
pushed or the overload relay or the short circuit relay trips
the starter.
As shown in Fig 7, when the `ON' push-button (6) is
pressed, the switching contact (10) gets closed, and
remains in a closed position, as the mechanical lever
system (5) holds the stem of the `ON' button by the cavity
(11) against the spring tension. By operating the stop
button (7), the mechanical lever system (5) gets disengaged
from the stem cavity, making the stem of the `ON' button
to spring back, thereby opening the switching contacts
(10).
Operation of overload relay: In the case of sustained
overloads, the heavy currents passing through the heating
element of the thermal overload relay heats up the bimetallic
strip, making it to bend as shown by the arrow in Fig 8,
thereby activating the mechanical lever system to open
the switching contacts.
The current setting of the thermal overload relay can be
changed by adjusting the setting screw, provided for this
purpose (not shown in the figure.)
Operation of short-circuit relay:In the case of a short
circuit in the motor circuit, the short circuit current will be
very high in value. Though the thermal overload relay is
also in series with such a short circuit current, it is
sluggish in operation and takes considerable time to
operate. On the other hand, the short circuit current within
such time of delayed operation, will sufficiently damage
the motor winding, power cables or the connected supply
line.
The magnetic relay will operate faster than the thermal
overload relay in such cases.
During normal load current the magnetic field produced by
the coil will not have sufficient pull to attract the armature.
But in case of short circuit, the current will be very high and
the coil produces sufficient magnetism to attract the
armature. Downward movement of the armature activates
the mechacnical lever mechanism as shown by the arrow
in Fig 9 and the switching contact opens. These contacts
cannot be reclosed until the starter mechanism has been
reset by pressing the Stop button.
Manual starters are used for fractional horsepower motors.
They usually provide across-the-line starting. Manual
starters cannot provide low-voltage protection or no-volt
release. If power fails, the contacts remain closed, and the
motor will restart when the power returns. This may be an
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

188
advantage for pumps, fans, compressors, and oil burners.
But in the case of machinery it can be dangerous to people
operating the equipment, and hence, such manual starters
are not recommended to be used in these places.
Electromagnetic relay: Single phase induction motors,
like poly phase induction motors takes heavy current from
the time during starting when started direct on line
Advantage of this high starting current is taken to operate
electromagnetic type relay which performs the same
function as the centrifugal device.  Connection diagram for
such a relay is shown in Fig 10.
The relay has a coil which is connected in series with the
main winding.  The auxiliary winding is connected across
the supply through a normally open contact of the relay.
Since split-phase motors are usually started direct on line,
the initial current inrush may be as high a five to six times
the rated current.  During the starting period, when the
main winding current is high, the armature of the relay will
be drawn upwards, thereby closing the relay contacts.
The auxiliary winding will, therefore, get connected across
the supply, thus helping the motor to start rotating.  As the
rotor starts rotating, the line current gradually goes on
decreasing.  After the motor reaches proper speed, the
main winding current drops to a low value and causes the
armature of the relay to fall downwards and open the
contacts, thereby cutting out the auxiliary winding from
the supply.  Such relays are located outside the motor so
that they can be easily serviced or replaced.  As centrifugal
switches are mounted internally, their servicing or
replacement is not as simple as an externally mounted
over-current relay.
Single phase, split phase type motor winding (concentric coil winding)
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the important points to be followed while winding split phase motors
• explain about coil distribution in concentric winding
• prepare the winding table, draw the connection and developed diagrams for concentric coil winding in
single phase, split phase type motors.
Split phase type : In general, single phase motors use a
capacitor to split the phase. Some motors are, as found
in fans, have the capacitor permanently connected to the
supply. In some motors, the capacitor is used only for the
starting period, then while running it is disconnected from
the supply by the use of a centrifugal switch mechanism.
In some other types of motors there are two capacitors,
one for starting and the other for running. However,
depending upon the power, function and the design of the
motor, the capacitor value will be different in each case.
Observe this point everytime you come across the split
phase motor.
There are certain points to be followed while winding a split
phase motor.
1
The single phase winding may have different shapes of
coils as explained below.
a
Concentric coil winding (Fig 1): This winding requires
coils of different shapes in a phase/pole group, and
different sizes between the phases in order to
accommodate in the slots and for placing both main
and starting windings. In addition to this, the coils in the
same group may have different number of turns.
b True mesh shaped coils (Fig 2): These coils are of
the same size and shape and the end windings form a
very tight roll.
c
Diamond mesh shaped coils (Fig 3): These coils are
of the same size and shape and the end winding is
longer and flatter than the true mesh type coils. The
end of the coils has a loop, knuckle or nose.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

189
2
The  main  and  starting winding should be placed  90
Powerdegrees apart from each other.
3
All the coil groups may or may not have the same
number of coils.
4
The main winding is kept first in the stator slots and the
starting winding is kept over the main windings.
5
Normally, the main winding consists of thick winding
wire, and the starting winding of thin winding wire. In
certain motors both the windings may have same size
of winding wire.
6
The number of turns in the main and starting windings
may or may not have the same number of turns.
7
In concentric coil winding, the coils in the same group
may or may not have the same number of turns.
8
Each slot may contain one or two coil sides.
9
The overhang of the coils should be of exact in size. If
it is less, the insertion of the coils will be difficult and
if the size is more, the coils may not allow the end
covers to be fitted.
10 While inserting concentric coils, start with the smaller
pitched coil set.
11 There may be empty slots in the stator. Note their
position.
Concentric winding: Concentric type of winding is
probably the most common type of winding used in
fractional horsepower single phase motors. The winding
may be hand wound or may be form wound.
As the starting winding is designed to split the phase and
is used to start the motor, it may have less slots (coils)
allotted when compared to the main winding. For example
there may be 8 coils for main winding and 4 coils only for
the starting winding.
Further it is a standard practice to wind only about 70%  of
the slots of a single phase motor, as owing to the effect of
the distribution or spread factor, no advantage is gained by
making a single phase winding any wider. Even if the whole
of the slots were to be wound, the extra winding would be
useless for producing the useful torque.
Similarly it has been found that in single phase motors, no
extra loss takes place if all the slots of each pole face are
not wound. Thus the running winding looses nothing in
efficiency, because some of the slots of each pole are
taken for the starting winding.
Winding calculation and diagrams for concentric
type winding : Let us discuss the following examples.
Example 1
Prepare the winding table, draw the connection and
developed diagrams for a single phase, 4 pole, whole coil
connected capacitor motor having 24 slots, 12 coils (8
coils for main and 4 coils for starting winding) with pitches
5, 3 for the main and 5 for the starting winding.
coils/pole
 2
 
 
4
8
 
 
poles
 
of
 
Number
coils
 
 winding
main
 
of
 
number
 
Total
 
 winding
main
 
in
 
pole
 
per
 
coils
 
of
 
Number
=
=
=
In other words, there will be 8 coils in the main winding
forming 4 pole groups. Each group will have two coils under
each pole. Pitches assigned will be 5 and 3 for each coil
group.
Number of coils per pole in starting winding = 4/4 =1 coil
/pole.
There will be 4 groups in starting winding having one coil
per group. Pitch assigned will be 5 for the coil.
Summarising the results we have the coil group as given
below in Table 1.
Table 1
Winding
Groups
Coil per pole
Pitches
Coil throw
Connection
Main
4
2
5, 3
1-6, 2-5
Whole coil-end to end and start to start
Starting
4
1
5
1-6
Whole coil-end to end and start to start.
Calculation of Powerdegrees required for phase
splitting
Total Powerdegrees
= 180 x Total number of poles
= 180x4= 720 Powerdegrees
Degrees/slot= 720/24 = 30 Powerdegrees
No. of slots required for 90 Powerdegrees dis-placement
between  main  and  starting  winding = 90/30 = 3 slots.
Hence if the main winding starts in, say, slot number one,
then the starting winding should be started in 1+3 = 4th
slot.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

190
Computing the above information in a winding table we
have Table 2.
Table 2
Winding table
Slot position for poles
Winding
I pole
II pole
III pole
IV pole
Main
1 - 6
7 - 12
13 - 18
19 - 24
2 - 5
8 - 11
14 - 17
20 - 23
Starting
4 - 9
10 - 15
16 - 21
22 - 3
Remembering whole coil connection the connection
diagram is to be drawn as shown in Fig 4.
Remember ‘S’ is for starting and ‘E’ for end connection.
Based on the winding table the developed diagram is
drawn as shown in Fig 5.
Example 2
Prepare the winding table, draw the connection and
developed diagrams for a single phase, 4-pole, whole coil
connected capacitor motor having 36 slots 28 coils (16
coils for main and 12 coils for the starting winding).
Coil per group in main winding 16/4=4 coils/group/poles
Coil per group in starting winding 12/4 = 3 coils/group/
poles
The coil throw for main winding will be 1-9 and the winding
table will be as shown in Table 3.
Table 3
Main winding - winding table
For the
same
1st pole 2nd pole 3rd pole 4th pole
group
1st coil
1 - 9
10 - 18
19 - 27
28 - 36
2nd coil
2 - 8
11 - 17
20 - 26
29 - 35
3rd coil
3 - 7
12 - 16
21 - 25
30 - 34
4th coil
4 - 6
13 - 15
22 - 24
31 - 33
Calculate the degrees/slot.
Total Powerdegrees = 180 x 4 = 720 Powerdegrees.
Degrees/slot = 720/36 = 20 Powerdegrees
For phase displacement of 90 Powerdegrees we require
90/20 = 4.5 slots. As it is impossible to start at 4.5 slots,
let us start the starting winding in slot No.5.
Hence the coil throw for starting winding will also be 1 - 9,
but it starts in the 5th slot. As such the winding table will
be  as shown in Table 4
Table 4
Starting winding - winding table
For the
same
1st pole 2nd pole 3rd pole 4th pole
group
1st coil
5 - 13
14 - 22
23 - 31
32 - 4
2nd coil
6 - 12
15 - 21
24 - 30
33 - 3
3rd coil
7 - 11
16 - 20
25 - 29
34 - 2
There will be several slots having 2 coil sides and some
slots may have single coil side only.
Remembering the whole coil connection, the connection
diagram will be as shown in Fig 6.
Based on the above,  the developed diagram is shown in
Fig 7.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

191
Capacitor - start, induction - run motor
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the construction and working of an AC single phase, capacitor-start, induction-run motor
• explain the characteristic and application of a capacitor- start, induction-run motor.
A drive which requires a higher starting torque may be
fitted with a capacitor-start, induction-run motor as it has
excellent starting torque as compared to the
resistance-start, induction-run motor.
Construction and working: Fig 1 shows the schematic
diagram of a capacitor-start, induction-run motor. As
shown, the main winding is connected across the main
supply, whereas the starting winding is connected across
the main supply through a capacitor and a centrifugal
switch. Both these windings are placed in a stator slot at
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

192
90° Powerdegrees apart, and a squirrel cage type rotor is
used.
As shown in Fig 2, at the time of starting, the current in the
main winding lags the supply voltages by about 70°
degrees, depending upon its inductance and resistance.
On the other hand, the current in the starting winding due
to its capacitor will lead the applied voltage, by say 20°
degrees.
Hence, the phase difference between the main and starting
winding becomes near to 90 degrees. This in turn makes
the line current to be more or less in phase with its applied
voltage, making the power factor to be high, thereby
creating an excellent starting torque.
However, after attaining 75% of the rated speed, the
centrifugal switch operates opening the starting winding,
and the motor then operates as an induction motor, with
only the main winding connected to the supply.
Reversing the direction of rotation: In order to reverse
the direction of rotation of the capacitor start, induction-run
motor, either the starting or the main winding terminals
should be changed. This is due to the fact that the direction
of rotation depends upon the instantaneous polarities of
the main field flux and the flux produced by the starting
winding. Therefore, reversing the polarity of any one of the
fields will reverse the torque.
Characteristic: As shown in Fig 2, the displacement of
current in the main and  starting winding is about 80/90
degrees, and the power factor angle between the applied
voltage and line current is very small. This results in
producing a higher power factor and an excellent starting
torque, several times higher than the normal running
torque, as shown in Fig 3. The running torque adjusts itself
with load by varying inversely with respect to speed as
shown in the characteristic curve in Fig 3.
Application: Due to the excellent starting torque and
easy direction-reversal characteristic, these machines
are used in  belted fans, blowers, dryers, washing machines,
pumps and compressors.
Capacitors used in single phase capacitor motors
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the precautions to be followed while using a capacitor in a single phase capacitor motor
• explain the methods of testing capacitors.
A capacitor is a device which can store Powerenergy in the
form of electrostatic charge. However the main purpose of
the capacitor in the single phase motors is to split the
phase for producing the rotating magnetic field. In addition,
they also draw the leading current, thereby improving the
power factor.
Precautions to be followed while using a capacitor in
a single phase capacitor motor: Paper or electrolytic
capacitors of non-polarized types are used for starting AC
capacitor type motors. These capacitors have special
marking for use in AC circuits, and will not have polarity
marking. Paper or electrolytic capacitors for use in DC
circuits have polarity markings. They must not be used in
AC circuits as the reversal of AC voltage will heat up the
capacitor, producing enormous gas inside the can, thereby
blowing it into pieces.
The AC voltage rating inscribed on the capacitor will have
two ratings. One for working voltage and another for the
maximum value of voltage. Working voltage refers to the
normal R.M.S. rating of the supply mains while the
maximum rating will be AC peak voltage which will be 2
times the rated R.M.S. voltage. Hence, while replacing a
capacitor, a careful scrutiny of voltage rating is essential,
as otherwise the capacitor may fail and may also explode.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

193
The duty cycle is another important point to be checked.
In most of the capacitors, the marking will indicate whether
it is for intermittant (short duty) or continuous (long duty)
rating. Though continuous rated capacitors can be used
for intermittant rating, never an intermittant (short duty)
rating capacitor should be used for continuous rating. This
has some relation with the centrifugal switch operation,
frequency of starting and stopping and load. When the
load is heavy or the centrifugal switch is not proper, there
will be a chance for the starting winding, along with the
capacitor, to be in the main circuit for a long time. In such
cases the capacitor, which is intermittant rated, will fail
due to overheating. This should be checked when the
capacitor fails often in a specified capacitor-start motor.
The capacity of the capacitor, which is given in microfarads,
should be the same as is specifed by the manufacturer of
the motor. A lower value will result in poorer starting torque
and high starting currents, whereas a higher rating may
not allow the speed to reach the rated value resulting in the
starting winding to be in main line for a long time there by
ending in poor operation and efficiency. In capacitor-start,
capacitor-run motors, there will be two capacitors. As the
starting capacitor will be 5 to 15 times of the rating of the
running capacitor, and will also be of intermittant-rated
electrolytic type, when compared to the running capacitor,
which will be of continuous-rated, oil-filled type. Due care
should be taken while connecting these capacitors in the
motor, avoiding wrong selection and connection.
While handling a capacitor, due care should be taken to
avoid shocks. A good capacitor can hold its charge for
several days, and when touched, may give a severe shock.
Hence, before touching any terminal of the capacitor,
which is in use, the Powercharge should be discharged
through a test lamp or through a 100 ohms 10 watts
resistor as shown in Fig 1. Direct shorting of the capacitor
terminals for discharging should be avoided as far as
possible as this results in creating an enormous strain to
the inner parts of the capacitor and it may fail.
Method of testing capacitors: Before removing a capacitor
from the motor connection for testing, it should be discharged
to avoid fatal shocks. The following methods are
recommended for testing the large value paper, electrolytic
or oil-filled capacitors.
Charge-discharge test: Check the working voltage
indicated on the capacitor. If the value is equal or more
than that of the usual, single phase voltge, say 240V AC
50 Hz, we can connect it to the supply through a 100
ohms, 25 watts resistor as shown in Fig 2. Preferably,
keep the capacitor, while testing on line voltage, inside a
covered cardboard box or in a wooden box. Sometimes, if
the capacitor is defective, it may explode and cause injury
to you. Switch on the circuit for about 3-4 seconds. Then
switch `OFF' the supply, and remove the supply terminals
carefully with the help of an insulated pliers, without
touching the capacitor terminals. Then, short the capacitor
terminals with the help of a screwdriver. A bright spark is
an indication that the capacitor is working. A dull spark or
no spark indicates the capacitor is weak or open. On the
other hand, no sparks while touching with the supply
terminals indicate that the capacitor is opened. In the case
of low capacity capacitors, the spark will be very feeble
even if the capacitor is in good condition. Further, this
check or the ohmmeter test described in the next para,
does not indicate the de-rated value of the capacitor.
Hence a capacity check is necessary as will be explained
later.
Ohmmeter test: Before using the ohmmeter, the capacitor
should be thoroughly discharged to avoid damage to the
ohmmeter. Set the range of the  ohmmeter to resistance
and adjust to zero ohms. Touch the terminals of the
capacitor and watch the deflection of the meter. If the
needle deflects towards zero and then moves towards
infinity, the capacitor is working. Reverse the test leads
and test it again, the needle will do the same thing again
in a good capacitor. If the capacitor is open, the needle will
not go to zero position but will remain in infinity side. On
the other hand, in a shorted capacitor, the needle will be
in zero position but will not go to infinity side at all. These
results are illustrated in Fig 3.
Capacity test: Connection should be as shown in Fig 4.
Keep the resistance value maximum at the time of
switching `on' to protect the ammeter. Keep the capacitor
inside a cardboard or wooden box to avoid injury in case
of explosion. The ammeter (I) and voltmeter (V) readings
are to be taken when the resistor is completely cut out
from the circuit. From the meter readings, the capacity
rating of the capacitor in microfarads can be calculated.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

194
If the capacity is 20 percent more or less than the notified
value, replace it.
Insulation test on capacitors: According to BIS 1709-1984
recommendations, the insulation test conducted between
the shorted capacitor terminals and the metal can, when
measured by a 500V megger/insulation tester, should not
be less than 100 megohms. If the can is of insulating
material, the measurement could be made between the
capacitor terminals and the metal strap holding the can.
Capacity of capacitor in  CF Farad =  2
I
πFV
Capacity in microfarad C
=  
2
mf
I
106
×
πFV
                                 =  3182
 microfarads.
×I
V
Permanent capacitor motor - capacitor-start, capacitor-run motor  and shaded
pole motor
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• distinguish between the single and two-value, capacitor-start, capacitor-run motors
• explain the working of a permanent capacitor motor, state its characteristic and use
• explain the working of a capacitor-start, capacitor-run motor, state its characteristic and use.
Capacitor-start, capacitor-run motors are of two types as
stated below.
•
Permanent capacitor motor (Single value capacitor
motor)
•
Capacitor-start, capacitor-run motor (Two-value
capacitor motor)
Permanent capacitor motor: This type of motor is
shown in Fig 1 which is most commonly used in fans. This
motor is preferred in drives where the starting torque is not
required to be high, while at the same time  elimination of
the centrifugal switch in the motor is necessary for easy
maintenance. The capacitor is connected in series with
the auxiliary  winding, and remains so throughout the
operation. These capacitors should be of oil-type
construction and have continuous duty rating.
To avoid low efficiency, the capacity of the condensers is
kept low, which, in turn, brings down the starting torque to
about 50 to 80% of the full-load torque.
The torque-speed characteristic of the motor is shown in
Fig 2. This motor works on the same principle as the
capacitor-start, induction-run motor with low starting torque
but with higher power factor, during starting as well as in
running.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

195
This motor is most suitable for drives, which require a lower
torque during start, easy changes in the direction of
rotation, stable load operation and higher power factor
during operation. Examples - fans, variable rheostats,
induction regulators, furnace control and arc welding
controls. This motor is cheaper than the capacitor-start,
induction-run motor of the same rating.
Capacitor-start, capacitor-run motors: As discussed
earlier capacitor-start, induction-run motors have excellent
starting torque, say about 300% of the full load torque, and
their power factor during starting is high. However, their
running torque is not good, and their power factor, while
running, is low. They also have lesser efficiency and
cannot take overloads.
These problems are eliminated by the use of a two-value
capacitor motor in which one larger capacitor of electrolytic
(short duty) type is used for starting, whereas a smaller
capacitor of oil-filled (continuous duty) type is used for
running, by connecting them with the starting winding as
shown in Fig 3. A general view of such a two-value
capacitor motor is shown in Fig 4. This motor also works
in the same way as a capacitor-start induction-run motor,
with the exception, that the capacitor C1 is always in the
circuit, altering the running performance to a great extent.
The starting capacitor which is of short-duty rating will be
disconnected from the starting winding with the help of a
centrifugal switch, when the starting speed attains about
75% of the rated speed.
Characteristic
The torque-speed characteristic of this motor is shown in
Fig 5. This motor has the following advantages.
•
The starting torque is 300% of the full load torque.
•
The starting current is low, say 2 to 3 times of the
running current.
•
Starting and running P.F. are good.
•
Highly efficient running.
•
Extremely noiseless operation.
•
Can be loaded up to 125% of the full-load capacity.
Application
These motors are used for compressors, refrigerators,
air-conditioners etc. where the duty demands a higher
starting torque, higher efficiency, higher power factor and
overloading. These motors are costlier than the
capacitor-start, induction- run motors of the same capacity.
The shaded pole motor
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the construction of a shaded pole motor and their functions
• explain the principle of working of the shaded pole motor
• explain the characteristic of the shaded pole motor and its application.
Shaded pole motor (construction)
The motor consists of a yoke with salient poles  as shown
in Fig 1 and it has a squirrel cage type rotor.
Construction of a shaded pole
A shaded pole made up of laminated sheets has a slot cut
across the lamination at about one third the distance from
the edge of the pole. Around the smaller portion of the pole,
a short circuited copper ring is placed which is called the
shading coil and this part of the pole is known as the
shaded part of the pole. The remaining part of the pole is
called the unshaded part which is clearly shown in Fig 2.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

196
Around the poles, exciting coils are placed to which an AC
supply is connected. When AC supply is given to the
exciting coil the magnetic axis shifts from the unshaded
part of the pole to the shaded part as explained in the next
paragraph. This shifting of axis is equivalent to the physical
movement of the pole. This magnetic axis which is moving,
cuts the rotor conductors, and hence, a rotational torque
is developed in the rotor. Due to this torque, the rotor starts
rotating in the direction of the shifting of the magnetic axis
that is from the unshaded part to the shaded part.
Shifting  of the magnetic flux from the unshaded part to the
shaded part could be explained as stated below.
As the shaded coil is of thick copper, it will have very low
resistance but as it is embedded in the iron core it will have
high inductance.
When the exciting winding is connected to an AC supply
a sine wave current passes through it. Let us consider the
positive half cycle of the AC current as shown in Fig 3.
When the current raises from ‘zero’ to point ‘a’, the change
in current is very rapid (fast), hence induces an emf in the
shading coil by the principle of Faraday’s laws of
electromagnetic induction. The induced emf  in the shading
coil produces a current which in turn produces a flux which
is in opposite direction to the main flux in accordance with
Lenz’s law. This induced flux opposes the main flux in the
shaded portion and reduces the main flux in that area to a
minimum value as shown in Fig 3 in the same form of flux
arrows. This makes the magnetic axis to be in the centre
of the unshaded portion as shown by the arrow (longer one)
in part 1 of Fig 3. On the other hand as shown in Part 2 of
Fig 3 when current rises from point ‘a’ to ‘b’ the change in
current is slow, the induced emf and resulting current in the
shading coil is minimum and the main flux is able to pass
through the shaded portion. This makes the magnetic axis
to be shifted to the centre of the whole pole as shown by
the arrow in part 2 of Fig 3.
In the next instant, as shown in part 3 of Fig 3, when the
current falls from ‘b’ to ‘c’, the change in current is fast and
its value of change is from maximum to minimum. Hence
a large current is induced in the shading ring which
opposes the diminishing main flux, thereby increasing the
flux density in the area of the shaded part. This makes the
magnetic axis to shift to the centre of the shaded part as
shown by the arrow in part 3 of Fig 3.
From the above explanation it is clear that the magnetic
axis shifts from the unshaded part to the shaded part
which is more or less physical rotary movement of the
poles.
Simple motors of this type cannot be reversed. Specially
designed shaded pole motors have been constructed for
reversing the direction. Two such types are shown in
Fig 4. In  a) the double set of shading coils method is
shown and in  b) the double set of exciting winding method
is shown.
Shaded pole motors are built commercially in very small
sizes, varying approximately from 1/250 HP to 1/6 HP.
Although such motors are simple in construction and
cheap,  there are certain disadvantages with these motors
as stated below:
•
low starting torque
•
very little overload capacity
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

197
•
low efficiency.
The efficiency varies from 5% to 35% only in these motors.
Because of its low starting torque, the shaded pole motor
is generally used for small table fans, toys, instruments,
hair dryers, advertising display systems and electric
clocks etc.
Universal motor
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• compare a universal motor with the DC series motor with respect to its construction
• explain the operation, characteristic and application of a universal motor
• explain the method of changing the direction of rotation
• describe the methods of controlling the speed of a universal motor.
Comparison between a universal motor and a DC
series motor: A universal motor is one which operates
both on AC and DC supplies. It develops more horsepower
per Kg. weight than any other AC motor, mainly due to its
high speed. The principle of operation is the same as that
of a DC motor. Though a universal motor resembles a DC
series motor, it requires suitable modification in the
construction, winding and brush grade to achieve sparkless
commutation and reduced heating when operated on AC
supply, due to increased inductance and armature reaction.
A universal motor could, therefore, be defined as a series
or a compensated series motor designed to operate at
approximately the same speed and output on either direct
current or single phase alternating current of a frequency
not greater than 50 Hz, and of approximately the same
RMS voltage. Universal motor is also named as AC single
phase series motor, and Fig 1 shows the multi-line
representation according to B.I.S. 2032, Part IV.
The main parts of a universal motor are an armature, field
winding, stator stampings, frame, end plates and brushes
as shown in Fig 2.
The increased sparking at the brush position in AC
operation is reduced by the following means.
•
Providing compensating winding to neutralize the
armature M.M.F. These compensating windings are
either short-circuited windings or windings connected
in series with the armature.
•
Providing commutating inter-poles in the stator and
connecting the inter-pole winding in series with the
armature winding.
•
Providing high contact resistance brushes to reduce
sparking at brush positions.
The table given below indicates the differences between a
universal motor and a DC series motor.
Universal motor
DC series motor
Can run on AC and
Can run smoothlly on DC
DC supplies.
supply. However when
connected to AC supply,
it produces heavy sparks
at brush positions and
beomes hot due to
armature reaction
and rough commutation.
Compensating winding
Does not require compen-
is a must for large
sating winding.
machines.
Inter-poles provided in
Does not require inter-
larger machines.
poles normally.
High resistance grade
Normal grade brushes will
brushes are necessary.
suffice.
Air gap is kept to the
Normal air gap is
minimum.
maintained.
Operation: A universal motor works on the same principle
as a DC motor, i.e. force is created on the armature
conductors due to the interaction between the main field
flux and the flux created by the current-carrying armature
conductors. A universal motor develops unidirectional
torque regardless of whether it operates on AC or DC
supply. Fig 3  shows the operation of a universal motor on
AC supply. In AC operation, both field and armature
currents change their, polarities, at the same time resulting
in unidirectional torque.
Characteristic and application: The speed of a universal
motor is inversely proportional to the load, i.e. speed is low
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

198
at full load and high on no load. The speed reaches a
dangerously high value due to low field flux at no loads. In
fact the no-load speed is limited only by its own friction and
windage losses. As such these motors are connected
with permanent loads or gear trains to avoid running at
no-load, thereby avoiding high speeds.
Fig 4 shows the typical torque speed relation of a universal
motor, both for AC and DC operations. This motor develops
about 450 percent of full load torque at starting, as such,
higher than any other type of single phase motor. Universal
motors are used in vacuum cleaners, food mixers, portable
drills and domestic sewing machines.
Change of rotation: Direction of rotation of a universal
motor can be reversed by reversing the flow of current
through either the armature or the field windings. It is easy
to interchange the leads at the brush holders as shown in
Fig 5.
However, when the armature terminals are interchanged in
a universal motor having compensating winding, care
should be taken to interchange the compensating winding
also to avoid heavy sparking while running.
Speed control of universal motor: The following methods
are adopted to control the speed of a universal motor.
Series resistance or applied voltage control method:
The motor speed is controlled by connecting a variable
resistance in series with the motor. Foot-pedal operated
sewing machines incorporate such a control. Fig 6  shows
the connections.
Tapped field method: In this method,the field winding is
tapped at 2 or 3 points and the speed is controlled by the
varying field MMF. Fig 7  shows such a connection. Most
of the domestic food mixers employ this method of speed
control.
Centrifugal switch method: A centrifugal mechanism
adjusted by an external lever is connected in series with
the motor as shown by Fig 8. If the speed reaches beyond
a certain limit, according to the lever setting, the centrifugal
device opens the contacts and inserts the resistance R in
the circuit, which causes the motor speed to decrease.
When the motor speed falls and reaches a predetermined
value, the centrifugal switch contact closes, the motor
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

199
gets reconnected to the supply and the speed rises. Some
advanced type of food mixers employ this sort of speed
control. A capacitor is used across the centrifugal switch
to reduce the  switching spark and to suppress the radio
interference. Apart from the above methods of speed
control, a thyristor is used in certain food mixers to control
the speed electronically.
Troubleshooting of universal motor
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the advantages and disadvantages of universal motor
• explain the method of troubleshooting in universal motor.
As the name suggest universal motors can operate on
either AC or DC supply. By a compromise of design
fractional horse power motors may be built to operate
satisfactorily on either 240 V 50 Hz AC or direct current at
240 volts. Such motors are known as universal motors.
Advantages of universal motors
•
These motors develop high starting torque and have the
ability to adjust the  torque and speed proportionally
when loaded.
•
Universal motors can operate on direct current or AC
supply.
•
Tapped fields provide an easy method of controlling
speed.
Disadvantages of universal motors
•
Since these motors operate at very high speed upto
40,000 rpm considerable air noise is present.
•
Because of the large increase in the power input under
stalled onditions and the loss of motor cooling, they
can burn out within a short time when overloaded too
much.
•
Useful for intermittent duty application only.
•
They produce radio and television interference.
Troubleshooting chart for universal motor: Table 1
gives possible faults, which occur in universal motor, their
causes, mode of testing and suggested rectification. As
a universal motor is similar in design to the DC machine,
trainees are advised to refer trouble shooting chart pertaining
to DC machines also.
Table 1
Troubleshooting chart for universal motor
Trouble
Causes
Mode of testing
Rectification
Motor fails to start
a) No voltage due to blown
a) Test by test lamp or
a) Replace the blown fuse.
    fuse
    voltmeter
b) Open overload relay of
b) Test by test lamp or
b) Reset or rectify the
    starter.
    voltmeter
   overload relay contact
c) Low voltage due to improper
c) Test by voltmeter.
c) Rectify the loose connec-
   supply voltage.
    tions at the switch & fuse.
d) Open circuited field or
d) Test by ohmmeter or
d) If possible join properly
    armature.
     Megger.
    or replace the winding.
e) Improper contact of carbon
e) Visual inspection and
e) Adjust for proper contact
    brushes with commutator.
     test by test lamp
    of carbon brush with
    commutator.
f)  Dirty commutator.
f)  Visual inspection and
f) Clean by buffing the
     test by test lamp.
   commutator using smooth
   sandpaper.
Shock to the
a) Grounded field or armature
a) Test by Megger or test
a) Rectify the defect and
operator
    circuit due to weak
    lamp.
   apply shellac varnish to
    insulation.
   armature and field
    winding
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

200
Trouble
Causes
Mode of testing
Rectification
b) Insufficent earth.
b) Test by Megger or test
b) Provide proper earth to
    lamp.
the motor.
Over heating of
a) Shorted coil of field or
a) Visual inspection and
a) Rewind field or armature
motor
   armature.
    resistance measurement      coil which is shorted
b) Tight bearing due to worn
b) Test the shaft for free
b) Clean the bearings and
    out or locked bearing.
    rotation. Check the
check for damage.
   shield for over heating.
Replace bearing if
necessary.
c) Heavy sparking at
c) By visual inspection.
c) Clean the commutator
   commutator due to pitted
    and true the surface of
   commutator.
the commutator.
d) Shorted commutator.
d) Test the armature by
d) Replace or repair the
    growler.
    commutator
e) Grounded field or armature.
e) Test by Megger.
e) Repair or rewind the
field or armature.
Humming sound.
a) Short circuited field.
a) Test by ohmmeter.
a) Rewind the field winding.
Lack of torque due
to overheat
b) Shorted armature coil.
b) Test by Growler.
b) Rewind shorted armature
winding.
Repulsion motor
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the principle, working, types and construction of the repulsion motor
• explain the characteristic and application of the repulsion motor.
Repulsion motors, though complicated in construction
and higher in cost, are still used in certain industries due
to their excellent starting torque, low starting current,
abilitiy to withstand long spell of starting currents to drive
heavy loads and their easy method of reversal of direction.
The repulsion principle : The principle of torque production
in a repulsion motor could be explained as follows. Fig 1
shows a two-pole motor with its magnetic axis vertical. An
armature, having a commutator  which is short-circuited
through the brushes, is placed in the magnetic field. When
the stator winding  is connected to an AC supply, it
produces an alternating magnetic field. Assume that at an
instant, a north pole at the top and a south pole at the
bottom are produced by this alternating magnetic field.
Because of this a voltage will be induced in all the rotor
conductors by the transformer action. The direction of
current in the conductors will be in accordance with Lenz's
law such that they create a north pole at the top just below
the stator north pole, and a south pole at the bottom just
at the top of the stator south pole to oppose the induction
action. Hence the stator poles and the rotor poles will
oppose each other in the same line. There will, therefore,
be no torque developed due to the abscence of the
tangential component of the torque.
Let us assume that the short-circuited brush-axis is
moved to a position as in Fig 2. Due to the present brush
position, the magnetic axis of the armature is no longer
co-linear with respect to the vertical axis of the main poles.
It will now be along the  axis `KK' with north and south poles
shifted around by an angle `A°' depending upon the shifting
of the brushes. In this position, the direction of current in
the conductors 1,2,3 and 13,14,15 is reversed, and hence,
the armature becomes an electromagnet having the north
(N) and south (S) poles in the `KK' axis just at an angle of
`A°' from the main magnetic axis. Now there is a condition
that the rotor north pole will  be repelled by the main north
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

201
pole, and the rotor south pole is repelled by the main south
pole, so that a torque could be developed in the rotor. Now
due to the repulsion action between the stator and the rotor
poles, the rotor will start rotating in a clockwise direction.
As the motor torque is due to repulsion action, this motor
is named as repulsion motor.
Direction of rotation : To change the D.O.R. of this
motor, the brush-axis needs, to be shifted from the right
side as shown in Fig 2 to the left side of the main axis in
a counter-clockwise direction as shown in Fig 3.
This working principle applies equally well for all types of
repulsion motors having distributed windings in the stator.
Types of repulsion motors : There are four types of
induction motors as stated below.
•
Repulsion motor
•
Compensated-repulsion motor
• Repulsion-start, induction-run motor
•
Repulsion-induction motor
Construction: The construction of stators is the same in
all the types, except for certain variation in the
compensated-repulsion motor. In general, for all types of
repulsion motors the stator winding is of the distributed,
non-salient pole type, housed in the slots of the stator, and
only two terminals as shown in Fig 4 are brought out. It is
wound for four, six or eight poles. The rotor for each type
of motor is different, and will be explained under each type.
Repulsion motor: The general construction of the repulsion
motor is similar to the one explained under the `Repulsive
principle'. However the rotor of the repulsion motor is like
a DC armature that is as shown in Fig 5, having a
distributed lap or wave-winding. The commutator may be
similar to the DC armature, that is axial type, having
commutator bars in parallel to the shaft or radial or vertical
bars on which brushes ride horizontally. The shorted brush
position can be changed by a lever attached to the
rocker-arm. The B.I.S. symbol for the repulsion motor is
shown in Fig 6.
As explained earlier, the torque developed in a repulsion
motor will depend upon the amount of brush-shaft as
shown in Fig 7, whereas the direction of shift decides the
direction of rotation. Further, the speed also depends upon
the amount of brush-shift and the magnitude of the load.
The torque speed characteristic of the motor is shown in
Fig 9.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

202
Relationship between the torque and brush-position angle
in a repulsion motor
Though the starting torque varies from 250 to 400 percent
of the full load torque, the speed will be dangerously high
during light loads. This is due to the fact that the speed of
the repulsion motor does not depend on frequency or
number of poles but depends upon the repulsion principle.
Further, there is a tendency of sparking in the brushes at
heavy loads, and the P.F. will be poor at low speeds.
Hence, the conventional repulsion motor is not much used
and the other three improved types are popular.
Compensated repulsion motor : The rotor of the
compensated repulsion motor is similar to that of the
repulsion motor, except that there is another set of
brushes placed in the middle position between the usual
short circuited brushes. On the other hand, the stator has
an additional winding, called the compensatory winding as
shown in Fig 8.
The purpose of the compensating winding is to improve the
power factor and to have better speed regulation. This
compensating winding is housed in the inner slots of the
stator and connected in series with the armature.
Repulsion-start, induction-run motor : The rotor of this
motor is similar to that of a repulsion motor but the
commutator and the brush mechanism are entirely different.
This motor starts like a repulsion motor, and after attaining
about 75% of the rated speed, there is a necklace-type
shorting mechanism, activated by a centrifugal force
which short circuits the entire commutator. From then on,
this motor works as an induction motor with a short-circuited
rotor (armature). After the commutator is short-circuited,
in some machines, there is a special mechanism to lift the
brushes to avoid wear and tear of the brushes and the
commutator.
The torque speed characteristic of this motor is shown in
Fig 9.
Repulsion-induction motor : The rotor of this motor has
a squirrel cage winding deep inside the rotor, in addition to
the usual winding. The brushes are short-circuited, and
they continuously ride over the commutator. Generally the
starting torque is developed in the wound part of the rotor,
while the running torque is developed in the squirrel cage
winding. The speed torque characteristic is shown in
Fig 9. This develops a little less torque, say about 300%
of the full load torque, and can start with a load and run
smoothly on no load. This motor has its starting
characteristic similar to DC compound motor, and running
characteristic similar to an induction motor.
APPLICATION: In these motors the average starting
torque varies from 300-400 percent of the full load torque,
and these motors are preferred in places where the
starting period is of comparatively long duration, due to
heavy load. These motors are used in refrigerators,
air-compressors, coil winders, pertrol pumps, machine
tools, mixing machines, lifts and hoists, due to their
excellent starting torque, ability to withstand sustained
overloads, good speed regulation and easy method of
reversal of direction of rotation.
Stepper motor
Objectives: At the end of this exercise you shall be able to
• state the basic theory and open loop operation of stepper motor
• list and explain the each type of stepper motor
• state the advantages, disadvantages and application of stepper motor.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

203
Basic theory
A stepper motor is basically a synchronous motor. There
are no brushes. It is an electromechanical device converts
Powerpulses into discrete mechanical movements. The
shaft or spindle of a stepper motor rotates in discrete
step increments when Powercommand pulses are applied
to it in the proper sequence. The motors rotation has
several direct relationships to these applied input pulses.
The sequence of the applied pulses is directly related to
the direction of motor shafts rotation. The speed of the
motor shafts rotation is directly related to the frequency
of the input pulses and the length of rotation is directly
related to the number of pulses applied.
This device does not rotate continuously, but it rotates in
the form of pulses. There are different types of motors
available based on the stepper rotation, manufactured with
steps per revolution of 12,24,72,144,180 and 200 in
stepping angles of 300, 150, 50, 2.50, 20 and 1.80 per
steps.
Open loop opearation
One of the most significant advantages of a stepper motor
is its ability to be accurately controlled in an open loop
system. Open loop control means no feedback information
about position is needed. This type of control eliminates
the need for expensive sensing and feedback devices such
as optical encoders. The position is known simply by
keeping track of the input step pulses.
Stepper motor types: There are three basic stepper
motor types. They are
1
Variable-reluctance (Fig 1)
2
Permanent-magnet (Fig 2)
3
Hybrid (Fig 3)
1
Variable-reluctance (VR): This type of stepper motor
has been around for a long time. It is probably the
easiest to understand from a structural point of view
(Fig 1) shows a  typical VR stepper motor. This type
of motor consists of a soft iron multi-toothed rotor and
a wound stator. When the stator windings are energized
with DC current the poles become magnetized.
Rotation occurs when the rotor teeth are attracted to
the energized stator poles.
2
Permanent magnet (PM): Often referred to as a "tin
can" or "can stock" motor the permanent magnet step
motor is a low cost and low resolution type motor with
typical step angles of 7.50 to 150 (48 - 24 steps/
revolution) PM motors as the name implies have
permanent magnets added to the motor structure
(Fig 2). The rotor no longer has teeth as with VR motor.
Instead the rotor is magnetized with alternating north
and south poles situated in a straight line parallel to
the rotor shaft. These magnetized rotor poles provide
an increased magnetic flux intensity and because of
this the PM motor exhibits improved torque
characteristics when compared with the VR type.
3
Hybrid (HB): The hybrid stepper motor is more
expensive than the PM stepper motor but provides
better performance with respect to step resolution,
torque and speed. Typical step angles for the HB
stepper motor range from 3.60 to 0.90 (100 - 400 steps
per revolution) The hybrid stepper motor combines the
best features of both the PM and VR type stepper
motors. The rotor is multi-toothed like the VR motor
and contains an axially magnetized concentric magnet
around its shaft (Fig 3). The teeth on the rotor provide
an even better path which helps guide the magnetic
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

204
flux to preferred locations in the airgap. This further
increases the detent, holding and dynamic torque
characteristics of the motor when compared with both
the VR and PM types.
The two most commonly used types of stepper
motors are the permanent magnet and the
hybrid types.
Advantages and disadvantages
Advantages
1
The rotation angle of the motor is proportional to the
input pulse.
2
The motor has full torque at stand still (if the windings
are energized)
3
Precise positioning and repeatability of movement
since good stepper motors have an accuracy of 3-5%
of a step and this error is non cumulative from one
step to the next.
4
Excellent response to starting/stopping/reversing.
5
Very reliable since there are no contact brushes in
the motor. Therefore the life of the motor is simply
dependant on the life of the bearing
6
The motor’s response to digital input pulses provides
open-loop control, making the motor simpler and less
costly to control.
7
It is possible to achieve very low speed synchronous
rotation with a load that is directly coupled to the shaft.
8
A wide range of rotational speeds can be realized as
the speed is proportional to the frequency of the input
pulses.
Disadvantages
1
Resonances can occur if not properly controlled
2
Not easy to operate at extremely high speeds.
Application
There are different applications. Some of these include
printers, plotters, high-end office equipment, hard disk
drives, medical equipment, fax machines, automotive and
many more.
Hysteresis motor
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the construction details of hysteresis motor
• explain the working principle of hysteresis motor
• state the torque-speed characteristics
• list the advantages, disadvantages and application of hysteresis motor.
A hysteresis motor is a synchronous motor without salient
(or projected) poles and without dc excitation which starts
by the hysteresis losses induced in its hardened steel
secondary member by the revolving filed of the primary
and operates normally at synchronous speed and runs
on hysteresis torque because of the retentivity of the
secondary core.
It is a single-phase motor whose operation depends upon
the hysteresis effect i.e., magnetization produced in a
ferromagnetic material lags behind the magnetizing force.
Construction:
It consists of: (i) Stator
(ii) Rotor
i)
Stator: A stator designed to produce a synchronously-
revolving field from a single-phase supply. The stator
carries main and auxiliary windings (which is called
split phase hysteresis motor) so as top produce
rotating magnetic field as shown in Fig 1. The stator
can also be shaded pole type (which is called shaded
pole hysteresis motor) as shown in Fig 2.
ii) Rotor: The rotor of hysteresis motors are made with
magnetic material of high hysteresis losses. i.e. whose
hysteresis loop area is very large as shown in Fig 3.
The rotor does not carry any winding or teeth. It consists
of two or more outer rings and crossbars, all made of
specially selected heat-treated hard steel. The type
of Steel that has a very large hysteresis loop is chosen.
When a rotating filed moves past the rotor, this
hysteresis effect causes a torque to be developed and
the motor starts to run. As synchronous speed is
approached, the crossbars presents a low reluctance
path to the flux thereby setting up permanent pole in
the rotor and causing the motor to continue to rotate
at synchronous speed.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

205
Working principle
When stator is energized, it produces rotating magnetic
field. The main and auxiliary, both the windings must be
supplied continuously at start as well as in running
conditions so as to maintain the rotating magnetic field.
The rotor, initially, starts to rotate due to eddy-current
torque and hysteresis torque developed on the rotor. Once
the speed is near about the synchronous, the stator pulls
rotor into synchronism.
In such case, as relative motion between stator field and
rotor field vanishes, so the torque due to eddycurrents
vanisehes. When the rotor is rotating in the synchronous
speed, the stator revolving field flux produces poles on
the rotor as shown in Fig 4.
Due to the hysteresis effect, rotor pole axis lags behind
the axis of rotating magnetic field. Due to this, rotor poles
get attracted towards the moving stator poles. Thus rotor
gets subjected to torque called hysteresis torque. This
torque is constant at all speeds.
When the stator field moved forward, due to high residual
magnetism (i.e. retentivity) the rotor pole strength remains
maintained. The hyteresis torque is independent of the
rotor speed. The high retentivity ensures the continuous
magnetic locking between stator and rotor. Only
hysteresis torque is present which keeps rotor running at
synchronous speed.
Hysteresis losses are produced in the rotor of a hysteresis
motor is proportional to the area of hysteresis loop. These
losses are dissipated as heat in the rotor.
Torque-Speed Characteristics
The starting and running torque is almost equal in this
type of motor. As stator carries mainly the two-windings
its direction can be reversed interchanging the terminals
of either main winding or auxiliary winding. The torque-
speed characteristics is as shown in Fig 5.
Advantages
The advantages of hysteresis motor are:
1
As rotor has no teeth, no winding, there are no
mechanical vibrations.
2
Due to absence of vibrations, the operation is quiet
and noiseless.
3
Suitability to accelerate inertia loads. 4. Possibility of
multispeed operation by employing gear train.
Disadvantages
The disadvantages of hysteresis motor are:
1
The output is about one-quarter that of an induction
motor of the same dimension.
2
Low efficiency
3
Low power factor
4
Low torque
5
Available in very small sizes
Applications
Due to noiseless operation it is used in sound recording
instruments, sound producing equipments, high quality
record players, electric clocks, teleprinters, timing devices
etc.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

206
Reluctance motor
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• list out the types of reluctances motor
• explain the operation of reluctance motor
• list out the application of reluctance motor.
A reluctance motor is a type of electric motor that induces
non-permanent magnetic poles on the ferromagnetic rotor.
Torque is generated through the phenomenon of magnetic
reluctance.
There are various types of reluctance motor:
•
Synchronous reluctance motor
•
Variable reluctance motor
•
Switched reluctance motor
•
Variable reluctance stepping motor.
Reluctance motors can deliver very high power density at
low cost, making them ideal for many applications.
Disadvantages are high torque ripple (the difference
between maximum and minimum torque during one
revolution) when operated at low speed, and noise[ caused
by torque ripple
Operation of reluctance motor
The stator consists of multiple projecting (salient)
electromagnet poles, similar to a wound field brushed DC
motor (Fig 1). The rotor consists of soft magnetic material,
such as laminated silicon/steel, which has multiple
projections acting as salient magnetic poles through
magnetic reluctance. For switched reluctance motors, the
number of rotor poles is typically less than the number of
stator poles, which minimizes torque ripple and prevents
the poles from all aligning simultaneously-a position which
cannot generate torque.
When a rotor pole is equidistant from the two adjacent
stator poles, the rotor pole is said to be in the "fully
unaligned position". This is the position of maximum
magnetic reluctance for the rotor pole. In the "aligned
position", two (or more) rotor poles are fully aligned with
two (or more) stator poles, (which means the rotor poles
completely face the stator poles) and is a position of
minimum reluctance.
When a stator pole is energized, the rotor torque is in the
direction that will reduce reluctance. Thus the nearest
rotor pole is pulled from the unaligned position into
alignment with the stator field (a position of less
reluctance). (This is the same effect used by a solenoid,
or when picking up ferromagnetic metal with a magnet.)
In order to sustain rotation, the stator field must rotate in
advance of the rotor poles, thus constantly "pulling" the
rotor along.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.4.142 to 3.4.150

207
Power
Related Theory for Exercise 3.5.151 to 153
Electrician - Alternator
Alternator - principle - relation between poles, speed and frequency
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the working principle of an alternator
• explain the method of production of sine wave voltage by a single loop alternator
• describe the relation between frequency, number of poles and synchronous speed.
Principle of an alternator: An alternator works on the
same principle of electromagnetic induction as a DC
generator. That is, whenever a conductor moves in a
magnetic field so as to cut the lines of force, an emf will be
induced in that conductor. Alternatively  whenever there is
relative motion between the field and the conductor, then,
the emf will be induced in the conductor. The amount of
induced emf depends upon the rate of change of cutting or
linkage of flux.
In the case of DC generators, we have seen that the
alternating current produced inside the rotating armature
coils has to be rectified to DC for the external circuit
through the help of a commutator. But in the case of
alternators, the alternating current produced in the armatrue
coils can be brought out to the external circuit with the help
of slip-rings. Alternatively the stationary conductors in the
stator can produce alternating current when subjected to
the rotating magnetic field in an alternator.
Production of sine wave voltage by single loop
alternator: Fig 2a shows a single loop alternator. As it
rotates in the magnetic field, the induced voltage in it varies
in its direction and magnitude as follows.
To plot the magnitude and direction of the voltage induced
in the wire loop of the AC generator in a graph, the
Powerdegrees of displacement of the loop are kept in the
`X' axis as shown in Fig 1 through 30 Powerdegrees. As
shown in Fig 2c, three divisions on the `X' axis represent
a quarter turn of the loop, and six divisions a half turn. The
magnitude of the induced voltage is kept in the `Y' axis to
a suitable scale.
The part above the X-axis represents the positive voltage,
and the part below it the negative voltage as shown in
Fig 1.
The position of the loop at the time of starting is shown in
Fig 2a and indicated in Fig 2c as `O' position. At this
position, as the loop moves parallel to the main flux,  the
loop does not cut any lines of force, and hence, there will
be no voltage induced. This zero voltage is represented in
the graph as the starting point of the curve as shown in
Fig 2c. The magnitude of the induced emf is given by the
formula  Eo = BLV Sinq
where
B is the flux density in weber per square metre,
L
is the length of the conductors in metres,
V is the velocity of the loop rotation in metres per second
and
q
is the angle at which the conductor cuts the line of
force.
As sin q = 0
E at 0 position is equal to zero. As the loop turns in a
clockwise direction at position 30° as shown in Fig 2c, the
loop cuts the lines of force and an emf is induced (E30) in
the loop whose magnitude will be equal to BLV Sinq where
q  is equal to 30°.

208
Applying the above formula, we find the emf induced in the
loop at 90° position will be maximum as shown in Fig 2c.
As the loop turns further towards 180° it is found the
number of lines of force which are cut will be reduced to
zero value. If the quantity of emf induced at each position
is marked by a point  and a curve is drawn along the points,
the curve will be having a shape as shown in Fig 3b.
During the turn of the loop, from 0 to 180°, the slip ring S1
will be positive and S2 will be negative.
However, at 180° position, the loop moves parallel to the
lines of force, and hence there is no cutting of flux by the
loop and there is no emf induced in the loop as shown in
Fig 3b.
Further during the turn of the loop from the position 180°
to 270°, the voltage increases again but the polarity is
reversed as shown in Fig 4b. During the movement of the
loop from 180 to 360°, the slip ring S2 will be positive and
S1 will be negative as shown in Fig 4a. However, at 270° the
voltage induced will be the maximum and will decrease to
zero at 360°. Fig 5b shows the variation of the induced
voltage in both magnitude and direction during one complete
revolution of the loop. This is called a cycle.
This type of wave-form is called a sine wave as the
magnitude and direction of the induced emf, strictly
follows the sine law. The number of cycles completed in
one second is called a frequency. In our country, we use
an AC supply having 50 cycles frequency which is denoted
as 50 Hz.
Relation between frequency, speed and number of
poles of alternator: If the alternator has got only two
poles, the voltage induced in one revolution of the loop
undergoes one cycle. If it has four poles, then one
complete rotation of the coil produces two cycles because,
whenever it crosses a set of north and south poles, it
makes one cycle.
Fig 6 shows the number of cycles which are produced in
each revolution of the coil, with 2 poles, 4 poles and 6
poles. It is clear from this that the number of cycles per
revolution is directly proportional to the number of poles,
`P' divided by two. Therefore the number of cycles produced
per second depends on P/2, and the speed in revolutions
per second.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.5.151 to 3.5.153

209
Therefore frequency F
P
n
=
×
2
' '
where `n' is in r.p.s.
`P' is the number of poles.
Generally speed is represented in r.p.m.
Then we have  requency F
PN
=
×
2
60 = PN
120
where P is number of poles and N is speed in r.p.m.
Accordingly we can state that the frequency of an alternator
is directly porportional to the number of poles and speed.
Types and construction of alternators
Objective: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the construction, and the various types of alternators.
Types of alternators: DC and AC generators are similar
in one important respect, that is, they both generate
alternating emf in the armature conductors. The AC
generator sends out the Powerenergy in the same form of
alternating emf to the external load with the help of slip
rings.
AC generators, named as alternators, must be driven at a
very definite constant speed called synchronous speed,
because the frequency of the generated emf is determined
by the speed. Due to this reason these machines are
called `synchronous alternators or synchronous
generators'.
Classification according to the type of rotating part:
One way of classifying the alternator is the way in which
the rotating part is chosen. In the earlier lessons, we
discussed how an alternator can have either stationary or
rotating magnetic field poles. Accordingly an alternator
having a stationary magnetic field and a moving armature
is called a rotating armature type, and an alternator with
a stationary armature and moving magnetic field is called
a rotating field type. There are definite advantages in
using rotating field type alternators.
Advantages of using rotating field type alternators
Only two slip rings are required for a rotating field type
alternator whatsoever the number of phases may be.
As the main winding is placed over the stator, more
conductors can be housed in the stator because of more
internal peripheral area. More conductors result in higher
voltage/current production.
As the winding in which the emf is induced is stationary,
there is no possibility of breaking or loosening the winding
and its joints, due to rotational forces.
There is no sliding contact between the stationary armature
and the external (load) circuit, as the supply could be
taken direct. Only two slip rings are provided in the rotor
for low power low voltage field excitation. Thus less
sparking and less possibility of faults.
The main winding being stationary, the conductors can be
easily and effectively insulated, and the insulating cost
also will be less for higher output voltage (less dielectric
strength insulation will be sufficient).
Stationary main conductors need less maintenance.
As the rotar has a field winding which is lighter for the given
capacity than in the rotating armature type, the alternator
can be driven at a higher speed.
Classification according to the number of phases:
Another way of classifying the alternators is based on
production of single or 3-phase by the alternator. Accordingly
the types are 1) single-phase alternators 2) three-phase
alternators.
Single-phase alternators: A single-phase alternator is
one that provides only one voltage. The armature coils are
connected in `series additive'. In other words, the sum of
the emf induced in each coil produces the total output
voltage. Single phase alternators are usually constructed
in small sizes only. They are used as a temporary standby
power for construction sites and for permanent installation
in remote locations.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.5.151 to 3.5.153

210
Three-phase alternators: This alternator provides two
different voltages, namely, phase and line voltages. It has
3 windings placed at 120° to each other, mostly connected
in a star having three main terminals U,V,W and neutral
`N'.
These alternators are driven by prime movers such as
diesel engines, steam turbines, water wheels etc.
depending upon the source available.
Construction of alternators: The main parts of a revolving
field type alternator are shown in Fig 1.
good insulation. This type of slots also facilitates easy
removal and replacement of defective coils. But this type
of slots creates uneven distribution of the flux, thereby
producing ripples in the emf wave. The semi-closed type
slots are better in this respect but do not permit the use
of form-wound coils, thereby complicating the process of
winding. Totally closed slots are rarely used, but when
used, they need bracing of the winding turns.
Stator: It consists of mainly the armature core formed of
laminations of steel alloy (silicon steel) having slots on its
inner periphery to house the armature conductors. The
armature core in the form of a ring is fitted to a frame which
may be of cast iron or welded steel plate. The armature
core is laminated to reduce the eddy current losses which
occur in the stator core when subjected to the cutting of
the flux produced by the rotating field poles. The laminations
are stamped out in complete rings (for smaller machines)
or in segments (for larger machines), and insulated from
each other with paper or varnish. The stampings also have
holes which make axial and radial ventilating ducts to
provide efficient cooling. A general view of the stator with
the frame is shown in Fig 2.
Slots provided on the stator core to house the armature
coils are mainly of two types, (i) open and (ii) semi-closed
slots, as shown in Fig 3a and b respectively.
The open slots are more commonly used because the
coils can be form-wound and pre-insulated before placing
in the slots resulting in fast work, less expenditure and
Rotor: This forms the field system, and is similar to DC
generators. Normally the field system is excited from a
separate source of low voltage DC supply. The excitation
source is usually a DC shunt or compound generator,
known as an exciter, mounted to the same alternator
shaft. The exiting current is supplied to the rotor with the
help of two slip- rings and brushes. The field poles created
by the excitation are alternately north and south.
Rotating field rotors are of two types, namely (i) salient
pole type as shown in Fig 4 and (ii) smooth cylindrical type
or non-salient pole type, as shown in Fig 5.
Salient pole type: This type of rotor is used only for slow
and medium speed alternators. This type is less expensive,
having more space for the field coils and vast heat
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.5.151 to 3.5.153

211
dissipating area. This type is not suitable for high speed
alternators as the salient poles create a lot of noise while
running in addition to the difficulty of obtaining sufficient
mechanical strength.
Fig 4 shows the salient pole type rotor in which the riveted
steel laminations are fitted to the shaft fitting with the help
of a dovetailed joint. Pole faces are curved to have uniform
distribution of the flux in the air gap leading to production
of sinusoidal wave form of the generated emf. These pole
faces are also provided with slots to carry the damper
winding to prevent hunting. The field coils are connected
in series in such a way as to produce alternate north and
south poles, and the field winding ends are connected to
the slip rings. The DC excitation source is connected to
the brushes which are made to contact the slip rings with
the required pressure.
Salient pole type alternators could be identified by their
larger diameter, short axial length and low or medium
speed of operation.
Smooth cylindrical or non-salient pole type rotor:
This type is used in very high speed alternators, driven by
steam turbines. To have good mechanical strength, the
peripheral velocity is lowered by reducing the diameter of
the rotor and alternatively with the increased axial length.
Such rotors have either two or four poles but run at higher
speeds.
To withstand such speeds, the rotor is made of solid steel
forging with longitudinal slots cut as shown in Fig 5a which
shows a two-pole rotor with six slots. The winding is in the
form of insulated copper strips, held securely in the slots
by proper wedges, and bound securely by steel bonds.
One part of the periphery of the rotor in which slots are not
made is used as poles as shown in Fig 5b.
Smooth cylindrical pole type alternators could be identified
by their shorter diameter, longer axial length and high
speed of operation.
Rating of alternators
An Powermachines is usually rated at the load, which is
can carry without over heating and damage to insulation.
i.e the rating of Powermachine is governed by the
temperature rise caused by internal losses of the machine.
The copper loss in the armature (I2R) depends upon the
strength of the armature current and is independent of
power factor.
The output in kW is proportional to power factor for the
alternator of a given kVA. For example output of 1000
kVA alternator on full load will be 200, 500, 800, 1000 kW
at power factor 0.2, 0.5, 0.8 and unity respectively but
copper losses in armature will remain the same regard
less of power factor.
For the above reasons alternators are usually rated in
kVA (kilo Volt Ampere).
Hunting
Hunting is a phenomenon in alternator which is caused
by continuous fluctuation in load. When the load on the
alternator is frequency changing, then the rotor of the
alternator runs unsteadily making a noise of a whistle
due to oscillations, or vibrations set up in the rotor. This
phenomenon is called as hunting of alternators.
Hunting is prevented by the Damper Windings provided in
the field pole core.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.5.151 to 3.5.153
Generation of 3-phase voltage and general test on alternator
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the method of generating 3-phase voltage wave-forms by a 3-phase alternator
• state the phase sequence of 3φ 
φ φ 
φ φ  supply
• state the method of testing an alternator for continuity insulation and earth connection
• state e.m.f. equation of the alternator
• state the I.E.E. regulations and B.I.S. recommendations pertaining to earthing of the alternator.
An AC three-phase system is the most common system
used in the present world. It is because of its high
efficiency, less cost of material required for the generation,
transmission and distribution for a given capacity. The
three-phase system supplies power to drive three-phase
motors in industry as well as supplying power to single
phase motors and lighting loads for both industrial and
domestic purposes. Present day electricians may be
employed in a generating station or may be employed in
a standby power station where three-phase alternators are
used. Hence a fairly good knowledge about production of
3-phase voltages, their phase sequence  and general
testing of alternators is essential.
Generation of three-phase voltage: Basically,the
principle of a three-phase alternator (generator) is the
same as that of a single phase alternator (generator),
except that there are three equally spaced coils or
windings which produce three output voltages which are
out of phase by 120° with each other.
A simple rotating-loop, three-phase generator with its
output voltage wave-forms is shown in Fig 1c.
As shown in Fig 1a, three independent loops spaced about
120° apart are made to rotate in a magnetic field with the
assumption that the alternator shown is a rotating armature
type. As shown in Fig 1a, the three loops are electrically

212
isolated from each other and the ends of the loops are
connected to individual slip rings. As the loops are rotating
in a uniform magnetic field, they produce sine waves. In a
practical alternator, these loops will be replaced by a
multi-turn winding element and distributed throughout the
rotor slots but spaced apart at 120° Powerdegrees from
each other. Further, in practice, there will not be six slip
rings as shown in Fig 1a but will have either four or three
slip rings depending upon whether the three windings are
connected in a star or delta respectively.
We also know, as discussed earlier, that the rotating
magnetic field type alternators are mostly used. In such
cases only two slip rings are required for exciting the field
poles with DC supply. Fig 1b shows a stationary, 3-phase
armature in which individual loops of each winding are
replaced by coils spaced at 120 Powerdegrees apart.
However, the rotating part having the magnetic poles is not
shown.
Fig 1c shows the rotating armature type alternator in which
the 3 coils of the three-phases are connected in  star which
rotates in a two-pole magnetic field. According to Fig 1c,
the coil `R' moves under the influence of the `N' pole cutting
the flux at right angles, and produces the maximum
induced voltage at position `Oo' as shown in the graph as
per Faraday's Laws of Electromagnetic induction. When
the coil `R' moves in a clockwise direction, the emf induces
falls to zero at 90 degrees, and then increases to -ve
maximum under the influence of the south pole at 180
degrees. Likewise the emf induced in the `R' phase will
become zero at 270 degrees and attain +ve maximum at
360 degrees. In the same manner the emf produced by
coils `Y' and `B' could be plotted on the same graph. A
study of the sine wave-forms produced by the three coils
RYB shows that the voltage of coil `R' leads voltage of coil
`Y' by 120°, and the voltage of coil `Y' leads voltage of coil
`B' by 120°.
Phase sequence: The phase sequence is the order in
which the voltages follow one another, i.e. reach their
maximum value. The wave-form in Fig 1c shows that the
voltage of coil R or phase R reaches its positive maximum
value first, earlier than the voltage of coil Y or phase `Y', and
after that the voltage of coil B or phase B reaches its
positive maximum value. Hence the phase sequence is
said to the RYB.
If the rotation of the alternator shown in Fig 1c is changed
from clockwise to anticlockwise direction,the phase
sequence will be changed as RBY. It is the most important
factor for parallel connection of polyphase generators and
in polyphase windings. Further the direction of rotation of
a 3-phase induction motor depends upon the phase
sequence of the 3-phase supply. If the phase sequence of
the alternator is changed, all the 3-phase motors, connected
to that alternator, will run in the reverse direction though it
may not affect lighting and heating loads.
The only difference in the construction of a single phase
alternator and that of a 3-phase alternator lies in the main
winding. Otherwise both the types of alternators will have
similar construction.
General testing of alternator: Alternators are to be
periodically checked for their general condition as they will
be in service continuously. This comes under preventive
maintenance, and avoids unnecessary breakdowns or
damage to the machine. The usual checks that are to be
carried out on an altenator are:
•
continuity check of the windings
•
insulation resistance value between windings
•
insulation resistance value of the windings to the body
•
checking the earth connection of the machine.
Continuity test: The continuity of the windings is checked
by the following method as shown in Fig 2.
A test lamp is connected in series with one end to the
neutral (star point) and the other end to one of the winding
terminals (R Y B). If the test lamp glows equally bright on
all the terminals RYB then the continuity of the winding is
all right. In the same way, as shown in Fig 3, we can test
the field leads F1 and F2 for field continuity.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.5.151 to 3.5.153

213
Testing continuity with the test lamp only indicates the
continuity in between two terminals but will not indicate
any short between the same windings. A more reliable test
will be to use an ohmmeter to check the individual
resistances of the coils, and compare them to see that
similar coils have the same resistance. The readings,
when recorded, will be useful for future reference also.
For insulation resistance test
Between windings: As shown in Fig 4, one end of the
Megger lead is connected to any one terminal of the RYB
and the other is connected to F1 or F2 of the field winding.
If  the Megger reads one megohm or more, then the
insulation resistance is accepted as okay.
If there is short, between the armature and field windings,
the Megger reads zero ohms. If it is weak, it shows less
than one megohm.
Testing insulation resistance between body and
windings: As shown in Fig 5, one lead of the Megger is
connected to one of the leads of the RYB, and the other
lead of the Megger is connected to the body. If the
insulation between the windings and the frame is all right,
the Megger reads more than one megohm.
The field is tested by connecting one terminal of the
Megger to F1 or F2 of the field and the other terminal to the
body as shown in Fig 6. If the insulation  between the field
and the frame is all right, the Megger reads more than one
megohm. A lower reading than one megohm shows weak
insulation and leakage to the ground.
Caution
While conducting the insulation resistance test, if the
Megger reads zero, then it should be concluded that the
insulation of the  winding has failed completely and needs
thorough checking.
The permissible insulation resistance should
not be less than 1 megohm.
Earthing of alternators: This consists of two equally
important requirements as stated below.
•
Earthing of the neutral of the alternator
•
Earthing of the alternator frame.
Earthing of neutral: According to B.I.S. 3043-1966, it is
recommended to use one of the following methods for
earthing the neutral of the alternator.
•
Solid earthing
•
Resistance earthing
•
Reactance earthing
•
Arc-suppression coil earthing
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.5.151 to 3.5.153

214
The selection and the type of earthing depends to a large
extent on the size of the unit, the system voltage protection
scheme used, the manufacturer's recommendation and
the approval of the Powerinspectorate authority. Trainees
are advised to refer to B.I.S.3043-1966 for further details.
As earthing of neutral is essential for the operation of
protective relays, to maintain proper voltage in the system
and for safety reasons, trainees are advised to identify the
method of neutral earthing adopted in the available
alternator, maintain the continuity of earth connections
and keep the earth electrode resistance within the specified
value.
Earthing alternator frame: This earthing is essential for
the safety of the workers, and to keep the frame of the
alternator at zero earth potential. Operation of the earth
fault relays or fuses to open the Powercircuits in case of
earth faults is fully dependent upon earthing of the frame.
As per I.E. rules No.61, all the Powerequipment/ machines
are to be provided with double earthings for safe operation.
The condition of earth must be checked periodically, and
the earth electrode and the earth conductor resistance
must also be measured and recorded at repeated intervals
of time. The earth electrode and the earthing conductors
should be maintained such that the resistance value is
lower than the stipulated value according to the design of
the system.
Emf equation of  the alternator
Objective: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the emf equation to calculate the induced emf in an alternator.
Equation of induced emf: The emf induced in an alternator
depends upon the flux per pole, the number of conductors
and speed. The magnitude of the induced emf could be
derived as stated below
Let
Z
=
No.of conductors or coil sides in series/
phase in an alternator
P
=
No.of poles
F
=
frequency of induced emf in Hz
Ø
=
flux per pole in webers
kf
=
form factor = 1.11  - if emf is assumed to
be sinusoidal
N
=
speed of the rotor in r.p.m.
According to Faraday's Law of Electromagnetic Induction
we have the average emf induced in a conductor
= rate of change of flux linkage
=  d
dt  
=  
change of total flux
ion in which the flux change takes place
∅
time durat
In one revolution of the rotor (ie in 60/N seconds), each
stator conductor is cut by a flux equal to PØ webers.
Hence the change of total flux = dØ = PØ and the time
duration in which the flux changes takes place
= dt = 60/N seconds.
Hence the average emf induced in a conductor
=  d
dt  =  P
60  volts
∅
∅
N
 -------- Eq 1
Substituting the value for N =  120F
P
  in eqn 1
we have the average emf  induced in a  conductor =
=  P 120F
P60
 volts =  2
F volts
∅
∅
   ------ Eq. 2
If there are Z conductors in series per phase we have the
average emf per phase = 2ØFZ volts.
Then r.m.s. value of emf per phase = average value x  form
factor
= VAV x KF
= VAV x 1.11
 = 2ØFZ x 1.11
= 2.22ØFZ volts.
Alternatively r.m.s. value of emf per phase = 2.22ØF2T
volts
= 4.44ØFT volts
where T is the number of coils or turns per phase and Z =
2T.
This would have been the actual value of the induced
voltage if all the coils in a phase were (i)full pitched and (ii)
concentrated or bunched in one slot. (In actual practice,
the coils of each phase are distributed in several slots
under all the poles.) This not being so, the actually
available voltage is reduced in the ratio of these two factors
which are explained below.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.5.151 to 3.5.153

215
Pitch factor (Kp or Kc.): The voltage generated in a
fractional pitch winding is less than the full pitch winding.
The factor by which the full pitch voltage is multiplied to get
voltage generated in fractional pitch is called pitch factor,
and it is always less than one; and denoted as Kp or Kc.
Normally this value is given in problems directly;
occasionally this value needs to be calculated by a
formula Kp = Kc = Cos α/2
where α is the Powerangle by which the coil span falls
short of full pitch.
Example: Calculate the pitch factor for a winding having
36 stator slots, 4 poles with a coil span of 1 to 8.
For full p
Number of 
itch =  Number of stator slots
slots
 =  36
4  =  9.
Hence winding should start at 1 and end at 10.
In actual practice the coil span is taken as 1 – 8.
Hence actual pitch = 8 – 1 = 7.
Hence the coil span is short pitched by = 9 – 7 = 2.
The angle α =  difference in pitch
full pitch
                    =  2
9  
 180  =  40
×
°
×
°
°
180
where 180° is the complete angle for full pitch.
Pitch factor K
= Cos 
= Cos 40
2 = Cos 20 = 0.94.
c
α
2
Distribution factor (Kd): It is imperative that the conductors
of the same phase need to be distributed in the slots
instead of being concentrated at one slot. Because of this,
the emf generated in different conductors will not be in
phase with each other, and hence, cannot be added
together to get the total induced emf per phase but to be
added vectorially. This has to be taken into account while
determining the induced voltage per phase.
Therefore, the factor by which the generated voltage must
be multiplied to obtain the correct value is called a
distribution factor, denoted by Kd and the value is always
less than one. The formula for finding the value of Kd is given
below.
K d =  Sin m 
/ 2
m Sin / 2
β
β
where m is the number of slots per phase per pole
β =  
180
No.of slots per pole
o
Example: A six-pole alternator rotating at 1000 r.p.m. has
a single-phase winding housed in three slots per pole; the
slots in groups of three being 20° apart. Find the distribution
factor.
K d =  Sin m 
/ 2
m Sin / 2
β
β
where m = 3 slots per phase per pole
β = 200
K d =  Sin 3
/ 2
3 Sin 
/ 2  =  Sin 30
3 Sin 10
     =  
0.5
3
0.1736  =   0.96
×
°
°
×
20
20
Example: A 3-phase, 12-pole, star-connected alternator
has 180 slots with 10 conductors per slot, and the
conductors of each phase are connected in series. The
coil span is 144° (electrical). Find the distribution factor
and the pitch   factor Kp.
0.957
=
0.1045
5
0.5
=
6
 
Sin
 5
30
 
Sin
=
2
12
 
Sin
 5
2
12
5 
Sin
 =
 
K
12
 =
 
12
180
180
 =
   
pole.
 
per
 
phase
 
per
 
slots
 5
  
=
 
12
3
180
 =
  
m
/2
 
Sin
 
m
/2
 
m
 
Sin
 =
 
K
d
d
×
°
°
×
°
°
β
×
β
β
Kp
= Cos α
2
= Cos (180-144)/2 = Cos 36/2 = Cos 18° = 0.95.
From the foregoing, it is found that the pitch factor and the
distribution factor are to be used to multiply the induced
emf to get the actual induced voltage. Thus emf induced
in an alternator  Eo per phase  = 4.44 KpKdFØT volts.
In the case of a star-connected alternator, the line voltage
=  E  =  3
 =  3
L
P
E
E0  and in the case of a
delta-connected alternator the line voltage EL = Ep = Eo.
However, if the value of either Kd or Kp is not given in the
problem it can be assumed to be one.
Example: Calculate the effective voltage in one phase of
an alternator, given the following particulars. F=60 Hz,
turns/phase T = 240, flux per pole Ø = 0.0208 webber.
Solution: As Kc/Kp and Kd values are not given, we can
assume they are equal to one.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.5.151 to 3.5.153

216
Voltage/phase   E = 4.44 ØFT volts
= 4.44 x 60 x 0.0208 x 240 volts
= 1329.86 V or 1330 volts.
Example: The following information is given in connection
with a 3-phase alternator.  Slots = 96,  poles = 4, r.p.m.
= 1500, turns/coil = 16 in single layer, Ø = 2.58 x 106 lines.
Calculate the voltage generated/phase.
F =  PN
120  =  4
1500
120
 =  50 Hz.
Coils per phase =
No.of slots
No. of phases = 96
3 = 32.
×
Therefore turns/phase = 32 x 16 = 512
= 2.58 x 106 lines = 2.58 x 106 x 10–8 weber
V = 4.44 FØT
= 4.44 x 50 x 512 x 2.58 x 106 x 10–8 = 2932 volts.
Example: The stator of a 3-phase, 16-pole alternator has
144 slots, and there are 4 conductors per slot connected
in two layers, and the conductors of each phase are
connected in series. If the speed of the alternator is 375
r.p.m. calculate the emf induced per phase. The resultant
flux in the air gap is 5 x 10–2 webers per pole, sinusoidally
distributed. Assume the coil span as 150° electrical.
Sinusoidal distribution, hence the wave form is sine wave
and the emf induced
Eo
= Ep = 4.44 KcKdFØT volts
Kc
= Cos α
2 = Cos (180-150)/2 = Cos 30
2
= Cos 15 = 0.966
m =  144
3
16
 =  180
144
16
= 180
9
= 20
K  =  
Sin 3
20
2
3 Sin 20
2
 =  0.96.
d
×
=
°
°
×
3
β
Number of slots/phase = 144
3
 = 48
Number of conductors/slots = 4
Number of conductors in series per phase = 48 x 4
Number of turns in series per phase =  48
4
2
= 96.
Frequency = PN
120 = 16
375
120
= 50 Hz.
×
×
Eph
= 4.44 KcKdFØT
= 4.44 x 0.966 x 0.96 x 50 x 5 x 10–2 x 96
= 988 volts.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.5.151 to 3.5.153

217
Power
Related Theory for Exercise 3.5.154
Electrician - Alternator
Characteristic and voltage regulation of the alternator
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the load characteristic of an alternator and the effect of the P.F. on terminal voltage
• explain the regulation of alternators and solve problems therein.
Load characteristic of an alternator: As the load on the
alternator is changed, its terminal voltage is also found to
change. The reason for this change is due to the voltage
drop in the alternator because of
•
armature resistance Ra
•
armature leakage reactance XL
•
armature reaction which, in turn, depends upon the
power factor of the load.
Voltage drop in armature resistance: Resistance of
each phase winding of the alternator causes a voltage drop
in the alternator, and it is equal to IpRa  where Ip is the phase
current and Ra is the resistance per phase.
Voltage drop in armature leakage reactance: When
the flux is set up in the alternator due to the current flow
in the armature conductors, some amount of flux strays
out rather than crossing the air gap. These fluxes are
known as leakage fluxes. Two types of leakage fluxes are
shown in Figs 1a and b.
Though the leakage fluxes are independent of saturation,
they do depend upon the current and the phase angle
between the current and the terminal voltage `V'. These
leakage fluxes induce a reactance voltage which is ahead
of the current by 90°. Normally the effect of leakage flux is
termed as inductive reactance XL and as a variable quantity.
Sometimes the value XL is named as synchronous reactance
to indicate that it refers to working conditions.
Voltage drop due to armature reaction: The armature
reaction in an alternator is similar to DC generators. But
the load power factor has considerable effect on the
armature reaction in the alternators.
The effects of armature reaction have to be considered in
three cases, i.e. when load power factor is
•
unity
•
zero lagging
•
zero leading.
At unity P.F. the effect of armature reaction is only cross-
magnetising. Hence there will be some distortion of the
magnetic field.
But in the case of zero lagging P.F. the effect of armature
reaction will be de-magnetising. To compensate this
de-magnetising effect, the field excitation current needs to
be increased.
On the other hand, the effect of armature reaction due to
zero leading P.F. will be magnetising. To compensate the
increased induced emf, and to keep the constant value of
the terminal voltage due to this additional magnetising
effect, the field excitation current has to be decreased.
Effect of armature resistance and reactance in the
alternator: The induced emf per phase in an alternator is
reduced by the effect of armature resistance, and reactance
drops as shown vectorially in Fig 2 where
V is the terminal voltage per phase
I
is the phase current
θ
is the power factor angle between phase current and
terminal voltage
Eo is the induced emf per phase
Ra is the armature resistance per phase
XL is the armature reactance per phase.
The induced emf can be calculated either vectorially or
mathematically.
Mathematically the induced emf

218
E
VSin
=
(VCos +
R
X
a
L
θ
θ
I
I
)
(
)
2
2
+
+
For any value of P.F. either lagging or leading, a combination
of the effects of cross-magnetising, de-magnetising or
magnetising takes place. In all the effects of armature
reaction, it is shown vectorially as a force acting in line with
the reactance drop as shown in Fig 3 by a vector IXa.
However this value is not measurable.
On the basis of the above information, it is found that the
terminal voltage of an alternator with unity power factor
load will fall slightly on load as shown in Fig 4. Also it is
found that the terminal voltage falls considerably for an
alternator having lagging power factor. On the contrary,
with leading P.F. the terminal voltage of the alternator on
load increases even beyond the no-load terminal voltage
as shown in Fig 4.
Rating of alternators: As the power factor for a given
capacity load determines the load current, and the
alternator's capacity is decided on load current, the rating
of the alternator is given in kVA or MVA rather than kW or
MW in which case the power factor also is to be indicated
along with the wattage rating.
Example: A 3-phase, star-connected alternator supplies
a load of 5 MW at P.F. 0.85 lagging and at a voltage of 11
kV. Its resistance is 0.2 ohm per phase and the synchronous
reactance is 0.4 ohm per phase. Calculate the line value
of the emf generated.
Full load current =   IL
L
E Cos
 =  
P
3
θ
     
  Amps.
309
 =
 
85
. 
11000
3
1000
1000
5
×
×
×
×
In star IL = IP
IRa  drop =
309x0.2=61.8 V
IxL drop
=
309 x 0.4 = 123.6 V
Terminal voltage (line)=11000 V
Terminal voltage(phase) =  11000 =  6350V
3
Power factor
= 0.85
Power factor angle =   θ = Cos –1(.85)
= Cos 31.8°
Sin θ
= 0.527.
Drawing the vector, as shown in Fig 5, with the above data,
we have
E
VSin
E
V
o
P
=
(VCos
+
R
X
    =  (6350
85 + 61.8)
    =  6468.787 volts.
Line voltage =  3
 =  3
a
L
2
θ
θ
I
I
)
(
)
.
(
.
. )
2
2
2
0
6350
0 527
123 6
6469
11204
+
+
×
+
×
+
×
=
The voltage regulation of an alternator: The voltage
regulation of an alternator is defined as the rise in voltage
when the load is reduced from the full rated value to zero,
with the speed and field current remaining constant. It is
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.5.154

219
normally expressed as a percentage of the full load
voltage.
% of voltage regulation =  VNL −
×
V
V
FL
FL
100
where VNL
-
no load voltage of the alternator
           VFL
-
full load voltage of the alternator
The percentage regulation varies considerably, depending
on the power factor of the load, and as we have seen for
leading P.F. the terminal voltage increases with load, and
for lagging P.F. the terminal voltage falls with the load.
Example: When the load is removed from an AC generator,
its terminal voltage rises from 480V at full load to 660V at
no load. Calculate the voltage regulation.
% regulation =  VNL −
×
−
×
=
V
V
FL
FL
100
660
480
480
100
37 5%
.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.5.154

220
Power
Related Theory for Exercise 3.5.155
Electrician - Alternator
Parallel operation and synchronisation of three phase alternators -  brushless
alternator
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the necessity and conditions for paralleling of alternators
• explain the methods of paralleling two 3 phase alternators
• state the effect of changes in field excitation and speed on the division of load between parallel operation.
Necessity for paralleling of two alternators
Whenever the power demand of the load circuit is greater
than the power output of a single alternator, the two
alternators to be connected in parallel
Conditions for paralleling (synchronising) of two 3
phase alternators
•
The phase sequence of both 3 phase alternators must
be same. It can be checked byusing phase sequence
meters
•
The output voltages of the two 3 phase alternators must
be same.
•
The frequency of both the alternators must be same
Dark lamp method
The following describes the method of synchronizing two
alternators using the dark lamp method.
Fig 1 illustrates a circuit used to parallel two three-phase
alternators. Alternator 2 is connected to the load circuit.
Alternator 1 is to be paralleled with alternator 2 Three
lamps rated at double the output voltage to the load are
connected between alternator 2 and the load circuit as
shown. When both machines are operating, one of two
effects will be observed:

221
1
The three lamps will light and go out in unison at a
rate which depends on the difference in frequency
between the two alternators.
2
The three lamps will light and go out at a rate which
depends on the difference in frequency between the
two machines, but not in unison. In this case, the
machines are not connected in the proper phase
sequence and are said to be out of phase. To correct
this, it's necessary to interchange any two leads to
alternator 1. The machines are not paralleled until all
lamps light and go out in unison. The lamp method is
shown for greater simplicity of operation.
By making slight adjustments in the speed of alternator 1
the frequency of the machines can be equalized so that
the synchronizing lamps will light and go out at the lowest
possible rate. When the three lamps are out, the
instantaneous Powerpolarity of the three leads from 1 is
the same as that of 2 At this instant, the voltage of 1 is
equal to and in phase with that of 2 Now the paralleling
switch can be closed at the middle period of the darkness
of the lamps so that both alternators supply power to the
load. The two alternators are in synchronism, according
to the three dark method.
The three dark method has certain disadvantages and is
seldom used. A large voltage may be present across an
incandescent lamp even though it's dark (burned out). As
a result, it's possible to close the paralleling connection
while there is still a large voltage and phase difference
between the machines. For small capacity machines
operating at low speed, the phase difference may not affect
the operation of the machines. However, when large
capacity units having low armature reactance operate at
high speed, a considerable amount of damage may result
if there is a large phase difference and an attempt is made
to parallel the units.
Two bright, one dark method (Dark and bright lamp
method)
Another method of synchronizing alternators is the two
bright, one dark method. In this method, any two
connections from the synchronizing lamps are crossed
after the alternators are connected and tested for the
proper conditions for paralleling phase rotation. (The
alternators are tested by the three dark method.) Fig 2
shows the connections for establishing the proper phase
rotation by the three dark method. Fig 2 shows the lamp
connections required to synchronize the alternator by the
two bright, one dark method.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.5.155

222
When the alternators are synchronized, lamps 1 and 2
are bright and lamp 3 is dark. Since two of the lamps are
becoming brighter as one is dimming, it's easier to
determine the moment when the paralleling switch can
be closed. Furthermore, by observing the sequence of
lamp brightness, it's possible to tell whether the speed of
the alternator being synchronized is too slow or too fast
and can be connected it.
At the moment when the two lamps are full bright and
one lamp is full dark, the synchronizing switch can be
closed.
Now the both alternator are synchronized and share the
load according to their ratings.
Synchroscope method
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the types of synchroscope
• explain the working principle of synchroscope.
Synchroscope
A synchroscope is used to determine the correct instant
for closing the switch which connects an alternator to the
power station busbars.  This process of connecting at the
correct instant or synchronizing is necessary when an
unloaded “incoming” machine is to be connected to the
busbars in order to share the load.
The correct instant of synchronizing is when the busbar
and the incoming machine voltages
a) are equal in magnitude,
b) are in phase and
c) have the same frequency.
For a 3-phase machine the phase sequence of the two
should be the same.  This condition is verified by a phase
sequence indicator.
The voltages can be checked with the help of a voltmeter.
The function of the synchroscope is to indicate the
difference in phase and frequency of voltage of the busbar
and the incoming machine.
Synchroscopes may either be of the electro-
dynamometer type or the moving iron type.  Both
types are special forms of respective power factor meters.
Electro dynamometer (Weston) type synchroscope
Fig 1 shows a simple circuit of Weston type synchroscope.
it consists of  three limbed transformer.  The winding one
of the outer limbs is excited from busbars and that on the
other outer limb by the incoming machine.  The winding on
the central limb is connected to a lamp.
The windings on the outer limbs produce two fluxes which
are forced through the central limb.  The resultant flux
through the central limb is equal to the phasor sum of
these fluxes.  This resultant flux induces an emf in the
winding of the central limb.  The two outer limb windings
are so arranged that when the busbar and the incoming
machine voltages are in phase, the two fluxes though the
central limb are additive and thus emf induced in the
central limb winding is maximum.  Hence under these
conditions the lamp glows with maximum brightness.
When the two voltages are 180° out of phase with each
other the resultant flux is zero and hence no emf is induced
in the central limb winding, with the result the lamp does
not glow at all and is dark.  If the frequency of  the incoming
machine is different form that of the busbars, the lamp will
be alternately bright and dark or in other words the lamp
flickers. The frequency of flickering is equal to the difference
in frequencies of the busbar and the incoming machine.
The correct instant of synchronizing is when the lamp is
flickering at a very slow rate and is at its maximum
brightness.
One of the defect of this simple circuit is that it does not
indicate whether the incoming machine is too fast or too
slow.  This defect can be corrected by introducing an
electrodynamometer type instrument into the circuit shown
in Fig 2.
The electrodynamometer instrument consists of a fixed
coil divided into two parts.  The fixed coil is designed to
carry a small current and is connected in series with a
resistance across the busbars.  The moving coil is
connected in series with a capacitor across the terminals
of the incoming machine.  The instrument is provided with
control springs which act as current leads for the moving
coil.  The shadow of the pointer is thrown on an opal glass.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.5.155

223
When the two voltages are in phase with each other,
current I1 and I2  in fixed and moving coils respectively will
be in quadrature with each other (Fig 3a) and therefore
there will be no torque on the instrument.  The control
springs are so arranged that the pointer is in vertical
position under this condition.  Also the lamp is at its
maximum brightness and the pointer is silhoueted against
the opal glass.
If the incoming machine voltage V2  is leading the busbar
voltage V1  and the incoming machine slightly too slow, the
conditions of the circuit will slowly change from those
shown  in Fig 3b to those shown in Fig 3c.  Then the torque
will change from KI1I2 cos (90° +  θ) i.e., from a negative
value through zero to a positive value.  And during this
period lamp will be bright and the pointer will be seen to
move from left hand side of dial through the vertical position
to the right and side of dial.  The dial can thus be marked
with directions Fast and Slow as shown in Fig 4.
During this period when the voltages V1 and V2  are 180°
out of phase the pointer will move back.  But it will not be
visible as under these conditions as the lamp is dark.
The visible movement of the pointer is therefore a series of
traverses on the dial in one direction.  If the incoming
machine is too fast the visible traverses will be in the other
direction.  The correct instant of synchronizing is when the
pointer is visible at its central position and is moving very
slowly.
It may be observed that in order to have an exact quadrature
relationship between currents I1 and I2  when voltages V1
and V2  are in phase, is obtained only if small inductance
L is introduced in the fixed coil circuit.
Moving Iron synchroscope
Fig  5 shows the construction of a moving iron synchroscope
which is due to Lipman.  It has a fixed coil divided into two
parts.  This fixed coil A is designed for a small value of
current and is connected in series with a resistance
across two phases of the busbar.  There are two iron
cylinders C1 and C2 mounted on the spindle.  Each iron
cylinder is provided with two iron vanes whose axes are
180° out with each other.  The iron cylinders are excited
by two pressure coils P1 and P2 which are connected to two
phases of the incoming machine.  One of the coils has a
series resistance and the other has a series inductance.
This is done in order to create an artificial phase difference
of 90° between the currents of two pressure coils.  There
are no control springs.  The instrument is provided with a
pointer which moves over a dial marked Fast and Slow.
When the frequency of incoming machine is the same as
that of busbars, the instrument behaves exactly like the
corresponding form of the power factor meter.  The
deflection of the pointer from the plane of reference is equal
to phase difference between the two voltages.
However if the frequencies of the two voltages are different,
the pointer rotates continuously at a speed corresponding
to difference in frequency of the two voltages.  The direction
of rotation depends whether the incoming machine is too
fast or too slow.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.5.155

224
Brushless alternator
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• state the principle and basic theory of brushless alternator
• explain the construction of brushless alternator
• describe the working of 3 phase brushless alternator.
Principle of brushless alternator
In all alternators, voltage may be generated by rotating a
coil in the magnetic field or by rotating a magnetic field
within a stationary coil wire. To produce voltmeter either
the coil is moving or the magnetic field is moving. Either
configuration works equally well and both are used
separately or in combination depending on mechanical,
Powerand other objectives.
In the case of brushless alternator both combination is
used together in one machine.
The stationary part of an alternator is called the stator
and the roating part is called the rotor. The coils of wire
used to produce a magnetic  field are called the field
winding and the coils that the power are called the
armature winding. Here both armature and field winding
used as rotor as well as stator.
Working of brushless alternator
Brushless alternators having two part one is excitation
alternator part and another is main alternator part (Fig 1)
Excitation alternator
The armature is rotor and field winding is stator. When it
starts rotating  a voltage is generatred in Exciter armature
which gives current the main field to produce magnetic
field in main alternator.
Main alternator
Here main field is rotor and armature is stator so the supply
can be taken out directly. No brushes required. Voltage
produced in the exciter armature produce a magnetic field
on the main alternator rotor. When this magnetic field
cuts the main armature, a potential difference produced.
Here the voltage produced can be regulated by exciter
field current (Fig 2).
Basic theory
When an electric current is passed through a coil of wire,
a magnetic field is produced (an electromagnet).
Conversely, when a magnetic field is moved through a
coil of wire, a voltage is induced in the wire. The induced
voltage becomes a current when the electrons have some
place to go such as into a battery or other load. Both of
these actions take place in alternators, motors and
generators or dynamos.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.5.155

225
Construction
A brushless alternator is composed of two alternators built
end-to-end on one shaft. Smaller brushless alternators
may look like one unit but the two parts are readily
identifiable on the large versions. The larger of the two
sections is the main alternator and the smaller one is the
exciter. The exciter has stationary field coils and a rotating
armature (power coils). The main alternator uses the
opposite configuration with a rotating field and stationary
armature
Exciter
The exciter field coils are on the stator and its armature
is on the rotor. The AC output from the exciter armature is
fed through a set of diodes that are also mounted on the
rotor to produce a DC voltage. This is fed directly to the
field coils of the main alternator, which are also located
on the rotor. With this arrangement, brushes and slip rings
are not required to feed current to the rotating field coils.
This can be contrasted with a simple automotive alternator
where brushes and slip rings are used to supply current
to the rotating field
Main alternator
The main alternator has a rotating field as described above
and a stationary armature (power generation windings).
This is the part that can be confusing so take note that in
this case, the armature is the stator, not the rotor.
With the armature in the stationary portion of the alternator,
the high current output does not have to go through brushes
and slip rings. Although the Powerdesign is more complex,
it results in a very reliable alternator because the only
parts subjects to wear are the  bearings.
Three-phase brushless alternator
A three phase alternator has a minimum of 3 sets of
windings spaced 1200 apart around the stationary armature
(stator). As a result, there are 3 outputs from the alternator
and they are electrically spaced 1200 out of phase with
each other. A multi-pole design will have multiple sets of
3 windings. These sets of windings (poles) are spaced
evenly around the circumference of the machine. The more
poles there are , the slower the alternator turns for a given
voltage and frequency. More poles increase the
complexity of the alternator and that in part accounts for
the higher price of slower speed versions.
Other than in single-phase power plants, most alternators,
including the automotive type, generate 3-phase power. A
three-phase AC alternator will not have any diodes in it. If
the output is DC, it will probably have 6 diodes to convert
the output from the main alternator to DC. This is the
configuration used in automotive alternators. A 3-phase
brushless alternator may have 4 or 6 diodes on the rotor
for the exciter output in addition to the diodes that may
be on the stator
There are two ways that 3-phase machines can be wired.
One is the delta (triangle) configuration with one wire
coming off each "point of triangle". The other is the wye
(Y) or star configuration. They have one wire from each
branch of the "Y" and in some cases a 4" common wire
is added from the centre/centre point of the "Y" (the
common connection point between the windings)
Multiple voltage machines will have additional wires to
allow them to be configured for the desired system voltage.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.5.155

226
Power
Related Theory for Exercise 3.6.156 & 157
Electrician - Synchronous Motor and MG Set
Synchronous motor
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• explain the working principle of synchronous motor
• explain the constructional details of synchronous motor
• state the different methods of starting a synchronous motor
• compare the features of synchronous motor and induction motor
• state the applications of synchronous motors.
Synchronous motor
An alternator which runs as a motor is called as synchronous
motor.  3-phase AC supply is required for the AC winding
and suitable  DC voltage is required for the field winding
excitation.  The synchronous motors are not self starting.
Working principle
When the stator winding of a three-phase synchronous
motor is connected to a three-phase supply, a rotating
field is set up in the machine.  If the rotor is then started
in the direction of rotation of the rotating field, the north pole
of the rotating field draws the south pole of the rotor with
it, and the south pole of the rotating field draws the north
pole of the rotor.    The rotor continues to turn at a speed
of rotation which can be calculated from the familiar
formula, Ns = 120f/p.  It turns synchronously with the
rotating field.  The machine is now working as a motor.
Construction
In construction, synchronous motors are almost identical
with the corresponding alternator, and consist essentially
of two elements.
1
Stator (armature)
2
Rotor (field)
A synchronous motor may have either a revolving armature
or a revolving field, although most synchronous motors are
of the revolving field type.  The stationary armature which
is wound for the same number of poles as rotor is attached
to the stator frame while the field magnets are attached to
a frame which revolves with the shaft.
The field coils are excited by direct currents, either from a
small DC generator (usually mounted on the same shaft
as the motor and  called as an exciter), or from other DC
source.  Figure 1 shows a directly connected exciter.
ELN3615611

227
Methods of starting a synchronous motor
1
By using a pony motor
2
By using damper windings
3
By synchronisation
1
By using a pony motor
A three-phase current is fed to the stator winding of three-
phase synchronous machine and its rotor is started by a
pony (starting) motor, having same number of poles as
that of synchronous motor.  The small induction motor
coupled to the synchronous machine for starting purpose
is called the pony motor.  The pony motor brings the motor
very close to the synchronous speed, then the DC is
supplied to the field and the switch of the pony motor is
switched ‘off’.  Then the motor pulls itself to the synchronous
speed.
2
By using damper windings
The damper winding is just like squirrel cage winding
consisting of copper embedded in the pole shoe and short
circuited at both sides.
Action of damper winding at start
While starting a synchronous motor set up a rotating
magnetic field that cuts the cage (damper) winding on the
field system (rotor) and induces  current in it.  A torque is
developed and the motor runs to a speed a little less than
that of synchronous speed as an induction  motor.  The DC
excitation is then switched on and definite poles on the
rotor are set up.  Now the two sets of poles suddenly lock
each other by which the motor pulls into synchronous
speed.
While starting a synchronous motor provided with damper
windings, first the main field windings is short circuited
and AC supply is switched on to stator terminals through
suitable starter.  The motor starts up and when a steady
speed is reached DC excitation is applied after removing
the short on the field winding.  If the excitation is sufficient
the machine will be pulled into synchronism.
3
By synchronisation
Initially the synchronisation motor is run as an alternator
and it is synchronised with the main supply bus by
following one of the synchronisation methods.  After
synchronisation the prime mover is disconnected.  Now
the alternator, ie the synchronous motor continues to run
at synchronous speed by drawing power from supply
mains.
Comparision of Synchronous and Induction motor
Aspects
             Synchronous motor
               Induction motor
1
Speed
Synchronous speed constant is
Less than synchronous speed.
independent of load condition.
Decreases with increasing load.
2
Power factor
Operates at all power factors
Operates at only lagging power factor.
whether lagging or leading.
3
Efficiency
Very good
Good
4
Cost
Costlier
Cheaper
5
Starting
Not self-starting
Self-starting
6
Speed control
No question
Can be controlled to small units.
7
Application
Used for mechanical load and also
Limited to supply of mechanical load.
to improve power factor as synchronous
condenser.
Application
Synchronous motors are employed exclusively  as power
factor correction devices, they are termed as  synchronous
condenser, because the effect on the power system is the
same as that of a static capacitor which also produces a
leading current.
1
Induction motors of all types particularly when they
are underloaded
2
Power transformers and voltage regulators
3
Arc welders
4
Induction furnaces and heating coils
5
Choke coils and magnetic systems and
6
Fluorescent and discharge lamps, neon signs, etc.
Causes of low power factor
The principle cause of a low power factor is
due to the reactive power flowing in the circuit.
The reactive power depends on the inductance
and capacitance of the apparatus.
The disadvantages of low power factor are as follows
1
Overloading of cables and transformer
2
Decreased line voltage at point of application
3
Inefficient operation of plant and
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.6.156 & 3.6.157

228
4
Penal power rates
The advantages of high power factor are as follows
1
Reduction in the current
2
Reduction in power cost
3
Reduced losses in the transformers and cables
4
Lower loading of transformers, switch gears, cables
etc.
5
Increased capability of the Power system (additional
load can be met without additional equipment)
6
Improvement in voltage conditions and apparatus
performance and
7
Reduction in voltage dips caused by welding and
similar equipment
Power factor control
If the rotor excitation is varied when the motor is running
on load, the load angle and stator current will change, but
the speed, load (and hence input power) remain the same.
The power factor of the motor can therefore be adjusted by
means of the excitation.  Unity power factor operation is
possible over a wide range of loads and by using a high
rotor excitation the motor can operate at leading power
factor.  This is particularly valuable with a large synchronous
motor, which can be used to compensate for the lagging
power factor of other induction motors on the same site.
Instant speed application
As the efficiency of a synchronous motor is high, these
motors are well suited for loads where constant speed is
required.
V Curves of synchronouos machines
V-Curve of a synchronous machine shows the relation
between the armature current and excitation current, when
the load and input voltage to the machine is constant. At
a constant load, if excitation is changed the power factor
of the machine changes, i.e. when the field current is
small (machine is under-excited) the P.F. is low and as
the excitation is increased the P.F. improves so that for a
certain field current the P.F. will be unity and machine
draws minimum armature current. This is known as normal
exciation. If the excitation is further increased the machine
will become over-excited and it will draw more line current
and P.F. becomes leading and decreases. Therefore, if
the field current is changed keeping load and input voltage
constant, the armature current changes to make VIcosθ
constant. Variation of armature current with excitation are
called 'V' curves (Fig 2).
The Fig 3 shows V and inverse V curves of synchronous
motor.
Effect of Changing Excitation on Constant load
As shown in Fig. (4a), suppose a synchronous motor is
operating with normal excitation (Eb = V) at unity p.f. with
a given load. If Ra is negligible as compared to XS, then la
lags ER by 90° and is in phase with V because p.f. is
unity. The armature is drawing a power of V.Ia per phase
which is enough to meet the mechanical load on the motor.
Now, let us discuss the effect of decreasing or increasing
the field excitation when the load applied to the motor
remains constant
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.6.156 & 3.6.157

229
a) Excitiation Decreased
As shown in Fig (4b), suppose due to decrease in
excitation, back e.m.f. is reduced to Eb1 at the same load
angle α1. The resultant voltage ER1 causes a lagging
armature current Ia1 to flow. Even though Ia1 is larger than Ia
in  magnitude it is capable of producing necessary power
V.Ia for carrying the constant load because Ia1 cos φ1
component is less than Ia so that V.Ia1 cos φ1< V.Ia.
Hence, it becomes necessary for load angle to increase
from α1 to α2. It increases back e.m.f. from Eb1 to Eb2
which, in turn, increases resultant voltage from ER1 to
ER2. Consequently, armature current increases to Ia2
whose in-phase component produces enough power
(VIa2 cos φ2) to meet the constant load on the motor.
b) Excitation Increased
The effect of increasing field excitation is shown in
Fig 4c where increased Eb1 is shown at the original load
angle α1. The resultant voltage ER1 cause a leading current
Ia1 whose in-phase component is larger than Ia. Hence,
armature develops more power than the load on the motor.
Accordingly, load angle decrease from α1 to α2 which
decreases resultant voltage from ER1 to ER2. Consequently,
armature current decreases from Ia1 to Ia2 whose in-phase
component Ia2 cos φ2 = Ia. In that case, armature develops
power sufficient to carry the constant load on the motor.
Hence, we find that variations in the excitation of a
synchronous motor running with a given load produce
variations in its load anlge only.
Different Torques of a Synchronous Motor
Various torques associated with a synchronous motor
are as follows:
1
starting torque
2
running torque
3
pull-in torque and
4
pull-out torque
a) Starting Torque
It is the torque ( or turning effort) developed by the motor
when full voltage is applied to its stator (armature) winding.
It is also sometimes called breakaway torque. Its value
may be as low as 10% as in case of centrifugal pumps
and as high as 200 to 250% of full-load torque as in the
case of loaded reciprocating two-cylinder compressors.
b) Running Torque
As its name indicates, it is the torque developed by the
motor under running conditions. It is the driven machine.
The peak horsepower determine the maximum torque that
would be required by the driven machine. The motor must
have a break-down or a maximum running torque greater
than this value in order to avoid stalling.
c) Pull-in Torque
A synchronous motor is stated as induction motor till it
runs 2 to 5% below the synchronous speed. Afterwards,
excitation is switched on and the rotor pulls into step
with the synchronously - rotating stator field. The amount
of torque at which the motor will pull into step is called
the pull-in torque.
d) Pull-out- Torque
The maximum torque which the motor can develop without
pulling out of step or synchronism is called the pull-out
torque.
Normally, when load on the motor is increased, its rotor
progressively tends to fall back in phase by some angle
(called load angle) behind the synchronously-revolving
stator magnetic field though it keeps running
synchronously. Motor develops maximum torque when
its rotor is retarded by an angle of 90° (or in other words,
it has shifted backward by a distance equal to half the
distance between adjacent poles). Any further increase
in load will cause the motor to pull out of step (or
synchronism) and stop.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.6.156 & 3.6.157

230
Power
Related Theory for Exercise 3.6.158 & 159
Electrician - Synchronous Motor and MG Set
MG set and rotary converter and inverter
Objectives: At the end of this lesson you shall be able to
• list the advantages of direct current over alternating current
• list the methods of converting AC to DC
• state the advantages and disadvantages of MG-set
• describe the rotary converter construction and its working.
The AC system has been adopted universally for the
generation, transmission and distribution of electric power.
It is more economical than a DC system of generation,
transmission and distribution. There are applications where
DC is either essential or more advantageous over AC.
DC is essential in the following applications.
•
Electrochemical process such as electroplating,
electro-refining etc.
•
Storage battery charging.
•
Arc lamp for search light and cinema projectors.
Direct current is more advantageous in the following
applications.
•
Traction purposes - DC series motor.
•
Operating telephones, relays, time switches.
•
Rolling mills, paper mills, elevators where fine speed
control, frequent starting against heavy torque  and
rotation in both directions are required, DC motors are
more suitable.
The conversion of AC to DC has become a necessity due
to the above reasons.
Methods : The methods of conversion of AC to DC
•
Motor-generator set
•
Rotary converter
•
Mercury arc rectifier
•
Metal rectifiers
•
Semi-conductor diodes and SCR
Out of the above five the motor generator sets and semi-
conductor rectifiers are now mostly in use. The other types
have become obsolete for obvious reasons.
Motor generator set : It consists of a 3-phase AC motor
directly coupled to a DC generator. In the case of larger
units, the AC motor is invariably a synchronous motor and
the DC generator is usually compound.
Advantages
1
The DC output voltage is practically constant. The
output (DC) voltage is not affected by changes in AC
supply voltage.
2
DC output voltage can be easily controlled by the shunt
field regulator.
3
The M.G set can also be used for power factor correction,
where synchronous motor is used for driving the
generator.
Disadvantages
1
It has a comparatively low efficiency.
2
It requires more floor space.
Rotary or synchronous converter
A rotary converter is used when a large DC power is
required. It is a single machine with one armature and one
field. It combines the function of a synchronous motor and
a DC generator. It receives alternating current through a
set of slip rings mounted on one side of the armature
rotating synchronously (Ns = 120 f/P) and delivers direct
current from the opposite end through the commutator and
brushes.
Construction : In general construction and design, a
rotary converter is more or less like a DC machine. It has
interpoles for better commutation. Its commutator is larger
than that of a DC generator of the same size because it has
to handle a larger amount of power.
The only added feature are -
•
a set of slip-rings mounted at the end opposite to the
commutator end
•
dampers in the pole faces as in a synchronous motor.
A simple sketch illustrating the main parts of a rotary
(synchronous) converter is shown in Fig 1.

231
The fact that the emf induced in the armature conductors
of a DC generator is alternating and that it becomes direct
(unidirectional) only due to the rectifying action of the
commutator, the slip-rings are to be connected to some
suitable points on the armature winding to use this
machine as an alternator.
The rotary converter armature is mostly lap wound. The
number of parallel paths in the armature is equal to the
number of poles. Therefore the number of equi-potential
points on the armature is equal to the number of pairs of
poles. The number of tappings taken to each slip-ring is,
therefore, equal  to  the  number  of  pairs of poles. For a
3-phase lap wound rotary converter, it is essential that the
number of armature conductors per pole should be
divisible by 3.
Operation :  In its normal role, the machine is connected
to a suitable AC supply through the slip-rings and it
delivers direct current at the commutator. In this application
the machine runs as a synchronous motor receiving AC
power from the slip-ring side and as viewed from the
commutator end, it runs as a DC generator delivering DC
power.
Mercury arc rectifier : In general, a rectifier may be
defined as a device which converts a fluctuating current of
zero mean value (alternating current) into a fluctuating
current of finite mean value (direct current). It is a device
for converting AC to DC.
It has many advantages over the rotary converter and
M.G.set. With the invention of semiconductor diodes
which is more advantageous than mercury arc rectifier,
nowadays no one wants to use mercury arc rectifier.
The comparison of the M.G.set, rotary converter and
rectifier with regards to certain specific aspects are given
in the tabular form below.
Converter
Rectifier
M.G.Set
Rotary converter
Aspects for
comparison
Machinery
No moving/rotating
Two machines i.e. one AC
Single machine
another one DC generator
Cost
Cheap
Very costly
Costly
Noise
Noiseless
Noisy
Noisy
Efficiency
Good, as high as 95%
Very low because of two
Low
rotating machines
Maintenance cost
Low
High
High
Overloading
Can be overloaded
Cannot be
Cannot be
capacity
up to 50%
overloaded
overloaded
Power factor of AC
Low power factor
Low power factor
Good power factor
Attention during its
Constant attention
Less attention required
No attention required
operation
required
Space required
High
Very high
Low
Maintenance of MG set
Objective: At the end of this exercise you shall be able to
• list out the points to be considered for maintenance of MG set.
The MG set must be maintained by inspecting electrically
and mechanically. The following points to be considered
while carrying out maintenance.
Powerinspection list
•
General cleaning of all Powercomponents and control
panels
•
Check/rectify motor insulation resistance by megger
•
Check/rectify earth wiring
•
Check/rectify main switch fuses
•
Check/rectify stator, brushes etc.
•
Check/rectify bearings of motor, rotating parts and use
oil grease for proper lubrication
•
Check/rectify/check starting panel
•
Check/rectify over load relays
•
Check/rectify loose connections and tighten them
•
Replace damaged flexible conductors and cables
•
Check/rectify the  control system
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.6.156 & 3.6.157

232
•
Replace the carburized non operative contactor if
necessary.
Carry out the maintenance work in MG set by referring
the mechanical inspection list and lubrication instruction
given below
Mechanical inspection list
•
Clean thoroughly and do visual inspection
•
Check/rectify motor couplings and bearings
•
Check for tightness of coupling, checking formulation
both,
•
Checking of pipeline flanger
•
Check/rectify machine for functional operation and
verify with the operator
•
Lubrication, Maintenance prints
•
Check/rectify the bearings for the lubrication
•
Use oil gun/grease to lubricate the same.
A separate register is to be maintained by the
maintenance authority to keep the records for
each maintenance on all working days.
Attend the breakdown maintenance of mechanical and
Powernature, during the operation of the MG set.
Power: Electrician (NSQF LEVEL - 5) - Related Theory for Exercise 3.6.156 & 3.6.157

233
Project work
Objectives: The Trainees/Participants shall be able to
• prepare project report of the project selected
• draw circuit diagram/layout diagram
• list the specification of the material/component to be procured
• list the plan of action to be executed
• develop the project, complete and submit it.
Selection of project and its execution
•
Discuss in details of the project - necessity, marketing
facility, cost involvement, availability of material and
hope of future development and expansion.
•
Collect all materials and tools required to start the
work.
•
The project has to be agreed by all the members
involved and get the approval of the concerned
authority.
•
Prepare an action oriented plan to execute the work
within a stipulated time table which is to be accepted
by all the members and also the approval of instructor
concerned.
•
Complete the project as per the plan.
•
Test, calibrate and finish the project as per the plan
and execution.
•
Keep the project with optimum finish and good
workmanship.
Preparation of project report
•
Report should start with an introductory information
connected with a known subject and highlight its
importance in present conditions.
•
A survey to be conducted regarding the marketing and
its commercial applications.
•
A brief working principle and its operation has to be
illustarted in the report.
•
Highlight the maintenance, repair and periodic servicing
etc in the report.
•
Costing should be competitive and affordable to the
concerned without any reservations.
•
Project should have the flexibility for further expansion
to an advanced version without major changes.
•
Report should be listed with reference books and
website details.

