PHYSICAL REALISM
Brian Ellis
Abstract
Physical realism is the thesis that the world is more or less as
present-day physical theory says it is, i.e. a mind-independent
reality, that consists fundamentally of physical objects that have
causal powers, are located in space and time, belong to natural
kinds, and interact causally with each other in various natural kinds
of ways. It is thus a modern form of physicalism that takes due
account of the natural kinds structure of the world. It is a thesis
that many present-day scientiﬁc realists would surely accept.
Indeed, some might say that physical realism just is scientiﬁc
realism, but under another name. However, the argument that is
presented for physical realism is not the standard one for scientiﬁc
realism. It is not a two-stage argument from the success of science
to the truth of scientiﬁc theories to the reality of the entities pos-
tulated in these theories. It is more powerful than this, because it
is more direct, and its premisses are more secure. It is more direct,
because it develops what is basically a physicalist ontology as the
only plausible metaphysical explanation of the new scientiﬁc image
of the world. It is more secure, in that it does not depend, as the
standard argument does, on any doubtful generalisations about
the nature or role of scientiﬁc theory.
1. Scientiﬁc realism
I suppose scientiﬁc realism to be a thesis about the nature of
reality. It is, therefore, primarily a metaphysical thesis. Neverthe-
less, there is a philosophical programme known as ‘scientiﬁc
realism’, which is as much about the nature and role of scientiﬁc
theory, and the epistemic status and semantic implications of its
laws and theories, as it is about metaphysics. This paper is critical
of the programme, but not primarily of the thesis. I call my own
version of the thesis ‘physical realism’, because the metaphysical
thesis that I wish to defend is a sophisticated physicalist one that
is inspired more by 1960s physicalism and the new essentialism,
than by the programme of scientiﬁc realism.
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 350
Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.
Ratio (new series) XVIII 4 December 2005 0034–0006

© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005
372
BRIAN ELLIS
The programme is admirably presented and discussed in
Stathis Psillos’s (1999) book on the subject. This book presents
an overall perspective on scientiﬁc realism that is comprehensive,
fair and lucid. Its major defect is one that it shares with most other
justiﬁcations of scientiﬁc realism, viz. that it presents the case for
realism as a two-stage argument from the empirical success of
science, to the truth, or approximate truth, of its dominant 
theories, to the reality of the things and processes that these 
theories appear to describe. Formally this argument would be
sound, if one had an adequate theory of truth to carry the meta-
physical burden. But no such theory of truth is developed in
Psillos’s book (or anywhere else, to my knowledge), and one is
left to speculate on what ontology might be implied by the truth
of science’s well-established theories.
Rather than try to develop such a theory of truth here, I shall
tackle the metaphysical task directly – my aim being to give 
an account of the nature of reality that will adequately explain
why science has been able to construct the scientiﬁc image that
it has. In presenting my argument, I shall presuppose no concept
of truth other than that of epistemic rightness (as developed in
Ellis 1990). For it is useful to separate the epistemic issues from
the metaphysical ones. To address the epistemic issue of whether
a proposition is true or not, we have only to consider whether 
the grounds for claiming it to be true are sufﬁcient to justify 
the claim. If the proposition is an empirical one, then we might 
consider the empirical evidence that is available to decide
whether or not it puts the issue beyond doubt. If it is a proposi-
tion of mathematics, then we might consider its proof, or, if that
is beyond us, the merits of the claim that it has been conclusively
proven. The epistemic concept of truth is thus straightforwardly
applicable to propositions of all sorts, whatever their ﬁeld, and we
do not need a metaphysical theory of what would make a propo-
sition of a given kind true or false in order to use it. For truth, 
in the minimalist sense of epistemic rightness, is metaphysically
neutral.
I take it that the following propositions are all true in the 
minimalist epistemic sense:
(a) Sugar is soluble in water
(b) It is impossible to produce a perpetual motion machine of
the second kind

(c) To a ﬁrst approximation, every body attracts every other
body in the universe with a force that is inversely propor-
tional to the square of the distance between them
(d) The speed of light is the same with respect to all inertial
systems
(e) eiq = cosq + isinq
(f) There are just ﬁve regular polyhedra
(g) The efﬁciency of a Carnot engine working between the
Absolute temperatures T2 and T1 is (T2 - T1)/T2
(h) Ideal markets ensure Pareto-optimality
(i) Paracetamol relieves pain
(j) The subject is thinking about a horse
But none of these statements is metaphysically transparent. For it
is not clear what ontology is required to accommodate them. Are
there any real causal powers, necessities, forces, or inertial systems
in the world? What do mathematical theorems describe? What are
the truthmakers of ideal theories? To what categories do mental
events and states belong?
I shall not try to answer all of these questions here. My more
modest aim is to argue that scientiﬁc realists need to be able to
answer such questions, if their position is to be tenable. It is not
enough for them to argue that the established laws and theories
of science are mostly true, or at least approximately true, as
though this were the end of the matter. In my view, this is just the
beginning. The real work has yet to be done in spelling out the
metaphysical implications of this conclusion.
Psillos’s account, like that of so many others, leaves the real
work to others. For the common assumption seems to be that the
principal worry for scientiﬁc realists is the question of whether
established scientiﬁc theories are true. Certainly, the main chal-
lenge to scientiﬁc realism has come from this direction. But, even
if the question of the truth of established theories could be settled
decisively in favour of scientiﬁc realism, the ontological question
would remain. For the correspondence theory of truth on which
realists usually rely is far too weak and indecisive to carry the meta-
physical burden of the argument for scientiﬁc realism. In putting
forward his semantic thesis, Psillos advises us to take scientiﬁc 
theories ‘at face value’, and see them as ‘truth-conditioned
descriptions of their intended domains, both observable and
unobservable’. But how, I ask, is one supposed to do this? I have
PHYSICAL REALISM
373
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005

© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005
374
BRIAN ELLIS
no trouble in taking ‘The cat is on the mat’ as a truth-conditioned
assertion about the domestic scene at home. Nor am I puzzled
about how to understand the statement ‘Oxygen has atomic
number eight.’ The ontological implications of these claims seem
clear enough. But many, if not most, scientiﬁc claims are meta-
physically much more obscure than these, and one cannot just
read their ontological commitments off the page.
Originally, a scientiﬁc realist was simply one who believed the
world to be more or less as the scientiﬁc image implies it is. Sci-
entiﬁc realists, such as Smart (1963) and Sellars (1963), believed
it to be a mind-independent reality, whose content and structure
is gradually, if imperfectly, being revealed to us by the methods
of empirical science. No scientiﬁc realist at any time has believed
that the world is exactly as current science depicts, because they
would all concede that some of our currently accepted theories
are bound to be superseded, and lead to signiﬁcant changes in
our beliefs about the world. Nevertheless, scientiﬁc realists have
generally been persuaded that such changes are now unlikely to
lead to the wholesale rejection of the current scientiﬁc image.
Some big changes may occur, they concede, but they think that
radical changes, such as those that have historically occurred 
in astronomy, dynamics, chemistry, heat theory, geology, and
biology, are unlikely to recur in any of these well-established areas.
And no scientiﬁc realist believes that the very existence of a mind-
independent reality is ever likely to be seriously challenged by 
scientiﬁc advances.
But even if this optimism should prove to be ill founded, and
profound scientiﬁc revolutions were later to occur in most ﬁelds,
belief in the ontology that seems to be required for current
science might still be the most rational metaphysical position. For
such a metaphysic would at least be the best explanation that is
currently available of the empirical successes and failures of
science, even if it were to prove to be inadequate for ultimate
science.
Most scientiﬁc realists of the 1960s would probably have called
themselves ‘physicalists’. For the physicalists of this period (e.g.,
Smart 1963; Sellars 1963) were those who believed the world to
be essentially a physical world that is more or less as the physicists
of that era believed it to be – and nothing more besides. Thus,
they accepted realism about the scientiﬁc image, and combined
it with physical reductionism. Consequently, the early physicalists
rejected the view that there are any essentially mental events or

processes, i.e. events or processes occurring in people’s minds,
that could not, even in principle, be reduced to physical ones.
The world, they argued, is really just a physical world, and all
mental events are really just physical events. This position seems
to me to be basically correct – but only as far as it goes. The phys-
icalism of the 1960s needs to be supplemented in various ways to
account for causal laws, natural necessities (and impossibilities),
and truths about natural kinds, properties, and relationships. For
without a much richer ontology than Smart or Sellars ever envis-
aged, many of the various kinds of truths encountered in the 
sciences would lack truthmakers. A richer ontology of the 
kind required was argued for in Ellis (1987), and developed in
Scientiﬁc Essentialism (Ellis 2001).
2. The new scientiﬁc image
The new scientiﬁc image of the world is an elaboration and devel-
opment of the old one. Like the old one, the new scientiﬁc image
is of a basically physical world. It is a world in which all objects are
really physical objects, all events and processes are physical, and
in which physical objects can have only physical properties (Ellis
1976). To elaborate this position, I now propose the following 
deﬁnitions:
1. A physical object is anything that has energy, or consists of
things that have energy.
2. A physical event is any change of energy distribution in the
universe.
3. A physical process is any causally or inertially connected
sequence of physical events
4. A physical property is any real property, possession of which
would make a difference to at least one kind of physical
process involving that object.
I think that most physicalists of the 1960s would have accepted
this picture, or something very like it.
The new scientiﬁc image differs from the old one in a number
of important respects. Firstly, it embraces the idea that the world
is a highly structured reality (Ellis 2001, 2002), in which there are
objective hierarchies of distinct kinds of things in each of the two
principal categories of existence.
PHYSICAL REALISM
375
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005

© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005
376
BRIAN ELLIS
1. There is an objective hierarchy of distinct kinds of objects
or substances generated by the species relation. This 
hierarchy is nowhere more evident than in the ﬁeld of
chemistry. For there are known to be literally tens, if not
hundreds, of thousands of categorically distinct kinds of
chemical substances, with laws at all levels of generality relat-
ing to them.
2. There is an objective hierarchy of distinct kinds of events 
or processes. For example, there is a hierarchy of kinds of
causal processes that is formally like the hierarchy of kinds
of substances, since every different chemical equation
describes a distinct kind of process, and the kinds of
processes that may be described are evidently related as
species in a hierarchy.
Secondly, the instances of the kinds in these two hierarchies all
have intrinsic physical properties in virtue of which they are things
of the kinds they are. Consequently, the new scientiﬁc image of
the world implies that reality has a deﬁnite modal structure (Ellis
2001, 2002). For the natural properties that exist in the world
must be supposed to include a range of causal powers, and,
realism about these causal powers should be as much part of the
new scientiﬁc image of the world as realism about the physical
objects or events that possess them. Consequently, the new scien-
tiﬁc image of reality is not that of a Humean world of logically
independent events, as Smart’s image of reality undoubtedly was,
but rather that of a world of objects of categorically distinct kinds
necessarily involved in the natural events and processes that are
the appropriate displays of their genuine causal powers in the
contingent circumstances of their existence.
3. Do the laws and theories of science truly describe reality?
According to the proposed deﬁnitions of the physical, the cate-
gory of physical objects includes all of the fundamental particles
and ﬁelds of the kinds that are recognised in physics, all of the
atoms and molecules that chemists talk about, all of the cells and
organisms of biology; in short, just about all of the things that
most scientiﬁc realists think they should believe in. However, the
category of physical objects does not include any of the Platonic
objects of mathematics, logic, or modal semantics. Nor does it

include the idealised objects of abstract model theories. It does
not, for example, include geometrical points, perfect gases, 
perfectly reversible heat engines, inertial systems, or ideal 
incompressible ﬂuids in steady ﬂow in uniform gravitational
ﬁelds, even though there are laws of physics that seemingly tell us
about such things. Nor does the category of physical objects
include Newtonian extrinsic forces, although there are laws of
action, combination and distribution of such forces. In my view,
these things are not real, and the propositions that are supposed
to be true of them need not be even approximately true of real
things. Therefore, a scientiﬁc realist should not, in my view, be
required to believe in them.
Yet the argument from the success of science, to the approxi-
mate truth of its dominant theories, to the reality of the theoreti-
cal entities seemingly referred to in these theories, would appear
to lead to a different conclusion. For it seems to require belief in
the Platonic entities of mathematics, the theoretical entities of
abstract model theories, and the forces of Newtonian physics.
There are, of course, many scientiﬁc realists who do believe in
some or all of these things. But a physical realist has no good
cause to do so.
There is probably no more successful or well-established
branch of scientiﬁc knowledge than arithmetic, which I take to
be the theory of numerical relationships. But scientiﬁc realists are
surely not required to believe in the reality of any abstract par-
ticulars, such as numbers. There are, it is true, some scientiﬁc real-
ists, who do believe in numbers, e.g. those who rely what I call
‘the strong argument for scientiﬁc realism’ (see my 1992 critical
notice of Bigelow and Pargetter’s Science and Necessity) to argue
from the predictive success of number theory to the conclusion
that numbers exist. Nevertheless, I do not think that we should
accept them. For there is no plausible ontology that would ac-
commodate them. Similarly, there is the case of geometry. The
theories of spatial and spatiotemporal relationships are certainly
of fundamental importance in physics. And such relationships
undoubtedly exist. But the primary theoretical entities of the
geometry, viz. geometrical points, are neither physical objects, nor
universals, nor members of any other plausible ontological cate-
gory. Therefore, we should not have to believe in them.
Geometrical points in space are not to be confused with the
mass-points of Newtonian gravitational theory, which are abstract
entities of a different kind. For Newtonian mass-points are sup-
PHYSICAL REALISM
377
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005

© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005
378
BRIAN ELLIS
posed to be located in space, rather than be elements of it. As
such, they are supposed to be capable of moving about in space,
and consequently of occupying different geometrical points at dif-
ferent times. But mass-points are not physical objects either. Nor
are they members of any other acceptable ontological category.
Rather, they are just the idealised objects of an abstract model
theory. It is true that mass-points are supposed to have mass, and
therefore energy. But mass-points cannot be accepted as physical
entities any more than geometrical points can be. For mass-points
exist only as abstract representations of physical objects, idealised
as having point-like locations, and postulated as having masses 
so that they can, theoretically at least, interact with each other. 
Of course, a theory that employs such abstract entities is not 
a realistic one. Presumably, it was never intended to be. Never-
theless, physicists, who wish to understand how clouds of real 
particles behave, might do very well to consider how clouds of
point-masses would behave. This is just the sort of thing that any
abstract model theory does. It does not, and is not intended to,
describe the world, but to model it, and so reveal its underlying
structure. One would have to be very naïve to suppose that
Newton, or anyone else, ever believed in the point-masses they
postulated in their theories.
Consider also Sadi Carnot’s theory of the heat engine (1824).
After 180 years, Carnot’s theory is still the fundamental one in the
area, and every student of thermodynamics has to have a good
understanding of it. But Carnot’s model of the heat engine is con-
sciously not realistic. Carnot sought to explain the workings of the
heat engine by abstracting from the heat losses, and other causes
of inefﬁciency, that occur in all real heat engines, in order that
he might consider the fundamental nature of the processes
involved in producing useful work. Carnot was a caloricist, and
his hypothesis was that heat produces useful work in the process
of falling from a higher to a lower temperature level, just as water
in a water mill does in falling from a higher reservoir to a lower
one. We now know that Carnot was wrong about this, and, accord-
ing to Psillos, there is evidence that Carnot himself had doubts
about the nature of the process (although you would never know
this from Carnot’s original paper). Whether this was so or not,
Carnot was not wrong about the essentials. Essentially, work is 
produced by maintaining a gas at a high temperature while 
allowing it to expand isothermally, allowing it to expand further

adiabatically, so that its temperature drops, compressing it isother-
mally at this lower temperature, and then compressing it further
adiabatically to restore it to its original pressurised state at the
higher temperature. The work done in a given cycle is the excess
of the work done by the gas in the expansion phase over the work
required in the compression phase.
Carnot’s model of the heat engine was an idealisation of this
process. The temperature of the source of heat required for the
isothermal expansion was assumed to be the same as that of the
expanding gas, so that no temperature differences would appear,
and hence no heat losses would occur, during this phase. Like-
wise, the temperature of the heat sink was assumed to be the same
as that of the working substance throughout the isothermal com-
pression phase. The adiabatic expansion and compression phases
of the cycle were supposed to occur in a perfectly insulated cylin-
der, so that no heat losses would occur during these phases either.
The whole process was supposed to involve a perfectly lubricated
cylinder to eliminate the possibility of work losses due to friction.
Obviously, no real heat engine even approximates to this ideal,
and the efﬁciencies of real heat engines are orders of magnitude
less efﬁcient than Carnot’s theory implies they could be. But
Carnot’s theory is nevertheless the fundamental one in the theory
of heat engines. For, using Carnot’s model, and what is now
known as the Second Law of Thermodynamics, it is not hard to
demonstrate that:
a) The efﬁciency of a Carnot engine is independent of the
nature of the working substance, and is a function only of
the temperature limits through which it operates. Speciﬁ-
cally, e = (T2 - T1)/T2, where T2 is the Absolute tempera-
ture of the source, and T1 that of the sink,
b) The Carnot engine is the most efﬁcient possible for 
any heat engine operating between these temperature 
limits.
But neither Carnot, nor anyone else at the time, ever thought
that Carnot’s engine was anything other than a theoretical ﬁction.
So, Psillos’s semantic thesis, which would require us to take such
well-established theories such as Carnot’s ‘at face value’, and see
them as ‘truth-conditioned descriptions of their intended
domains’, does not seem to be good advice. Good theories in
PHYSICAL REALISM
379
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005

© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005
380
BRIAN ELLIS
established ﬁelds in the mature sciences, even seminal ones, need
not be realistic.
The case of forces, conceived of in the manner of Newton as
extrinsic to the bodies on which they operate, is different again.
According to my proposed deﬁnition of physicality, Newtonian
forces are not physical objects, since they do not have energy. 
The action of a Newtonian force is a physical event, since it 
necessarily involves some change in the object on which it 
acts. But strangely, the production of such a force is not. The
object that produces the force is not affected by the fact of its pro-
duction; it is affected only by the reaction that its action produces.
So, if Newtonian forces are objects, then they are very curious
objects. As Robert Mayer once noted: ‘If gravity be called a force,
a cause is supposed which produces effects without itself dimin-
ishing, and incorrect conceptions of the causal connexion of
things are thereby fostered’ (Magie 1935: 199). Theoretically,
Newtonian forces are always eliminable from physics. We need
only combine the laws of their production with those of their 
combination and action to obtain laws of distribution of their
effects. But, in practice, we cannot always do this, because the
resultant forces are often the products of too many and too
complex factors, and the measurements and calculations that
would be required to eliminate the forces would be beyond us,
even if there were some point in trying to do it. So, should we be
realists about forces of the kind that Newton described? The stan-
dard arguments for scientiﬁc realism clearly say ‘yes’. They are,
after all, theoretical entities in causal roles in highly successful the-
ories in one of the maturest of all of the sciences. But a physical
realist should say ‘no’. Forces are not physical entities. Therefore,
however useful they may be as theoretical entities, they must be
rejected in ontology.
There are, therefore, some very good reasons for thinking that
established physical theory is not ontologically transparent. Firstly,
the ontological implications of established propositions about 
Platonic entities, such as numbers, geometrical points, Euclidean
planes, propositions and possible worlds, simply cannot be read off
from the page, as though they were unproblematic. There are, of
course, realists about all of these things. But according to physical
realism, if one wishes to be a realist about any of them, then one
must construe them as universals of some kind. For these are the
only kinds of physical entities in a physical realist’s ontology that
they could possibly be. But mathematical entities do not appear to

be universals either.1 Secondly, the ontological implications of laws
about theoretical ideals are not obvious. Certainly, there are well-
known and well-established laws that purport to be about ideal
things of one kind or another. For example, there are established
laws of ideal gases, inertial systems, black body radiators, ideally
free markets, perfect competition, and so on. And since these laws
are all presumably true in the minimalist epistemic sense, a scien-
tiﬁc realist who accepts Psillos’s semantic thesis would appear to be
committed to the reality of all of them. But according to physical
realism these entities do not exist as physical objects. They are,
rather, the objects of ideal theories, which are not intended to
describe the world, as Psillos’s semantic thesis requires. Thirdly,
there are objects of conceptual convenience, such as forces. There
is good reason to think that forces are not physical entities. 
Certainly, they are not physical objects, events or properties, as 
I have deﬁned them. Therefore, there is good reason not to
include them in a scientiﬁc ontology. Therefore, scientiﬁc realists
should not, qua scientiﬁc realists, be committed to their existence.
Psillos’s semantic thesis should therefore be rejected.
4. Explaining science metaphysically
The best argument for physical realism is not an argument from
the empirical success of science to the truth of it laws and theo-
ries to the reality of its theoretical entities. For no such argument
is able to be as metaphysically discriminating as it should be about
the different kinds of theories in science, or the different kinds
of theoretical entities that are postulated. The best argument is
the one that derives from the extraordinary nature of the new sci-
entiﬁc image or the world, and the attempt to explain it meta-
physically. For the question that needs to be addressed is this: How
is the sophisticated, relatively stable, scientiﬁc image of the world
that is the result of the last two or three centuries of scientiﬁc
work to be explained? Don’t look at it theory by theory, I say, and
seek to justify the ontologies of the most successful ones in terms
of what these theories are able to predict. Look at the picture as
a whole. This is what no hypothesis other than a global meta-
physical theory such as physical realism can possibly explain. The
image that the most successful scientiﬁc theories have systemati-
PHYSICAL REALISM
381
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005
1
My positive account includes a range of numerical and spatio-temporal relationships
as genuine universals, but does not embrace numbers or geometrical points. See Ellis
(1987).

© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005
382
BRIAN ELLIS
cally constructed for us is an extraordinary one. It is an image of
a world that consists entirely of things belonging to an elaborate,
strongly interconnected, hierarchical structure of categorically
distinct kinds (of chemical substances, particles, ﬁelds, etc.), and
involved in natural processes which themselves are organised in
a natural hierarchy of categorically distinct kinds. Moreover, the
ways in which they are involved are seen as depending on their
speciﬁc causal powers, capacities and propensities, and the spa-
tiotemporal relations between them. It is a picture, not of a mech-
anistic world, but of a world that is every bit as tightly organised
and structured as Paley’s watch.
According to the Maxwell-Bridgman theory of physical reality,
a real thing always manifests itself in more than one way. A bas-
ketball not only looks round; it feels round, and it rolls. A bas-
ketball that manifested itself only visually, or only from one point
of view, might well be dismissed as a chimera. But one that you
can catch and throw into a basket is not a chimera – it is the real
thing. Much the same is true of the theoretical entities of science
that most of us believe in. The same entities crop up again and
again in the explanations we offer, and are seen to be involved in
a great many different natural processes. A theoretical entity that
had only one role in explanation, e.g. to conserve energy in some
speciﬁc kind of process, would be highly suspect. But one that has
as many different properties as a copper atom does, and mani-
fests itself in as many different ways as copper atoms do, cannot
plausibly be supposed to be a theoretical ﬁction. The theoretical
picture of modern chemistry, to which the theory of copper
belongs, is too tightly interconnected for it to be anything other
than what it purports to be.
The emergence of this scientiﬁc image of the world really has
only one plausible explanation, viz. that the world is, in reality,
structured more or less as it appears to be, and, consequently, that
the kinds distinguished in it (the chemical substances, particles,
ﬁelds, biological species, etc.) are natural kinds of one sort or
another, and that the causal powers they appear to have are
genuine. They may not all be natural kinds in the strict sense in
which I use this term in Scientiﬁc Essentialism. But nor are they just
arbitrary classiﬁcations that lack adequate foundations in the real
world.2 Any other hypothesis would make the appearance of all
2
Biological species, for example, are what I call ‘generic cluster kinds’. See my reply
to Stephen Mumford in Ellis (2005).

this structure in the scientiﬁc image astounding. The hypothesis
that the appearance of structure arises from our manner of per-
ceiving or thinking about the world has no plausibility at all. It
does not even begin to explain the structures that we actually 
ﬁnd in chemistry, for example. Moreover, the hypothesis that 
our mental processing systematically distorts reality in some way,
so that the real structures are not the same as the apparent 
ones, is simply gratuitous. It explains nothing, and the doubt 
that the structures are as they are represented as being is merely
sceptical.
This is the real argument for the proposed ontology of scien-
tiﬁc realism. It is a powerful argument, and it is independent of
any theory of reference or truth. It does not proceed from any
premisses about the truth, or approximate truth, of the laws or
theories of science. Nor does it depend on any semantic theory
about what makes a law or theory true, or approximately true. It
does not even depend on our acceptance of the truth or approx-
imate truth of most established scientiﬁc theories. It is enough if
we accept that the scientiﬁc image is the most rational picture to
have of the nature of reality. The argument by-passes all questions
about the language of science, and gets down to the crucial ques-
tion, which is: How is the emergence of a scientiﬁc image of the
world, consisting of a multiply connected, hierarchical structure
of categorically distinct kinds of physical systems that are involved
in a range of categorically distinct kinds of processes, to be
explained? What gives rise to this image? The image is clearly a
human construct. But it is a stable and revealing image that
accommodates and explains just about everything in the relevant
ﬁelds that scientiﬁc investigation has demonstrated, and excludes
nothing that seems to be indispensable. This is what we should
expect, if the new scientiﬁc image were, for the most part, descrip-
tive of reality, as physical realism assumes it to be. Its emergence
otherwise has no plausible explanation.
La Trobe University
Australia 3083
and
University of Melbourne
Australia 3010
phibde@bigpond.com
PHYSICAL REALISM
383
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005

© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005
384
BRIAN ELLIS
References
Bigelow, J. C. and Pargetter, R. J. (1990). Science and Necessity. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Carnot, S. (1824). ‘Reﬂexions sur la Puissance Motrice du Feu’, reprinted in Magie (1935).
Ellis, B. D. (1976). ‘The Existence of Forces’, Studies in the History and Philosophy of Science
7: 171–85.
—— (1987). ‘The Ontology of Scientiﬁc Realism’, in Metaphysics and Morality: Essays in
Honour of J.J.C. Smart, ed. P. Pettit, R. Sylvan and J. Norman. Oxford: Blackwell: 50–70.
—— (1990). Truth and Objectivity. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
—— (1992). ‘Scientiﬁc Platonism. An Essay Review of Bigelow and Pargetter’s Science and
Necessity’, Studies in the History and Philosophy of Science 23: 665–79.
—— (2001). Scientiﬁc Essentialism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—— (2002). The Philosophy of Nature: A Guide to the New Essentialism. Chesham: Acumen.
—— (2005). ‘Universals, the Essential Problem and Categorical Properties’, this volume.
Magie, W. F. ed. (1935). Source Book in Physics. New York and London: McGraw-Hill.
Psillos, S. (1999). Scientiﬁc Realism: How Science Tracks the Truth. London and New York:
Routledge.
Sellars, W. (1963). Science, Perception and Reality. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Smart, J. J. C. (1963). Philosophy and Scientiﬁc Realism. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

