 
 
TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE 
 
 
The area of technique, technology, and the technological system is one 
in which Jacques Ellul undoubtedly speaks with a prophetic voice.  Already 
events have justified many of his earlier warnings or even shown them to be 
too restrained.  In this latest work, which rests on solid research and covers a 
wide and varied range of topics, his message comes through with unusual 
urgency and force.  He might be mistaken on some of the details but this 
ought not to blind us to the truth in the general thesis.  Conversely, even if we 
find the thesis implausible, this ought not to prevent us from hearing the 
challenge of the details.  As Ellul sees it, either technology as a whole or 
individual technologies are hurrying us into a situation of catastrophe.  Lulled 
by the bluff of technological discourse, we sleepily fail to perceive the perils 
that confront us.  Ellul's purpose, therefore, is to jolt us awake before we pass 
the point of no return.  A special concern, perhaps, is to awaken the timid 
churches that are paralyzed by their fear of being derided as old-fashioned 
and outdated. 
 
 
Since most of the specific examples that Ellul adduces are taken from 
his native France, readers should be advised that in a few instances where 
explanatory footnotes might be needed the details have been omitted.  The 
context will show what is meant in the case of some systems such as Minitel 
for which the United States has no existing equivalent yet.  Established usage 
in English makes it difficult to retain the distinction that Ellul himself always 
makes and emphasizes between la technique (technique) and la technologie, 
(technology).  It should be remembered, however, that in the title Ellul has the 
stricter sense in view, that is, technology as discourse, study, or system.  The 
same applies, of course, to his discussion of technological terrorism. 
 
 
Whether the powerful tocsin of Ellul can arrest the march of 
 
ix 
 
 
 
 
events may well be doubted, but in this regard Ellul has greater hopes, 
perhaps, from the New World than the Old.  With the same sober optimism 
we present his exposure of the bluff to the English-speaking public. 
 
Pasadena, Pentecost 1989 
GEOFFREY W.  BROMILEY 

 
 
FOREWORD 
 
 
On seeing the title of this book some people might exclaim: "What!  
Another book on technology!"  They would not be wrong.  In 1950 I wrote a 
comprehensive study of "The Technical Society.”  This was meant to be the 
title, but the publisher, a sociologist, would not let me use it, stating that he 
himself was writing a work with this title, although in fact he never finished it.  
Hence my own book became La technique ou l'enjeu du siécle (1954; 
translated into English as The Technological Society).  But at that time two 
important publishers had also rejected the manuscript on very similar 
grounds.  What kind of a subject was this?  they asked.  Whom did I expect to 
interest in a subject that was no subject?  Yet even at that time there were 
studies of the industrial mechanism (a model being the work of Georges 
Friedmann) and literary works on society that carried references to technique 
(e.g., G.  Duhamel's unjustly forgotten Les scènes de la vie future).  There 
were also works (e.g., Huxley's Brave New World) at a level much higher than 
the dreadful and stupid books and films, no less vulgar than misleading, that 
go by the name "science fiction.”  But there was nothing on technique itself, or 
on the society about to be assimilated by it.1  My book needed the influence of 
M.  Duverger with a fourth publisher to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xi 
 
                                                 
                                                
1 In this book we shall retain the distinction in French between la technique, which 
Ellul defines as "the totality of methods rationally arrived at and having absolute 
efficiency in every field of human activity," and la technologie, which is the study 
of technique.  As in The Technological Society (for the most part, except for the 
title!), we shall translate the former as "technique" and the latter as "technology.”  
For Ellul's elaboration of this distinction, see, e.g., The Technological Society, tr.  
John Wilkinson (New York: Knopf, 1964), pp.  xxv-xxvi; idem, Perspectives on Our 
Age, ed.  William H.  Vanderburg, tr.  Joachim Neugroschel (New York: Seabury, 
1981), pp.  32-33.-TRANS. 
 
 
xii 
FOREWORD 
 
appear finally in 1954.  Today the wheel has turned full circle and there is a 
multiplicity of writings on the subject.  Hardly a week passes without a work 
coming out on these questions in France. 
 
 
Among such works I find three categories.  First there are popular 
descriptive accounts of technique itself, usually of high quality, and dealing 
with specific subjects such as the computer or the laser and their application 
(e.g., the computer in schools or offices).  Then there are lighter works 
consisting of essays on modern society under the impact of techniques and 
their rapid development (the consumer society, the computer society, the 
wasteful society), the upshot being that as technique achieves domination the 
society becomes one of networks rather than groups; we shall return to this 
idea.  Finally, there are philosophical works.  Since Heidegger and Habermas 
technique has become a primary theme in philosophy.  Many philosophers 
are trying to understand the phenomenon (e.g., Cérézuelle, Janicaud, 
Neirynck, Hottois) or to see what its influence is on the world (e.g., 
Baudrillard, Morin, Brun).  I refer only to books in French!  Thus some think 
that this book of mine cannot hope to say anything new.  Nevertheless, I see 
some important things that have not yet been brought to light. 
 
 
I am not going to repeat what I said in my two earlier works.2  But I will 
obviously begin with the conclusions I then reached and the phenomena I 
discerned.  Only a few weeks ago an American sociologist told me how very 
relevant my first work on the subject still is.  With no false modesty I can say 
that social, economic, and technical developments have confirmed in its 
entirety what I said thirty years ago.  I have no need to correct or modify 
anything.  Unfortunately, these analyses have been largely ignored in France, 
due to labeling.  When my first book came out it was described as 
anti-technique, as hostile to progress, as reactionary.  There was thus no 
point in reading my other books; their contents were known in advance.  The 
Protestant world in particular has paid no attention to what I have written in 
this area.  The label adequately described the product.  It is true that many 
writers, without knowing their origin, have used analyses and conclusions of 
mine that have passed into common discourse (e.g., the neutrality of 
technique, or the ineluctable character of its development that escapes our 
grasp, or its universality).  But the label remains.  Although I was never 
against technique, and stated expressly that this would be absurd, and that I 
did not want a return to the Middle Ages, the label resulted from the rigor of 
my analysis, which gave to readers with a serene and superficial 
 
2 The Technological Society and The Technological System, tr.  Joachim 
Neugroschel (New York: Continuum, 1980). 

 
 
FOREWORD   
 xiii 
 
view of technique the impression of being in the presence of a strange, 
aggressive, and constrictive world.  Obviously, someone who wrote in this 
way had to be an enemy of technique.  They preferred the soothing language 
of advertising which argues that technique brings freedom. 
 
 
A recent example of the game of labeling, which leads to two false 
conclusions, may be found in a work by A.  Bressand and C.  Distler3 who say 
that those who are most opposed to technology are now reexamining it.  Thus 
Ellul now grants it the benefit of ambivalence.  (A first mistake here is that I 
already granted it ambivalence in 1950, and this had nothing whatever to do 
with the fact that it offers us very useful and satisfying products, which I have 
never denied.)  The first false conclusion is that of opposition to technique.  
That is just as absurd as opposition to an avalanche or to cancer.  It is 
childish to say that someone is against technique.  The second false 
conclusion concerns my work Changer de révolution, which the authors quote 
but totally misunderstand.  They say that I changed my view of technique 
because some new techniques serve the cause of decentralization and offer 
more free time.  But I never denied this.  The trouble is that they ignore half 
my argument.  Some techniques can have positive effects so long as there is 
at the same time a change in society: the coming to power of a revolutionary 
socialism of liberty, which has nothing whatever to do with modern socialism 
or communism but demands a return to the ideas of Proudhon and Bakunin 
and a serious consideration of those of Castoriadis.  Also demanded is a 
basic socioeconomic upheaval (e.g., in remuneration and distribution).  
Previously, there was no way to do this, but new techniques make it possible, 
though naturally they do not bring it about automatically.  In saying this I was 
not reexamining any of my previous analyses.  I was simply pointing out that 
change is possible if a politico-economic about-face goes hand in hand with 
the new techniques.  I was also pointing out that the time was short in which 
to do this, perhaps only months, at most only a few years.  Those years have 
now passed.  It is now too late to change the course of technique.  We have 
lost a decisive opportunity in human history. 
 
 
I have adduced the example of Bressand and Distler to show how slight 
and superficial is the way in which most authors read my books.  I am not 
referring, of course, to those who really read them.  My warning today is the 
same as in 1954, when I wanted to alert people to the future potential of 
technique and to the risks entailed by its growth so that they might be able to 
react and to master it, lest otherwise it escape their control.  I began with a 
warning, for one person warned is worth 
                                                 
3 Le Prochain Monde (Paris: Seuil, 1985). 
 
 
xiv  
FOREWORD 
 
two who are not.  But people did not read the warning, and the book found its 
way onto library shelves and among the quiet studies of slightly outdated 
intellectuals.  The only ones to take it seriously belonged to a society in which 
it was already too late to do anything--the USA.  There both intellectuals and 
the public at large seized on my book because it described exactly what they 
were already experimenting with and experiencing.  It helped them to 
understand what had taken place and how they had reached the point they 
had.  But the book had only retrospective interest.  In France people 
dismissed my expositions as the reveries of a solitary walker who prefers the 
country to the town.  No one had any idea that it might change the course of 
things.  I had indeed dreamed of another possible development.  I wanted to 
play a role that no one had assigned to me, that of a watchman.  But no one 
listened to me and the result was inevitable.  My main purpose today, then, is 
not quite the same.  I am now looking at the point which we have reached 
today. 
 
 
There is a story behind this book.  My first intention, stated at the end of 
The Technological System, was to write a book on all aspects of the impact of 
the computer on society, on technical malfunctioning, and on the way on 
which the computer might enable us to overcome some of this malfunctioning.  
I did work on the book from 1978, but I was too late.  The world of computers 
was evolving so fast that I was always two years behind.  I could never catch 
up.  I thus abandoned the two hundred pages that I had already written and 
abandoned the whole project of clarifying the computer jungle and its 
relations to our world.  I obviously never succeeded in mastering the material.  
It slipped through my fingers as soon as I thought I had grasped it. 
 
 
After lengthy detours I conceived of another book, which would 
correspond, in a picture at once broader and more superficial, to an attempt 
to understand the reception of technique in modern society.  The first of three 
parts would be: Challenges, Stakes, Wagers.  Technical progress provides 
the challenges, the stakes are on the table, and intellectuals and politicians 
make the wagers.  The second part would deal with the changes of society 
under the impact of technique.  The third would have as its theme: The 
Issues, The Probable, and The Possible.  I amassed for seven years an 
enormous amount of material that I had great trouble in assimilating and 
arranging, but I worked out a detailed plan and set to work.  The first part was 
almost completely written when a book by Chesneaux, De la modemité 
(1984), was published.  It was a terrible blow to me, for it corresponded 
almost exactly to my second part.  It was a good book, and I would have had 
to repeat it.  My own work would have been better documented and 

 
 
FOREWORD 
xv 
xvi 
FOREWARD 
 
would not have put things in quite the same way, but the essentials were 
already there.  I did not know quite what to do, and then, at the end of 1984, 
there came out the massive tome of the Encyclopédia Universalis entitled Les 
Enjeux, which contained a thousand pages and one hundred and twenty 
articles which dealt expressly with the stakes, the challenges to which they 
related, and implicitly the wagers.  In other words, it contained my first part, 
and with ten times better documentation than I could offer.  I thus had to ask 
myself whether it was worthwhile persevering in my investigation of 
technique.  Yet I still had the impression that I had something different to say. 
 
 
Three books drove me by way of reaction into a different field.  Thus far I 
had been trying to work out a theory of the technical society and system.  
Three books now came out which greatly advanced this theoretical 
interpretation from a philosophical angle: Dominique Janicaud, La Puissance 
du rationnel (1985), Gilbert Hottois, Le Signe et la Technique (1985), and 
Jacques Neirynck, Le Huitième Jour de la Création.  Introduction à 
l'entropologie (1986).  I have to say that instead of discouraging me these 
three works showed me that there is as never before a current of thought 
which can effectively grasp technique and its implications, and measure its 
impact and risks, without falling into pessimism or making concessions.  I was 
no longer alone; others were dealing with the issue.  Should I myself 
withdraw? No, after a certain time I began to have a vague sense of another 
possible approach.  Perhaps there might be new orientations in the world of 
technique, more diffuse and less certain than those that I had thus far 
analyzed.  I was drawn in pursuit of these shadows. 
 
 
I have entitled this book The Technological Bluff.  Most who see the title 
will react sternly.  Technique is an area in which bluff is not permitted.  Things 
are plain in technique -either one can or one cannot.  When it is said that 
people will walk on the moon, shortly afterward they do.  When it is said that 
an artificial heart can be inserted, it is done and it works.  Where is the bluff?  
But the problem is one of language.  American usage has implanted in our 
minds the idea that the word technology refers to actual processes.  This is 
the way the media use the term.  But in a strict sense technology is discourse 
on technique.  It involves the study of a technique, a philosophy or sociology 
of technique, instruction in a technique.  To talk of computer technologies or 
space technologies when the reference is to technical means of 
communication or to the building and use of rockets, orbital stations, etc., is 
strictly ridiculous.  I realize that my protest is useless in face of a usage 
established by collective ignorance, but I have to justify my title.  I am not 
referring to technical bluff.  I am not trying to show that 
 
 
 
techniques do not deliver what they Promise, that technicians are bluffers.  
That would make no sense.  I am talking about technological bluff, about the 
gigantic bluff in which discourse on techniques envelops us, making us 
believe anything and, far worse, changing our whole attitude to techniques: 
the bluff of Politicians, the bluff of the media, the bluff of technicians when 
they talk about techniques instead of working at them, the bluff of publicity, 
the bluff of economic models. 
 
 
Discovery of this bluff led me into strange areas.  The bluff consists 
essentially of rearranging everything in terms of technical progress, which 
with prodigious diversification offers us in every direction such varied 
possibilities that we can imagine nothing else.  Discourse on technique is not 
justification of techniques (which is not necessary) but a demonstration of the 
prodigious power, diversity, success, universal application, and impeccability 
of techniques.  And when I say bluff, it is because so many successes and 
exploits are ascribed to techniques (without regard for the cost or utility or 
risk), because technique is regarded in advance as the only solution to 
collective problems (unemployment, Third World misery, pollution, war) or 
individual problems (health, family life, even the meaning of life), and because 
at the same time it is seen as the only chance for progress and development 
in every society.4  There is bluff here because the effective possibilities are 
multiplied a hundredfold in such discussions and the negative aspects are 
radically concealed.  But the bluff is not without great effect.  Thus it 
transforms a technique of implicit and unavowed last resort into a technique 
of explicit and avowed last resort.  It also causes us to live in a world of 
diversion and illusion which goes far beyond that of ten years ago.  It finally 
sucks us into this world by banishing all our ancient reservations and fears. 
 
Pessac, October 8, 1986 
 
JACQUES ELLUL 
                                                 
4 A good example of this bluff may be found in the special number of Match, Oct.  
2, 1987, on "Technique de 2005." 

 
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: 
THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
1.  Multiple Progress 
 
 
There is general agreement that the last few years have brought an 
explosion of techniques, their perfecting in many fields, and the possibility of 
unheard-of progress: the atom, computer science, the laser, space 
technology, and genetic engineering1 ' I need not say much about these five 
areas.  Their general aspect is well known, though their technical reality is 
very mysterious and indeed stupefying, surpassing anything that might have 
been imagined ten years ago.  How far we have come from the elementary 
computers and rockets of 1950!  There has been a ferment of invention in 
every field providing increasingly powerful and versatile types of equipment.  
This is wholly in accordance with the law that I formulated in 1950, namely, 
that techniques advance by a geometric progression.2  My mistake in 1977 
was to think that once a certain stage of efficiency and perfection was 
reached in a particular area, things would tend to stabilize.  I believed that the 
power and speed of computers at that time would be sufficient, that there 
would be no need for further advance.  I was wrong.  Scientists have 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
                                                 
                                                
1 I use the term genetic engineering in a general sense to cover such things as in 
vitro fertilization, cloning, and surrogate motherhood.  Naturally, I am not dealing 
with the moral questions entailed; cf.  P.  Kourilsky, "Le génie génétique," La 
Recherche (April 1980).  We should take note of the warning of J.  M.  Testart 
(Sept.  1980) that genetic engineering carries with it great risks, and we need to 
fix limits for it and declare a moratorium. 
2 See Technological Society, e.g., pp.  89, 91.  [Note that when Ellul mentions 
1950 he is referring to when he first wrote Technological Society; likewise, 1977 
refers to Technological System.  -TRANS 
 
 
2  
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
found that to make the enormous calculations needed for new research they 
have to have computers a thousand times more powerful.  The same applies 
in all five fields of innovation listed above. 
 
 
A few years ago it seemed as if one of these covered the whole 
technical realm and could transform both society and the technical world: the 
computer had succeeded the atom in preeminence.3  The computer seemed 
to demand a new study of its technique.  But the computer is now rivaled in 
importance by the laser, outer space, and genetic engineering, which can 
also change our world.  We cannot speak solely of a "computer shock.”  This 
is only one part of a whole raft of changes.  We have also to meet the 
challenge of space, and we feel our impotence in face of such an explosion at 
so many different points.  As I said earlier, I could not expound properly even 
the fantastic change brought about by advances in computer science.  But 
how can an analyst grasp the transformation effected by every branch of 
these techniques?  Critics might object to my choice of five basic fields, citing 
other examples of technical progress: cardiac surgery, agronomic research, 
discoveries in chemistry, developments in television, etc.  The great 
difference is that the innovations in these areas, unlike the multidirectional 
innovations in the five noted, are measurable, apply only to specific domains, 
and cannot be put to more varied use.  In contrast, the five mentioned above 
involve incalculable innovations in innumerable and unlimited domains.  True, 
the five differ among themselves.  Three-computer science, space, and 
genetic engineering-are complex fields of incorporated techniques, while the 
laser is a single technical tool.  Yet all are versatile in an apparently unlimited 
way. 
 
 
Some years ago there was an exuberant discovery of the many uses of 
the computer, and the same is true today of the laser.  It seems that there 
night now be a change in the way in which we describe the evolution of 
society.  In classical times, economic and industrial development might be 
described in terms of the evolution of energy.4  Animal energy gave way to 
coal and coal to oil.  When energy was then derived 
 
3 There is an obvious hesitation to characterize modern society.  One discovers in 
extremely learned studies some remarkably idiotic statements.  Thus the 
transition from industrial society to our own has been described in terms of "a 
logic of development from an industrial society based on mass production to a 
post-industrial society based on science and technology" (see "Technopolis," a 
special number of Autrement [1985], p.  87).  This is absurd.  Industrial society 
was also based on science and techniques, and postindustrial society has mass 
production as its objective. 
4 On energy problems see the special number of Science, Technology and 
Society 5/1 (1985), which contains good studies of the evolution of various forms 

 
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
3 
 
from nuclear fission (as I predicted in 1950, though I was then treated as 
incompetent in view of the immense problems that had to be solved), we were 
still within the normal scheme.  One source of energy was succeeding 
another and making possible a new advance in production and transportation.  
But unfortunately this atomic age was very brief, for the technical novelty 
which came to domination in the 1960s had nothing to do with energy; it was 
the computer.  Hence the established criterion for measuring the stages of 
industrial and technical progress, that is, energy, now proved to be 
inadequate.  A new model of society was emerging.  The computerized 
society, the society of networks, was not a prolongation of previous societies.  
It became less and less appropriate to talk of the post-industrial society. 
 
 
Up to 1977 I could still think that the central feature of this society was 
the computer and that we should analyze the computer society in the same 
way as I had analyzed the technical society.  The change was in effect 
startling, especially with the development of the minicomputer and the 
microcomputer.  In previous models the dream had been of bigger, of more, 
and more profitable, material goods.  But now in the computer field the 
advance was to the smallest.  Efficiency was not tied to size but to reduction 
of size.  The aim, too, was not to produce material goods but to produce, 
treat, transmit, interpret, and store information.  Even in a world dominated by 
the automobile, research was now oriented to an ideally simple machine 
which could unceasingly create more and more complex systems.  Saving 
energy now replaced the growing consumption of energy.  The new world of 
computers, office automation, telematics, robots, etc., is a very efficient world 
which is very productive but which consumes very little energy. 
 
 
It is not enough to think rather calmly that we are simply at a new stage 
of substitutes for people.  For a long period human physical force was being 
replaced progressively by machines and enhanced energy.  People now had 
not simply to provide energy; they had to master machines.  They had to 
think, to devise better machines.  But with the computer, with the transition 
from the production of material goods to the production of information, a new 
stage of human activity has come.  Does this mean that human beings have 
finally been made redundant?  Let us leave this question, which some take 
very seriously but others trace to the fears of ignorant people who are afraid 
of anything new.  We will take it up later.  The major fact that we need to note 
in the complete turnabout involved in this transition is that in the industrial age 
of energy, whether coal or oil, more workers were constantly needed.  This 
was part of the trend toward the increasingly bigger. 
                                                                                                               
                                                
of energy, and especially the future of electricity. 
 
 
4  
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
 
We recall that the theory of Marx rests on this fact.  The working class 
will grow ineluctably and thus become the most numerous and tile most 
powerful class, though also the dominated class.  That domination cannot last 
indefinitely.  In these circumstances the dominated class will necessarily 
become the dominant class.  But in the age of automation and 
computerization the trend is reversed--there is less need of manual work.  In 
spite of attempted proofs to the contrary, the new machines are laborsaving.  
Investment in capital increases, and investment in labor decreases.  The 
number of workers declines.  In compensation another social category arises 
which corresponds to the multiplication of services.  This has been the major 
issue with accelerated economic growth.  It has become evident that we can 
support a multiplication of services in every field: care, administration, 
management, instruction, health, social work.  Thousands of jobs are created 
each year in sectors that are of social usefulness but of no economic value.  
With mass production, increasing salaries, and mass consumption, along with 
additional wealth on a national scale, it has been possible to develop these 
services, including those whose sole purpose is to amuse children. 
 
 
Computers have played a part in this development.  They have invaded 
every field, especially that of services.  With computerization, office 
automation, and telematics, fewer people are needed in offices.  The worst 
reductions have been in banks and insurance.  What people once did, 
machines now do, and with more inevitability than at first.  Where the crisis 
does not mean overproduction, and labor costs are highest, computers have 
replaced service people, and once they are bought they cost little to run.  
What automation did in the industrial world, computers are doing in the 
service world. 
 
 
I have read the intensive discussions, with statistics, on whether 
computers cause unemployment.  The statistics do not convince me, but once 
we get into the arguments there can be no doubt that computers bear a great 
deal of responsibility for unemployment.5  Only a few jobs are needed for their 
building and maintenance.  This fact raises I lie question as to the validity of 
the French policy of teaching all children the use of computers so as to 
prepare them for the modern world.  It is plain that few of them will find 
employment in the field.  We shall return to this point in studying the bluff of 
the computer.  Tile multiplication of computers and their application has made 
our society the computer 
 
5 See R.  Rothwell and W.  Zegveld, Technical Change and Employment (New 
York: St.  Martin, 1979); P.  Boisard, "Les 35 fretless et l'emploi," La Recherche 
128 (Dec.  1981). 

 
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
5 
 
society.  The atom has been dethroned as the essential criterion of our times.  
This computer society is characterized by two factors that modify the very 
idea of progress.  Progress is henceforth measured by the savings of energy 
and of labor in producing the same amount of goods.  One must never lose 
sight of these criteria when one hears a discourse on productivity.  Earlier, 
productivity was linked to an increase in labor, but this is no longer true.  An 
enterprise is now more productive and competitive the less it employs human 
labor.6  At all events, the new society is no longer dominated by the problem 
of energy but by that of communication and data processing.  This has 
become so fascinating and allows us to imagine so many applications and to 
open up so many new fields that people have become bold enough to think 
that they are real creators.  The computer seems able to do everything from 
poetic and pictorial creation to the management of pollution and even the 
making of political and military decisions.  I could almost accept it when I 
consider (as above) that the microchip might work in favor of freedom.  But 
then there arises the question of knowing (cf.  my Technological System) 
whether, thanks to computer science, one can set up a true feedback in the 
technical system, that is, whether this system, which evolves and expands 
without any control, might develop a mechanism of feedback that would 
control the orientation and rapidity of the functioning and adaptation of the 
system.  There can certainly be no doubt that our society is characterized 
above all by the computer, and that atomic energy, important though it is, is 
not what gives meaning to our world. 
 
 
But a rival for the computer replaced it more swiftly than it did the atom: 
outer space.  Space today involves a number of such new and decisive 
techniques and opens up so many possibilities and fields to human 
enterprises that one might say quite definitively that our world is just as much 
characterized by the opening up and conquest of space as by the computer.  
What might give the opposite impression is that  
                                                 
6 For this reason two types of argument are ridiculous: first, that to solve 
unemployment we must make business more competitive and increase 
production; and second, that the crisis of 1979 was like that of 1929.  The 
accelerated development of new industry solved the 1929 crisis, along with the 
use of new techniques; the automobile industry gave the economy a new boost.  
Therefore, according to this incredibly simplistic argument, the development of a 
new technical apparatus, i.e., the computer, will revive the economy today.  The 
computer industry will enable us to overcome the crisis.  It matters little what the 
product is, or what its features are! Unfortunately, the features in the world of 
computers are very different from the new techniques in metallurgy in 1930.  A 
new technical development alone will not give a boost to the economy.  The two 
types of techniques have little in common and we cannot expect from them the 
same results. 
 
 
6  
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
the microchip has invaded daily life in the form of desktop computers and 
Minitel, whereas space is still only a spectacle on television.  In political, 
military, and economic realities, however, and also in the matter of science 
and information, space is supreme.  Our society, then, is just as validly 
characterized by this opening up of boundless worlds. 
 
 
Yet a new technique now threatens the two dominant ones, namely, the 
laser.  Ten years ago we hardly knew what this was; it was still at the stage of 
laboratory experiment.  Now it is everywhere: in surgery, heavy industry, 
music recording, astronomy, military preparations, etc.  We have here an 
instrument of tremendous efficiency, unimaginable flexibility, and a power and 
precision never previously attained.  We cannot as yet conceive of all its 
immense possibilities.  Should we not describe the world that is now 
burgeoning as that of the laser?  In other words, in twenty-five years there 
has been a total transformation of the database, the organization, and the 
activity of our society.  It is in fact characterized by four dominant factors that 
are coherent with one another: computer science, genetic engineering, space, 
and the laser.  These are dominant as regards investment, expected returns, 
the number of specialists and research workers involved, prestige, etc.  And 
all this seems to be completely new.  Yet the more I study this society and its 
technical system and all the new data, the more I see that it is still the same 
technical system.  It is richer and more complex.  It is constituted differently.  
Yet it is self-coherent.  That is, all these great innovations fit in just as well 
with the general characteristics that I have demonstrated for the technical 
system as those of technical progress and the mode of technical progression.  
From the standpoint of basic analysis nothing has changed.  If you have a 
motor, you want to go fast, but whether you do 80 or 120 makes no real 
difference.  Even if you press your engine to do 180 it makes no real 
difference.  Things are exactly the same here.  The computerized society, the 
space society, the laser society-in the last resort they are all just technical or 
technicized societies.  The magnificent innovations change neither the 
character nor the basis of the problem.  It is not they that are the great 
innovation of our age.  The technical changes enhance the impact, power, 
and domination of technique in relation to all else, but no more.  The same 
applies to the means supplied by research. 
 
 
Nevertheless, this does not mean that nothing fundamental has 
happened.  It has happened, but in a different way from that imagined.  
Obsessed by the computer, people want to see something there that evades 
prior qualification.  What they see is true at the superficial level of society's 
modes of operation.  It is true when we think of the change from the 
domination of industrial production to that of information, 

 
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
7 
 
though obviously the latter is no substitute for the former, as in the absurd 
thesis of J.-J.  Servan-Schreiber in his ridiculous book The World Challenge.  
As great changes in energy do not affect the industrial system, the computer 
does not change the technical system; it simply confirms it, develops it, and 
makes it more complex.  At the surface level of what is seen there may be 
great changes (progress?) in the organization of the system, but these 
remarkable gadgets change nothing.  In spite of that, we have in fact been 
witnessing a great innovation from the early 1980s, but of a very different 
kind. 
 
2.  Social Discourse 
 
 
Before studying this innovation, however, I want to show what social 
discourse relates to it.  Our new situation is denoted by the trilogy of 
challenges, stakes, and wagers.  Whether in articles, in publicity, on the radio, 
on television, in political discourse, or in some serious works, everyone is 
speaking in these terms.  Computer science, space, and genetic engineering 
all involve challenges, stakes, and wagers.  There is the Japanese challenge 
and the European stake; the Third World stake (for the two great powers), 
wager (for its development), and challenge (its possibility of growth); and the 
stake of independence from the USA.  Peace is a stake, but peaceful 
coexistence is a wager.  Growth and plenty are both stakes and wagers.  The 
space shuttle is a wager, immigration is a challenge, unemployment is a 
challenge, politics is a wager.  I might give many other examples, but all these 
are taken from the information that is fed to us and all come through the same 
grid.  But I do not think the categories are imposed by chance.  They 
unconsciously express the collective interpretation of our situation.  But what 
do the three words mean? 
 
 
 
The term wager suggests an awareness of risks and a readiness to be 
bold.  in a situation that seems to be fixed and closed, we wager on 
something uncertain and whose outcome is unpredictable.  We take risks 
when we wager.  "The game of truth involves risks, the game of democracy 
involves risks, the game of revolution involves risks, and to play all these 
games together involves many risks" (Morin).  By talking of wagers we want 
to show that we are taking risks, that we are authentic and democratic.  We 
also want to show that we are free.  To make a wager (even though it be 
fictitious) is to be free. 
 
 
Again, when we talk of a challenge we want to show that we have the 
courage to take up the challenge thrown down by a disturbed, evolving world 
of nightmares and apparent impossibilities.  We can face 
 
 
8  
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
the worst of circumstances.  Society may be full of rivalry and conflict, but we 
can handle the conflict and triumph.  We will not be defeated.  It is riot a 
matter of power but of judicious judgment and bold decision.  “All computing, 
transmitting, and reproducing of information involves the risk of error.  The 
living organization of each of these operations is subject to the risk of error, 
which is the risk of degradation, disorganization, and finally death.  Thus the 
essential and basic need of every living organization is to combat error."7  We 
might apply this idea exactly to the social body.  It shows us that if we fail to 
meet the challenge of circumstances we are rejecting the possibility of error. 
 
 
Finally, the word stake is ambiguous.  It means first that everything is to 
some extent a game.  It does riot have ultimate seriousness.  "Monopoly" was 
a game in the image of reality, but reality has now become a game in the 
image of "Monopoly" (or a naval battle).  When we think of the contingent 
character of new computer games we realize that the games that we play do 
not depend on our skill or knowledge or virtue, but neither are they a matter of 
pure chance.  These games are not roulette. 
 
 
No matter how serious our situation may be, it is only a game.  But the 
problem is to know definitively what we are putting in play.  Our outlay 
depends on the seriousness or gravity of the game.  The important thing is to 
know the dimension of what we are risking in this game that we do not 
control.  It may involve our whole future, and if the stake is well chosen we 
can win all or lose all.  It is then a game of all or nothing, and the main thing is 
to see clearly not the rules of the game but what we decide to risk.  Ladrière 
can even talk of the wagers of rationality. 
 
 
With the three terms, which meet us on every hand with great insistence, 
we are thus trying to signify our freedom, audacity, and clear-sightedness.  
This sums it all up.  Nothing in our society might not be described in terms of 
challenge, stake, and wager.  Nothing is any longer a mere private adventure; 
there is no longer any private sphere--we are all in this game.  Nothing is 
indifferent, nothing is outside.  The game is so big and so universal that it is 
communal.  There are no individual players; we all play it together.  In 
circumstances great and small, economic and political, we have to win a real 
battle in the form of a game the stakes of which we cannot appraise exactly.  
We set the stakes but we are not sure exactly what they are. 
 
 
Having tried to show what the three terms conceal, I must say in 
conclusion that they finally relate to technical questions.  This is 
                                                 
7 Edgar Morin, Pour sortir du XXe siècle (Nathan, 1981). 

 
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
9 
 
certainly not obvious.  The Third World, Europe, militarization, etc., are all 
political matters.  Inflation, exchange rates, standards of living, and growth 
are all economic matters.  Yet technique has a part in all of them.  It is like a 
key, like a substance underlying all problems and situations.  It is ultimately 
the decisive factor.  The new technique is the real challenge.  We have only 
to think of the number of books on the subject: the computer challenge, the 
genetic challenge, the technological challenge, etc.  (cf.  Salomon).  We see 
at once that both individually and socially we are not prepared quietly to 
accept the computer, for example, into our way of life.  It is a challenge 
because it upsets not only our rhythm of management but also our way of 
thinking.  It overturns our bureaucratic and cerebral approaches.  On every 
point it puts thousands of bits of information at our disposal which overwhelm 
us and accustom us to count in millions and billions as if they were single 
digits.  It changes the dimension and speed of life.  Whether we like it or not, 
it sets up networks in society that have nothing whatever to do with ancient 
networks or traditional structures.  We cannot continue as before.  Simply 
because the computer is there, we cannot ignore it. 
 
 
When the railroad and the automobile came on the scene, those who 
wanted could still travel by horseback.  But now there is no choice.  The 
computer as such implies networks.  A businessman cannot acquire a 
computer just because he likes progress.  The computer brings a whole 
system with it.  The difference is that the technical system has now become 
strongly integrated.  Offices, means of distribution, personnel, and production 
have all to be adapted to it.  If they are not, they run the risk not merely of 
losing the advantages brought by a fascinating and useful gadget but also of 
causing unimaginable disorder by introducing computers into an organization 
or society but not making possible their proper use.  I might say the same of 
nuclear energy or genetic engineering.  To bring the latter into play is to 
challenge not merely social organization but our philosophical concepts, our 
traditional humanism, our morality. 
 
 
Everything, then, is challenged.  Can we adapt physically, socially, and 
intellectually to the computer?  Can we adapt morally to genetic engineering?  
These are not rhetorical questions or academic hypotheses.  We might see 
clearly enough how to train children for the computer age, but the other 
questions are left in the void and are subject to mere reactions.  Yet here is 
the point of real relevance.  Let there be no illusion: All the challenges that are 
called such in social discourse are directly or indirectly the result of technique.  
The same applies to the stakes.  What are these?  Among other works there 
is, as we have noted already, a whole volume of the Encyclopédia Universalis 
which 
 
 
10  PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
devotes a thousand pages to the stakes in our society.  Obviously, these are 
of all kinds and they give the impression (which is accurate from one 
standpoint) that we are at a decisive turning point in human history.  We need 
to know what is going to happen in the sphere of communication, or what the 
simple fact of prolonging human life and the increase in the number of older 
people will mean for society, or what is the relation between human 
intelligence and artificial intelligence, or what will become of the arts with all 
the new processes (e.g., in music), or whether ideologies (religious or 
political) will disappear when they come into contact with technical reality.  
We can no longer say that technique is a simple instrument in the service of 
human thought.  But the stake is also knowledge itself.  Can we continue 
being able to know as humanity has known for centuries past? 
 
 
The stake is also the social and natural environment.  Ecologists are 
obviously behind the times; they cannot meet the challenges.  They rightly 
stress the natural stake, but how about the technical challenge?  The stake is 
the social link itself.  Processes of change are modified.  The media have now 
confused what used to be the clearly separate domains of social and private 
life.  The terrible growth of violence and terrorism is not just a political matter 
but primarily a technical matter, as I have shown in various articles.  The 
stake is information, and disinformation through excess of information.  It is 
the inability of political and administrative structures, of politicians and political 
doctrines, to take into account the reality of the technical mutation.  Will there 
ever be any politics again but television politics?  This is a more profound 
matter than simply having to make constant decisions about problems that 
are infinitely beyond us, or being in the presence of things that are impossible 
to decide.  In relation to techniques, where is the frontier today between what 
can be decided and what cannot?  An unheard-of stake.  Finally, of course, 
there are the more banal stakes of the relation between North and South, of 
the paradoxical and apparently inextricable situation of a world which has 
become one, both materially through the means of communication and 
economically through complementary economies (because one must 
henceforth speak of a world economy, not an international economy), but 
which is still divided into over- and underdeveloped countries, or over- and 
underequipped countries. 
 
 
This is not a matter of justice or of sentiment.  It is a matter of technique.  
It is urgent, for if we do not win the stakes we will die.  The stakes, which are 
multiple in the economic world, may finally be reduced to two that are 
economically dominant: redressing demographic imbalance and reorganizing 
the world monetary system.  We 

 
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
11 
 
certainly cannot continue indefinitely to live with aggravated monetary 
imbalance, especially now that the sums involved are unimaginably high.  But 
finally at issue in each of these stakes is what technique to apply here and 
now to win this game.  In society as it now is our only recourse is to find the 
techniques that will enable us to evaluate the stakes and win.  This is not 
always perceived if we look at the wagers that are made.  When we find this 
term in discussions, what is meant by it?  The wager is that we will be able to 
control technique.  But it takes different forms.  Some wager that it can be 
done by a planned policy.  Others wager on democracy, that is, that they can 
direct technique by democratizing society.  We see this in the ideal of 
controlling energy.  Still others wager that law can master technique: global 
law in the form of new international institutions, international treaties, codes of 
conduct, rules of responsibility.  The globalizing of law will correspond to the 
globalizing of technique that produces the globalizing of the economy.  In the 
last resort the wager is that technique will issue in the decentralizing and self-
organizing of society. 
 
 
The idea here differs from that mentioned earlier (i.e., the conjunction of 
microtechniques and a socialism of freedom).  Here it is technique itself that 
leads to a self-organized society.  The two wagers are obviously antithetical.  
In the one case the bet is that technique will be brought under control by 
politics.  In the other the bet is that technique will produce a normalized 
society. 
 
 
It is thus wagered that technical growth is the only means to overcome 
the present crisis and that we must use new techniques to deal with the 
economic crisis.  It is also wagered that we will finally produce a technical 
culture.  This is the decisive wager.  In face of the crisis in modern culture, the 
apparent conflict between culture (in the traditional sense) and technique, and 
the fact (noted by only a few authors)8 that in all societies up to the 
eighteenth-century West, techniques were integrated into a global culture, it is 
culture that is now dominated or marginalized by technique, so that thoughtful 
people believe that we must now create a new model of culture that will fully 
integrate technique and again subordinate it as a simple tool. 
 
 
The stake of a technical culture is a major one and it is wagered (e.g., in 
education) that this culture is possible.  Bets are placed on the computer.  
Thanks to it we can supposedly solve all our problems.  It is also wagered 
that there can be a new and adequately balanced world economy on the triple 
basis of research, development (or growth), and modernization.  It is thought 
that in coming years the contradiction thus 
                                                 
8 I studied the decisive switch in this regard in Technological Society. 
 
 
12 
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
far perceived between growth and development can be overcome.  
Qualitative growth can be achieved; Poperen has proposed a "pact for new 
growth.”  It is wagered that technique will overcome the innumerable 
impasses of the Third World.  Thanks to new techniques the Third World will 
finally "take off" (i.e., take the good path of growth, which is that followed by 
our society!).  it is wagered, too, that technology will make it possible to 
forecast successive stages of evolution, as well as the perverse effects of 
techniques and the objectives of assured growth.  Finally, we are told that to 
the degree that people are not at a technical level we must invent or create a 
new people who can use techniques correctly so as to achieve the best result 
that will not slow progress or have adverse effects.  A bet is placed on the 
possibility of these new people. 
 
 
These wagers all merit full discussion.  I have simply listed them here as 
the wagers that are commonly made today by those who discuss technique.  
It is noted that with technical proliferation technique is itself the challenge to 
all humanity, to our society, and to our economy.  It challenges all (to live or 
die).  Technique is also the stake.  We must find the most efficient technique.  
Every form of technique, being the key to all else, is the stake in political, 
economic, and scientific battles.  It is finally the wager as well, for thanks to it 
one can win the bets that are placed on the future of humanity and society.  
Everything now depends on technique.  We live incontestably in a society that 
is totally made by it and for it. 
 
 
In the many works and discussions that center on this trilogy, I am 
somewhat perplexed by the links that are most often made between the 
wagers put on the stakes and the evaluating of the stakes in terms of the 
challenges.  For coherence each ought to correspond to the others.  But this 
is the exception!  Thus the challenge is to integrate new techniques smoothly 
into the social order.  But the stake is economic, that is, balancing the 
resources and technical forces between North and South.  What, then, is the 
wager?  That law will solve all these problems.  I might take each word in turn 
and show that a feature of technical, scientific, and even highbrow intellectual 
discussion is that the terms do not adequately correspond to one another, so 
that the discussion is finally incoherent in spite of an appearance of rigor. 
 
 
The progress made in these areas is the growing (if tardy) awareness 
that everything depends on technique (and not economics), but the 
responses are still halting and so is reflection or discussion on the part of 
those who bear responsibility in this venture.  Throughout this book we shall 
see, indeed, that the reality is far larger than anything we can imagine or think 
of mastering.  Extraordinary innovations in 

 
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
13 
 
many fields have forced all those responsible to take note, but this is not 
enough now, We need to be convinced that what we see clearly or learn 
through the media is nothing compared to the small changes that are taking 
place, each important in its own sphere but not spectacular enough to engage 
the public's attention. 
 
 
We must constantly remember that when we learn with astonishment 
that a new space vehicle is used or a new surgical operation performed, 
these are merely the final results of hundreds of small, patiently accumulated 
improvements.  The multiplying of innovations in many different areas makes 
it possible for us to speak of a third industrial revolution (though this is not a 
happy term, since the whole is more than industrial).  There is such diversity, 
such effervescence, that it is hard to describe our society.  Is it the media 
society, developing from the outset data processing in the broader sense?  Is 
it the space society?  Is it the society of nuclear power?  Or, to revert to older 
categories, is it the consumer society (Scardigli), or the education society 
(Beillerot)?  In a more comprehensive fashion, let us for the moment speak of 
the society of progress. 
 
 
The idea of progress seems self-evident, both as assured direction and 
as effective progression.  Economic growth governs economic development, 
which in turn governs social and individual development.  Quantitative 
increase in all areas entails of itself qualitative amelioration.  This is obvious.  
Yet at the same time one sees that this technical proliferation involves a kind 
of neo-mechanism with a panoply of (technical!) sciences of organization, of 
information, of communication, of complexity, and of the social in general 
viewed in mechanical terms.  For in every way the sciences (as we shall see) 
have become social.  "There seems to be an irresistible attraction of scientists 
to what is social (biologists, physicists, etc.).  Clearly, they are no longer 
content to elaborate concepts and theories in their own fields; they also try to 
generalize in the social domain (Varela) or to think in a social perspective 
(Prigogine)."9 
 
 
But in many new sciences and technologies, whose four main areas I 
have cited, we have to note the development of a series of second-degree 
techniques, that is, of techniques supporting technique.  For example, studies 
of the conditions of change in business, of the transfer of technologies, of 
technological gaps, of the research and development trend, of technology 
assessment; studies of impact, studies of the psychological effects of 
technical applications on personnel. 
                                                 
                                                
9 See J.-P Dupuy in L'Auto-organisation, Colloque de Cerisy (Paris: Seuil 1983).   
 
 
14   
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
 
An enormous field of research is thus constituted in relation to the 
effects of techniques, especially in the four main spheres of innovation.  We 
thus have a sense of tremendous change in the world.  This is true.  But it is 
difficult to assess this change.  It is not enough to list the technical 
innovations, for the change is at a different level from the direct level of the 
innovation itself.  It is not enough to cite statistics.  These have their value, 
but we have stated already that the change is qualitative as well as 
quantitative.  We have too weak a view of it if we cite only the numbers and 
fail to bear in mind the uncertain character of statistics in every field.  To 
measure the change, should we then proceed subjectively, referring to 
memories, to the experience of older people who have lived through three 
technical revolutions?  This is useful, but it is too fragmentary and haphazard.  
The measure of change is in every way too vague.  It is too limited on the one 
hand, too sensitive on the other.  It is not scientific or comprehensive.10 
 
 
In fact, we cannot measure change and progress.  They are 
unmeasurable in the sense that they cannot be compared with anything else.  
They are phenomena that we can neither contest nor grasp.  There is nothing 
analogous to them.  I said above that obviously everything changes, and yet 
fundamentally nothing has changed.  What counts is the level on which we 
speak.  I have used elsewhere the model of the ocean.  A furious storm stirs 
up its surface, great waves arise and crush everything.  But a hundred yards 
down the water is calm, the storm has no effect.  Ocean currents remain the 
same in spite of the storm.  There has been tremendous technical change, 
but no global technical change, no change in the technical system.  No 
particular technique challenges or opposes the global movement of 
technique.  Even the most dazzling innovations are within the system.  There 
is a vast difference between high-speed trains and local trains, but the 
railroad system-the rails, the network, and the signaling-is the same for both.  
There is no change in organization, in timetable, in the material and 
organizational infrastructure. 
 
 
We can certainly speak of a "computer shock."11  Production methods 
have all been challenged.  The computer itself has become an object of 
production of major importance.  It takes the place of other sectors of the 
production of goods.  It modifies our manners and upsets our ways of 
thinking, reasoning, and understanding.  It gets rid of whole sectors of 
knowledge and creates a new environment and a mode of 
 
10 See Michel Henry, La Barbarie (Grasset, 1987). 
11 Contrary to Bachman and Ehrenberg, who deny that there is any future shock, 
Le Monde, March 4, 1985. 

 
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
15 
 
relating without precedent.  It is a shock in that all these upsets come so 
quickly that we have no time to get used to them.  As soon as one begins to 
get used to some computer equipment, it has already changed. 
 
 
We could also speak of a third industrial revolution, so long as we retain 
the word industrial.  New goods are produced which in the marketplace seem 
to be competing with those produced for the last hundred years and 
surpassing them in importance.  After the textile revolution and the 
metallurgical revolution has come the information revolution, that is, the 
production of goods which themselves produce and manage information.  
These are radically new products.  We might add that this revolution tends to 
save energy.  But it is better to speak of a third economic revolution; it is not 
strictly a technical revolution, since there is no change either at the level of or 
in the character of technique.  Everything new fits perfectly into the technical 
system.  It follows the normal line of technical development (since it is 
characterized by incessant growth) and takes on the same features.  There 
may be technical progress and new fields of application, but these do not 
throw doubt on my earlier analyses of the technical phenomenon.  Naturally, I 
will not repeat those here; I will presume that the main lines of what I found 
are well known.  I refer, for example, to the fact that technique is our 
environment, the new "nature" in which we live, the dominant factor,12 the 
system.  I need not elaborate on its features: autonomy, unity, universality, 
totality, automatic growth, automation, causal progression, the absence of 
finality.13  Nor need I discuss afresh the distinction between the technical 
system and the technical society.  I analyzed all these matters in 1950 and 
1977, and what I said is still valid and has not been contradicted by any 
modern technical development.14 
                                                 
                                                
12 Twenty years ago it was scandalous to say that technique was the dominant 
factor in society, hut now Le Monde can have a heading to this effect relative to a 
franco-japanese discussion held on July 1-4, 1985. 
13 On the universality of technique cf.  E.  Zaleski and H.  Wienert, Technology 
Transfer Between East and West (Washington, DC: OECD, 1980). 
14 See Technological Society, e.g., pp.  78ff.; Technological System, e.g., pp.  
34ff.; What I Believe, tr.  Geoffrey W.  Bromiley (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1988), 
e.g., pp.  133ff.  My views have aroused lively opposition, especially regarding the 
autonomy of technique; cf.  Dupuy, Castoriadis, Lussato, Kemp, Gorz, etc.  
Basically they are used, e.g., by Roqueplo, Penser la technique (Paris: Seuil, 
1983), though he does not say so. 
 
 
16 
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
3.  The Great Innovation 
 
 
We have tried to show that the innumerable innovations do not of 
themselves change the existing technical system.  Nevertheless, there has 
been a vast transformation during the last few years, but of a very different 
kind.  It was well known that people adapt badly to modern techniques.  In 
spite of progress in industrial mechanization due to ergonomics, there have 
been many maladaptations which have produced either disorders -formerly 
physiological and in modern times psychological -or disruptions in the order 
and efficiency of techniques.  The troubles vary greatly, but the classical 
problem is that people do not adapt to machines nor machines to people.  
The ideal goal is a marrying of people and machines.  It might be the people 
who were evaluated negatively: by their retrograde spirit they were hampering 
the harmonious development of the technical world.  Or the blame might be 
put on the machines: technical growth was crushing spontaneity, imagination, 
values, the irrational element-in other words, all that makes us human.15 
 
 
Since the opposition between people and machines as it found 
illustration in Charlie Chaplin's Modern Times, the contradiction has changed 
much, becoming situated in the nervous system (e.g., creating psychoses, 
loss of sleep), with new techniques being implemented.  But it is no less an 
antithesis, and remedies are being sought without, of course, trying to stop 
technical progress.  On another plane there is opposition between the 
technical society and the technical system.  I have shown that we must not 
confuse the two.  The system has its locus in society.  It controls almost all 
social orientations and structures, but it does not incorporate everything.  That 
is, society remains outside the system; its institutions are not rigorously 
technical; society carries within it a whole ensemble of ideologies, of survivals 
of the past, and of myths.  As Castoriadis has finely shown in his analysis, it is 
constituted by "social fantasy.”  Manners and customs are on the fringe of 
technique.  Society, with the human relations that Crozier sees underlying all 
else, is not just a simple expression of technique, even though technique is 
slowly invading domains that it does not yet control.  I have also shown that 
this situation reacts upon the technical system itself: it is developing in a world 
that does not favor it a priori.  It has to overcome resistance.  Most of the 
malfunctioning in the technical system results from the maladaptation of the 
social body to technique, which otherwise would function without breaks or 
adverse effects. 
 
15 M.  Henry, La Barbarie, stops at this point. 

 
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION  
 
17 
 
 
In both cases the problem is that of rootage in the past.  We go back to a 
remote or recent past from which (even unconsciously) we take most of our 
features.  Each society is the result of slow evolutions, of progressive 
creations.  It draws its substance from an accumulation of past experiences.  
It cannot cut its roots without falling apart.  Technique, however, is a thing of 
the present and looks to the future.  It gradually effaces its own past.  
Yesterday's machines are now valueless.  The automobiles of 1950 are 
laughable.  Genealogies are not needed to reach the present stage; only 
efficiency and power count.  Today's technique certainly has its origin in 
yesterday's, but yesterday's, if it is still useful, is incorporated into today's.  I 
think that it is this radical antithesis which brings conflict between people and 
society on the one side and the technical system on the other. 
 
 
In 1970 this conflict was the central question of our civilization.  One 
attempt to answer it was made by negating the problem; this attempt was 
presented in two forms.  There were irrational remnants that could be quickly 
set aside, or technique was not as disruptive as supposed and it could be 
restricted to enter quietly into the social framework and to fit there.  Another 
attempted answer, once conflict was accepted, was the postulating of utopia, 
either a social utopia or a human utopia.  In literature the former was depicted 
optimistically in Brave New World and pessimistically in 1984.  On the popular 
level we find the social utopia in films and science fiction.  In every case, by a 
leap past a delicate intermediary period, there is entry into a marvelously 
equipped and balanced society with machines of unimaginable power that 
solve all problems either positively or negatively.  Good or bad, utopia is a 
response to the actual situation, though no one can tell us how we arrive at it.  
I have found it in very serious writers who think that our present-day 
difficulties are negligible and who look to the future, which will solve every 
problem. 
 
 
The human utopia has also been fashionable.  It envisions the 
psychological changes that are necessary for entry into the next century.  But 
since these are uncertain, it also envisions interventions like the implanting of 
tiny electrodes in the human brain, an operation which is without risk and 
which can eliminate outdated reactions and emotional adaptations and 
achieve the behavior that is in full keeping with the environment. 
 
 
This, then, was the core of all the problems of our Western world, 
whether political, economic, sociological, or psychological.  The sights were 
obviously set on the main difficulties, which it seemed impossible to 
overcome. 
 
 
But it is precisely at this point that, some years ago, what I call 
 
 
18   
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
the great innovation occurred.  This is infinitely more important than all the 
technological discoveries mentioned above.  The transformation was as 
follows: People stopped looking for direct means to resolve conflicts.  They 
have stopped trying to adapt politics or economics to technique by force.  At 
the same time, they have stopped trying to produce mutants, that is, people 
perfectly consistent (flawless) with a technical universe.  They have stopped 
trying to clash head on with obstacles and refusals.  They have stopped trying 
to rectify technical malfunctioning by direct action.  There has been a 
transformation the results of which we are not yet able to measure but which I 
would call an outflanking or encirclement.  Obviously, no one has calculated 
such a strategy, no one has deliberately brought about what has happened or 
is now happening.  To all appearances nothing has changed.  Techniques 
continue to forge ahead.  We profit by them.  We have the same ideological 
reactions to them as from the beginning of the technical era. 
 
 
No one has taken charge of the system to bring about a corresponding 
social and human order.  Things are done, "by force of circumstances," 
because the proliferation of techniques, mediated by the media, by 
communications, by the universalization of images, by changed human 
discourse, has outflanked prior obstacles and integrated them progressively 
into the process.  It has encircled points of resistance, which then tend to 
dissolve.  It has done all this without any hostile reaction or refusal, partly 
because what is proposed infinitely transcends all capacity for opposition 
(often because no one comprehends what is at issue), and partly because it 
has an obvious cogency that is not found on the part of what might oppose it.  
For what would it be opposing?  This is no longer clear, for insinuation or 
encirclement does not involve any program of necessary adaptation to new 
techniques.  Everything takes place as in a show, offered freely to a happy 
crowd that has no problems. 
 
 
This encirclement by what is obvious takes place in many ways and 
through many voices, but it is possible only through the prodigious 
development of modern techniques, which, while being so powerful, give us 
at the same time the sense that they are more close, more familiar, more 
individualizing, more personal.  Here is the true technical innovation, for it is 
by this basic support of the whole social body and of each individual that the 
system can develop without encumbrance.  This is incomparably more 
important than the laser, in vitro fertilization, or intergalactic probes. 
 
 
There is no longer any need for myths or great projects.  The 
transformation takes place in the everyday world.  Its very ordinariness 
ensures its success.  To present an image of a changed humanity is to 

 
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
19 
 
provoke an inevitable reaction.  Ordinariness gives reassurance.  Tile genius 
of technique (not of technicians) is to produce the most reassuring and 
innocent ordinariness.  This is what we are studying under the title of the 
technological bluff.  We must try to make the situation clear.  It is not that we 
or society are better adapted to technical growth, but only that we are, let's 
say, neutralized in a way that there can no longer be any open or secret 
conflict. 
 
 
This encirclement or outflanking of people and society rests on profound 
bases (e.g., a change in rationality) and the suppression of moral judgment, 
with the creation of a new ideology of science.  But it is effected by the 
enticement of the individual into permanent sociotechnical discourse.  This 
enticement is brought about by deliberate action on the part of those who 
want absolutely to make the change and by a spontaneous movement on the 
part of others.  The first case has again two possibilities.  There is the work of 
those who as theorists of technique or as superior technicians think that our 
supreme good is to adapt as well as we can to this ideal of perfection.  There 
is also the intervention of politicians and economists who think that given the 
crisis, unemployment, etc., extreme technical development is the only 
solution, so that willingly or unwillingly we must adapt to it.  The second case, 
that of spontaneous movement, has two paths as well.  The first is that of 
those who want to succeed in society and who know that henceforth only 
those who are technically adept can do so.  The second, to which we must 
devote more attention, is that of the group of what I -would call the fascinated, 
that is, those who are so fascinated by the kaleidoscope of techniques 
invading their universe that they do not know and cannot want anything other 
than to adapt fully to them. 
 
 
These are the different paths that we shall try to explore, pointing out the 
great distance between technical reality and our present situation on the one 
hand and the seductive discourse of techniques, which constitutes the 
technological bluff, on the other.  These different paths, these different actions 
and reactions, will bring us face-to-face with the great technical innovation, 
the integration of people and society into the technical world.  Naturally, this 
has not yet been achieved.  There is still a gap between society and the 
technical system, between individuals and the technique which surrounds 
them.  But this gap is constantly narrowing and a new model of humanity is 
emerging in the West.  In spite of the pious talk of politicians, the result is an 
increasing gap between Western humanity and that of other societies. 
 
 
20   
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
Excursus on Simon, The Ultimate Resource 
 
 
I want to discuss Julian Simon's book The Ultimate Resource, which 
deals with demographic growth, natural resources, and the standard of 
living.16 
 
 
The fine title of the French edition, L'homme notre dernière chance 
(Humanity, Our Last Chance), might suggest that this is a humanist work 
amid the perils of the age.  It is not.  Its focus is on the growth in population.  
It shows that this might double, triple, and quadruple, but concludes that this 
is a good thing and raises no problems.  I will not go into that matter and may 
thus ignore the last few chapters, which defend this point of view, attack its 
opponents, and proclaim the author's own values.  The preceding twenty 
chapters, however, merit attention because I have seldom seen a book which 
is so absurd in the realms of economics (the author is an economist) and 
technology. 
 
 
In the chapters which follow I plan to study the "average" technological 
discourse in trying to discern the bluff in it.  Simon's work offers us an extreme 
example which it is useful to analyze.  To begin with, Simon pretends to be 
rigorously scientific, and he accuses his opponents, especially in the report of 
the Club of Rome and the English report on The Limits to Growth, of trickery 
and scientific error.  We must examine this accusation.  He himself thinks that 
being scientific means presenting statistics, graphs, and percentages; his 
work is full of them.  But one of the most interesting aspects is precisely the 
fact that statistics and graphs inserted in false reasoning are of no help.  This 
observation seems to me to be significant: Simply providing accurate data is 
not enough.  To be truly scientific one must also have sound hypotheses and 
correct reasoning. 
 
 
The author's theses are quite remarkable because they run up against 
all that analysts of the modern world more or less admit.  This nonconformity 
would not displease me if it were not so disconcertingly naive.  The author is 
a liberal economist,17 but of a kind of liberalism that one no longer sees-an 
absolute liberalism.  For him, in all circumstances, the market is the place of 
equal and perfect competition.  The best will always prevail.  For him there is 
nothing to stop the free 
                                                 
16 The Ultimate Resource (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1981); the 
French edition was published in 1985 as L'homme, notre dernière chance. 
17 He is a professor of political economy and business administration at the 
University of Maryland.  His work was very successful in the USA and well 
reviewed in France, especially in Le Monde. 

 
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
21 
 
circulation of workers (who will automatically go where the pay is highest) or 
capital.  He sets out his fundamental theses at the start.  There is no food 
problem in the world.  The situation improved constantly from 1950 to 1980.  
Now land came into cultivation and agriculture will expand as needed.  
Natural resources are unlimited and become increasingly available.  The 
future of energy is just as bright; there are no limits to the development of 
sources.  Pollution does not exist.  Air and water are purer than in 1850 and 
will become even purer.  There is no reason to want to arrest population 
growth, for density of population has no pathological consequences and 
poses no obstacles.  These are the principal theses that the author 
"demonstrates" in the first twenty chapters. 
 
 
The arguments rest on two foundations.  First, experts cannot arrive at 
any certain results.  Their estimates of potential energy reserves in oil, 
copper, steel, coal, etc., have all turned out to be wrong.  The only 
incontestable criterion is economic.  It is the market.  We may thus dismiss 
technical data relating to pollution and the exhaustion of nonrenewable 
resources.  This is interesting in an author who, as we shall see, justifies 
technical potential.  The second foundation is that there are no limits.  In 
every field the idea of a limit is false.  For example, in mathematics this term 
is ambiguous.  One might say that the distance between two fixed points is 
limited, but there might still be an unlimited number of points between them.  
Again, no one can say in any field what the limit is.  What is the limit of 
pollution?  of copper reserves, etc.?  No one can say.  Hence, there is no 
limit!  "There is no necessity either in logic or in historical trends to suggest 
that the supply of any given resource is 'finite"' (p.  50).  For lack of a precise 
definition, we may say that an object is not finite. 
 
 
Let us take oil.  The potential of one well can be measured; it is thus 
limited.  But we cannot measure the number of wells in the world, and 
therefore we cannot know or measure potential production in an absolute 
sense.  Hence the term limit makes no sense.  Even if one could arrive at an 
estimate, one would have to add that better techniques might be able to reach 
new levels more easily, or make it possible to turn coal into oil, or enable us 
to derive oil from other sources.  Nuclear energy is also inexhaustible.  Even if 
sources for nuclear energy ran out on earth, "sources of energy exist on other 
planets." 
 
 
The optimism of this economist rests, then, on an absolute belief in 
unlimited progress.  Whenever a difficulty arises, "technical progress will deal 
with it.”  We have here an absolute form of the technological bluff.  Let us 
consider some further strange examples of this so-called scientific thinking.  
How can one measure the scarcity of a product? 
 
 
22 
  
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
The author rejects totally the ability of experts.  For him price is the only strict 
criterion.  When something is in short supply, it is costly.  When it is marketed 
well, it is in good supply.  Copper is an illustration.  It fell in price between 
1800 and 1980.  More of it is sold today.  The price has fallen continuously, 
and therefore there is no reason why this should not continue, and why 
copper should not become more abundant.  By extrapolation we thus have a 
proof that copper reserves are unlimited! 
 
 
The author constantly extrapolates from his graphs.  He seems not to be 
aware that for the last thirty years forecasters and futurologists have not 
proceeded by linear extrapolation.  He uses the same procedure for the food 
supply.  The price of grain has gone down steadily over the last century; this 
means that grain is in abundant supply and this will continue indefinitely.  "It is 
a fact, then, that the world food supply has been improving" (p.  59).  There is 
no fear of famine or inadequate supplies.  "'While there have been some 
deaths due to famine in the third quarter of the 20th century, it is highly 
unlikely that the famine-caused deaths equal a tenth of the period 75 years 
earlier....  The percentage of the world's population who find themselves 
subject to actual famine conditions is probably lower now than at any time in 
the past'" (pp.  61-62, emphasis added).  The example of London in 1880 
shows that pollution is not as bad as it used to be, as though London were the 
only place on earth that suffers from pollution! 
 
 
Let us return to technical ideology.  There need be no fear about the 
food supply because new technical inventions will at least double production.  
Thus giant mirrors reflecting sunlight on the dark side of the earth might 
speed up growth.  And if a limit is ever reached according to the law of 
diminishing returns, the whole galaxy is at our disposal.  There lie the true 
pastures in the sky.  We can begin mining the moon by 1990.  Satellites for 
solar energy can supply energy needs from the year 2000.  Satellites can also 
be used for agricultural and industrial purposes from the 1980s (p.  89).  We 
will really have to hurry up!  Again, we are wrong to fear pollution.  But we 
must begin by setting aside the advice of experts.  The fact that their 
estimates differ proves their incompetence.  Happily, the author has other 
criteria.  He starts with statistics showing that people live longer in the West.  
This proves that the environment is healthier than it was.  Simon seems to 
think that all illnesses come from the environment.  When listing those that 
have disappeared, he ignores medical advances and new medications, e.g., 
antibiotics.  It is hardly believable.  "Life expectancy is the best index of the 
state of health-related pollution.  And by this measure, pollution has been 
declining steadily and sharply for decades" (p.  131).  There has been 
pollution, but modern techniques have improved the 

 
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
23 
 
quality of the environment.  In the USA the quality of air and water is much 
better.  "The proportion of water-quality observations that had 'good' drinking 
water rose from just over 40 percent in 1961 to about 60 percent in 1974" (p.  
133).  "'There is no contaminating factor in the environment ...  that defies a 
technical solution"' (p.  139).  The same applies to the extension of areas that 
can be cultivated.  "The notion of a fixed supply of farmland is as misleading 
as is the notion of a fixed supply of copper or energy.  That is, people create 
land -agricultural land-by investing their sweat, blood, money, and ingenuity in 
it" (p.  225).  The proof is that the amount of agricultural land never stops 
increasing.  No thought is given to the depopulation of the country and 
overpopulation of the cities.  The author's ignorance is astounding. 
 
 
Let us take a final example of these pseudoscientific absurdities.  As we 
have seen, adequate techniques can supposedly solve every problem.  But 
for new technical inventions there is need of inventors, scientists, and 
technicians.  One inventor for 10,000 people will mean ten for 100,000 and a 
hundred for 1,000,000.  Thus we must increase the population so as to have 
more scientists, technicians, also artists, philosophers, etc.  This is ridiculous.  
It rests on the thesis that every discovery or invention will inevitably be 
positive and good.  There can be no hesitation with regard to techniques.  
Such inventions as dynamite, nonrecoiling guns, rockets, Molotov cocktails, 
etc., are just as valid as any others.  Simon does not even consider any other 
possibility.  I might cite other enormities of the same kind.  I have spent time 
on the work only because it has had such success and seems to me to be a 
good illustration of the technolatry that is supposed to be scientific and to be 
based upon facts.  It gives us a good start.  But we shall have to deal for the 
most part with more refined and subtle discussions.18 
 
4.  The Aristocrats 
 
 
In the West we live in the certainty that ours is a democratic regime.  We 
see an antithesis between dictatorship and democracy.  We enjoy various 
liberties and take part in elections.  To be sure, Socialists think that there is 
no equality and attack middle-class privileges, the unequal distribution of 
wealth, and the influence of capital.  But both these dated evaluations are 
superficial and largely inaccurate.  We are now grasping two equally 
important ideas.  We live in a society where the important 
                                                 
18 I might add at this point the title of a more recent book on technological growth, 
Erich E.  Geissler's Welche Farbe hat die Zukunft? (Bonn: Bouvier, 1987). 
 
 
24  PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
thing for individuals is not what is inherited from parents but their own 
knowledge.  Knowledge gives us our place in society.  This knowledge comes 
into play at all levels.  At the top of firms, one can no longer imagine a son 
who inherits a business from his father wasting his time at play.  He has to 
know.  In the working-class world, too, the old ideas of apprenticeship and 
practical experience, which were the older form of training, are outdated.  
There is a need to study, to acquire, if not a diploma, at least theoretical 
competence, if one is to fill a post in modern industry. 
 
 
This point, which Touraine brought to light twenty years ago, is now 
taken for granted.  We are gradually moving on to a meritocracy.  We shall 
return to this idea.  But a different orientation in the same discussion stresses 
the existence of a technocracy.  For a long time I resisted this term on the 
ground that technicians have no wish to have a direct influence on the course 
of things.  I used to say that this is not a technocracy because technicians do 
not play a role in our political parties, and we cannot therefore put 
technocracy on the same level as democracy or autocracy.  But I also 
doubted the existence of technocrats in the strict sense.  I recognized the 
growing number of technocrats, that is, men and women who thought they 
could direct the nation according to their technical competence.  Naturally, 
this was not immediate direction.  Politicians still had the role that I analyzed 
in The Political Illusion, that of mediating between the social body and the 
higher technicians.  But there has since been the following development.  
These technicians have come to see that nothing can be done without them.  
They dictate in full the decisions that politicians and administrators must take.  
They have multiplied enormously along with the multiplication of every kind of 
technique.  They have increasingly permeated every field of political action.  
The principal activity of states is henceforth to promote techniques and to 
engage in vast technical operations.  It seems that the whole life of society is 
now tied to technical development.  The technician is the key figure in 
everything. 
 
 
As they have become aware of the situation, however, technicians are 
no longer talking as technicians who in the presence of given problems 
provide technical solutions, but as technocrats who say: "Here is the solution.  
There is no other.  You will have to adopt it.”  They now add authority to 
competence.  This is what makes them technocrats.  Nothing exists apart 
from what they know and say.  The final aspect of the transformation is that 
on the basis of their competence they make a general sketch of what ought to 
be, of what form the society of tomorrow should take. 
 
 
It is most interesting to compare the sketches of competent 

 
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
25 
 
nontechnicians (F.  de Closets, A.  Ducrocq, J.-J.  Servan-Schreiber) with 
those of technocrats (e.g., Bressand and Distler, or the symposium 
"Technopolis").  The latter sketches are in the imperative.  They do not 
hesitate to go beyond technical logic and say that this is the society that we 
have to construct, that we cannot escape this model.  Yet these technocrats 
from different fields do not constitute a technocracy in the narrow sense.  The 
phenomenon is less visible and more profound.  They constitute a new ruling 
class, and we are actually living under an aristocratic regime.  Technocrats 
are the aristoi, the best people.  "The best" clearly varies according to the 
dominant social criterion in a society, its main objective.  In a military society 
the aristoi are the best warriors; in a democratic society they are perhaps 
those who have the greatest political wisdom or those who have the greatest 
oratorical skill and can thus gain the people's adherence. 
 
 
The aristoi today are those who have the greatest technical competence, 
those who are most apt at increasing applications and results of these 
techniques.  But they are not really interested in strictly political leadership.  
Many of their texts repeat, directly or indirectly: What good is the state?  Is it 
necessary?  When one can exercise this power to organize society and make 
it work without the mediation of the state, then the state can wither away and 
be replaced by a social organ which is not political but is based on a certain 
knowledge.  (An obvious external sign of the decadence of classical 
democracy is the impotence of politicians in their use of words; their 
speeches no longer say anything; they cannot put them over.) 
 
 
Our aristocrats, then, are those who in their own fields can put to work 
the most complex and sophisticated techniques that also promote 
development.  For them the slogan that knowledge is power is true.  It is not 
true for those who know Greek or Roman law-this knowledge gives no power 
(except to pass examinations).  In all technique, however, knowledge means 
power.  We should never forget that its only objective is to enhance power.  
Those who have technical knowledge in any field have power.  Those who do 
not have this technical knowledge have no power, even though they are 
eminent ministers or generals.  For the latter are directly, strictly dependent 
on those around them that know the appropriate techniques, without whom 
they would be completely helpless.  They are unable to reach any decisions 
without computers and technical experts.  We have here the realization of a 
meritocracy,19 but in a much stricter sense.  For if 
                                                 
                                                
19 Michael Young's La Méritocracie en mai 2033 (Futuribles, 1969) is the first 
study of the remarkable phenomenon of a society based on merit that turns into 
another form of dictatorship, In an ironic vein it has a much clearer and more 
farsighted vision than either Brave New World or 1984. 
 
 
26   
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
we cannot tolerate mistakes by politicians, those of technicians are always 
excused.  We shall have to return to this problem of the general 
irresponsibility of technicians.  We must stress it at this point, however, for it is 
a feature of aristocracy.  Aristocrats can never be held responsible, for who is 
to judge them?  The only cases, and these are rare, are those of surgeons, 
and we know the general concern that arises when a great surgeon is 
accused.  But even in cases of serious error or extensive damage, we never 
see nuclear or rocket engineers or administrators prosecuted and 
condemned.  A feature of aristocracy is that aristocrats are above the law.  
The same applies to technocrats today.20 
 
 
For technocrats the law has no value or interest.  It is an invention of the 
past which might have been useful in the 16th century but certainly not today, 
for it paralyzes progress.21  We shall have to come back to this problem of 
law, In any case law is of no account face-to-face with the technical 
imperatives issued by technocrats (e.g., the many treaties against nuclear 
proliferation are rarely enforced).  Technocrats, like aristocrats, are 
characterized by the fact that they have exclusive practices. 
 
 
A feature of aristocrats is that they alone know certain practices or 
exercises and have the right to engage in them.  In technical spheres, beyond 
a certain point, only specialists can practice.  This is not just a matter of 
knowledge but a monopoly, a barrier between technocrats and the public, 
who are merely allowed to play around with certain lesser techniques.  
Anyone can tap on a computer, but only superior technicians can pro-ram the 
complex systems on which economic and financial orientations and 
confidential communications depend.  The essential part of technical use is 
beyond the reach of average citizens.  AD esoteric language corresponds to 
the exclusive practices.  All aristocrats speak a language of their own that is 
not that of the common people.  It is not a different language in the sense that 
German differs from French, but a coded language that only initiates 
understand.  This was true with the medieval knights as well as among other 
aristocracies, for example, that of the 18th century.  The Freemasons carried 
it to absurd lengths in trying to set up an artificial aristocracy.  Technocrats, 
too, have their own language.  They do not have to spell things out to each 
other.  There is a  
 
20 An important aspect of commissions of inquiry into nuclear accidents or air 
accidents or landslides or clams bursting is that neither technique nor higher 
technicians are blamed but "human error" on the part of management or 
machinists.  Technique is always impeccable. 
21 Cf.  A.  Bressand and C.  Distler, Le Prochain Monde (Paris: Seuil, 1986). 

 
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
27 
 
language that is common to all technical categories, and also a language 
peculiar to each specialized area.  This is one of the important aspects of the 
power that ordinary people do not share.  Of course, the secret language, 
which among other aristocrats might have a certain religious or philosophical 
character, makes the aristocratic message esoteric.  The language that 
technicians speak among themselves is not just algebraic; it is digital.  This 
transposition from multiform information, transmitted by an analogical method, 
to uniform information, in the elementary form of "bits," this omnipresence of 
numerical logic, means that the language no longer has the same 
consistency.  Nor is it merely the presence of computers that makes technical 
language obscure for nontechnicians.  The complication of society, the 
multiplication of networks, makes necessary a certain type of intelligence to 
which the language corresponds and in virtue of which one part of a nexus 
can easily be put into touch with another. 
 
 
Knowledge, practice, and language separate technicians from ordinary 
people.  But a fourth feature also defines this aristocracy: They have a 
multitude of functions, all of which are indispensable to the group (just as the 
nobility had military, judicial, governmental, economic, and monetary 
functions).  Their technical ability is of general application and enables them 
to exercise a totality of powers.  They are at the center of every organism of 
management and decision.  Armaments, space exploration, medical 
treatment, 
communications, 
information, 
industry, 
administrative 
rationalization -all that is power depends on them. 
 
 
Naturally, those who are behind the times argue that everything finally 
depends on capital, or money, that the sole aim is to make a profit, and that 
the capitalist is in command.  This is a touchingly simplistic view.  There 
certainly has to be a massive mobilization of capital, as we shall see later.  I 
have never denied the importance of multinational business.  Yet this is no 
longer the catalyst.  The proof is, for example, the springing up of the 
technopolis all over the world, and the more and more frequent possibility for 
the true high-tech technician to create with very little capital a business which, 
if the technique is adequate, will quickly become very large (e.g., Apple).  This 
aristocracy creates its own environment, the technopolis. 
 
Americans invented the technopolis.22  Its first beginnings were 
                                                 
22 Cf.  "Technopolis," special number of Autrement (Nov.  1985); Everett M.  
Rodgers and Judith K.  Larsen, Silicon Valley Fever: The Growth of 
High-Technology Culture (New York: Basic, 1984); B.  Montelh, “L'éclosion des 
technopôles," special number of Le Monde, Dec.  1986. 
 
 
28   
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
in California in the 1930s, and the Silicon Valley, started between 1950 and 
1960, is now known everywhere.  The ideal of a technopolis is complex.  
Scientific research is put in touch with industries that can use it but also 
finance it.  An organic union must be set tip between them, on which a third 
factor will be grafted: the university, which will be invigorated by the proximity 
of industry, whose students will be assured of jobs, and which will be 
intrinsically established by research.  This is the perfect technical world: 
Technicians control research, they correspond with industrial technicians 
(dealing with the economy, analyzing needs, etc.), and the major function of 
the university henceforth is to provide technicians.  Studies no longer have 
any justification unless they serve a useful purpose. 
 
 
The technopolis inclines to become a motive center for society and the 
economy.  What happens comes to expression in the linguistic transition from 
the technopolis, the city of technique, to the technopole, the pole of 
techniques.  There are many examples of the technopolis in the USA, in 
Japan, and in Europe, where it is hoped that they will be a source of new 
vitality.  We find them in Britain (Cainbridge and Heriot-Watt), in Sweden, and 
in 
France 
(Rennes-Atalailte, 
Metz, 
Paris-Sud, 
and 
especially 
Sophia-Antipolis).  Technological parks are multiplying.  The idea is always 
the same, a cross-fertilization between the university and industry, but with a 
center outside the town, in open country or a forest.  The twofold point of the 
location is to make a break with the rest of society (which is directed from this 
point) and to concentrate all that is useful and to exclude all that is not (i.e., 
cultural, spiritual, and aesthetic factors, apart from those that are needed to 
produce pleasant and harmonious buildings and traffic routes).  Other things 
do not contribute to the inflexibly serious aim of cross-fertilization. 
 
 
When a center is set up, it exerts an appeal, Risk capital flows toward it.  
New enterprises are set up according to an interesting process.  
Researchers, industrialists, students, and financiers follow one another.  The 
technopole is a rallying point.  News bulletins are issued and new businesses 
nurtured.  But one might ask whether the multiplying of such centers (twenty 
in France alone from 1969 to 1986 and others projected) will not negate their 
efficiency, which is connected with their character as models.  Will risk capital 
always be available?  Will there always be the same flood of technical 
innovation?  And what is happening to Silicon Valley?  A breath of panic 
swept the technopole when the market for home computers dropped in 1985.  
For the first time, the field of electronics had a deficit.  After having been the 
glorious example, the model, this collapse prompted fear and 

 
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
29 
 
restraint.  Is a purely technological environment really viable?  Is not the 
infatuation bound to fade in view of the impossibility of indefinite growth?  Nor 
can we believe that cities of this type are really good social models, as it was 
first thought they might be.  In reality they reproduce all the vices of a 
technocapitalist society, with a characteristic gulf between high-tech 
technicians with fabulous salaries (highest in the USA) and poorly paid 
employees and workers who live far from the center of activity, who have to 
commute great distances to work, and who reap no benefits. 
 
 
The technopolis is a magnified image in the lens of our society.  
Economic, financial, political, and administrative powers all pass through the 
hands of groups of technocrats.  If one such group goes on strike, a small 
number of strikers can bring general paralysis.  Fortunately, this seldom 
happens, for technicians have no reason to strike, since they are in control, 
situated at the hub of communications and activities. 
 
 
The reciprocal character of the ideology of this aristocracy, which also 
shows that it is a real aristocracy similar to its predecessors, might be 
described as its complete disdain for all else and its extraordinary ignorance 
of the world outside and of other settings.  When these technocrats talk about 
democracy, ecology, culture, the Third World, or politics, they are touchingly 
simplistic and annoyingly ignorant.  Once when I was voicing my objections to 
nuclear arms, one of them confidently replied that his technicians would 
answer all my questions.  They respect the idea of democracy but in the 
sense that telematics will make it possible for each person to voice an opinion 
and share in decision making.  We will show later the astonishing cultural 
ignorance of these aristocrats (perhaps a feature of all aristocrats) and their 
errors of judgment regarding human nature. 
 
 
It is astounding constantly to find among their affirmations the belief that 
everyone will have access to data banks, to all useful information, to any 
necessary files.  But who is this "everyone"?  The reference is merely to other 
technicians.  Immigrant workers, poor farmers, and the young unemployed 
are not going to consult data banks.  In France three million people at the 
most might do so.  But these aristocrats ignore the real situation.  Once a 
thing is possible, they think it is open to everyone regardless of the actual 
situation.  This disdain assuredly makes them different from the rest.  At times 
they openly display their contempt for opponents (cf.  Illich or Schumacher).  
They are also totally indifferent to morality.  What does it matter if their 
discoveries serve a destructive purpose (e.g., improving armaments)?  Some 
of them find it good, and a sign of freedom, that devices (e.g., 
 
 
30 
  
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
Minitel) can be used to maintain pornographic and obscene verbal relations.  
To see common people degraded is a wonderful pastime for aristocrats. 
 
 
Yet this ignorance and disdain are also a source of weakness.  It is 
ridiculous to read from the pens of some of them that tomorrow's society will 
take the form of networks, communications, progress, free circulation, and 
democracy, when they fail to mention the growth of armaments, Third World 
stagnation, and the innumerable problems caused by these techniques 
themselves (of which ecologists have noted only a few).23  They put all such 
things in parentheses.  The technocrats have a strange blindness to the 
complex reality of the world and to the lessons of common sense (e.g., that 
no system can grow indefinitely in a closed and finite universe, a truth that 
they treat sarcastically).  Their great knowledge and narrow specialization 
prevent them from understanding questions outside their field.  Yet they write 
authoritatively about tomorrow's world.  It will be like this or like that, and 
therefore we must prepare our children for this particular world.  (We shall 
return to these affirmations in more detail.)  They are thus plunged into 
electronics and computers without a thought that perhaps in the future being 
able to till a bit of ground or light a wood fire or do proper grooming might be 
more useful than being able to tap on a keyboard.  Such is their casual 
ignorance of most of what constitutes our world.  Here is another general 
feature of aristocrats who are capable of dancing on a volcano. 
 
 
The compensation of this is the creation of a specific ideology, the 
ideology of applied science.  (They have some reservations regarding basic 
or pure science, which in its modern formulations seems to them as though it 
might upset their secure stock of knowledge.)  The ideology of the 
indispensability of technique is also that of the ineluctability of its progress.  In 
the eyes of technocrats it is monstrous to say that we should stop building 
nuclear power stations and return to the energy consumption of 1954.  They 
immediately retort that what opponents want is a return to the Middle Ages.  
As they see it, there has to be growth.  They will not accept any other 
hypothesis.  They find their justification in the fact that increasingly everything 
depends on the application of techniques.  Not only is technique good, not 
only is it indispensable, but also, as we said above, it alone can also achieve 
all that human beings have been seeking throughout the centuries: liberty, 
democracy, justice, happiness (by a high standard of living), reduction of 
work, etc. 
                                                 
23 A typical work is that of Bressand and Distler, Le Prochain Monde. 

 
 
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION  
 
31 
 
 
Another feature of this aristocracy is that they impart this ideology to 
society as a whole.  It stands behind what the media hand out to us, the 
ideology of the political parties, and the banal ideology of the person on the 
street.  "The dominant ideas of a society are those of the dominant class.”  By 
this ideology technocrats hope to model the future' though this is not 
apparent.  Their ideology, which is their justification, is based on their 
profession, it forms the link between the environment, the thinking, the 
profession, and the rest of society.  We have here the classical procedure of 
justification.  All that is said about technique is said in ideological justification. 
 
 
Beyond question technocrats are in solidarity with one another.  They 
cover one another and protect one another as needed.  This solidarity may be 
seen at every level.  When any of them makes a grave error, there are others 
to justify it.  They can tolerate no criticism.  When I raised certain questions 
regarding Chernobyl, I was put in my place by French technocrats.  The 
solidarity is complex.  It rests on a common interest and ideology and 
produces social affiliations.  But can one compare this group to earlier social 
groups? 
 
 
This aristocracy does not constitute a social class in Marx's precise 
sense of the term, for its place in the process of production does not 
characterize it.  Some technocrats participate in this, but not all, and a 
number are working to reduce its importance.  Again, in this aristocracy there 
is no inheritance of position or power.  Yet the problem of heredity is 
significant, for it exists without existing.  That is, the children of 
polytechnicians are particularly well placed to follow in their steps, though 
they do not have to do so.  The children of great technocrats will almost 
certainly have a place in the aristocracy, even though it is not that of their 
parents.  One technocrat will not dismiss another technocrat's child (apart 
from the rivalries of sections and projects which divide this aristocracy, along 
with the struggles for power which exist in all aristocracies).  The problem of a 
heredity that exists without existing is like that of the nomenklatura.24  Yet 
there are also major differences.  In this case no political orthodoxy is 
demanded.  Again, recruitment is not by internal administrative promotion.  
The decisive factors are degrees, competition (meritocracy), and adaptation 
                                                 
24 This word is now in fashion.  A recent book which enjoyed an immediate 
success bears the title La Nomenklatura française.  But the term is quite 
inadequate, at least in the sense that Michael Voslensky gave it in Nomenklatura: 
The Soviet Ruling Class, tr.  Eric Mosbacher (New York: Doubleday, 1984).  A 
similar term that came into vogue after 1946, after the model of Hitler, was 
apparat, which was applied no less indiscriminately. 
 
 
32   
PRELIMINARY THESIS: THE GREAT INNOVATION 
 
seminars.  Hence one cannot say that technocrats form a nomenklatura, even 
though there are certain points of resemblance. 
 
 
The closest parallel is Galbraith's technostructure, for technocrats 
obviously constitute a very solid social structure around which everything is 
organized but which has its foundation and justification in the exercise of a 
technique.  Nevertheless, the term as Galbraith defines it seems to be too 
narrow, since technocrats play a key role in all activities, hierarchies, and 
social, economic, political, and intellectual groups, not just in the world of 
industry and production.  The best word to describe them is aristocracy, so 
long as we realize that there is no comparison with the futile French 
aristocracy of the 18th century. 

 
 
 
 
PART I 
 
Uncertainty 
 
As I attempt in Parts II and III below to bring out the character of the bluff 
of technical discourse, I have to do more, I think, than simply point to the 
actual reality of inventions, innovations, and applications, or integrate new 
techniques into my older schemas.  What I have to stress is a feature 
which, the more I know the technical world, the more it imposes itself 
upon me, but which so far I have never studied.  This is the feature of 
uncertainty.  We are moving into a world which is increasingly the product 
of technique.  But we also live in a world which is increasingly uncertain 
about techniques (not their origin or mechanism, but their effects).  I can 
analyze this uncertainty from four angles: the ambivalence of technical 
progress; the unpredictability of development; the double feedback which 
is constituted by the originating factors of technical progress; and the 
internal contradictions inherent in the system.  I will not dwell on the 
negative effects that are most often studied (pollution, the exhaustion of 
nonrenewable materials, the imbalance of ethnic groups, etc.), for it is not 
my object to study techniques themselves.  My concern is with the fact 
that we are moving ahead very rapidly and are unable to say exactly what 
the goal is or through what stages we shall pass.  Uncertainty is the lot of 
all technicians and scientists, who are occasionally aware of it.  But it is 
also the situation into which the populace is thrust without being in the 
least aware of it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
Ambivalence 
 
 
From a very elementary standpoint the ambivalence of techniques 
has often been stressed (as in my own study in 1950).1  Technique can 
have both good and bad effects.  My friend Duverger, reviewing my first 
book on technique, wrote that it was like the language of Aesop: the best 
and the worst of things.  It is often quietly added that everything depends 
on the use one makes of technique.  With a knife one can peel an apple 
or kill one's neighbor.  I also tried to show that this comparison is absurd 
and that technique carries with it its own effects quite apart from how it is 
used.  (Use also enters in, but leads us into a moral question that has 
nothing to do with the analysis of technique.)  If we want to know what the 
issue is when we speak about technique, we must begin by eliminating 
the futile argument about its use. 
 
 
The ambivalence of technical progress is unfortunately more 
complex than might be suggested by the simplistic view just mentioned.  
To believe that everything depends on the use is to think that technique is 
neutral.  In 1950 I demonstrated the contrary and thereby caused a 
scandal.  But today most writers are convinced in fact that technique is 
not neutral.  No matter how it is used, it has of itself a number of positive 
and negative consequences.  This is not just a matter of intention.  For a 
time, use may orient this or that technique in a purely positive direction, 
but this technique has in itself potentialities that are inevitably exploited.  
The simplest and best-known example is gunpowder.  The Chinese used 
it only for fireworks, but it had the potentialities 

 
 
 
 
36  
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
with which we are familiar and which could not be neglected for long. 
 
 
Optimists regard technique as essentially good and "globally 
positive.2  This is not just a matter of temperament.  Most scientists and 
technicians view technique favorably.  Pessimists look at the negative 
effects, but again this is often a philosophical or political posture.  In effect 
the problem is both bigger and more complex.  We are here in a domain 
that is not really scientific, though it is given scientific features.  If we 
consider only the concepts and standards of well-being--the easiest to 
grasp and measure-we see how futile it is to try to see and evaluate fully 
the effects of technique.  It is relatively easy to measure the total quantity 
of goods and services provided.  There are also several partial indicators 
of well-being, but what about effective use, or the possibility of access 
(including information, education, and the choice allowed by the social 
structure)?  Should we also measure the quality of actual use or simply 
look at the level and distribution of incomes?  But such things are only 
preliminary to the real study, which we quickly see to be beyond us.3 
 
 
Analyses which appear very rigorous, which are built on statistics, 
and which make no reference to these problems are the most dangerous.  
For they, too, are ideological, but they pretend to be purely scientific and 
have an appearance of strictness that one does not find in more rhetorical 
but more honest studies.  In this area, in which the whole person is 
involved today, it is impossible to be purely scientific and completely 
disinterested.  We all realize that everything finally depends on the 
technical venture.  How, then, can we keep cool heads and not take 
sides?  The stake is too great and we are too directly implicated in this 
movement.  The transformation is both global (affecting all humanity and 
all aspects of society and civilization) and personal (modifying our ideas 
and life-styles and conduct).  We have to ask what will become of us in 
this upheaval.  No response that is purely logical is possible.4  We do not 
know all the facts.  We cannot achieve a 
 
 
AMBIVALENCE  
 
 
 
 
 
37 
 
truly synthetic perspective as we must, since all the pieces of the 
technical system hang together and we can say what will become of us 
only from a global apprehension and not from a sum of fragmented 
predictions. 
 
 
We proceed on the basis of extravagant hopes, only too easily 
sacrificing what have thus far been regarded as truths about humanity 
(certain values, or an individuality that is now progressively weakened in 
favor of collectivism).  Or else we give way to despair (e.g., the absurdity 
of the world, dehumanization, the China syndrome) without taking into 
account the opportunities that we still have.  The game is still afoot.  It is 
in this context, which is bound to be a passionate one, that I wish to draw 
attention to one of the most important features of technical progress, its 
ambivalence.5 
 
 
My meaning is that technical development is neither good, bad, nor 
neutral.  It is a complex mixture of positive and negative elements.  Some 
are good and some are bad, if we want to use moral terms.  It is 
impossible to dissociate them and thus to achieve a purely good 
technique.  Also, good results do not depend at all on the use which we 
make of technical equipment.  In effect, even in such use we ourselves 
are modified in turn.  In this totality of the technical phenomenon, we do 
not remain intact.  We are not just indirectly oriented by this equipment 
itself, but thanks to the means of psychological adaptation we are also 
adapted with a view to better utilization of the technique.  We thus cease 
to be independent.  We are not subjects in the midst of objects 
concerning which we may freely decide how to act.  We are closely 
implicated in this technical universe.  We are conditioned by it.  We 
cannot put human beings on the one side and equipment on the other.  
We have to set human beings, too, in the technical universe.  The use we 
make of equipment is not decided by spiritual, ethical, autonomous 
beings, but by people within this universe.  Thus this usage is as much 
the result of human choice as it is of technical determination.  The 
technical universe also makes determinations that are not dependent on 
us and that dictate a certain use. 
 
 
Regarding this good or bad use we have also to consider that we 

 
 
 
 
38   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
are necessarily speaking about individuals who use such technical 
objects and who can thus make certain choices as to what they use and 
how.  But the technical civilization is made up of an inseparable nexus of 
technical factors, and the good use of one or other of them will change 
nothing.  What will count is the general behavior of humanity as a whole.  
We shall not insist on this; it does not seem that we are as yet close to 
arriving at this situation.  To solve the problem of good use, people finally 
have to have clear goals which are adapted to reduce technique to the 
state of a pure and simple means.  In our actual situation the goals are 
either well formulated in an antiquated fashion, and thus ill-adapted to the 
situation, or else they are totally vague. 
 
 
We have stressed already that the effects of a technique are never 
solely positive or negative.  Ambivalence is thus a basic feature of 
technical progress.  But it is not intrinsic; we can see it only as we analyze 
the effects.  Hence we have to study not technical progress as such but 
its results.  It is by examples, then, that we shall bring to light the nature of 
the ambiguity. 
 
 
We are set in an ambiguous universe in which each technical 
advance accentuates the complexity of the mixture of positive and 
negative elements.  The more progress there is in this field, the more 
inextricable is the relation between the good and the bad, the more choice 
becomes impossible, and the less we can escape the ambivalent effects 
of the system.  Marcuse said nothing new about the relation between 
humanity and the system in the light of my analysis in The Technological 
Society, but he formulated very well the ambivalence of technical 
progress, and his formulation might serve as an introduction to the 
present chapter.  Operational sociology and psychology, he said, have 
helped to make human conditions more pleasant and are factors in 
intellectual and material progress, but they also bear witness to the 
ambivalent rationality of progress.  It is beneficent in virtue of its 
repressive force and repressive in its benefits.6 
 
 
Before proceeding to an analysis of the ambivalence, I must 
differentiate it from two other concepts.  The first is that of ambiguity, 
which I have already stressed.  Whereas ambivalence implies that an 
object has two precise and opposing orientations, ambiguity is more fluid.  
It carries the notion of what is confused, indeterminate, vague, and 
equivocal.  But technique is neither fluid nor confused it is precise 
 
 
AMBIVALENCE 
39 
 
and not at all equivocal.  We shall have to speak later, of course, about 
the uncertainty in technique itself.  The second notion is that of the 
perverse effect, which is much in vogue today.  The idea here is that there 
are normal effects and bad effects, which are surprising and perverse.  
This word has a moral connotation which we must reject in this context 
and implicitly recall the idea of a use which would be perverse.  We need 
to understand that the good and the bad, the positive and negative 
effects, lie intrinsically in the very constitution of the technical universe 
and in all technique.  J.  Chesneaux had good reason to say that 
technique (his word is "modernity") is an original combination of two 
globalities: that which Sartre denounces and that of which Saint-Simon 
dreams.7  On the one hand we have the serializing of beings, conditions, 
objects, and machines like the computer-the reduction to a single pattern 
of trivialized life.  On the other hand the planet is linked together and we 
have 
the 
global 
interdependence 
of 
economies, 
networks 
of 
communications, sociopolitical structures, and the despotism of the global 
market.  Here is an exact characterization of the technical system and 
technical progress in their ambivalence. 
 
 
But it is not enough to emphasize the ambivalence.  We must 
analyze it, and we shall do so with the help of four propositions. 
 
First, all technical progress has its price. 
 
Second, at each stage it raises more and greater problems than it solves. 
 
Third, its harmful effects are inseparable from its beneficial effects. 
 
Fourth, it has a great number of unforeseen effects. 
 
 
We do not have here haphazard data but a first and basic feature of 
technical progress.  According to a formula that A.  Merlin used about the 
crisis in America, especially in the computer market (1985-86), we try to 
analyze but we do not understand.8  As he also stated, the most 
convinced optimists need time to find encouraging signs.  No path is 
without its stars.  But the feature of technical progress is precisely that it is 
without stars.  Its growth is causal, not final.  9 Technical progress does 
not know where it is going.  This is why it is unpredictable, and why it 
produces in society a general unpredictability. 

 
 
 
 
40   
UNCERTAINTY 
 
1.  All Technical Progress Has Its Price 
 
There is no absolute technical progress.  With each advance we can see 
a certain setback.  It is not just that it needs considerable intellectual effort 
or the injection of capital.  Capital is invested with the hope of return.  But 
this is not guaranteed.  Often decisions are made to launch technical 
enterprises that are not economically profitable (e.g., satellites).  These 
two costs of progress are obvious, and we may set them aside.  The 
problem is much more complex.  We have to consider first what is 
destroyed in many fields by such technical progress. 
 
 
S.-C.  Kolm observes humorously: "The United States would seem to 
have double the national revenue of France, but would much of this gap 
remain if one took into account social values and deducted a measure of 
the ugliness of American cities.”  if we take human life seriously, we 
certainly have to take aesthetics into account and the quality of the 
environment.  But everywhere technique creates ugliness.  This is the 
price we have to pay.  In the cost we have also to reckon what 
economists now call externals (a problem to which we must return).  
These are the costs that are not directly linked to the creation or use of 
technique: pollution, health problems, protective measures, nuisances of 
all kinds.  Growth carries with it costs that change all calculations 
according to whether we include them.10  There has been agricultural 
destruction in order to promote industrial development (e.g., in the 
Tennessee Valley in the USA or the jurançon vineyard in France). 
 
 
A second aspect that we have to consider regarding the price that 
has to be paid has to do with the replacement of one product by another.  
In general no note is taken of products that have disappeared.  Thus in 
estimating textile consumption, account is taken only of textiles that are 
actually used (wool, cotton, artificial products) and none of those that are 
no longer used (linen, hemp), which were more common than is often 
thought and much more durable.  This is not to deny that consumption is 
up but to point out that the growth is far less 
 
 
AMBIVALENCE 
41 
 
important than imagined.  We have to include products that are 
eliminated.  Mechanized farming may produce more food, but we have to 
consider that a calorie of food now demands the consumption of a calorie 
of fuel.  A team of oxen or horses would use less. 
 
 
In this game of substitutions, which are the price to pay for progress, 
we have also to consider Third World countries.  Many of their products 
(minerals, sugar, cotton, wood) face total elimination.  The production of 
artificial materials might mean total ruin for some countries.  Since 1963 
they have several times asked the United Nations Organization to see to 
it that the developed countries stop manufacturing competing products.  It 
is highly unlikely, however, that technical progress can be halted.  Already 
replacements have affected countries like India (indigo), Chile (nitrate), 
and Indonesia (hemp).  We shall have to return to the effects of 
technicization on the Third World.  For the moment our emphasis is that 
technical progress almost always has negative effects on people.  Roads 
and truck transport in the Sahara have replaced the caravans that were a 
main source of wealth for the Tuaregs.  The increasingly efficient 
technicization of seal hunting has deprived the Eskimos of something that 
was basic to their society.11  At the same time medical care has increased 
their numbers.  Denmark has thus had to feed and clothe them at great 
expense with Western products that are transported and distributed free 
(since they have no cash to give in return).  This cost of maintaining a 
people that used to have a stable society has to be regarded as the 
passive side of the activity of seal hunting. 
 
 
But that is all far away.  We must look at the situation of the rural 
population in our own Western countries.  I will not take up the problem of 
rural depopulation.12  If one says that technical progress demands that 
people leave the countryside, that it gives more leisure time, and that it 
greatly increases agricultural production (even without the sun), the cost 
is the influx into cities and increased unemployment, a concentration of 
rural property, a rural capitalism that shatters rural society, and the use of 
nature as a place of recreation for those who live in cities.  But most 
geographers, agronomists, and sociologists tell us that the countryside 
without inhabitants is either uninterestingly incoherent or else it takes the 
form of a public park.  Nor has it any protection against industrial 
enterprises (e.g., high-tension lines, ski lifts).  Only 

 
 
 
 
42  
UNCERTAINTY 
 
an adequate rural population cultivating the soil can create the kind of 
nature that attracts city dwellers.  The destruction of the rural population 
avenges itself not only with economic disasters (surplus production, 
inferior products, the replacement of agriculture by agroindustry), not only 
with the despoiling of nature as a place where we can rediscover 
ourselves, but also with natural catastrophes (e.g., devastating forest fires 
which are due to the existence of flammable undergrowth that was not 
present when people lived in the forests and that cannot be replaced by 
useful plants through an occasional clearance by bulldozers). 
 
 
The destruction of rural workers, with all the negative consequences 
that it entails, leads us to the price that is paid by all workers.  In an older 
work that is still relevant, G.  Friedmann has shown that automated and 
computerized manufacturing, suppressing older forms of work, modifies 
the attitudes and habits of workers and leads to the destruction of values 
that the working-class world used to regard as essential.13  The new style 
of production carries with it modifications of our whole being: our instincts, 
perceptions, vision, sense of time, instinctive conduct, interpretative 
perception.  Our very notions of fatigue and prediction have changed in 
both form and meaning.  In the area of the transformation of labor we 
have a typical example of the price that has to be paid.  One of the grand 
claims of technique is that modern machines greatly reduce muscular 
effort.  This is obviously a gain in the case of exploitation, of exhausting 
work that is beyond the threshold of fatigue.  But is economy in all 
physical effort a real gain?  What seems to prove the contrary is the need 
to find a replacement by expenditure of effort in sport.  This is not a 
serious matter.  What is serious is that economy in physical effort exacts 
a price in the form of all kinds of physiological, psychological, and even 
sociological ill effects.  Each of these taken alone is less serious than the 
exhaustion of underground miners around 1880, but it is of a different 
kind.  The problem is that of nervous fatigue due to extreme tension in 
new factories.  We find ourselves in a world that demands more rapid 
reflexes, sustained attention continuously, and adaptation to new 
situations and challenges.  Nervous tension offsets muscular relaxation.14 
 
 
AMBIVALENCE 
43 
 
 
Two remarkable facts: A 1980 study (by the Confédération française 
et démocratique du travail) shows that insomnia is the basic problem of 
modern workers, and epidemiological studies show that heart and 
nervous problems have now spread to the working class.  Yet we have to 
point out that nervous fatigue is not due solely to the change in work.  It is 
due to the modern life-style in general, the constant need to do everything 
faster, increasing life rhythms (fast food!), the multiplying of superficial 
human contacts, the tension of more and more crowded timetables.  It is 
exhausting to live in a world in which everything is timed to the minute, in 
which there is never any time for rest.  Another reason for nervous 
tension is that in our life today we no longer keep pace with the seasonal 
rhythms.  Artificial light has made it possible to live as much at night as 
during the day.  It has broken one of life's most basic rhythms.15 
 
 
Exhaustion inevitably follows.  Our summary of reasons for nervous 
tension is no mere matter of hypothesis-this is one of the tragic realities of 
our time.  We have here a danger which is linked to technical progress 
and the answer to which it is hard to see, for it is the result of all the 
structures of a society that is geared for technical progress.  The 
remedies that might be found are only temporary palliatives.  Thus 
tranquilizers enable people to endure nervous tension while continuing to 
live as usual.  This simply increases the imbalance and produces in the 
long run an even more serious crisis.  We have here no more than one ill 
effect replacing another.  Clearly, this tension due to more activity at night 
is aggravated by a shift system (three eight-hour shifts) which forces 
people to work a third of the time at night and which is demanded by the 
way factories are set up and the maintaining of communications.  
Machines do not stop, and to achieve maximum profitability they must be 
run as much as possible.  People, then, have to be organized to work as 
the machines do.16 
 
 
The breaking of seasonal rhythms is a familiar problem.  All 
organisms are at the height of their vigor and powers in spring and 
summer.  In autumn and winter (until hibernation), all organisms lose their 
vital force.  They are reduced, becoming less resistant and more fragile.  
Rural work follows the seasonal rhythm; there is less to do in winter.  But 
industry, dictated by technique, which allows and now 

 
 
 
 
44   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
demands vacations, reverses the rhythm.  Vacations and rest come 
during the "beautiful season," and there is more work in winter.  This 
disturbs life's rhythm.  Some functions are not discharged as well as they 
once were.17 
 
 
This leads to a larger observation that I believe to be of vital 
importance as regards the price to be paid.  It is well known, and we are 
all glad of it, that modern life expectancy is greater than in traditional 
societies.  Tables prove that previously the average expectancy was only 
about thirty years,18 and that it has now risen to around seventy years.  
What progress!  But a double price has been exacted.  There is first the 
demographic problem.  A greater number of old people have to be cared 
for and supported, and supposedly more children are needed to 
compensate.  That is, the doubling and tripling of children will produce 
twice as many workers in twenty years to support the aged.  But this is 
the height of folly; it betrays an astonishing lack of foresight.  For in sixty 
years there will be two or three times as many old people.  Need we go 
on?  In fifty years there would be almost a tenfold increase in the 
population of a country.  Completely absurd!  Second, there is the 
physiological problem.  We now keep alive innumerable infants who 
"normally" would have died in the first months.  Their health will always be 
fragile, or they will be invalids.19  Studies have also shown that the human 
life which is now prolonged is much diminished and very precarious.  Our 
health is much more fragile.  We have less resistance to grief (cf.  the 
studies of Professor Leriche), to fatigue, and to privation.  We have less 
resistance to lack of nourishment, variations in climate, and internal and 
external stresses.  We are more susceptible to infections (cf.  the studies 
of Dr.  Carton).  Our senses are less sharp, especially sight and hearing.  
Our nerves are much more fragile (we suffer more from insomnia and 
distress).  We have to take more precautions and are more easily laid up 
by little things.  We have more opportunities in life and live longer, but we 
live diminished lives and do not have the same vital force.  We have to 
compensate for new deficiencies by artificial procedures that in turn 
produce other new deficiencies. 
 
 
AMBIVALENCE 
45 
 
 
As a final example of the price to be paid I might refer to the 
functional constraints in our society in face of the triumphant song of 
freedom that we sing concerning technique.  As M.  Massenet has 
strikingly shown, "We have to pay in functional constraints for apparent 
freedom at the level of objectives.  The more society is collectively 
voluntary, the less it is individually so.  The more society controls its 
objectives, the less it controls its processes."20  Technical progress 
demands collective planning and organization.  But the technical process, 
the means, limits the possible choices.  Moreover, there are choices only 
at the level of global society, which can think that it is conscious and free 
to fix its objectives, but which is really governed by the means that give it 
the illusion of this consciousness and freedom.  The more it plans, the 
more it imposes functional constraints and reduces the voluntary aspect 
of individual decisions.  The mechanisms of determination increase in this 
way, producing at the same time the appearance of freedom and its 
restriction, but situated on different levels. 
 
 
Looking at another example of the growth of social controls, we 
recall that one of the serious problems engendered by technique is 
overpopulation.  But how are we to control this growth?  It is precisely in 
terms of the "price to pay" that Edward Goldsmith and others have 
analyzed this question.21  To control population growth we have to 
suppress individual freedom.  The cost is not too heavy, he thinks, if we 
consider the long-term results.  But where will the suppression of 
individual freedom finally lead us?  To the control of individuals, and 
technique certainly makes possible a total control.  Surveillance of private 
life, of births, the regulating of social behavior and finally of all human 
conduct.  To save the species we must sacrifice the individual!  But all 
individuals?  And the essential characteristic of the species? 
 
 
Goldsmith is hardly consoling when he tries to justify this total control 
by saying that it is also present among the aborigines of Africa and 
Australia, ignoring the differences between the two types of social control.  
Is it not precisely the only real progress of the human race that it has 
freed individuals from social controls? 
 
The price to be paid seems to be enormous.  The problem of paying it is 
always a tragic one.  I have in mind a saying of the Brazilian

 
 
 
 
46   
UNCERTAINTY 
 
Minister of Finance (M.  D.  Neto) in 1975 to the effect that only an 
authoritarian regime could ensure economic rectification and technical 
growth.  Technocrats alone could establish an industrial Brazil.  Economic 
expansion would be the response to social problems.  The price to pay 
was an absolute regime with all the "flaws" that this entails: a police state, 
imprisonments, torture.  This was Stalin's dilemma, Rapid technical 
growth involves this cost. 
 
 
To conclude our look at the first aspect of technical ambivalence, I 
would say that technique obviously brings with it considerable, 
indisputable benefits.  But it destroys other good things that may be just 
as important.  We can never say that there has been real progress (with 
no counterbalancing factors), nor deny it, let alone quantify it.  Naturally, 
we must not try to apply our formula too strictly.  I am not saying that 
technical progress means the payment of one value exactly by another, 
that there is precisely the same amount of destruction as creation.  There 
is obvious growth or progress in the material sphere.  There is more 
energy, more consumption, more "culture.”  I am not saying that each 
thing has its own price tag (especially since the price is hard to calculate).  
What seems to be certain is that technical progress is much less at its 
level of consumption than it is said to be at present.22 
 
 
There are several reasons why it is hard to grasp this first feature.  
First, we have to consider the global situation.  In most cases the price is 
not of the same type as the gain.  We have to look at the phenomenon in 
its entirety in order to grasp the compensations which are made.  But this 
is seldom done; people look only at facts of the same category.  This is 
poor methodology.  With technical progress we face a transformation of 
civilization.  Since a civilization is not made up of juxtaposed elements but 
of integrated elements, we have also to take into account all the reactions 
that may be traced to a single technical advance.  This is why studying 
the phenomenon is such a delicate task.  Yet it is at the global level that 
we can maintain that all progress has a price.  The difficulty is that of 
estimating what is gained in relation to what is lost, since the two things 
are of different types and cannot be compared.  We must not let 
ourselves be caught in the trap of either the necessity or the possibility of 
exact comparisons in this field. 
 
 
A final difficulty in grasping the reality of this compensation is 
 
 
AMBIVALENCE 
47 
 
that it is deceitful.  It is always a matter of vague phenomena, which are 
significant only by their bulk and their general nature.  They present only 
rarely an explosive or tragic aspect, but eventually give a certain negative 
style to human life by the accumulation of details that all move in the 
same direction. 
 
2.  Technical Progress Raises More 
and Greater Problems than It Solves 
 
In October 1965 Admiral Rickover, the father of the nuclear submarine, 
made a shattering statement regarding the "technological monster." 
 
 
Speaking from experience, he expressed the disquiet which was felt 
by many scholars and higher technicians and which had nothing whatever 
to do with a romantic antitechnical position.  He stressed two aspects: on 
the one hand the irreparable character of the damage done by 
uncontrolled technical growth, and on the other the immensity of the 
problems raised by technique as it becomes more and more complex. 
 
 
At much the same time Jouvenel (Arcadie) made a similar point, 
showing in detail the relation between the problems that were solved and 
the complex problems that were caused (e.g., in matters of speed, 
overcrowding, nuisances, etc.).  We might refer also to Kahn and Wiener, 
who made a useful distinction between an intrinsically dangerous 
technique (e.g., which contributes to environmental degradation) and a 
technique which creates problems through dangerous individual 
choices.23  But we have to keep in mind that human choices may bear a 
confused aspect.  They thus concluded that technology raises such 
serious problems as nuclear proliferation, attacks on private life, 
excessive power over individuals, and centralization.  Changes are too 
big or too rapid to be assimilated smoothly.  There are new possibilities of 
harm to nature.  The pace of change increases exponentially.  This leads 
to internal tensions, and things are not perhaps in the best hands. 
 
 
For a global presentation we might refer to a defender of technique, 
Elgozy, who asked in 1970 whether the computer might not create more 
problems than it solves.  Might it not be better at the first opportunity to 
replace the computer with a less presumptuous system of data 
processing?  But to go back is unthinkable.  We have to obey the 
technical rule of the primacy of means.  We must accept the growth of 

 
 
 
 
48  
UNCERTAINTY 
 
problems.24  To grasp the situation we must obviously start at a plain fact 
that we must now discuss more closely, namely, the fact that every 
technical advance does solve some difficulties and some problems.  Each 
time we clearly see a problem or danger and decide to respond to it, one 
can say that it is virtually resolved or met.  In our world, if we decide to 
meet a difficulty and devote sufficient technical resources (i.e., people and 
capital) to doing so, we can eliminate it.25  Each technical advance is 
designed to solve a certain number of problems.  More precisely, in face 
of specific and limited difficulties or dangers, we have to find an adequate 
technical response.  This is bound up with the movement of technique 
itself, but it is also in keeping with the profound and widespread conviction 
in developed countries that everything is ultimately a technical problem. 
 
 
The movement is as follows.  Every problem--social, political, 
human, or economic--must be analyzed in such a way that it becomes a 
technical problem (or nexus of problems).  Technique is then a perfectly 
adequate means to solve it.  We might take as an example the crisis due 
to the rise in the price of oil.  The result of the debate touched off by the 
expression "energy crisis" was the creation in many countries of new 
nuclear power stations (about 3,000 over the whole world in the last 
twenty years).  This is significant from two angles.  First, ideological and 
political differences were shown not to count: China, like the USSR, the 
USA, and France, thought only of a solution in terms of nuclear energy.  
Second, this solution was accepted because it was purely technological.  
Other solutions were supplementary because they were less advanced 
technologically. 
 
 
The debate itself is very hard to pin down.  There were in effect three 
debates.  The debate among pure nuclear technicians related solely to 
the elimination of hypothetical dangers.  The debate between nuclear 
technicians and technicians in other energy fields (solar, geothermal) 
related solely to means, an increase in energy consumption being 
accepted as the objective.  The final debate was between nuclear 
technicians and so-called eccentric groups (ecologists, humanists, etc.) or 
the public, who were accused of ignorance or unfounded fears.  
Politicians were unquestionably trapped in the first debate and their 
 
 
AMBIVALENCE 
49 
 
discussion resulted in commitment to the most immediately effective solution.  We 
tend today to see human phenomena solely from a technical angle, and it is true 
that technique can solve most of the problems that we confront.  Having conceded 
this, I will now take some examples to show that the problems which technique 
raises are much bigger and harder at every stage than those that it solves.  
Readers will no doubt find this surprising. 
 
 
The proletariat offers the first example.  In the 18th century capital was 
available, new technical inventions were there to exploit, and new products could 
be manufactured for which an absolute need was not yet felt (except in the case 
of better armaments, faster ships, etc.).  Hand in hand with this came the creation 
of new industries (textiles first, then metallurgy).  Workers were needed for the 
factories.  The first migration to the cities followed.  Farm workers became 
artisans.  Marx has fully shown that the changing of workers into the proletariat 
was not just the doing of capitalists who wanted to increase their profits (the only 
aspect that is generally remembered!).  Above all, it was the result of 
mechanization and of division of labor, which are two technical advances.  One 
might say that these two advances are the foundation of all the rest.  Marx has 
brought to light the strict relation between the technical phenomenon and the 
creation of the proletariat.  Capitalists were simply the intermediaries setting in 
motion the forces of production.  The proof of this is that the analysis applies 
equally well in noncapitalist countries.  The technicization in the USSR demanded 
the creation of a proletariat at least as unhappy as that of England in 1850.  The 
same is taking place in Third World countries that are taking the path of 
industrialization and technicization. 
 
 
The technical society has to respond to a certain number of specific but 
nonurgent problems, to needs of varying importance, the goal being the creation 
of material happiness.  But in the process a new problem arises, that of an 
exploited class that is more unhappy, being uprooted and plunged into an 
inhuman situation.  It seems impossible to break this relation, for reasons that are 
well known and are independent of the economic or political structure.  The 
problem is that human beings find it hard to adjust to machines, that workers have 
to be concentrated, that there is a very rapid transformation of social structures, 
groupings, and ways of thinking, that external disciplines have to be adopted, and 
that the consumer products are not adequate.  It is recognized today that the 
situation of the proletariat is not just one of insufficient consumer goods, of 
unfairness in the distribution of the products of their labor.  That is part of the 
question, but to some extent it can be rectified by an appropriate social regime.  
The rest of the 

 
 
 
 
50   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
equation, the problem of the change in consumer goods as the traditional 
ones are replaced by new ones which are not satisfying because they do 
not meet real needs, is a most important factor in the situation of the 
proletariat.  Even if technically advanced countries have been able to 
some extent progressively to eliminate some of the disadvantages caused 
by the relation between human beings and machines, this cannot be done 
at once in Third World countries, for example, by automation, which 
presupposes an infrastructure that does not exist there.  It is simply not 
possible to save time and bypass various stages. 
 
 
The Soviet experience, with the extreme misery suffered by the 
whole population from 1917 to 1940, suggests that the faster we want to 
go in technicization, the more intense is the global misery (which creates 
the true proletariat in Marx's sense).  Speed simply creates an even more 
intolerable proletarian situation.  Mechanization and technique have thus 
brought great gains and responded to many human needs.  But it is 
incontestable that they also gave rise to the main problem for Western 
society throughout the 19th century.  Nor could things have been 
different, as recent experiences have shown and as Marx himself thought.  
I do not think it is an exaggeration to say that the problem that has been 
raised is much greater than those that have been solved.  It was too 
great, however, to be related directly to technical progress. 
 
 
The insoluble problem of a proletariat is not just a nineteenth century 
problem or a problem of immigrant workers today.  We recall that miracle 
of progress, Silicon Valley.  The success and growth of this new 
conglomerate produced a new and completely crazy proletariat in 1950, 
with salaries the lowest in the USA, overpopulation in a distant suburb, 
extreme industrial pollution, a high rate of divorce and infanticide, 
high-density population, etc.  This is the result of high tech at its extreme. 
 
 
A second example of the law that problems grow with the growth of 
techniques may be found in the challenge to the natural world in which we 
have to live.26  The ecological problem with its many aspects: wholesale 
pollution, nuisances, the production of new chemical elements that do not 
exist in nature, the final exhaustion (at a time that cannot be calculated 
with exactitude) of natural resources, the great threat to our water, the 
destruction of the countryside, the wasting of tillable soil-these facts are 
hard to dispute today, in spite of some 
 
 
AMBIVALENCE 
51 
 
opposition.  They are all the result of frenzied growth, of the unrestricted 
application of techniques. 
 
 
There is a tendency to divide up the danger, for example, water 
pollution, or the ultimate exhaustion of copper.  This is a technocratic mistake.  
We must look at the ecological question in its entirety, with all the interactions 
and implications, without reductionism.  We then see that the problem raised 
is a thousand times more.  vast and complex than any of those raised in the 
19th and early 20th centuries which techniques have been able to solve.  It is 
much harder to purify the Mediterranean than to make an airplane fly.  The 
danger is so great that people prefer to ignore it.  After a period of awareness 
between 1955 and 1970, the public has lost interest and governments do their 
best to deny the danger.  Those who have really studied the situation regard 
the danger as such that immediate measures are necessary on a global scale 
if we are to restore ecological balance to our environment, since we are 
dealing with an ecology that is now socio-agroindustrial.27 
 
 
To illustrate the great gap between the enormous problems created by 
technique and the many isolated benefits that it has conferred, I will choose 
only one other example: overpopulation (although I might easily adduce 
others, such as the effects of automation, new illnesses, urbanization, 
transport, etc.).  I certainly cannot share the optimism of Sauvy and other 
demographers and economists who argue that the earth can easily support a 
hundred billion people.  We remember that there is no such thing as 
overpopulation in the absolute.  There is overpopulation only in relation to the 
possibilities of subsistence.  In the long run Malthus seems to have been 
right, not in an absolute sense, but in a concrete sense.  In two or three pages 
I cannot bring out the extraordinary complexity of the matter.  I will keep to 
three aspects. 
 
 
First, demographic growth is the result of techniques: the prolonging of 
life, the keeping alive of infants who would "normally" be dead, vaccines, the 
eliminating of epidemics, and hygiene.  Technical progress has brought with it 
the astonishing proliferation of the human species during this century.  The 
difficulties that have been created are due to so-called good or positive 
techniques, not negative or aggressive techniques but ones that are designed 
to serve and protect us.  It is this that has produced the impasse, showing 
how hard it is to distinguish between good techniques and bad. 
 
 
This absolute demographic growth raises the question of  

 
 
 
 
52  
UNCERTAINTY 
 
support.28  Again we have arguments among the specialists and experts.  
Some think there is still much arable land that can be used (up to twice 
the amount already in production).  Others regard it as madness to try to 
bring most of this land into cultivation, since it would involve disastrous 
deforestation.  We should also note that during the thirty-five years that 
would be needed for this doubling of cultivated land, the population, 
according to every calculation, would also double.  In absolute figures 
there would thus be twice as many undernourished people as today.  
Again, some argue that there are inexhaustible food resources in the 
oceans (algae, plankton), but others point out that the level of radioactivity 
is increasing rapidly in the oceans, and this radioactivity particularly 
effects algae and plankton, thus rendering them useless as food.  As 
Professor Furnestier has also pointed out, we cannot develop aquaculture 
when our oyster beds are threatened with asphyxiation by the overflow 
from campsites.  Account has also to be taken of underwater drilling for oil 
and the pollution of our coasts.  In Japan industrial effluents at nontoxic 
levels effect plankton and through them fish and people.  Increased 
cultivating of algae and plankton would obviously involve solving 
hundreds of problems of incredible difficulty.  It is generally conceded that 
we will have to triple food production in twenty-five years, but no one 
knows 
how.29 
 
The problem is, in fact, harder than we suppose, for we have to distribute 
as well as produce food.  The transport needed to take it to famine areas 
is generally lacking.  We have also to fight the policies of 
 
 
AMBIVALENCE  
53 
 
 
monopolists and national leaders who sidetrack aid funds to their own 
pockets.  It has been often emphasized, too, that direct food aid to Third 
World countries is ultimately disastrous since the products compete with 
local products and bring ruin to Third World farmers.  It is hoped that new 
chemical products and technical advances will bring solutions.  Research 
goes on and artificial food that is high in proteins and vitamins can be 
produced.  But experience shows that undernourished people do not 
readily accept these substitutes.  The main difficulty lies in the field of 
traditions, attitudes, and social, political, and religious beliefs, which give 
rise to strong resistance.  We must not think that people who are the 
victims of famine will eat anything.  Western people might, since they no 
longer have any beliefs or traditions or sense of the sacred.  But not 
others.  We have thus to destroy the whole social structure, for food is 
one of the structures of society (see, of course, Lévi-Strauss). 
 
 
This will mean destroying groups and personalities.  Again people 
will be fed materially at the cost of inner psychological and social 
destruction.  This time, too, the price to pay is very high; it is qualitatively 
immense.  It cannot be compared with the benefit of chemical nutrition.  
Here we have a general feature of the price: It cannot be compared with 
the positive technical gain.  Nor is every discovery good.  We recall the 
extraordinary finding of Dr.  Gudmand Hoeger that most of the people of 
the Third World are allergic to milk.  Millions of people do not have in their 
digestive systems the enzymes that enable them to assimilate it.  Milk 
causes them serious gastrointestinal troubles.  If this finding is confirmed, 
we can see what its effects will be, for example, on the use of powdered 
milk in aid, or on the policies of agricultural development.  It is in keeping 
with the native resistance to powdered milk (as though this food were 
bewitched) that has often been noted (in Africa especially).  The technical 
calculating of calories and economic orientation can obviously have 
unforeseeable results.   
 
 
The World Health Organization has attempted to reduce the birth 
rate by setting up research centers to stimulate research and to influence 
public opinion and legislation.  But psychological, cultural, sociological, 
and interrelational problems have increasingly been encountered in 
teaching methods of contraception, sterilization, etc.  In two excellent 
articles Dr.  Escoffier-Lambiotte stressed that a profound change in 
traditions and scruples is entailed.30  There has to be an 

 
 
 
 
54   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
ethical revolution or else a dictatorship will be needed to suppress the 
right to procreate, with the attendant abuse of compulsory sterilization. 
 
 
For his part A.  Sauvy drew attention long ago to the psychological 
and sociological disasters that a sudden stoppage of demographic growth 
might bring.31  We must not believe that the only danger is the bomb.  
There is the second danger of growth.  But checking growth by drastic 
measures will entail no less serious consequences, except that they will 
be in other areas and less obvious than famine and material want.  This is 
not to speak of the spiritual impact on populations which are driven by 
strong and vital religious convictions toward procreation, which regard an 
infant as a gift from God (Judaism, Roman Catholicism, Islam), or as a 
condition of the transmigration of souls (Hinduism).  We cannot dismiss 
such convictions with a wave of the hand, stating that they are ridiculous 
and must he eliminated.  The price that has to be paid in this sphere is 
surely enormous.  We have here a typical case of the insoluble dilemmas 
that technique thrusts upon us when it is applied to some problems. 
 
 
These, then, are three examples of the gigantic and unforeseeable 
problems that technique raises.  We can say that every technical advance 
carries with it problems of the type that we have just sketched.  These 
problems are the fruit of the industrial era (with its obvious progress in 
metallurgy, transport, medicine, etc.) and of the early technical era up to 
about 1970.  What vast problems will arise with the new stage of the 
technical system, with genetic engineering, computers, the laser, and 
space?  It is just as impossible to answer this question as it was to 
foresee the creation of the proletariat in 1800.  Nevertheless, in the 
course of this work we will try to give some hint of the problems that might 
arise in the future.  We are certain of one thing: they will be more difficult, 
more extensive, and more complex than their predecessors. 
 
3.  The Harmful Effects of Technical Progress Are Inseparable from 
Its Beneficial Effects 
 
We have seen already that it is almost impossible to distinguish good and 
useful techniques from those which are bad or useless.32  It is futile
 
 
AMBIVALENCE 
55 
 
also to speak of a "good use" of techniques.  Simplistic evaluations of this 
kind rest on very summary, general, and abstract views of techniques 
without any real study of the technical phenomenon and technical 
progress as such.  In fact, things become much more complicated the 
moment we cease looking at an abstraction and philosophizing, and 
instead consider the functioning and development of a specific technique.  
Classification, then, is by no means easy, for one technique entails a 
multitude of diverse effects. 
 
 
It is not at all a simple matter-in spite of appearances-to distinguish 
peaceful techniques from military techniques.  For some time past I have 
tried to show that the atomic bomb was not at all the product of wicked 
warmongers but a normal result of atomic research, a necessary stage, 
and that the enormous effects for the human race go far beyond the 
bomb, there being many peaceful applications of splitting the atom.  I will 
not go over that material again.  But one might take any level of 
technique, the lowest or the highest, and one will find that nothing is 
univocal.  The techniques of exploiting riches are good for us?  No doubt.  
But what if they involve the exhaustion of riches, their unchecked 
exploitation?  The techniques of production are unquestionably good.  But 
the production of what?  When techniques make possible the production 
of all kinds of things, if we give people their freedom, it will be used to 
produce things that are absurd, empty, and useless.  A remarkable truth 
thus comes to light: Producing is regarded as good in itself.33  No matter 
what is produced!  The only function of technique is to increase 
production.  And since our only function is to work, and to participate in 
the development of production is our means of livelihood, we go on to 
produce absurd, empty, and useless items, but items that are infinitely 
serious because our life and work are devoted to them, and from them we 
earn our living. 
 
 
Let it not be said that this is not an effect of technique or that things 
might be different.  With a totalitarian government and an authoritarian 
control of production, such objects are not produced (rather, tanks and 
missiles with nuclear warheads).  But dictatorship does not sit easily with 
technique.  Production techniques work properly in nondictatorial regimes.  
Let it not be objected, then, that we ourselves are to blame, for in the long 
run we must see people as they are.  One of the great weaknesses of 
those who separate the good results 

 
 
 
 
56  
UNCERTAINTY 
 
of technique from the bad is that they constantly think of people as wise, 
reasonable, in control of their desires and instincts, serious, and moral.  Thus 
far experience has not shown that the growth of technical powers has made 
us more virtuous.  As of now, to say that we must make a good use of 
techniques is to say nothing at all. 
 
 
I want to show, however, how the very core of technical mechanisms 
produces without distinction both good and bad results quite apart from 
human intervention.  Here again I will give examples.  Let its take first a very 
complex instance that I will sketch very simply.  I refer to a cycle of bad 
effects linked to positive effects which has been notably brought to light in an 
excellent article by Nathan Keyfitz.34  We might sum it tip as follows.  
Europeans settled in countries with scattered populations and developed 
single-crop plantations or exploited the raw materials.  They required more 
laborers, diminished the mortality rate, and increased the population.  In time 
they found substitutes for the raw materials, and they were driven out of their 
colonies, which for the most part they no longer needed.  But the population 
growth, once started, did not stop.  It is one of the essential factors in 
underdevelopment.  Thus the good effects (hygiene, better techniques, 
discoveries, decolonization) are inseparably tied to bad effects (loss of 
outlets, loss of a subsistence economy, dangerous overpopulation). 
 
 
We will cite other examples.  One of the constants of technique is the 
growth of rhythms and complexities.  Every economic, administrative, 
managerial, and urban operation becomes more and more complex as a 
result of the multiplication of techniques.  Every field demands knowledge of 
more and more techniques.  This extraordinary extension of techniques 
brings with it increasingly advanced specialization.  It is virtually impossible 
for a single person to know several techniques, several methods.  Processes 
are increasingly refined, complex, and subtle.  We have to restrict ourselves 
to one if we are going to master it.  In this situation we have to know perfectly 
the technique that we use, because this gives greater efficiency and greater 
speed, but a single mistake can be catastrophic.  The faster the machine, the 
more serious the accident.  The more subtle the machine, the less forgiving 
the error.  What is obvious at this mechanical level is equally true in every 
technical field.  Technicians become increasingly narrower specialists.  Yet 
the system cannot function unless the operations parceled out to specialized 
technicians are related to one another, are literally connected.  Within the 
different operations of an automated chain, each 
 
 
AMBIVALENCE 
57 
 
operation successively controls and determines many others.  Similarly, in a 
technicized society all the work of a technical specialist has to be coordinated 
with that of others if it is to be effective and to mean anything.  Working 
together, specialization and coordination allow an acceleration of rhythms but 
also cause congestion. 
 
 
This phenomenon of congestion, to which I have already alluded and 
upon which P.  Massé has insisted for many years, shows itself to be one of 
the unavoidable but disastrous effects of technical improvement.35  We find it 
everywhere, not just on the roads.  It is the surcharge on academic programs, 
the ransom that must be paid for the growth of knowledge.  I admire those 
who reform our curricula.  But do we have to stop teaching the rudiments to 
children?  If we reduce these rudiments to useful, technical knowledge (which 
does not develop the intelligence but is essential for entry into this society), 
we have demented programs that simply serve to crush children's 
personalities and sensibilities.  This is the congestion of sounds, images, and 
written material.  Paper (which is far from being dethroned) congests all 
activity, which loses its significance by being smothered in papers received 
and papers given out.  There is a mania for regulation, by which we think we 
can control the proliferation.  We draw tip rules, make organizational charts, 
set up groups, and are convinced that in this way we can see clearly what we 
are doing.  The result is a multiplicity of regulations which are both finicky (for 
how can one get a handle on the proliferation without going into details) and 
contradictory (for there is no longer any possibility of synthesis).  This 
regulation finally becomes totally detached from reality.  By its density and 
complexity it becomes itself a real hindrance and a source of other 
hindrances.  In such situations the number of decisions one must make 
multiplies endlessly.  It is an illusion to hope for a machine that will make 
these decisions.  Human beings themselves, politicians or managers, must do 
so.  But the decisions are increasingly inadequate and confused, and 
managers are increasingly crushed under their weight. 
 
 
These phenomena of congestion are simply an inevitable consequence 
of positive technical progress.  Even though each element might be useful, 
the totality is inhuman.  As Massé says, it crushes the individual and 
dislocates social life.  The result is twofold containment.  The greater the 
congestion, the more difficulties of communication confine us in restricted 
localities.  The era of planetary exploration translates itself into increasing 
immobility at the level of daily life.  Again, the mass of knowledge acquired 
restricts us all to special fields 

 
 
 
 
58   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
with their own secret codes.  We must insist on the fact that these results are 
inextricably linked to one another. 
 
 
The same applies to the problem of transport-the means to escape, to 
freedom, to knowledge of the world.  In the insoluble problem of heavy traffic, 
noise, and loss of time in commuting, the intermingling of positive and 
negative effects is evident.  It is less so, but the more tragic, when one 
considers the effect of the growth of rhythms and complexity in work.  There 
is undoubtedly more efficiency and increased production, etc.  But it is this 
that impressively adds to what we have to call human scrap heaps.36  In our 
technical society we meet with increasing numbers of men and women who 
cannot adapt to specialization, who cannot follow the general rhythm of 
modern life.  This is not merely true in capitalist countries, as may be seen 
from the testimony of Rudenko, Soviet Minister of Labor, in 1961.  Nor does it 
apply merely to the aged.  An increasing number of young people are called 
"maladjusted.”  We are in the presence of a whole population of 
semi-incapable people.  They are so, not intrinsically, but relative to the 
technical society.  There are exhausted men and women, nerves stretched 
tautly, able to work part-time (the question of part-time work arises not merely 
for married women), unable to concentrate or to do precision work for long.  
There are also the slightly unbalanced, who can do slow and simple work 
(which no longer exists in our world), and the aged (we recall that with the 
present rhythm of work and the constant flow of new techniques, people are 
old at fifty, and that people have to be continually retrained to learn the new 
techniques in their own fields). 
 
 
There are not so many of these human scrap heaps in a traditional 
society because conditions of work that are not technical permit the 
employment of all kinds of people; anybody can be used.  Our own society, 
then, more and more strictly separates the qualified from the unqualified.  
Freely supporting a host of the unqualified is no doubt possible in a very 
productive society but it is reprehensible from a human standpoint.  We do 
not refer to exceptional cases but to the general difficulty, which may be 
temporary (but for how long?), of living in a continuously mobile society that 
has no frame of reference, in accelerated changes in forms, in work, in speed, 
in employment, and in knowledge.  The state of permanent disposability that 
is imposed on us is shocking to us all.  There are too many new ideas, novel 
situations, unconnected techniques, towns without roots (Massé). 
 
 
The risk is that there will be created what Mendras calls a 
 
 
AMBIVALENCE 
59 
 
counter-society made up of those who cannot follow the rhythm.  We should 
also include in this category what Keyfitz calls the unexploitable, that is, those 
whom it is not worth employing.  The situation of those who are exploited in 
the capitalist world is ultimately less serious than that of the unexploitable, of 
those who are useless, of those who are not worth employing, whom no one 
is interested in employing even for the minimum wage, who have nothing to 
do even in Socialist lands.  This is not the leisure society, which demands an 
income on which to live even while not working.  In the movement from 
production to productivity, technical progress makes whole categories of 
people unexploitable before it reaches a level of production that would make it 
possible to support them for nothing.  The situation is even more startling 
when one looks at it globally, taking into account the relation between the 
advanced technology of the West and the demographic growth of the Third 
World. 
 
 
The more technique advances, the greater the dangers.  This is true in 
practically every area.  The bolder the technique and the greater the 
achievements, the more unheard-of the danger.  A decision has been made 
to put a road across Amazonia which will link the Atlantic to the frontier of 
Peru.  The forest will have to be cut for 3,000 kilometers, a gigantic technical 
feat which endangers all the Indian populations of the area.  N.  Neto's 
description is both plain and terrible.  The Indians will lose by mere contact 
with civilization.  We need to take into account what this road will mean in 
terms of a human disaster. 
 
 
A spectacular example is the pollution caused by the fight against 
pollution.  The methods used to purify the air in the USA are very effective 
against smoke pollution, but unfortunately they eliminate certain solids, so 
that in combination with air and water the emissions form acids which the 
solids previously prevented, the result being that acid rain falls on houses and 
crops.  Rainwater has sometimes been no less acid than citrus juice.  Studies 
have shown that the situation in Norway is catastrophic in this field.  Fish and 
forests are affected and corrosion is reported.  But the clouds that are 
charged with acid come from places at which attempts have been made to 
solve the problem of smoke pollution. 
 
 
In this period of the diffusion of means of communication I might also 
study, as an instance of the inseparability of positive and negative effects, the 
inextricable mixture of information and propaganda.  But I will not dwell on 
this matter here since I have looked into it elsewhere.37  I will conclude with 
three general remarks.  According  

 
 
 
 
60   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
to the fine study of M.  Micaleff, the idea that technique serves human 
needs to increase individual well-being is illusory.38  Economic growth has 
become detached from improved well-being.  All remunerative activity is 
viewed as added value that generates well-being.  In many cases, 
however, the activity represents deducted value.  Thus investment in the 
anti-pollution industry does not improve well-being.  It is a supplementary 
cost of production which reduces well-being.  At times the deduction 
exceeds the addition.  E.  Morin also theorizes that the principle of 
entropy tends to degrade the original meaning of an action, to sidetrack it, 
and finally to dissolve it in the play of interactions.  In a haphazard fashion 
every action enters into a complex and multiple play of interaction which 
the action does not control and in many cases does not even suspect.39  
This applies in an exceptionally exact way to technique and to actions that 
use technical means.  Morin was probably thinking of technical actions, 
since others today are of no importance. 
 
 
We may conclude this account of the link between the positive and 
negative effects of technique with the profound thought of Jouvenel: "We 
are spoiling our environment not merely as individuals, when we act like 
ignorant brutes, but also as agents serving a useful social function when 
we do things in a way that is rational in terms of the objective but ill 
considered and damaging from the overall standpoint.”  The problem is to 
know whether, given technical action, it is possible to act in such a way 
that we take every factor into account, or whether the "overall standpoint" 
would not paralyze technical action. 
 
4.  Technical Progress Has a Great Number 
of Unforeseen Effects 
 
Unpredictability is one of the general features of technical progress.  We 
find it at the commencement, at the stage of invention and innovation, 
then in the course of application, and finally at the end, at the stage of 
effects.  I will study general unpredictability in the next chapter;40 here 
 
 
AMBIVALENCE 
61 
 
I am looking only at the effects and not at the total movement.  This 
section should thus be read in the perspective of the chapter that follows. 
 
 
The technical phenomenon never has the simplicity of a diagram.  All 
technical progress has three kinds of effects: the desired, the foreseen, 
and the unforeseen.41  When scientists do research in a technical sector, 
they are often looking for a precise and sufficiently clear and obvious 
result.  The kind of problem might be that of how to drill 3,000 yards to get 
at a pool of oil.  Various techniques can be used or new ones invented.  
We have here desired effects.  When there is a discovery, scientists see 
how it can be applied, work out the methods by which to apply it, and 
expect and obtain certain results.  The technique is fairly sure and yields 
the expected results.  There might be uncertainties and setbacks, but one 
can be assured that technical progress will eliminate the zone of 
uncertainty in each field. 
 
 
Each technical operation has a second series of effects.  These are 
not sought but they may be foreseen.  Thus a great surgeon once said 
that surgical intervention replaces one infirmity by another.  To be sure, 
the new infirmity is less serious than the one it replaces, or it is perhaps 
local instead of being a general threat.  Similarly, very effective 
medications might have serious side effects.  Accidents are numerous, 
leading to some 10 percent of all the hospitalizations in France.  The use 
of such medications is justifiable only if the risks associated with them are 
less than the benefits they confer.  A calculation has thus to be made of 
foreseeable risks and benefits.  These are effects that we would rather 
not have, that are negative, but that are also inevitable, that are known 
and kept within bounds.  In every technical operation, we have to be as 
clear-sighted as the surgeon and recognize effects that are not sought but 
that can be foreseen.  The fact that many people are not so clear-sighted 
we saw under our first section.  If they are not, they cannot properly 
evaluate what they are doing or strike a balance between the positive 
effects and the negative.42 

 
 
 
 
62   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
 
But then, third, there are totally unforeseeable effects.43  Yet we must 
still distinguish between effects that are unforeseeable but expected and 
effects that are unforeseeable and unexpected.  In the former case we 
can see the possibility but not give an exact prediction, Thus, in housing, 
we can see that unit housing might have profound psychological and 
sociological effects.  People who live in large unit housing will undergo 
changes, but how and in what respect we cannot foresee with any 
accuracy.  There will be some change in behavior and relations and 
amusements, but what these changes will be no one can predict; one 
guess is as good as another.  Ironically, the conclusions of Francastel on 
this subject are diametrically opposed to those of Le Corbusier.  All that 
we can be certain about is that there will be changes.  Leisure provides 
another example.  If it is true (and this is not absolutely certain in spite of 
the prophecies of a number of believers in technique who never explore 
anything in depth) that we are moving on to an era-a civilization?-of 
leisure, we can be sure that this will produce great changes in people, but 
no true prediction is possible.  This is a very hypothetical domain.  Our 
concrete knowledge of psycho-sociology is still uncertain, and we cannot 
go on to make a prediction.  We can only extrapolate, and since the data 
are limited and relatively uncertain, we are only guessing. 
 
 
There are also unexpected effects that might have been foreseen.  
Among dramatic examples I might adduce Venice, the Torrey Canyon, 
and those that have followed.  I am deliberately taking older instances.  
The troubles in Venice might have been foreseen.  The unexpectedness 
was due to a lack of information and a refusal to foresee what is negative.  
The slogan that the worst is the least certain is the best pillow for sloth.  It 
could easily have been foreseen that changes in navigation would cause 
damage.  In a city exposed to salt winds, the combination of salt and 
carbon deposits has, it seems, a pulverizing effect on marble.44  The 
sculptures, pictures, and frescoes have suffered more  
 
 
AMBIVALENCE 
63 
 
damage in the last twenty years than in the preceding five centuries.  We 
can well imagine the effects of the constant waves in the canals washing 
against walls than never previously knew anything but the slow motion of 
waves in the lagoon.  Again, it was easy enough to foresee the disastrous 
effects of an oil spill of the magnitude of the Torrey Canyon.  These 
effects were unexpected only because it was not known when the 
accident would happen.  What is known is that oil spills are likely. 
 
 
Then there are results that are totally unforeseeable and 
unexpected.  I recall an example that I have quoted elsewhere: the 
cultivation of cotton and corn.45  This represented incontestable progress 
for many new areas.  The cutting down of forests seemed to be a good 
and profitable venture from every standpoint.  Here was technical 
progress.  It could not be foreseen that the cotton and corn would destroy 
the soil, not only robbing it of its richness but attacking its very structure.  
The roots destroyed the organic link of humus.  Areas that were brought 
under cotton and corn were reduced to dust after thirty or forty years.  The 
wind had only to blow and nothing was left but rock.  This happened in the 
USA around 1930, but the phenomenon is global.  We find it not only in 
the USA but also in Brazil and Russia.  One of the battles between 
Khrushchev and certain agricultural specialists in the USSR related to this 
problem.  Experience served so little in this domain, even though the 
danger was known, that there was no hesitation in starting the cultivation 
of corn.  Khrushchev himself was passionately aware of the possibility of 
impoverishing the soil, and many Soviet agronomists were hostile to him 
for this reason.  The battle lasted for three years (1960-1963), ending with 
the famous declaration of Khrushchev to the Central Committee on 
December 10, 1963, that we have not sworn eternal fidelity to corn and 
hence must reduce the areas on which it is cultivated.  He stopped the 
experiment in time, but by then the effects were not unforeseeable; they 
were known very well.  Incidentally, this brings to light one aspect of the 
development of techniques: the obsession with efficiency is so great that 
increasingly serious risks are taken in the hope that they will be escaped.  
At first the ill effects of corn were not known.  The facts were 
unforeseeable; they could not be known until twenty-five or thirty years 
later.  Pessimistic evaluations (e.g., by William Vogt) lead to the 
conclusion that the arable land in the USA has been severely damaged (if 
not destroyed) by about 20 percent. 

 
 
 
 
64  
UNCERTAINTY 
 
 
In the same field agronomists are now alerted by the fact that the 
embodying of massive amounts of chemical fertilizer in the soil, mainly 
nitrogen, begins by greatly enhancing the yield but then destroys later 
crops by developing by-products and polluting neighboring lakes and 
underground water.  Above all, it is realized that new strains demand 
enormous quantities of water and fertilizer.  In some countries in which 
they have been introduced water is scarce and the people are too poor to 
buy sufficient fertilizer.  The poisonous effects are so great that the talk 
now is of a "satanic trilogy": improved strains, fertilizers, and pesticides. 
 
 
There are literally innumerable examples of unexpected secondary 
effects.  The whole world has been talking about a miracle in the case of 
the green revolution, but after three years it was seen that the new strains 
of rice carry resistant parasites that are disastrous for traditional strains 
and that they produce rice which is nutritionally inferior.  There is always a 
qualitative price.  Bringing large new areas under cultivation even under 
expert control always has disastrous results.  Nepal has made a big effort 
in this direction.  Excellent!  But it was necessary to cut down Himalayan 
forests, and catastrophic floods and devastation have been the result in 
Pakistan and Bangladesh.  The massive extension of irrigated lands has 
also entailed grave ecological distortion.  The Aswân Dam has brought 
epidemics to peasants in the Nile valley, and by retaining the soil it has 
reduced fertility.  A.  Toffler, with his usual illogicality, said that some 
people were arguing that the dam, "far from helping Egyptian agriculture, 
might someday lead to salinization of the land on both banks of the Nile....  
But such a process would not occur overnight.  Presumably, therefore, it 
can be monitored and prevented."46  He wrote this in 1970, but already by 
1973 it was possible to see the extensive and disturbing effects of the 
dam on the whole Nile valley.  Phenomena which disrupted the whole of 
life and culture had now become irreversible.  Modern fishing techniques 
(deep trawling) have destroyed the beds of algae where the fish seek 
their food and spawn.  Using techniques always pays off in the short term 
and then brings disaster.  I am not passing ethical judgment, but I identify 
very closely with the assessment of Mme.  Ferhat Delassert that 
"technological solutions work for good or ill according to whether they 
preserve or disturb the basic ecological balance."47  This is indeed an 
excellent principle by which to judge.  The examples that I have just given 
show that it is not always easy to 
 
 
AMBIVALENCE 
65 
 
detect quickly the profound effects of techniques and their unforeseeable 
consequences. 
 
 
It is especially in the field of chemistry that we find unforeseen and 
unexpected results of this kind.  We see it first in the use of medicines.  
No matter how serious or cautious researchers may be, they cannot 
possibly do all the experiments that are needed to discover every possible 
effect of a medicine.  Psychological effects cannot be discovered from 
animals.  Physical effects may also be unexpected.  Experiments cannot 
go on long enough to show what the long-term effects might be.  At issue 
are the effects on descendants, the effects after long years of use (e.g., of 
tranquilizers), and the effects some time after the use of a powerful 
medicine that might modify a physiological function. 
 
 
Do we have to recall the unexpected side effects of penicillin, or the 
dreadful scandal of thalidomide?  In the latter case, to save the face of 
science, it was argued that there had been no negligence at the 
experimental stage.  There had been six years of laboratory tests on 
animals.  But it was not possible to imagine every possible result.  The 
case of thalidomide is particularly well known because of the media 
campaign and the trial, etc.48  We must not forget, however, that there are 
more instances than we think.  In 1946 another drug (triparanol), which 
had been tested by serious laboratories, had to be withdrawn from the 
market because of very serious side effects.49 
 
 
Nor is it just a question of medications.  In many other areas the 
development of chemistry has had unforeseen effects that are very 
dangerous.  Even with careful controls, medications can be harmful, but in 
the case of other chemical products the controls are much less careful.  
The typical example is that of DDT.  From 1941 to 1951 it was claimed 
that DDT had no harmful effects on warm-blooded creatures.  Alarm was 
raised in 1951 when it was discovered accidentally that it caused rickets, 
and since 1958 all kinds of other harmful effects have come to light.  Now 
its use is so extensive that an official analysis by the U.S.  Department of 
Health in 1965 showed that average Americans have twelve parts per 
million of DDT in their tissues, while a report to the Council of Europe 
tends to show that forty-four parts per million can be fatal.  Since 1968 
there has been a very violent reaction to DDT 

 
 
 
 
66   
 UNCERTAINTY 
 
in the USA, and its manufacture and use have been strictly controlled 
since 1969. 
 
 
The more we advance, the more we bring to light the unpredictable 
and disturbing effects of many chemical products that have been in use 
for many years.  Almost every day an attentive reader will find the 
denouncing of very dangerous products that have been in common use.  
Thus biphenyl has a harmful effect according to the Academy of Medicine 
(February 1970), and phenacetin might be said to bring death by 
ignorance to those who take certain remedies that contain it.50  We might 
also refer to chemical products that are not taken.  Thus it was discovered 
in 1962 that certain plastics are not stable and can finally have effects that 
are dangerous to the human organisms.  Detergents, too, are by no 
means harmless.  Their abuse has harmful effects on watercourses, 
whether through the effluents of the factories that manufacture them or 
through the contamination of city water supplies.  Massive amounts of 
detergents in rivers destroy all life and according to some experts in 1963 
may 
even 
threaten 
the 
continuity 
of 
the 
water 
cycle 
(evaporation-precipitation).  It is now admitted that even in very small 
doses (a tiny fraction of a milligram per liter of water) they are fatal to fish.  
The best analysis of the problem may be found in a German study of 
1965 which led to a law regulating the manufacture of detergents and 
which showed how complex the problem is, the need being to 
manufacture a product that is profitable, effective, and yet harmless to 
bacteria and fish.  Thus far all satisfactory products are either too costly or 
ineffective.  A detergent that is harmless to fish is harmful to bacteria, 
which have an indispensable role.  Furthermore, detergents are still 
present.  Indeed, they are accumulating and their toxic effects are still to 
be feared.51 
 
 
As regards the toxicity of detergents (which remains in spite of every 
attempt at cleansing), the French Committee on Detergents published a 
report in 1963 which stated that there is little acute toxicity and that 
chronic toxicity is not any cause for disquiet.  But new and more powerful 
detergents have not been tested from this standpoint.  It is hard to relate 
to human beings the results obtained from animals, 
 
 
AMBIVALENCE 
67 
 
nor is it easy to calculate long-range effects.  We have to recognize the 
honesty of such conclusions, but specialists on toxicology have raised 
questions.  Direct toxicity is certainly rare, but granted the cancer-forming 
properties of some detergents, they agree on the important point that 
detergents can cross the intestinal barrier that agents normally cannot 
pass.  They are weighing the seriousness of this fact.  Fournier and 
Gervais show that no chemical product is without danger for any of us, 
that products created for profit create new dangers, and that there are so 
many associations that no one can detect them all.52  They point out how 
some controls, for example, the use of computers, the setting up of more 
centers for toxic detection, etc., can mitigate the dangers.  But the 
unforeseen must always be expected.  Most cosmetics are more or less 
dangerous.  It has also been discovered (after many years of use) that 
aerosol sprays, used in painting, lacquer, perfumes, pesticides, etc., are 
dangerous because of the "neutral" gas that is present in them and that 
can cause unexpected accidents.  The most serious gas, aeon, is not 
toxic, but it has been found that it releases gases (in refrigeration, air 
conditioning, etc.) which are attacking the ozone layer that encircles the 
atmosphere and which have already caused holes in this layer.  For us 
these are very harmful effects since that layer absorbs most of the 
ultraviolet rays that can disrupt the structures of living matter.  Hence the 
holes in the layer are fatal, but who of us think that we are participating in 
suicide when we use aerosol sprays?53 
 
 
Controls of new products are now stricter.  Y.  Rebeyrol can thus 
assure us that with progress in the chemistry of pesticides and general 
mistrust of these substances the launching of a new product is now 
preceded by many years of research and testing.  Groups like Pepro (of 
Rhône-Poulenc) and Plant Production Limited (of Imperial Chemical 
Industries) study seven or eight thousand new chemical products each 
year, and only one of these will reach the production stage after seven or 
eight years of research.  The effectiveness, specificity, and acute and 
chronic toxicity of a new molecule are studied first, then they are tested in 
all kinds of different conditions and climates, and the effects on the 
microorganisms of soils and species are verified.  Finally, there is 
research into the residues and derivatives in the cereals, fruits, and 
legumes that it is desired to protect.  Experiments will show what is the 

 
 
 
 
68   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
ultimate toxicity of the residues and determine the maximum tolerable 
dosage with a security coefficient of 100.  All countries submit a new 
pesticide to a strict procedure regulating the way in which it is used. 
 
 
This is all well and good.  Yet other technicians are impatient and 
find these delays ridiculous.  Doctors who know that a medication is being 
studied in a certain sector urgently want to use it. 
 
 
We have also to take into account two factors which are becoming 
increasingly disturbing: hazardous waste and accidents.  The question of 
waste in general (to which we shall have to return) is an agonizing one, 
for the more we produce and the more the public has to buy, the more 
there is to throw away, to discard.  For the economy to function well we 
need to replace cars and television sets every two years.  The waste is 
thus accumulating.  Here, however, I want to speak about hazardous 
waste, for example, dioxin, or potassium salts (cf. the Rhine), or nuclear 
waste.  Disposing of these things is very difficult if harm is not to be done.  
We must also look at accidents: Three Mile Island, Chernobyl, Bhopal, the 
emission of dioxin at Milan, etc.  Such accidents are not very numerous, it 
is said.54  So be it.  Yet this is not wholly true.  Every year there is one 
serious accident per 500 reactors,55 and if the risk is so great, can we 
engage in such operations without allowing for accidents?  The accidents 
of new technologies are not like airplane or road accidents.  They have 
long-term effects, perhaps for many generations.  They have unknown 
secondary effects that are discovered only after they happen.  Of course, 
the question is whether we can arrest progress (the course of technique) 
because of the serious problems it raises.  This is a choice of 
civilization.56 
 
 
One might say that unpredictable effects will finally come to 
 
 
AMBIVALENCE 
69 
 
light and can then be contained, analyzed, and avoided.  But we must qualify 
such optimism.  There are some irreversible effects.  There are irreparable 
accidents in the individual sphere (the victims of harmful products).  It is no 
real answer to say that progress demands victims.  In many cases it is 
impossible to go back, to clarify matters by saying that a fresh start will be 
made.  The effects are there.  DDT is fixed in the human organism; 
radioactivity is slowly increasing.  Often, too, the process is irreversible.  We 
cannot stop using pesticides.  The insects that have been affected display by 
way of compensation an increase in fecundity and resistance, so that they 
would proliferate on a gigantic scale if we ceased to destroy them.  If this is 
true, it shows in what direction we have to proceed. 
 
 
There are also phenomena which are so big and have such social 
implications that it is impossible to go back even though their harmful 
character is perceived.  Can we even conceive of stopping the manufacture of 
detergents, aerosols, or insecticides?  We face here an industrial and social 
complex which is too important to be called into question.  We might improve 
the products, or withdraw some medicines from circulation, but such acts 
would only lead to more unforeseeable effects.  In other words, we have less 
and less mastery over the techniques that we use.  If one product that is 
secondarily toxic is taken off the market, at the same time a hundred more 
are put on it the effects of which we do not know, since they will become 
evident only two or ten years later.  Finally, we have also to take into account 
the element of prestige and technical fervor. 
 
 
An aspect that is by no means negligible is that of the opposition 
between immediate needs and long-term effects.  Technique tends to reply to 
immediate needs.  I am not saying that all real needs are taken into account, 
or that technical development is in terms of needs, but when it does take 
needs into account they are always immediate needs, and it is in relation to 
these that we assess its effects and that it sees its justification.  But this being 
so, little account is usually taken of long-term effects.  We are indifferent to 
these so long as our immediate needs are met.  We are also indifferent to the 
promise that technique will satisfy our needs in ten or fifty years.  It is now 
recognized that the liberal promise that increased production will finally end 
the misery of the disadvantaged is a snare and delusion for the poor.  'At 
once" is an important feature in the technical mentality.  But this implies that 
only immediate effects claim attention.  Long-term effects?  What matter?  Let 
us eat and drink for tomorrow we die. 
 
 
But the harmful effects are long-term effects.  Even though they are set 
forth, people find it hard, to focus on, them.  How can arguments 

 
 
 
 
70  
UNCERTAINTY 
 
like those that I have advanced prevail against the evident need for 
technical progress?  We will constantly come back to this point.  The 
problem of nuclear disintegration offers the best example.  There is 
endless discussion of the dangerous thresholds of radioactivity.  
Innumerable experiments contradict one another.  Nevertheless, there is 
the real possibility of a dangerous accumulation of radioactivity and of the 
threshold of tolerance being lower than some say.57  The Chernobyl 
accident has given new life to the discussion.58  We face a decisive and 
irreversible eventuality.  If we were in the least bit rational this (by no 
means hypothetical) eventuality would cause us to stop all nuclear 
research and application.  But even though the world perish, we will not 
arrest technical progress. 
 
 
We can actually formulate the principle that the greater the technical 
progress, the larger the number of unpredictable effects.  To complete our 
demonstration we would have to give a detailed inventory of the situation.  
This is not possible.  But the importance of the examples given seems to 
me to be enough to make possible a generalization, and their quality 
authorizes it.  Ours is not a method of rough approximations.  Instead of 
drawing up statistics or collecting unimportant facts, we have here 
significant facts that carry considerable weight.  It seems to me that the 
analysis of the ambivalence of technical progress from this standpoint 
enables me to evaluate very accurately the reality of our society and our 
human life in a technicized world without engaging in value judgments or 
obeying concealed presuppositions. 
 
 
Meadows had good reason to say that in the presence of every 
technical invention, before adopting it and putting it to general use, we 
ought to ask the following questions.  What are the parallel effects, both 
socially and materially, of the general use of the invention.?  What are the 
social changes that are necessary to put it into use properly (the price to 
pay)?  If it is really effective and enables us to remove an obstacle to 
material growth, what will be the new limit that the system will come up 
against in expansion?  Should we prefer the constraints inherent in this 
limit to those that the invention is designed to overcome? 
 
 
AMBIVALENCE 
71 
 
 
These are vital questions that sum up the problem.  Unfortunately, in 
fact, we cannot answer them.  Even if we could, rational decision would never 
be possible.  I will add these questions to the principle that I believe to be 
fundamental, namely, that if a venture carries with it a considerable potential 
risk, even if this is not normally foreseeable or short-term, the course of 
wisdom is not to undertake it.  This principle would suppose full mastery of 
the situation and disbelief in progress.  For this reason there is no chance that 
it will ever be applied. 
 
 
Naturally, the facts that I adduce are simply examples of the profounder 
reality that we are trying to trace, namely, the permanent phenomenon of the 
unforeseeability of the effects of each new technique and their constantly 
renewed seriousness.  In other words, the illustrations are not designed, as in 
most works that deal with such things as pollution or pesticides, to stress the 
seriousness of the particular situation.  They are designed to stress the 
constant factor of ambivalence.  In effect, each time we become aware of one 
of these dangers we fairly quickly find an answer.  I am not unduly afraid of 
the current situation of pollution or of poisoning by pesticides.  It will be 
aggravated for a time but solutions will be found.  As regards pesticides, I 
realize that there is advanced research on replacing them by parasites that 
prey on the species we wish to eliminate.  A priori these should have no toxic 
effects on other living creatures.  But listing the disasters shows us at once 
that each time the problem raised is more difficult and the remedy more 
costly.  The constant feature is that we never know what we are starting.  We 
cannot even imagine it.  This fact sets at once a very strict limit to our ability 
to predict.  If we look at studies of the evolution of techniques, we note that 
normally they can see extensions or, on the basis of current scientific 
research, applications.  But what threatens totally to upset the calculations is 
the appearance of problems or dangers that result from the techniques 
themselves, that cannot be imagined in advance, and that demand a great 
deal of time, of research, of money, which ought to be devoted to foreseen 
technical applications.  This ambivalence of technique constitutes the true 
limit of the possibility of prediction. 
 
 
I must now draw some conclusions from these fragmentary data. 
 
 
1.  There, is no progress that is ever definitive, no progress that is only 
progress, no progress without a shadow.  All progress runs the risk of 
declining.  There is a double play of progress and regress.  The 19th century 
ignored the shadow of industrial development and we today basically ignore 
the shadow of technical progress.  But this progress entails and produces 
specific regress.  Technocratic thinking finds a 

 
 
 
 
72   
UNCERTAINTY 
 
place only for what is vital, both anthropologically and socially.  Its only logic 
is the simplistic logic of artificial machines.  Technocratic competence is that 
of experts whose general blindness envelops specialized lucidity.  Socially 
and politically, technocratic action can only be mutilated and mutilating. 
 
 
2.  Ambivalence can take the form of stunning reverses.  We shall have 
occasion to list some of these.  In this context let us simply say that technique 
has always functioned in a mode of rationality but that at the present point of 
development it is falling into irrationality and at times delirium.  It has always 
had utility in view and followed the criteria of utility, but it has now reached a 
climax in generalized inutility.  It has always sought value, but it now functions 
in a way that contributes nothing of value (mere services and data 
processing).  It has always tended to be constructive, but the potential for 
destruction is now its main development.  Irrational reactions in individuals 
(music, sports, social maladaptation) have always counterbalanced it, but 
now irrationality lies in technique itself, in its processes and results, so that it 
includes the irrationality of the reactions themselves. 
 
 
Ambivalence confronts us with one of the chief questions put by 
technique.  We refuse to see what real technical progress is.  We refuse to 
see its real consequences and the way in which it calls into question all that 
we are.  We refuse to pay the price that technique exacts.  When one draws 
attention to this price, we call it pessimism.  We also refuse the possible 
technical remedies to the problems that technique causes, for we want to 
regard these problems as accidents, and to think that we have opted for the 
good side of technique.  We are always too late, therefore, when we try to 
respond to specific technical challenges.  In the face of technique, and of our 
inability to confront it, I would say then, with Livy, that we can endure neither 
our evils nor their cures, and with Tacitus, that the weakness of human nature 
means that cures always lag behind evils. 
 
 
I know how the defenders of progress usually reply to the problem of 
ambivalence and unpredictability.  We are called, they say, to more 
responsibility, more choice, more freedom.  We have to prove ourselves 
worthy of what we create (as is said increasingly about the pill).  I wish we 
could, but who is to guarantee that most people will quickly rise to this high 
level of awareness and responsibility?  We face a whole host of dangers 
caused by technique, and the most serious of them are as yet only 
hypothetical.  But is not the hypothesis enough that someone might put a 
given technique to evil use?  Technological instruments become increasingly 
powerful and therefore pose greater and greater dangers.  If at the extreme 
there are instruments of absolute 
 
 
AMBIVALENCE 
73 
 
power (not merely the H-bomb but computer systems that might control 
whole populations, or chemical intervention), who is to guarantee that an 
absolute government will never use them, that it will never, for example, 
make use of electrodes in the brain (Rorvik's ideal)?59  As we know less 
and less about the results of our innovations and are increasingly unable 
to find the necessary remedies, little more is needed to bring us face to 
face with an absolute risk.  This is why all technical development that 
increases infinitely a risk that is hypothetical but absolute seems to me to 
be totally reprehensible.  This is the first time that I have said this. 
 
5.  Our Lack of Awareness 
 
 
An embarrassing question remains that I shall treat only briefly.  If 
technique has such negative effects and raises such dangers and threats, 
why do we have so little awareness of it?  Why do most people not sense 
it or see it?  Why is there this headlong rush into technical progress?  
Why do only a few specialists know it?  Soveso, Bhopal, Chernobyl-but 
we are assured that these were simply rare and local accidents.  They are 
no challenge.  There are, in fact, many converging reasons that combine 
to prevent awareness even apart from the great machine of advertising 
and propaganda that plays such a big part in molding public opinion. 
 
 
As always, I prefer to examine the mechanism of social organisms 
rather than the evil or self-interested intervention of specific groups.  
Furthermore, we shall be looking at advertising later.  The first factor in 
suppressing awareness is very simple.  The positive results of a technical 
enterprise are immediate.  They are felt at once, as in the case of 
electricity or television.  The negative effects, however, are long-term and 
are felt only with experience.  I have sufficient confidence in the honesty 
of researchers and technicians to be convinced that if they discovered the 
dangers in time they would not market a product.  But the negative effects 
come to light only many years after the product is on the market and there 
can be no going back.  Automobiles cause terrible slaughter (12,000 
deaths a year in France), but this does not halt our love affair with them.  
The fact that the negative effects 

 
 
 
 
74  
UNCERTAINTY 
 
come much later is decisive.  Second, we have to take into account what has 
been called the paradox of Harvey Brooks,60 namely, that whereas only a 
small fraction of the population usually has to bear the costs and carry the 
risks of a new technique, the advantages are widespread.  Often, too, the 
disadvantages for the local group are barely perceptible (to public opinion) 
and the global advantages for the population carry much more weight. 
 
 
A chief engineer at one of the most polluting factories in France once 
told me with a frankness which I appreciated that the area around the factory 
was obviously dangerous in spite of precautions, for it was a traditional place 
of pasturage and farmers from a village close by continued to lead their cows 
there.  Occasionally some of these cows died, but it was much less costly to 
compensate the owners than to install a more complex system of depollution.  
One might add that often specialists themselves do not see the dangers or 
drawbacks.  The public certainly does not see air pollution and is not aware of 
the pollution of water tables.  If there are no immediate ill effects, it is hard to 
impose what seem to be useless measures (e.g., catalytic converters).  The 
public will not accept the changes that are needed.  Intellectuals even less so!  
As they prepare to "enter the 21st century" (to quote the title of Morin's 
famous work), what they think are the problems of society are already 
outdated and their responses are inadequate.  The grasp of things is 
increasingly behind the times even in supposed looks at the future.  The 
problems that arise are thus increasingly difficult because there is public 
awareness of them only when they have become vast and inextricable. 
 
 
A third feature is to the same effect.  Except in the case of accidents the 
problems and dangers are very diffuse and there seems to be no clear causal 
relation between the technique and its effects, for example, between industrial 
techniques and the creation of the proletariat or medical techniques and the 
population explosion.  The more hazy and hypothetical or contested a 
problem is, the less it affects the public.  People prefer not to see it or to hear 
about it.  Those who speak about the dangers are labeled ignorant or 
pessimistic.  The advantages are sure and plain to see; the disadvantages 
are diffuse and uncertain, all the more so since there are experimentations.  
The pill is glorified in the name of women's liberation.  Women can have 
children as they choose.  Those who oppose it are sexists or moralists or 
enemies of progress.  The risks of cancer ought to be considered but are 
ignored. 
 
 
AMBIVALENCE  
75 
 
Even serious studies discount also the cardiac risks.  But the danger has 
come to light where it was least expected.  There has been an explosion of 
venereal disease, which has again become a scourge, and the fact is plain 
that it is a secondary consequence of the pill.  Yet it is a diffuse effect, and the 
causality is not apparent to the public. 
 
 
A final factor is that the advantages are concrete but the disadvantages 
are usually abstract.  Motorcyclists take pleasure in their engines and the 
pleasure is doubled if they make the maximum noise.  But there is now 
increasing alertness to the great danger that noise presents to our society, 
affecting hearing, the heart, and the nerves. 
 
 
Noise is regarded as one of our greatest scourges, but in spite of its 
confirmed effects, which are precise and concrete, the danger seems to be an 
abstract one to the public.  The same applies to the dangers of television.  
These are obvious examples.  In many cases, however, the danger is not 
apparent at all (and this is one of the inevitable setbacks to serious 
ecologists) -it comes to light only after long arguments, by means of a specific 
method that must be used to present to the public problems that they do not 
understand, in studies that demand a certain competence.  This is why the 
public can have no awareness of the negative effects of technique.61 
 
 
Yet this is not the end of the matter, for even if awareness developed it 
would come up against three decisive obstacles.  First we have the existence 
of the so-called military-industrial complex, which really ought to be called the 
technico-military-statist complex.  The original term applies only to a capitalist 
organization and even there it is too narrow.  Not industry; but the technical 
system is to blame, along with the state, which is the engine and primary user 
of techniques and which organizes the military.  The larger term embraces the 
socialist world as well.  This complex will prevent awareness from developing 
and having an impact.  Its power is unlimited, and scientists and groups of 
militants are helpless against it.  All the opposition to nuclear power stations 
has been of little avail even though this subject did attract public interest.  The 
interests behind technical operations are so important that opposition is 
useless and is regarded as retrograde. 
 
 
Second, we must add that the operations involve enormous amounts of 
private and public capital.  They must not stop merely because the public is 
uneasy.  The use of a technical means must not 

 
 
 
 
76  
UNCERTAINTY 
 
be abandoned because it has harmful effects.  The situation is the same 
as in the 19th century when the exploiting of mines went on even though 
miners suffered from pulmonary ailments.  Investments have to pay 
dividends (to the state or the firm).  The harmful effects are less important 
than this imperious demand.  At best they will be assessed financially and 
compensation will be paid.  But the work will go on. 
 
 
This leads us to the third point, namely, that damages and dangers 
are assessed only in money.  Methods cannot be changed, manufacturing 
stopped, branches of production abandoned, except very rarely.  
Compensation is given, for example, to the inhabitants of polluted coasts 
or the sick at Bhopal.  This forms part of the general expenses and it 
might make the economic situation a little more difficult, but the facile 
conclusion is that we do not stop progress.  This is why technique is 
intrinsically and unalterably ambivalent.  Its negative effects are never 
suppressed nor are they a reason for suppressing operations that have 
positive effects.  A balance ought to be struck at the outset between the 
advantages and the disadvantages, all the disadvantages, those that 
cannot be assessed in terms of money and also those in the realm of 
psychology and social grouping.  But this is unthinkable.  According to 
Salomon, we need new rules such that unfavorable effects are always 
less than they would be if competition alone were at work, and we need to 
define these rules at an early stage in the process before interests are in 
place, situations are set up, and the dynamism of competition renders 
their obligatory application impossible.62  This is why all the dissertations 
on 
autonomy 
(individual 
and 
institutional), 
decentralization, 
personalization, the growth of liberty, the opening up to small groups, and 
democratization thanks to new technologies -and these dissertations have 
multiplied infinitely over the past few years-are absolutely futile and 
inconsistent.  For they ignore the feature which is intrinsic to the very 
being of technique: its irrepressible ambivalence. 
All endnotes are footnotes in the published text, but have been converted 
to endnotes to help formatting in E-texts.  So that the page numbers 
remain the same as the published book without creating waste, etc. 
                                                 
1  I am taking up and developing here my earlier study of ambivalence: 
"Réflexions sur l'ambivalence du progrès technique," La Revue administrative 18 
(1965): 380-91. 
2  See Lech Zacher, "Illusions of Technological Optimism," Science, Technology 
and Society 2/2 (1982). 
3  Cf.  the remarkable and precise studies of I.  C.  Merriam, "Concepts et 
Mesures du bien-être," Analyse et Prévision (1969), and J.  Desce, 
"Consommation individuelle et Consommation collective: essai de mesure," ibid 
4  In spite of its declared optimism, I know of no more radical book than Jouvenel's 
L'Arcadie when, in assessing the technical society, it draws attention to the failure 
to enhance the quality of goods, the quality of the environment, and tile rapport 
with labor, which ought to have been the normal result of the increase of wealth. 
5  At this point I must take issue with the simplistic view of de Closets regarding 
the -ambiguity" of technique.  For him technique has better and worse aspects 
according to human freedom.  We have seen already how limited is our power in 
this area, how severely our freedom is limited.  The great remedy that de Closets 
proposes is organization.  Techniques do harm for lack of organization; technical 
specialists know little about this.  What do Closets fails to see is that organization 
itself belongs to the technical system; it does riot stand in counterpoise with it. 
6  Cf.  William Kuhns, The Post-Industrial Prophets (Now York: Weybright and 
Talley, 1971), who describes technique as radically ambivalent in its effects.  At 
first, however, only the negative or the positive effects are seen, the former in the 
case of railroads and steamships, the latter in the case of automobiles. 
7  Cf.  J.  Chesneaux, De Ia modernité les treize effets pervers de Ia modernité. 
8  Albert Merlin, "Les entreprises qui n'ont pas d'étoile," Le Monde, June 24, 1986. 
9  See J.  Ellul, Technological System, pp.  256-82. 
10  Cf.  G.  Dessus, "Les Coûts et Rendements sociaux," Analyse et Prevision 
(1966).  On this subject F.  Partant, Que la crise s'aggrave (Solin, 1978), has the 
original thought that "technical progress has illusory results but is supposedly 
necessary for social progress.  We have to pay for the latter.  We can achieve it 
only by increasing wealth.  It will come only if directly or indirectly it contributes to 
economic growth.  It is less an acquisition financed by the value created by labor 
than a source of productive activities.  But our mode of increasing wealth 
constantly gives rise to new domestic social problems that are even more 
dramatic on the international scale.  Hence social progress has to be an effort to 
combat the negative consequences of this mode of increasing wealth.”  We might 
apply this thought to what we call technical progress. 
11  See Gessain, Anmassolik (1969). 
12  See Le Lannon, Le Déménagernent du territoire; B.  Charbonneau, Le Jardin 
de Babylone (Paris: Gallimard, 1969); J.  Piel, Les Paysons et le Paysage (1966); 
0.  C.  Herfendahl and A.  V.  Knees, Quality of the Environment (Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1965). 
13  G.  Friedmann, Sept Études sur l'homme et la technique (1966). 
14  It is now established that nervous tension brings on premature aging.  In a very 
exact study Viennay has shown that physical labor did not prevent people from 

 
 
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                              
working to age 65, but miners are now old at 45, workers on assembly lines at 40, 
and women in some industries at 30.  Some automated factories have to find 
fresh personnel every two years (Colloque européen sur I'automatisation 
[Grenoble, 1977]).  Jouvenel (Arcadie) brings out the difference between 
organized, technicized work and free work.  Leisure is no compensation, for the 
person who is free after work is not in the same situation as the one who takes 
pleasure in work. 
15  See no 17 below on biological rhythms. 
16  But this has now been questioned, along with the whole of Taylorism.  Cf.  B.  
Coriat, L'Atelier et le Chronomètre (C.  Bourgois, 1979), which draws attention to 
the crisis in the scientific organization of work. 
17  More and more studies have come out on the importance of biological rhythms.  
There is a daily rhythm that cannot be broken; medications work differently 
according to the time they are taken (La Recherche 132 [1982]).  Cf.  A.  
Reinberg, L'Homme malade (in temps (Stock, 1979). 
18  I am of course skeptical regarding the figures for the 16th or 17th century, 
which can hardly be viewed as scientific. 
19  There are actually some 15 million handicapped people in the USA who would 
have died at birth. 
20  Massenet, "Du changement technique a l'éclatement social," Analyse et  
Prévision 11 (1971).  Cf.  also the thesis of C.  Castoriadis that there is a power 
which is impotence as regards the essentials of contemporary technoscience, 
"Voie sans issue?" in A.  Jacquard, ed., Les Scientifiques parlent (Paris: Hachette, 
198 7). 
21  E.  Goldsmith, et al., Blueprint for Survival (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1972). 
22  For an interesting demonstration of this relativity see the University of 
Bordeaux thesis of J.  Gellibert, "Le Choix de la biomasse comme énergie.  .  .”  
(1986), which by estimating the power output of watermills and windmills in the 
16th century shows that between 250,000 and 500,000 tons of petroleum would 
be needed to produce the same amount of energy.  The relativity of technical 
progress! 
23  Herman Kahn and A.  J.  Wiener, The Year 2000 (New York: Macmillan, 1967); 
idem, "Pouvoirs forestiers et choix humains," Analyse et Prévision (1969). 
24  Cf.  F.  Partant, Que la crise s'aggrove, who points out that our mode of 
enrichment constantly creates new social problems; cf.  also Giarini and 
Loubergé, La Civilisation technicienne à la dérive, who argue that new methods of 
production can have the opposite results from those intended, e.g., the reducing 
of whole areas to deserts by overexploitation of the soil. 
25  Cf.  D.  Hafemeister, "Emerging Technologies for Verification of Arms Control 
Treaties," Science, Technology and Society 5/4 (1985). 
26  Of the many works see especially F.  Ramade, Écologie des ressources 
naturelles (Masson, 1980); against ecology cf.  Missica and Wolton, L'Illusion 
écologique (Paris: Seuil, 1979). 
27  Cf.  G.  Lambert, Le CO2 aujourd'hui: les controverses scientifiques; R.  
Delinas, "Le gaz carbonique naturel et artificiel," La Recherche 114 (Sept.  1980). 
28  The growth is aggravated by continuing growth in the Third World and 
stagnation or even regression in developed countries.  People in the West live 
with the firm idea that we have obtained a spectacular prolonging of life, and that 
 
this is one of tile incontestable triumphs of of the quality of our life and of 
technique.  But this does not give a totally accurate picture.  The reduction of 
mortality in the industrialized West goes hand in hand with stagnation and even 
regression in the population, and now there is even a fall in average life 
expectancy due to more male deaths, the development of harmful sociocultural 
behaviors (alcohol, drugs, accidents), the aging of the population, and less 
efficient sanitation systems (even though we have the opposite impression).  The 
demographic gains are very fragile and the amelioration of health depends 
increasingly oil unstable social and cultural factors.  We have little reason to 
boast.  Cf.  J.-C.  Chesnais, "La durée de la vie dans les pays industrialisés," La 
Recherche 147 (Sept.  1983).  R.  Lewontin (in Jacquard, ed., Les Scientifiques 
parlent) adds that population does not depend on fertility but on Such resources 
as food and space.  Furthermore, an increase in the number of young people can 
lead to a decline in the adult population.  These are vital points that are regularly 
overlooked. 
29  It is true that proteins can be manufactured by microorganisms and that some 
fast-food steaks contain up to 30 percent of such proteins.  Such is our future!  
See Bourgeois-Pichart in Jacquard, ed., Les Scientifiques parlent. 
30  "Le droit de procréer," Le Monde, Jan.  1972. 
31  Alfred Sauvy, Zero Growth?  tr.  A.  Maguire (New York: Praeger, 1976). 
32  On this subject cf.  the works of B.  de Jouvenel, especially Arcadie, and B.  
Charbonneau's Le Jardin de Babylone (1969).  One of the few writers to see how 
positive techniques become negative is Donald Schon, Technology and Change 
(New York: Dell, 1967).  In his last chapter he emphasizes that we are beginning 
to realize that we cannot regard the bad effects of technique merely as bad 
application, but that technological changes themselves sabotage the good effects 
that are expected from progress to the benefit of the great society. 
33  I will simply refer to Galbraith's The Affluent Society, 2nd ed.  (Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1970). 
34  Nathan Keyfitz, "Développernent, déinograpbie, technologie, isolement des 
pays tropicaux," Analyse et Prévision (1967). 
35  P.  Massé, "L'homme encornbré," Prospective (1969). 
36  Cf.  Willard Wiatz, Report to the Secretary on the State of Labor (USA, 1965), 
in which he concludes that there is a growing "human scrap heap." 
37  See J.  Ellul, Propaganda, tr.  Konrad Kellen (New York: Knopf, 1968). 
38  Micaleff in Jean Touscoz, et al., Transferts de technologie (Paris: PUF, 1978).   
39  E. Morin, Pour sortir du XXe siécle (Nathan, 1981). 
40  I will leave aside the unpredictability due to the autonomy assumed by 
technical instruments, as in the story of the robot revolt.  I will simply emphasize 
that the greatest uncertainty obtains in this regard.  For one thing machines are 
simply machines and cannot be autonomous.  No machines can think or create.  
Nevertheless, there is a tendency toward autonomy and a creative capacity, e.g., 
in the aesthetic realm.  Furthermore, "as computers become more self-programing 
they will increasingly tend to perform activities that amount to 'learning' from 
experience and training.  Thus they will eventually evolve subtle methods 
processes that may defy the understanding of the human designer" (Kahn and 
Wiener, The Year 2000, p.  90). 
41  Schon, Technology and Change, offers a good analysis of risks (the probability 

 
 
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                              
that an action will produce an undesired effect) and uncertainties (situations in 
which we cannot analyze risks or there are unlimited possibilities and 
applications).  He stresses that technical innovation is the biggest factor of 
uncertainty, since it unceasingly creates situations in which one cannot say what 
the real issues are. 
42  There is still a good deal of contingency in this regard.  In the economic sphere 
external effects have been the most studied.  A barrage at the mouth of a river 
can cause changes in the movement of the tides and affect ports.  These effects 
have now begun to be taken into account; cf.  D.  Pearce and S.  G.  Sturmey, 
"Les effets externes et I'antagonisme entre bien-être individuel et bien-êre 
collectif," Analyse et Prévision (1967). 
43  See F.  F.  Darling, Wilderness and Plenty (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1970), 
who shows especially that each liberating technique always brings now 
constraints.  See also A.  Mendel, Les Manipulations génétiques (Paris: Seuil, 
1980), who raises basic and pertinent questions regarding genetic engineering. 
44  This process accentuates the damage caused by automobile and industrial 
fumes as these come down on stone monuments in the form of rain and have a 
corrosive effect; cf.  Y.  Rebeyrol in Le Monde, Jan.  1, 1970; A.  Jaubert, "Venise 
sauvée des eaux?" Le Recherche 122 (May 1981). 
45  Ellul, Technological Society.  The same for all the manipulations of the genetic 
genes: one never knows the exact consequences; cf.  "Les manipulations 
génétiques: des risques encore mal évalués," La Recherche 107 (Jan.  1980). 
46  Alvin Toffler, Future Shock (New York: Bantam, 1970), p.  444 
47  Ferhat Delassert, Analyse et Prévision (1970). 
48  Cf.  J.  Paulus and J.  Rozet, Le Procès de la thalidomide (1963).  There were 
4,500 instances of infant deaths or deformity.  At the trial expert witnesses 
disagreed, some saying that the drug was not at all harmful in normal conditions.  
We find the same defense of DDT (cf.  Y.  Rebeyrol, Le Monde, Aug.  1973). 
49  Outside the field of chemistry, sonograms, while posing no danger to adults, 
might be very harmful to the fetus; see La Recherche 106 (Dec.  1979). 
50  Escoffier and Lambiotte, Le Monde, Feb.  1970. 
51  Unpredictable side effects of this kind have produced some notable theses.  
Thus I.  Cheret in L'Eau (1968) adopts a position that is gaining ground in the 
USA, namely, that when a new product is invented there ought to be verification 
before it is put on sale to make sure that it can be introduced into the natural cycle 
without doing harm, being not only nontoxic but also ecologically sound.  This 
policy would be disastrous for plastics and detergents.  It would mean, however, 
that unpredictable effects are dealt with by reintegration into the natural cycle. 
52  Fournier and Gervais, Le Monde, Sept.  1972. 
53  Cf.  P.  Aimedieu, "La disparition de l'ozone (essential)," La Recherche 186 
(1986).  Supersonic aircraft contribute to the destruction of the ozone layer as 
well.  A conference on the subject at Vienna in 1985 was fruitless, but a protocol 
of agreement was signed at Montreal in 1987. 
54  But most of the accidents are ignored or concealed by the media.  C.  
Castoriadis (in Jacquard, ed., Les Scientifiques parlent) has revealed that the 
USSR is manufacturing bacteriological weapons and that two serious accidents 
have taken place (at Novossibirsk and Sverdlovski) with the escape of a virus.  
Thousands died in these two cases.  Delayed fallout has also to be taken into 
 
account, as at Three Mile Island (cf.  La Recherche 113 [19801). 
55  See La Recherche 137 (1982). 
56  Cf.  Patrick Lagadec, La Civilisation du risque (Paris: Seuil, 1981).  A good 
example of unexpected effects may be seen in the seemingly innocent field of 
electronics.  Acid baths are needed in the manufacture of chips to impress the 
circuits on the ceramic, and strong detergents are needed to eliminate impurities.  
An inquiry at an important factory in 1983 revealed that it was storing reserve 
products in containers that did not prevent infiltration into the soil, thus 
contaminating the water, and causing seven deaths in a neighboring town and 
many birth accidents and defects.  Accident?  Negligence?  No doubt, but the 
more such operations, the greater the probability of such accidents and 
negligence.  Cf "Technopolis," special number of Autrement, 1985. 
57 M.  Errera (La Recherche 168 [Aug.  1985]) has shown that the effects of even 
low-dosage nuclear radiation are by no means negligible, and we have to take 
into account its progressive increase.  Furthermore, for many pathologies there is 
no threshold of tolerance.  Some authors have also noted mental retardation 
among descendants of the survivors of Hiroshima to two generations.  When 
scientists are not sure, they ought to admit that there is no dose of radiation that is 
without its effect. 
58 Cf.  Ellul, "Incertitudes," Sud-Ouest Dimanche, May 1986. 
59 We shall take up later the problem of decision, but I might quote here the 
question of Castoriadis: "Who is to decide on in vitro fertilization?  Who is to 
decide that the way is open for genetic engineering?  Who is to decide on 
anti-pollution practices that produce acid rain?" (in jacquard, ed., Les Scientifiques 
parlent). 
60 60.  H.  Brooks, "Science, technologie et société dans les années 80," OCDE 
Report, La politique de la science et de la technologie dans les années 80. 
61 In rebuttal one might point to the relative success of the Greens in Germany.  
But this success does not represent any true awareness of technique.  It is due to 
the fact that the Greens have become a political party of the left with some 
fragmentary policies regarding technique. 
62 J.-J.  Salomon, Prométhée.empêtré (Paris: Pergamon, 1981). 

 
 
CHAPTER II 
_____________________________________ 
 
Unpredictability 
 
1.  Introduction to Unpredictability 
 
 
We live in a society in which looking ahead has become an absolute 
necessity.  In earlier societies farmers and seafarers needed to forecast 
the weather a few days ahead, merchants had plenty of time to assess 
market needs, workers had no need to look ahead, and although 
politicians needed to foresee the reactions of their partners in a limited, 
well-structured arena, they too had plenty of time to do so.  Since our 
invasion by technical objects, however, along with the intensity and 
complexity of relations, the rapidity of reactions, and the growth in 
population, looking ahead has become essential in all matters and all the 
time.  We have to look ahead in an automobile.  We have to provide 
safeguards and assess risks.  Every business has to arm itself against 
competition; it has to prepare for the future.  All enterprises invest and 
borrow.  The future, then, has to be as they forecast.  If not, they can lose 
their investments and be unable to repay their loans.  Without foresight an 
economic debacle is certain.  The state, too, must foresee growth and 
prepare for it or else its budget will become enormous.  If production does 
not increase, the state's drain on the economy will be excessive, which 
will help to bring on recession.  There has also to be global forecasting.  
"Society accepts the present only as preparation for the future.  We all 
accept our economic and social status only because there is hope of 
improving it.  Everything is viewed in relation to the future, hence growth 
is an economic necessity...  Our economic and technical construction is in 
reality only a movement.  Our wealth exists only if it continues to grow."1 
 
 
 
 
 
77 
 
 
78   
UNCERTAINTY 
 
 
The urgent and universal need to look ahead applies in all systems.  
A liberal system of government?  This, too, rests on calculations of 
strategy and probability.  The stock market is continuously a school of 
forecasting.  Buying and selling shares take place on the assumption that 
they will rise or fall.  We are also aware of the economic effects of 
predictions which by their very existence bring about the effects that they 
regard as probable.  We know the effects of predicting devaluation, or 
how entrepreneurs are encouraged or discouraged to launch a particular 
business according to their anticipation of possible profits.  In effect, no 
social reality is independent of the anticipations, predictions, and general 
indications that are offered in relation to it.  A prediction may become 
"true" simply by reason of the actions or reactions that it induces. 
 
 
Morton has studied this remarkable fact of the "unanticipated 
consequences of intentional social actions.”  What we have here is 
"self-fulfilling prophecy."2  To understand the prediction of one thing, we 
need to understand many others.  A technical innovation has no chance 
of being accepted by a manufacturer and marketed unless its chances of 
being accepted and bought by the public have been assessed first.  
Agriculture no longer depends on the weather but on a vast international 
market which has to be predicted.  This need to forecast is vital in a liberal 
order.  It is on this condition that the invisible hand orders everything.  It is 
also on this condition that individual disorder becomes collective* order.  It 
is here that we find Friedrich Hayek's intermediary category in which the 
social machine is self-organized and can engender forms that no one can 
control but that come into play to the degree that individual and group 
predictions of probable evolution prove to be right.3  This implies an ideal 
of total transparency. 
 
 
However that may be, in our society, which is neither liberal nor 
interventionist, there is an increasing need for forecasting.  The military 
must predict the potential of an enemy.  There has to be forecasting of 
economic growth and of technical possibilities.  As technique becomes 
more powerful, forecasting becomes not only more necessary but also 
more accelerated.  The more powerful the technique, the more serious 
the effects of an error in forecasting.  (At 35 miles per hour an automobile 

 
 
UNPREDICTABILITY 
79 
 
crash might not be too bad, but at 150 Miles per hour it would be fatal.)  
This applies on every level of life and for every activity, whether individual, 
collective, national, or global.  The situation is much worse under more or 
less totalitarian, statist regimes with a ubiquitous administration, in which 
the state plays the role of providence and the economy is planned.  
Planning is not the same as forecasting.  It fixes long-term objectives that 
are to be reached sector by sector.  State planning has to be transformed 
into individual planning to achieve a plan that takes account of objectively 
calculated needs according to a well-known double procedure.  But it has 
been progressively shown that this system does not work and that 
attention must be paid to what is viable.  Hence forecasts have again to 
be made.  Thus in French projects, where plans have always been 
flexible, it has been seen that everything depends on a better forecasting 
of technical progress. 
 
 
France used to think that economic growth could be controlled, but 
as Chesneaux has said, the plan finally works only for the state itself.4  
The state is an indispensable aid to economic growth.  The plan decides 
how much the state will give and to whom.  Yet it has less and less 
control over the growth.  Thanks to television it has impressed upon the 
public the image of a consumer society but it has not been able to 
stimulate growth.  Interestingly, the Socialists, with their desire to direct 
the economy, have failed.  Big business has a monopoly of big technical 
projects.  J.-P Chevènement could state that the task of the Socialists 
was to organize the profound technological transformation that France 
needs.5  It is obvious that they have not succeeded and that the change 
that has come about is quite different.  What was needed was to forecast 
the consequences of the new technological beginning, but in fact 
practically nothing was foreseen: not the revolution in personal habits, not 
the upsetting of relations between regions and generations, not the risk of 
higher unemployment.  At all costs we need to foresee, but the 
government was incapable of doing this, and the plan that should have 
produced a rational economy "opened up an abyss before being a failure" 
(Chesneaux). 
 
 
Yet the failure was not because the most scientific or technical 
methods were not sought for forecasting.  Forecasting by linear 
extrapolation had long since been abandoned.  Instead, two great 
branches were developed.  One was futurology.  This takes account of all 
possible scenarios in an effort to foresee which are the most probable.  G.  
Berger 
 
 
80   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
worked out this method toward the end of the 1950s.  It is not a science 
but a rigorous exercise in thought.  Present action is based on 
hypotheses regarding the future.  An evaluation of the true long-term 
stakes is thus demanded.  The core of the method is the discovery of the 
stakes so that each group concerned may devise a strategy to win these 
stakes.  Futurology looks at all possibilities in the actual situation and tries 
to work out the evolution of the most probable.  But we have to say that 
failure will often be the outcome.  E.  Morin rightly points out that in the 
1960s the method presupposed that the past and present were known, 
that society was stable, and that on a firm foundation the future would 
develop dominant trends in technique, the economy, etc.  In its feeble 
optimism this type of prospective thinking believed that the 21st century 
would reap the ripe fruits of the progress of humanity.  In fact it 
constructed an imaginary future on the basis of an abstract present.6 
 
 
The other branch is that of models.  This system analyzes the 
existing situation, establishes the main parameters, considers what might 
happen if one of these parameters is varied, and then looks at all possible 
variations in all the parameters.  But this approach gives a very broad 
canvas of possible developments without saying which has the best 
chance of coming to pass.  It can hardly offer much guidance for action.  
In "Futuribles," a movement of forecasting launched by B.  de Jouvenel, a 
different process has thus developed, that of proposing objectives instead 
of simply assessing what is most probable.  First we have to consider 
what might happen if we do not intervene, then we have to consider what 
result we desire.  One thus takes account of the difference between the 
probable and the desirable, and devises the best strategy to reduce the 
difference.  (I will not go into the techniques that are used.) 
 
 
The vital point as I see it is that the different methods of forecasting 
meet with almost constant failure.  Need we recall what seems to have 
been the most serious effort, the most rigorous, the one which uses so 
many facts and parameters, the famous report of the Club of Rome with 
the help of MIT?  Ten years later its forecasts had all been successively 
demolished.  The authors themselves had to admit that their work offered 
no guarantees.  Need we recall the no less serious errors in the forecasts 
of Hermann Kahn?  Or those of Fourastié, who after the war wrote a little 
work predicting the civilization of 1960, no part of which has proved true?  
Or the fact that economists failed to predict the great economic 
phenomena between 1950 and 1980 (the impact of oil, the collapse of 
growth in U.S.  productivity)?  One might 

 
 
UNPREDICTABILITY 
81 
 
extend to every economic and technical domain the detailed studies that 
have been made concerning forecasts about the price of oil.  in 
1974,1977,1980, and 1983, all the predictions of all the experts proved 
false.7  The experts were regularly mistaken about the economy and 
indeed in every technical field, according to Robert Gibrat.8  This is a 
cruel fact.  One might analyze the sources of the errors, but the fact 
remains.  We have only to reread economic and technical forecasts 
twenty years later. 
 
 
I must devote a special note to the evaluation of prediction in A.  
Bressand and C.  Distler, for these authors offer a remarkable analysis.9  
They regard prediction as essential, and most of their work is a prediction 
of what the world will be like in 2000.  They rightly note that there have 
been periods in forecasting: prediction (and preaching) in the 1930s; then 
after 1960, with Daniel Bell, an attempt at more scientific forecasting that 
sets aside mere fantasy and personal judgment.  According to Bell, 
research into economic growth makes forecasting necessary in every 
society.  We cannot foretell the future but we can describe alternative 
futures that depend on choices, along with the consequences of the 
choices.  This is the epoch of R Massé, G.  Berger, and the Hudson 
Institute Report (1967).  But none of this work really forecasted what 
actually took place between 1972 and 1980.  The interesting point is that 
the two authors do not regard it as of any significance that the forecasts 
failed to predict the rise in prices, the oil crisis, or the problem of natural 
resources.  After all, foreseeing the energy crisis in 1967 would not have 
changed anything!  The strategies set to work in the 1960s were 
strategies of growth, not of managing scarcity.  Hence foreseeing the 
crisis would not have influenced those who made the decisions, 
especially coining only from individuals or small groups.  The authors 
argue, however, that the works were justifiable and necessary, for they 
gave prominence to the idea of the strategic hour.  The concepts used in 
forecasting are dependent on the problems, themes, and questions of a 
given period (which, according to them is a decade or so).  Moreover, the 
1960 forecasts are closer to what has been happening after 1980 than to 
the situation in 1970!  The stress on technological possibilities rather than 
on constraints, and the attention paid to the great powers (USA, Japan, 
USSR, etc.) rather than 
 
 
82  
UNCERTAINTY 
 
to North-South relations, bring the forecasts of 1960 into line with those of 
1980. 
 
 
Here are two important points.  First, in such scientific forecasting 
errors of fact are supposedly unimportant; trends are what count.  
Second, the North-South relation is of no significance (according to 
Bressand and Distler).  The forecasts of H.  Kahn (The Year 2000) are 
regarded as technically noteworthy (though only in relation to the field of 
computers and not as regards surgery, space, new materials, etc.).  But 
according to the authors' own criteria Kahns work is viewed as weak in 
economic forecasting since it deals only with productivity, tables of 
growth, etc., and fails to identify such new variables as the cost of money, 
debt, etc.  Yet the two things are inseparable.  The only point at which I 
agree with the authors is that Kahn fails to see that the information 
explosion is not merely in the cultural domain but fully in the economic as 
well.  Finally, the authors stress that Kahn thinks the value of economic 
efficiency will be reduced, when in fact our age is more devoted to 
efficiency than ever.  We thus see the errors of one of the most famous 
futurologists as they are pointed out by new futurologists.  But the new 
ones are also much deceived if they think that the technical system has 
ever obeyed any other imperative than that of efficiency. 
 
 
In other words, I can conclude without misgivings that on the one 
hand forecasting is more than ever necessary in our world but also that 
economic and technical forecasts in fact are always inaccurate.  This 
leads us into the twofold question of our failure to foresee and to predict. 
 
2.  Our Failure to Foresee and Relative Unpredictability 
 
There is a lack of foresight when one might foresee something but does 
not.  There is unpredictability when in spite of every effort future events 
are obscure and one cannot give the probable course of their 
development.  This happens often.  We fail to foresee because there are 
so many things that we have to foresee.  The lack of foresight may 
sometimes be individual and due to emotion or passion.  For example, we 
now know that the speed of automobiles is the cause of fatal accidents, 
yet drivers who are sure of themselves and intoxicated with power drive 
much too fast and cause terrible crashes.  Here is a complete lack of 
foresight.  It is all the more serious when we find it in big business (e.g., 
polluting factories, though perhaps often we should not speak of lack of 
foresight, since accidents and pollution are perfectly foreseen). 

 
 
UNPREDICTABILITY 
83 
 
 
Finally, public agencies have a very serious lack of foresight hen 
they devise inefficient plans, fail to fund them properly, provide 
inadequate materials, and do not fully consider the methods to be used.  
Some of the resultant accidents are almost inconceivable: forest fires, the 
running aground of oil tankers, nuclear power accidents, disastrous 
floods, etc.  How are we to respond to all this?  The point is that most of 
the problems could actually have been foreseen.  Experienced sailors told 
us that tankers of over 350,000 tons present great difficulties in steering, 
stopping, and changing course, but in spite of that, tankers of 500,000 
tons were built.  The shipping industry also lacked foresight when they 
equipped very large ships with automatic pilot systems and put their full 
confidence in them.  Here we run into a problem which applies especially 
in the computer field.  The functioning and results of machines have to be 
controlled by specialists.  One cannot put blind confidence even in 
fourth-generation computers.  I might argue that whenever such 
confidence is placed in a device or a machine, there is a lack of foresight. 
 
 
One instance of lack of foresight demands particular notice, 
however, because it is not local like the others but global.  The more 
industrial equipment is produced by techniques with a scientific character, 
the more rigid the economic system becomes and the harder it is to 
correct if it is moving in the wrong direction.  In particular, market 
mechanisms are slowed down by technical inertia (and the economic 
system thus becomes more vulnerable).  This is why there are so many 
(discreetly concealed) failures in what seem to be correct computer 
programs.  People have often failed to include in the calculation of 
objectives a recognition of all the actual factors present that have already 
irreversibly programmed the future, the length of time they will last, and 
the probability of events that are still unpredictable.10  The more we 
advance our equipment, the more the social and economic system is 
subject to inertia, to inevitable stickiness It is an irreparable mistake not to 
foresee this. 
 
 
More serious, of course, is relative unpredictability, that is, the 
occurrence of things whose existence and date one cannot reasonably 
foresee.  Everything is functioning normally but we know that an accident 
is likely to happen.  We can then take one of two courses.  On the one 
hand we can be always on the alert and take drastic and costly measures 
to prevent an accident (which of course may never occur). 
 
 
84   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
Or we can let things be, thinking that accidents are rare and usually not 
too serious.  We can talk of unpredictability in a certain state of 
knowledge, corresponding to a larger uncertainty.  We know that 
statistically a certain number of traffic accidents will occur in this or that 
country.  But what can we do about it?  We speed along, not knowing the 
when, how, where, etc.  One might say that amid this fairly general 
uncertainty the Western world has tried to control, not uncertainty, but the 
specific risks to humanity (Giarini). 
 
 
The most striking example of unpredictability due to uncertainty may 
be found in the area of nuclear energy.11  In the French program we find 
an excess of production of electricity, an extreme rigidity (well studied by 
Granstedt in L'Impasse industrielle), a lack of certainty about the real 
effects, an inability to arrange for long-term disposal of wastes, a gamble 
on future operations when a plant reaches the end of its useful life and 
the core has to be shut down, and a failure to foresee the possibility of 
triggering some irreparable processes.  All this, in France, goes hand in 
hand with a lack of respect for the laws (e.g., regarding the sale of 
enriched uranium) or for the many nonproliferation treaties, which are 
violated as soon as they are signed.12 
 
 
Chernobyl is an example of unpredictability along with uncertainty.  
This accident brings to light the general uncertainty about nuclear power 
that seems most typical.  It was not just a matter of the USSR being slow 
to pass on information or its tardy circulation in France.  Such things were 
only secondarily to blame.  The essential points are the ignorance of 
experts and the uncertainty of the public.  This is where the 
unpredictability resides.  Here is a basic uncertainty which puts the 
human race in a far worse situation than any seasonal disasters or 
famines.  Nor was this accident by far the most serious that might be 
imagined.  We can understand the reasonable arguments of scientists.  
Here is a single accident among hundreds of nuclear power 

 
 
UNPREDICTABILITY 
85 
 
stations in the world that are functioning with no problems.  It happened 
seven years after the accident at Three Mile Island.  One accident every 
seven years is a tolerable risk.  And how many victims were there?  The 
Western press announced that two thousand had died, though the USSR 
at first said two, finally seven.  The figures have undergone later 
adjustment and no one knows for sure.  But two thousand would be no 
more than the number killed every two months in traffic accidents in 
France.  This is not a disaster out of all proportion.  Even if seventy-five or 
eighty thousand people had been killed, this is no more than might be 
killed in a violent flood or cyclone.  We have thus no reason to regard that 
nuclear power station as the Devil.  Nor must we rush into extreme 
measures or give way to panic as in Germany-a panic exploited if not 
provoked by the Greens.  All necessary measures have been taken to 
protect against radiation. 
 
 
If there is no panic, however, there is anxiety in spite of all the 
explanations and reassurances on radio and television and in the press.  I 
think that this anxiety, which might engender a mad panic, is present, 
perhaps unconsciously or in hidden form, in every inhabitant of Europe, 
and its main source is uncertainty.13  
 
 
We do not know what is dangerous.  We see clearly that the experts 
do not know either.  This uncertainty is the disconcerting factor.  A cloud, 
pushed by the winds, covers most of France.  No one is permitted to 
divulge its presence.  It seems to be as innocent as other clouds.  It then 
withdraws.  But what exactly does it carry?  The public by and large 
knows that there are four kinds of radiation and radioactive products.  
Some are terrible but last only a few hours.  Others are less harmful but 
can last for hundreds of thousands of years.  What is in the cloud?  When 
do we think it will go?  Is there going to be a long game of hide and seek? 
 
 
We can also state that this accident has brought to light something 
that ecologists have known for a long time, namely, that scientists are in 
disagreement.  Most biologists think that some radioactive fallout can 
cause cancer in those exposed to it within ten years.  Others argue that 
infants exposed to the bombing of Hiroshima in 1945 have had no 
significant increase in death due to leukemia or other cancers.  The same 
applies to babies born to pregnant women who were exposed to radiation 
at that time.  They have not had more cancers than others, and 
 
 
86   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
they are normal.  Unfortunately, laboratory experiments on mice do not back 
up this argument.  And naturally the long-term results of radiation are totally 
unknown. 
 
 
There is uncertainty again, and contradiction among experts, about the 
maximum doses of radiation that are bearable without danger.  I have heard 
discussions among German, French, and Italian experts; none of them 
agrees with another.  The Germans are much stricter, claiming that doses 30 
percent weaker than those that the French regard as dangerous are harmful. 
 
 
A little fact that is not recalled is that thirty years ago the French, too, 
regarded as dangerous much weaker doses of about the same strength as 
those suspected by the Germans.  But the limit was suddenly raised when the 
decision was made to go ahead with nuclear power.  The information 
disseminated by experts leaves us perplexed.  Ten days after the accident at 
Chernobyl there was talk of a point 150 times above the mean but an alert 
would be sounded only for 500 times above! 
 
 
Another uncertainty was that radioactivity had always been measured in 
millicuries or rents but the reference now was to B litres (B: Becquerel).  What 
was the relation between the scales?  Intellectuals did not know, nor, of 
course, the public.  The intention, it seems, was to reassure at all costs.  This 
is understandable.  But in the debate about the threshold that we must not 
pass it is very clear that the French experts are tolerant.  The reason is that 
France has the greatest number of nuclear power stations.  Scientific 
objectivity has nothing whatever to do with the different measurements.  They 
depend on politicoeconomic factors. 
 
 
Another uncertainty lasted for many weeks.  Was there a meltdown?  a 
complete loss of control of the chain reaction which would lead to such high 
temperatures as to force the core deep into the earth with all kinds of pollution 
to water tables?  Some said yes, others no, and most specialists said nothing, 
since they did not know.  In any case, there was uncertainty in the 
information, which the government came to recognize was slow and watered 
down.  At first we were given the absolute assurance that the cloud had not 
reached France, and then ten days later we learned that four-fifths of the 
country was covered by it.  We were also uncertain what to do in case of 
radiation.  Argument raged as to whether we ought not to drink milk or to eat 
salads or river fish. 
 
 
These were matters for general political decision, but individuals had no 
idea at all what to do finally to protect themselves.  After all, it made no 
difference.  Providence in the form of the state and science would look after 
us.  But is this providence as sure as that which one 

 
 
UNPREDICTABILITY 
87 
 
attributes to God?  Three months ago I read a report by the director of a 
nuclear power station in the USA which came to the confident conclusion 
that another accident like Three Mile Island is totally impossible.  It is also 
considered that a more serious incident with an effect equal to that of one 
or several nuclear bombs (I realize that a power station is not to be 
compared to an atomic or hydrogen bomb) is to be ruled out.  But is it 
totally impossible?  No one can say.  No matter which way they turn in 
this field, citizens come up against such differences, gaps, and 
possibilities that they live in complete uncertainty, the uncertainty of being 
delivered up bound to a kind of destiny that is beyond their control and 
that might be triggered at any time.  It is this uncertainty which causes 
panic, and, as I see it, it is likely to continue for many years. 
 
3.  Conditions that Make Forecasting Impossible 
 
 
An optimistic note about the future is often sounded,14 but I would 
draw different conclusions on the basis of several conditions that make 
forecasting difficult.  There is the difficulty of getting information.  We are 
overwhelmed by writings and by data from data banks, but it is hard and 
costly to get the relevant information (I will return to this matter at more 
length).  There is the difficulty of projecting oneself into a different 
situation, whether in space (what does a reporter understand when he 
arrives in a distant country?) or in time (how does one project oneself into 
the year 2000?  The well-informed work of Ducrocq is an amusing 
example of the limits in this regard).15  There is the difficulty of 
understanding: Science and techniques develop so fast and become so 
complex that they are beyond the competence of futurologists who 
honestly recognize their limitations.  There is the difficulty of imagining 
scenarios, for we are constantly coming up against negative probabilities 
and we cannot take refuge in a dramatic and inexorable science fiction. 
 
 
Even what seem to be the clearest developments must be treated 
with caution.  Interestingly enough, great uncertainty obtains even in the 
field of computer science.  Scardigli has said that given their cost, and the 
overturning of mentality and habits that they presuppose, the new 
techniques in computer science and telecommunications will 
 
 
88   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
develop much more slowly than their backers think; by the end of the 
century they will hardly rival the automobile.16  We will see in effect a kind 
of state terrorism forcing people to go into computer science. 
 
 
I will begin with the impossibility of being well informed in the present 
state of affairs.  But how can we make a forecast unless we are well 
informed about the situation, the present situation?  Everyone agrees that 
accurate information is not possible.  This was the great scandal at the 
time of the book by Morgenstern,17 who pointed out how haphazard are 
even the best statistics.  But the more we advance, the more we have to 
admit that the data on which we try to establish exact knowledge of the 
present are fragile.  Morin rightly stresses that the progress of the media 
in setting up an extraordinary network of information has helped to 
promote disinformation and ignorance.18 
 
 
I have studied elsewhere disinformation through excess of 
information,19 but in this flood we have to take into account the flattening 
out of all information.  It is materially impossible to pick out in the flow 
what is important and what will change overnight.  It is impossible to 
discern what bears on the future and will fairly certainly affect its 
development and what is dramatic but has no real significance (e.g., 
walking on the moon).  Morin also shows that the powers that are 
threatened by the power of information have no recourse but to change it 
into an instrument of obfuscation.  We shall return to this point.  For the 
moment, however, we have in mind only deliberate deception.  According 
to Morin, "Stalinist history in the USSR is authenticated by doctored 
photographs which have left out the faces of the old Bolsheviks whom 
Stalin condemned.  Nothing is more misleading than documentaries on 
China, Siberia, or Cuba with a camera as witness [I might refer also to 
irrefutable television reports on South Africa in 1985 and 19861.  The 
powers systematically practice pseudo-information.  The spread of lying in 
this field is the answer to the potential spread of truth through the rise of 
the media.  Lying has spread because the media permit the spread of 
truth." 
 
 
It is hard to know what is real today because of systematic doctoring 
everywhere.  But even more serious is the impossibility of knowing what 
is real, due to an incompatibility of criteria.20  Thus it is 

 
 
UNPREDICTABILITY  
 
89 
 
totally absurd to reckon the income of a peasant, especially a Third World 
peasant, in U.S.  dollars.  How can we evaluate the standard of living of 
one living in southwest France in this way when we do not take into 
account the abundant picking of mushrooms (about 20 pounds in one 
outing), or the gathering of crayfish, or hunting (real hunting and not 
organized massacres)?  Peasants might not have many skills, but I know 
firsthand that they can live well with little money in the form of income.  
And what about Third World peasants?  F.  Partant has rightly noted that 
a theoretical study has yet to be done on the concept of wealth in our 
societies.  When we consider the patrimony of peasants which has been 
built up in a significant way to assure the growth of agricultural production, 
we are surprised to find that it is no higher in relative value than half a 
century ago.  Different crops are grown, but the value is no higher.  
Evidently, southwest France may have more corn to sell, but hardly any 
mushrooms, fish, or woodpigeons. 
 
 
It is thus impossible to get accurate information in matters of this 
kind.  And once a crisis comes in a country it is impossible to get any 
serious information at all.  I have shown this in the case of the war in 
Lebanon, and J.  L.  Seurin has shown it in the case of New Caledonia.21  
It is necessary and easy to show it in the case of South Africa.  All 
information is given a bias by the warring parties and interests.  A good 
example is the passionate hostility of Le Monde to Israel and South 
Africa.  I might say that all of us (including politicians, specialists, and 
experts) are poorly informed about the world as a whole.  We have to 
know all the facts (political, economic, social) to be able not merely to 
know but to evaluate a society: the positive or negative results of modem 
techniques; the probabilities of technical evolution; the insertion of 
techniques into the society.  How can we predict if the basic, primary facts 
are either missing or contradictory? 
 
 
In writing this section I have had in view the remarkable analysis of 
information in economic practice by Ingmar Granstedt.22  Some call for 
the disseminating of information, an end to secrecy, access to the facts.  
Others rationalize communication systems and computers.  But the 
problem lies elsewhere.  With the endless growth of facts that have to be 
taken into account in all economic activities, something has burst.  The 
integration of information has moved beyond the limits at which it is 
reliable.  As the contexts engendered by our instruments of 
 
 
90  
UNCERTAINTY 
 
power have increased beyond measure, we continue to put the innumerable 
variables in the hands of ever more exalted officials.  But synthesis is beyond 
us.  What the best-performing means of communications dispatch and treat 
and stock is no longer faithful to the reality of data that are constantly 
expanding.  The integration of information is not possible.  To the size and 
growing complexity of the economico-technical world we inevitably respond 
with differentiation, with an increased fragmentation of the information 
necessary to each laboratory, Office, or firm.  With the massive 
preponderance of the mode of integrated production, the contexts become 
enormous.  It is no longer possible to track directly all the variables.  External 
"observers" try to do this, their task being to pass on the information obtained.  
Information networks receive, synthesize, and filter what is learned.  The 
breakdown occurs at the center where the fragmentary data ought to 
converge.  A programmed reconstitution of the contexts is impossible 
because our mental faculties of assimilation and communication are limited. 
 
 
The data that information networks make accessible for the guidance of 
a business are far beyond what can be assimilated.  The integration of 
information has been pushed beyond the breaking point.  We can extend it 
indefinitely but it will no longer function.  It is no longer reliable.  Ignorance 
becomes chronic.  We see it clearly when we read even the best journals.  
Crushed by information, those in charge realize that they are constantly under 
informed.  At the extreme this might mean the exclusion of people.  
Computers will talk to computers, for they alone can take everything in.  But 
then decision-making would also pass into the hands of computers.  We have 
not yet reached that point.  But a number of economic decisions are taken 
without a proper knowledge of the matter.  What Mr.  Chirac says is much the 
same as what Mr.  Fabius says and he in turn reminds us of Mr.  Barre.  They 
are all using the same data.  In the process of decision the essential data are 
not known and the basic variables are not perceived (even though they may 
be found somewhere in the enormous network).  The "integration of 
information" means that we now know only the data relating to our own area.  
No human brain or committee can master the whole.  In other words, the 
chronic ignorance of those who make decisions in every field is not due to the 
absence of data or to lack of access, but to the disproportion between our 
limited mental capacities and the unlimited complexes that we think we can 
daily assimilate. 
 
 
In the preceding remarks I have been thinking especially of the 
economic and political realm.  I have not been referring directly to technique.  
Technicians, of course, are specialists, and (with increasing 

 
 
UNPREDICTABILITY 
91 
 
difficulty) they can master the information in their own fields of 
microspecialization.  But the problem here is not that of a single technique 
but of technique as a whole.  Unpredictability in technical matters 
depends to a great extent on unpredictability in economics.  Strictly one 
might estimate (like Ducrocq) that in ten years we will have this or that 
gadget or innovation or means of transport or system of communication, 
but are they all economically possible?  At this point our ignorance is total.  
We recall that technique has three phases: invention, innovation, and 
diffusion.  The first two depend on effectively applying prior techniques.23  
The first also depends on contingent political directions and decisions.  
The third depends strictly on the economy.  Will there be venture capital?  
Will there be a market?  Since in this regard we are in a totally 
unpredictable situation, there is necessarily unpredictability in technical 
development.  When the industrial use of nuclear fission coincided with 
the early stages of the computer, no one could say which would win the 
market or become the dominant force and shape society.  The latter won, 
but no one could foresee this. 
 
4.  Absolute Unpredictability 
 
I will not be referring here to the unpredictability of scientific invention, 
which is always possible.  The discovery of penicillin or the silicon chip 
was not foreseeable, but we must always leave the field open in 
techniques.  We shall see the importance of this later (allowing that an 
unforeseeable invention can often be blocked, or that there is no one who 
tries to apply it, so that it becomes the victim of a blackout).  In the 
preceding section we have dealt with the unpredictability that is due to 
excess of information.  We must now have a look at absolute 
unpredictability24 if we are to cover all the parameters.  When the report of 
the Club of Rome came out, in spite of great efforts to collect data and the 
scientific apparatus, it soon became evident that because of faulty 
analysis the authors had forgotten what are to my mind certain essential 
parameters of the technical process.  It seems that on the one hand the 
complication of the calculations became insurmountable if the whole was 
to be kept in view, and on the other hand that the refinement of analysis 
has limits, and here we cannot trust computers to do the work. 
 
 
92   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
What is more, the longer the term of the forecast, the more account has to 
be taken of a great number of parameters of which some are not yet 
known and have not yet even become visible.  Moreover, since each of 
the parameters evolves on its own for its own reasons, combination is 
doubly impossible. 
 
 
What happens in fact when we try to give a long-term forecast (and 
history has now speeded up, so that the long-term of a century ago is no 
longer long-term: a forecast for the year 2000 is now long-term!) is simply 
that we reduce the number of parameters so as to be able to combine 
and normalize them, other things being equal.  All long-term calculations 
relate to precise points that need not be combined with others.  In 1995 
France will have the largest and most modern airport in the world.  That is 
an example.  I would say that the shorter the term of forecasting, the more 
it can be global; the longer the term, the more it has to be restricted.  
Furthermore, if we want to take into account the negative effects of an 
innovation, we are tempted, in long-range forecasting, to neglect some of 
the effects, whether through a belief that technique will annul them, or 
through the fact that, since they will not become apparent for twenty or 
thirty years, we do not regard them as important. 
 
 
Truly to understand absolute unpredictability, we have to look at 
three decisive factors.  E.  Morin has excellently analyzed the first of 
these.  It is not enough to have a correct view of the present, for this 
contains as yet invisible microscopic germs which will develop.  
Furthermore, it is obvious that innovations, inventions, and creations 
cannot even be imagined before they appear.25  We can imagine only the 
consequences of actual inventions.  Innovations not only modify given 
factors as they enter into new and unforeseeable combinations; they also 
cause the very principles of evolution to evolve.  At first an innovation is 
always a deviation.  If it succeeds it can become a tendency.  It can then 
form a new norm of evolution.  This seems to me to be vital in technique. 
 
 
Technical (or as Morin would say, techno-economic) thinking sees 
the world in terms of power (we shall come back to this), of rates of 
growth, of gross national product, of speed, of consumption–that is, 
inevitably in terms of secondary phenomena.  It is radically incapable of 
thinking about technique itself.  It is thus incapable of 

 
 
UNPREDICTABILITY 
 
93 
 
dealing with the root of any problem in the modern world, since all these 
problems are at root technical.  In all the circumstances and conditions of 
the modem world the root evil is of a technical order (I do not say it is 
provoked by technique).  Technical thinking is incapable of thinking about 
technique.  This is the real problem of the so-called technical culture that 
we shall have to study at length.  Technical thinking thinks only in terms of 
the progress of techniques.  it cannot think about the general 
phenomenon of technique.  If we document the malfunctions or negative 
effects of technique, it is incapable of making any real response.  
Technical solutions bring with them the very evils they are supposed to 
remedy or produce worse ones in another area.  Along similar lines, 
technical thinking is incapable of foreseeing anything new.  It can foresee 
only the extension and perfecting of what already exists.  It cannot think in 
terms of a new paradigm, an unpredicted event, a true invention, a social 
revolution.  It is shut up in its own limited logic.  I would add that this 
inability is present not merely when there is a change of scale or domain.  
We find it in its own domain as well.  Forecasts are fantastic once we 
leave the laboratory where experiments are made of which this or that 
result can be expected.26 
 
 
When there is a need to forecast (even at the technical level) what is 
likely to happen in the next fifteen years, the predictions are contradictory, 
for in the order of global technique we do not know exactly what we are 
capable of doing.  Uncertainty reigns not merely regarding the dangers of 
nuclear power but also regarding space, genetic engineering, and 
computers.  The advice given by experts in these areas is contradictory.  
There is no real knowledge of what is possible, what is probable, and 
what is merely desired.  The impossibility of knowing exactly what we can 
do is very plain in the political game that utilizes technical potential.  The 
great debate about star wars is significant in this regard.  No one knows 
precisely what this is, or whether it is technically or economically feasible.  
I will discuss this further in Part Two below. 
 
 
Finally, there is a third factor of unpredictability that D.  Janicaud has 
brought to light.27  We are now in a complex of power, in its absolute 
novelty and vertiginous unpredictability.  The novelty may be noted in the 
irreversible character of phenomena.  Many points of no return have been 
passed.  The unpredictability is due to the incommensurable  
 
 
94  
UNCERTAINTY 
 
growth in the risks that are taken and the specificity of the new phase of 
potentialization that has been initiated. 
 
 
A powerful idea as I see it is that when a system achieves a certain 
degree of power, forecasting becomes impossible (as we see in the case of 
nuclear power and its problems).  In his study of power Janicaud rightly 
emphasizes that we cannot control the exercise of this power, since its 
degree of rationality is problematic.  Never before has there been calculation 
so precise, so incomparably exhaustive.  Power itself is incessantly adjusted, 
computed, and reassessed, but precisely in these circumstances (Janicaud 
cites Castoriadis) no rational calculation exists that can show that a temporal 
horizon of five years is more or less rational than one of a hundred years.  
Decision has to be made on a basis different from the economic or technical 
basis.  The basis is an incalculable postulate of development.  Power carried 
to an extreme and seen in terms of indefinite development is no longer 
quantitative.  It is qualitative, for it becomes a real quality.  The gigantic 
(which we shall find in techno-economic relations) becomes as such 
incalculable. 
 
 
To conclude our discussion of unforeseeable aspects, I will also note the 
uncertainty which results from an important change in the order of economic 
and sociological thinking.  There has been introduced the flux and vision of a 
fluid world.  We have been accustomed to viewing the world as an object 
made up of fixed objects and quantities.  In this world forecasting was 
possible.  But this conception has been overturned by the discovery that our 
world and society are not made up of objects but of a flow, of currents, 
changes, and combinations.  We no longer have to study money but the flow 
of money.  This is so obvious that we might ask why it was not seen at once.  
Probably people refused to see it because of the complexity that it entails.  
Everything is moving and changing and taking on new aspects according to 
currents that we have to discover and mark.  But obviously if we put 
technique in this varied flow it is almost impossible to follow its shifting 
course.  For technique is not uniform.  As we have seen in thinking about the 
four main modern techniques, it is diverse even as it uniformly pushes on to 
absolute power. 
 
 
This analysis of absolute unpredictability leads us ineluctably to lateral 
but essential reflection on our relation to time in terms of techniques.  Lewis 
Mumford showed already in the 1930s that it was this relation above all that 
early techniques changed, and that it was from an accurate and widespread 
measure of time that the whole technical system could be developed (the 
clock and the watch).  Today the basic problem is the same but with much 
more acute transformations.  I am following here the notable study of J.  
Chesneaux with its 

 
 
UNPREDICTABILITY 
95 
 
new insights on the subject.28  Chesneaux starts with the diffusion of the 
computer and data processing in our society.  The computer is a machine 
which compresses the time needed for development, production, and 
management.  It reduces time to smaller and smaller units.  It thus gives 
the present an absolute primacy over the past and the future.  It is the 
main indicator of social evolution, which takes its rhythm from 
"generations of computers" (a vital observation that we need to explore). 
 
 
The primacy of the computer makes forecasting not only uncertain 
but futile.  In a modern technical society what we have to do is to integrate 
time, that is, integrate the past and future into the present, which alone is 
real.  A nuclear power station is a model of the integration of time as well 
as of centralized social control.  It cannot stop at will.  It cannot vary its 
rhythm in producing energy.  It produces energy even when energy is not 
needed.  Its clients have to adapt.  Factories must work round the clock.  
At this point we leave the domain of prediction and arrive at a more global 
view of the relation of technique to time.  Technique does not predict; it 
programs time.  Everything must be ordered according to a single 
temporal axis, that of the organization, functioning, and production of 
technique.  This does not allow for contradiction or for dialectical 
evolution, and it seems to me to be significant that at the very time of this 
transformation of all society, philosophy and scientific theory rushed into 
thinking in "loops" and "vortexes" and "gulfs," that is, the very opposite of 
the actual reality that had been constructed. 
 
 
Technical programming is infinitely broader than planning, for in its 
totality it includes even living elements.  General synchronization results 
(Granstedt).  Real time, in which the computer now functions, is a time 
looped in advance and made instantaneous.  One must eliminate dead 
time, compress deadlines, increase the pace.  We have moved beyond 
our obsession with speed to demand the instantaneous.  This is no longer 
the present, for it is gone even before we are aware of the present.  There 
is no longer any delay or tarrying.  The ideal is that of the 
instantaneousness of the computer, which shortens the time of execution 
by apportioning out the tasks; or of the digital watch, which shows only 
numbers and eliminates the element of space denoted by the movement 
of the hands; or of television, which unlike the cinema constantly presents 
us with new pictures; or of fast food.  "The instantaneous achieves 
hegemony to the point of almost literally dissolving 
 
 
96   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
the natural time accumulated over the centuries.  A forest becomes a 
daily paper, which is almost immediately thrown away."29  
 
 
Naturally, this forms part of the basic unpredictability as the time of 
observation is compressed.  All our indicators are falsified by the brevity 
of monthly or weekly reporting unemployment rates, prices, trade, public 
opinion polls on international political decisions or the popularity of a 
politician.  We need to realize that all these numbers and percentages 
mean absolutely nothing. 
 
 
From instantaneous use (objects immediately ready for use and then 
discarded) Chesneaux also draws another conclusion that seems to me 
to be decisive if we are to understand the change in our society in relation 
to time.  There has taken place a radical inversion between the time of 
use and the time of elimination.  Up to the 19th century objects were 
made to last.  They were kept as long as possible.  When they were no 
longer of use, being degradable, they could be disposed of without 
problem.  Today we have reversed the situation.  Each machine or 
appliance becomes obsolete in a year, as a much more efficient one 
replaces it.  But the vast number of discarded machines produces a 
buildup of scrap, which takes a long time to eliminate.  Increasingly, 
indeed, we are making products that cannot be eliminated.  This inversion 
seems to me to be very significant.  It shows how technical rhythms are 
unable to fit in with the rhythms that are natural to us, to the world, and to 
its possibility of a future.  We are now accustomed to recalling that there 
cannot be infinite growth in a finite world.  This applies to space, but we 
have to realize that it applies to time as well.  Fanatics for progress think 
there will always be more.  There is talk of exponential progress.  
Chesneaux shows that when we look at the real curve of the evolution, at 
the host of technical inventions over the last twenty years, both great and 
small, the curve is "superexponential.”  There has been infinite growth in 
finite time, and this "will pitilessly flatten out the vertical asymptote.”  I 
believe that the complex transformation in the relation to time, which is 
not yet fully felt, will produce psychological disorders which will contribute 
to the disintegration of society. 
 
5.  Foresight 
 
What I have just said leads on to another point.  If forecasting is 
scientifically necessary but no less scientifically impossible as regards 
both specific events and larger trends, and if this fact is related 

 
 
UNPREDICTABILITY 
97 
 
fundamentally to the change in our relation to time, we have to abandon 
any illusions we may have about our grip upon the future.  Instead we 
must appeal to a different quality, that of foresight, which functions 
precisely when there can be no sure prediction.  In the 1930s it was 
thought that a society could be set up which would not only foresee the 
future but also prepare for any accidents that might occur (insurance 
companies in the 19th century spoke plainly of taking thought for the 
future).  We had to be protected and secured at all points.  There thus 
came into being life insurance, social security, unemployment insurance, 
and pensions.  But this system, which relates primarily to accidents in 
private life, can hardly deal with collective disasters; note the extreme 
difficulties of compensation for oil spills or for disasters like Bhopal.  
Insurance companies, indeed, have to have growing reserves to handle 
the risks of terrorism, the taking of hostages, and air crashes.  The risks 
that we have to deal with are different from those in the 19th century.  We 
should also note that some Christians argued at that time that they ought 
to express their faith by refusing to take such precautions and insure 
themselves.  That was the noble age of the Devoir d’imprévoyance of 
Isabelle Rivière.  But if Christians have constantly to affirm and assume 
and live out this duty of improvidence in virtue of their faith, they must not 
impose it upon responsible politicians or all other citizens.  It is within this 
general framework that I would say that since foreseeing is definitely 
impossible, we now need to manifest foresight. 
 
 
But what is that?  We must begin by stating that in the case of 
serious accidents, whether natural or artificial, it is never possible to find 
an adequate response, whether economic or technical.  Foresight comes 
into play when we recognize that we have now created a civilization of 
risk, according to the fine formula and demonstration of P.  Lagadec.30  
Lagadec's theory of "major technological risk" seems to me to be 
irrefutable, even though understandably it has been poorly received.  His 
analysis of social attitudes in face of this risk is to my mind exemplary.  
Industry has to produce at all costs, no matter what serious risks it 
creates.  The state wants to protect productive activity and refuses to 
alarm the populace, stating in each case that the situation is not really 
serious.  The people are ignorant and impotent and finally accept 
little-known risks as the price they have to pay for the pleasures that the 
technical society hands out to them.  As for experts, they are always on 
the margin of the world of risk.  They study each case and regularly 
conclude that there is no problem, or that it is a chance 
 
 
98   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
incident.  No one will accept the idea that technique has placed us 
effectively within a ring of volcanoes.  At most there is interest only in the 
risk of war or military armaments, since here we are on familiar ground; 
we have lived through war, and arms today are infinitely more deadly.  As 
for the rest, we prefer to ignore it, not taking up the very difficult task of 
securing information when we meet with secrecy on every hand: the 
secrecy of laboratories, of administrators, of experts, of technicians, of 
politicians, etc. 
 
 
We have seen that forecasting is practically impossible, and 
information is barred to us by secrecy.  In the first instance, then, foresight 
is the virtue of accepting, on the basis of incontestable experiences in the 
immediate past (at least two in the last twelve years),31 that we are living 
in a civilization which is at serious risk as a result of technique, and that 
the more technique advances the more serious the risk and the greater its 
probability.  It will naturally be objected that with hundreds of nuclear 
powers stations in action an accident every five years is negligible, 
especially when there are few victims.  But more powerful instruments 
push us toward a risk that might be final.  In another work Lagadec has 
shown that we cannot go by probability alone in face of these disasters.32  
Scientific rigor relativizes what is usually said about the safety of high-risk 
installations on the basis of past results.  The question of possibility 
eclipses that of probability.  Furthermore, statistical reasoning loses its 
value when a single serious incident can upset the curve, as is always 
possible. 
 
 
Foresight should then develop attitudes and institutions and 
instruction based on the constant possibility of a serious accident.  It can 
be objected that the worst might not happen.  This commonsense slogan 
is no longer valid.  What we ought to say is that the worst has become 
much more probable.  Foresight demands that we now take the step of 
regarding the worst as probable, not by a calculation of probabilities to 
which circumstances no longer correspond, but because high risks are 
accumulating.  To give only one example, we all know that nuclear power 
stations are built to function on average for thirty years.  Many of them are 
now reaching that age.  What are we going to do with them?  We cannot 
simply erase them.  Are we going to build concrete mounds to isolate 
them and then build new ones alongside them?  It is the function of 
foresight to consider all essential facts so as 

 
 
UNPREDICTABILITY 
99 
 
to have a response to the worst scenario in each case.  We have to weigh 
what is probably the worst in each situation and then find a solution for it. 
 
 
This is the foresight which ought to replace forecasting if we have the 
least sense of responsibility.  Along this line, the only serious one, we 
ought to do the very opposite of what we find in most books on technique.  
The worst thing that we can do is declare that all is well or act as though 
there were no risk.  I have already criticized the work by Simon, but I 
might equally well take to task that of A.  Ducrocq (1985-2000, le Futur 
aujourd'hui), in which we find hundreds of pages on the marvels of 
technique and the glorious future that is before us, but only a page or two 
on star wars, only one page on nuclear weapons (which will happily lead 
to the disappearance of states!) and nothing at all on pollution, or on the 
growth of armaments, or on chemical dangers.  Nothing!  Ducrocq simply 
tells us that there will be some difficult transitional years as we move 
toward the ideal society that technique permits, but he says nothing 
whatever about the enormity of the risks.  His books are a public menace, 
for they lull his readers to sleep and prevent them from achieving the 
indispensable foresight which is our only chance of survival. 
 
                                                 
1 See F.  Partant, Que la crise s'aggrave (Solin, 1978). 
2 Cf.  the colloquium of Cerisy, L'Auto-organisation (Paris: Seuil, 1983). 
3 Hayek divides phenomena into three classes: the purely natural that are 
independent of human action; the purely artificial that are humanly produced 
(prediction being relatively easy in this field); and the intermediary, which 
comprise unintentional configurations and regularities in human society and which 
social theory has the task of explaining, since they are the result of human action 
but not of human design. 
4 Jean Chesneaux, De la modernité (Maspero, 1983); cf.  M.  Moraucsik, "Can We 
Plan Science?" Science, Technology and Society 4/4 (1984). 
5 J.-P Chevèniernent, Le Monde, Sept.  1982. 
6 E.  Morin, Pour sortir du XXe siécle (Nathan, 1981). 
7 See Arthur Andersen and Cambridge Energy Assoc., "The Future of Oil Prices: 
The Perils of Prophecy," Le Monde, Feb.  1985. 
8 R.  Gibrat, "La prévision à long term est-elle possible?" Le Jaune et le Rouge 
(1980). 
9 A.  Bressand and C.  Distler, Le Prochain Monde (Paris: Seuil, 1986). 
10 See Giarini and Loubergé, La Civilisation technicienne à la dérive (Dunod, 
1979).  See also Simon Charbonneau's excellent studies of the management of 
risks. 
11 See F.  David, Me retraitement des combustibles nucléaires. . . .”  La 
Recherche 111 (May 1980).  When supergenerators were initiated, the price of 
electricity was supposed to drop by 1990 (Giscard seeing an outpouring of energy 
equivalent to that of Saudi Arabia), though both the left and the right agreed that 
the main benefits would not appear until 2200.  In 1984 Fabius signed an 
agreement with Italy, Germany, etc., for Super-Phoenix, which "theoretically would 
free production from reliance on uranium supplies" (Louis Puiseaux, formerly the 
person in charge of forecasts for Électricité de France). 
12 Cf.  B.  Goldschmidt, The Atomic Complex (American Nuclear Society, 1982).  
Excess production was finally recognized (with bad grace) in September 1987, 
when the president of Électricité de France admitted the need to slow down 
(industry would not permit stopping) and not to press ahead with a second 
supergenerator (Le Monde, Sept.  20, 1987). 
13 According to a poll by the Institut française d'opinion publique on October 23, 
1986, 93 percent of the French people think that they have not been well informed 
about the problems caused by nuclear power stations and radioactivity. 
14 See, e.g., La Prospective à la softie du désert (Société internationale des 
Conseillers de synthèse, 1985). 
15 Albert Ducrocq, 1985-2000, le Futur aujourd'hui (Plon, 1984). 
16 V Scardigli, La Consommation, culture du quotidien (Paris: PUF, 1983).  
17 0.  Morgenstern, On the Accuracy of Economic Observations, 2nd ed.  
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, repr.  1972). 
18 E.  Morin, Pour sortir du XXe siécle. 
19 J.  Ellul, "L'Information aliénante," Économie et Humanisme 192 (March-April 
1970): 43-52. 
20 See F.  Partant, Que la crise saggrave. 
21 See J.  Ellul, Un chrétien pour Israël (Monacon: Rocher, 1986); J.  -C.  Seurin 
and Couteau Beguarie, L'Antipode de la démocratie (Lieu commun, 1986). 

                                                                                                               
22 Ingmar Granstedt, L'Impasse industrielle (Paris: Seuil, 1980).   
23 See J.  Ellul, Technological System. 
24  This must obviously be differentiated from accidental unpredictability.  I have in 
view an irremediable unpredictability inherent in the technical system. 
25 I have never been able to understand the enthusiasm over the last fifty years for 
Jules Verne as a pioneer!  He was no more a pioneer than Cyrano was for going 
to the moon or Icarus for flying.  All the machines that he imagined are completely 
absurd, and much less practicable than those of Leonardo da Vinci. 
26 Technical forecasts are grotesque in public journals; cf, Match, Oct.  2, 1987. 
27 D.  Janicaud, La Puissance du rationnel (Paris: Gallimard, 1985). 
28 J.  Chesneaux, De la modernité (Maspero, 1983), chap.  2. 
29 ibid.   
30 P.  Lagadec, La Civilisation du risque (Paris: Seuil, 1981). 
31 In addition to Chernobyl and Three Mile Island, there would be many more if we 
count forest fires due to technique or technical blunders. 
32 P.  Lagadec, "Faire face aux risques technologiques," La Recherche 105 (Nov.  
1979). 

 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
Double Feedback 
 
In The Technological System I emphasized that if technique in its 
complexity were finally to be regarded as a true system in the scientific 
sense (according to Ludwig von Bertalanffy), it would have to have a 
regulatory mechanism, a mechanism of feedback which would react to 
the source or origin or cause of malfunctions, deviations, and negative 
effects and correct them, thus conferring order and balance in growth.  
Thus far the system had in fact functioned in a completely anarchical and 
spontaneous way; no one could control or direct it.  But it already seemed 
to me that there was a possibility of creating coherent feedback thanks to 
computers.  In effect computers enable us to record all the snags and 
malfunctions and perverse effects in every area, to trace them back to 
their source, and thus to eliminate, correct, or bypass them with some 
degree of certainty.  The decision to do so, of course, is still a political 
one.  Computer feedback on the technical system can only inform; 
decision rests with us.  The computer has the task of showing us where 
the problem lies and what to do about it, in this way preparing the ground 
for decision. 
 
 
To arrive at this stage, however, there needed to be awareness that 
technique does constitute a widespread system which affects political 
circles, so that they realize that it is the key problem of our society rather 
than armaments or production.  It was also necessary that computer 
scientists should orient their researches to this enormous (and not very 
profitable) work of research and should be able to subjugate technique to 
the general interest.  This was the most urgent task in this field.  But 
speed was necessary in view of the rapidity of development in every 
direction.  There was a need to think about mastering the technical 
system, and the computer was the means.  I used to think that it would be 
possible to get a hold on technical growth 
 
100 
 
 
 
DOUBLE FEEDBACK  
101 
 
so as to be able to direct it during the 1970s.  It did not happen, of course.  In 
spite of the determined proclamations by intellectuals, in spite of the 
intentions of the socialists to direct the economy, no one saw the need for an 
operation of this kind.  The socialists were immersed in the big problems of 
the 19th century (nationalization, the battle against large fortunes).  As for 
computer scientists, they do not have any larger vision.  They do not see the 
greater potential of their tools.  They thus continued to manipulate their 
instruments so as to offer various services, from the reserving of theater seats 
from the home to the guidance of rockets.  Instead of mastering the technical 
system, computers entered into the system, adopted its features, and simply 
reinforced the power and incoherence of its effects.  In fact, I think that the 
game is lost.  With the help of computer power, the technical system has 
definitively escaped from control by the human will. 
 
 
Once again the power of events has prevailed over free human decision.  
But if my utopian dream of feedback control has not come to pass, this does 
not mean that the technical system is without feedback.  Feedback has come 
into it spontaneously, but in a very different way.  The true problem is that 
over the last few years we have witnessed the formation of a double 
feedback.  This familiar mechanism is that among the effects of an applied 
force there appears automatically one that reacts on the origin of the force 
and changes either the force or its orientation.  This is a retroactive control, or 
self-regulation.  But feedback of this kind can have two consequences.  There 
can be positive feedback, that is, acting positively on the force in question at 
its origin, and consequently reinforcing the action and its effects.  There can 
also be negative feedback (and we usually think of this), that is, the force is 
moderated, the effects are kept at a certain level, and indefinite development 
or acceleration is checked.  This feedback is a regulator.  Now when we 
consider the technical system, we note that spontaneously, by the very 
pressure of things, two types of feedback have appeared, a negative and a 
positive.  The one tends to check the acceleration of technique in every 
direction, the other tends to increase it.  These two reactions are completely 
beyond our human will or human control, although naturally we are their 
agents.  Here is a major difference from what I used to think.  We are no 
longer masters of the speed and direction of the system.  We are no more 
than intermediaries.  As I study the creation of this double feedback in these 
chapters on uncertainty, it is obviously impossible to know precisely what is 
the real effect of the two contradictory actions in combination.  Positive 
feedback arises out of the relation between politics and technique and 
science and technique.  Negative feedback arises out of the relation between 
the 

 
 
102  
UNCERTAINTY 
 
economy and technique.  In all three cases the process is much the 
same.  Technique has consequences for politics, science, and the 
economy, and because of this they, in turn, react upon technique. 
 
1.  Positive Feedback 
 
I will first study the relation to politics.  We begin with the effects of 
technique on politics.  Clearly, technique provides politicians with 
extraordinary means to achieve their projects, whether they are of the 
right or the left.  Technique is an extraordinary means of unification.  Even 
in liberal or federated states the trend toward unification is inevitable 
because it makes things easier.  It is much easier to govern a unified 
whole than a collective in which people speak different languages, work in 
different ways, use different currencies, and receive autonomous 
instruction.  Such things are an almost insurmountable obstacle to 
government.  Technique, however, necessarily overcomes divisions.  The 
networks of railroads and power lines mean unification.  Yet technique 
brings to the state the twofold possibility of concentration and 
centralization on the one hand and deconcentration and decentralization 
on the other.  The one superimposes itself on the other.  Whether the 
organization is viewed as centralized or decentralized finally comes to the 
same thing if unified techniques of management, communication, and 
information are used.  Widespread and unified communications make it 
possible for the central power to know at once all that is happening within 
a nation and thus to exercise control even though the administration is 
deconcentrated and power is decentralized.  We do not have here an evil 
will but a process of simplification, of unification, of facilitation, which 
seems to be inherent in the human creature (at least in the West). 
 
 
Technical means also improve the means of control and accelerate 
the process.  And what political power can be exercised without means of 
control?  The media are essential both in order to know all that is taking 
place within the nation and also to control the public.  In this field 
technique is of great assistance to the state.  It seems to make 
forecasting possible (though I have proved the contrary).  It thus seems to 
give us a handle on the future.  It shows those who have political power 
how they may act in new spheres of the social body.  Technique gives 
substantial and increasing aid to political power.  In return this power 
ascribes to technique exorbitant qualities.  For years we have been told 
that we must develop technique in order to solve the crisis.  All economic 
problems come back to technique, thanks to which  
 
 
DOUBLE FEEDBACK 
103 
 
productivity will increase, unemployment will supposedly disappear, and 
the deficit in the balance of trade will be overcome, etc.  The state finally 
finds its legitimacy in science and technique.i  This relation needs to be 
explored.  The legitimacy of power is no longer religious or democratic.  
Power affirms itself scientifically.  Science validates it because it can do 
nothing without power.  For the public, science is the great goddess which 
it cannot question and which validates those who serve it. 
 
 
Science and technique thus act upon politics and politics functions 
as positive feedback.  It throws all its weight into the development of 
technique.  For the most part it does not commit the mistakes regarding 
technical research that I stressed in 1950.  In only a few cases (e.g., the 
decisions of the U.S.  government on NASA) does it try to direct research.  
Instead, it engages in what is at root a full-scale acceleration of scientific 
and technical research.  The state is now convinced that all development 
depends upon this research.  It provides considerable funds to promote it.  
Research is indeed very expensive and demanding.  Much of it in the 
USA is funded by powerful companies, but the government offsets the 
lack of funds in neglected fields.ii  In France most research and 
development is state-funded and there could be no new development 
without state aid.  The state thus accelerates the movement, counting on 
economic benefits and the strengthening of its own means of control. 
 
 
The second positive feedback is that of science.  For many years a 
distinction was made between pure and applied science.  In 1950 I 
showed that this is not quite accurate.  From the very first science has 
been dependent on technical possibility.  The interaction is very 
significant.  Science can advance only through technical improvements, 
whether it be a matter of discoveries in space, molecular structures, or the 
effects of developments in chemistry or mathematics, etc.  By 1970 
computers were functioning so rapidly that they could meet all "useful" 
needs in management, in social and economic information, and in the 
handling of this information.  But mathematicians and physicists were 
posing problems that were so complex and demanded such great 
calculations that the computers of the day were not adequate.  Another 
generation of more powerful computers was needed that were in fact of 
use only to these scientists. 
 
 
All real scientific progress, in biology, chemistry, physics, 
astrophysics, 

 
 
104   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
microphysics (and, more relatively, medicine), depends solely on 
technical equipment.  This does not mean that simply having the 
equipment will make progress possible.  Science has to throw in all its 
political and social weight, its prestige, and the support of scientists for 
technicians to amplify and accelerate technical progress.iii  It is also 
thanks to the discoveries of science that ultramodern technique is 
possible.  Some seemingly very remote sciences like linguistics make 
possible the discovery of how to talk directly to a computer.  Analysis 
makes possible the establishment of systems experts, etc.  There is 
mutual support.  It is very significant that the launching of space 
laboratories is justified on the ground that only in this way are certain 
experiments possible (e.g., physiological observations to see how we 
might live in space), or the making of new chemical products that cannot 
be made on earth but are needed in technical application.  There is thus a 
strict circle.  Science accelerates technical progress and technical 
progress reacts by making possible new discoveries.  Much technical 
progress is of value in making scientific development possible.  And since 
science is the final justification of our Western world, money devoted to 
these technical exploits seems to be legitimately spent. 
 
2.  Negative Feedback 
 
Over against this remarkable acceleration, however, there seems to be 
another force, that of negative feedback, which tends to put serious limits 
on technical growth.  We refer to the economy and finance.  Research is 
increasingly expensive.  Various questions arise.  Is there certainty that 
the relation between research and economic development is sure, clear, 
and unrestricted?  This is still the belief in the world of Western politics, 
but much less so in the USA.iv  Again, from the economic point of view, 
are research and technique really profitable?  The costs are so great that 
it is hard to meet them and avoid inflation.  Many projects have had to 
become international, like the Concorde.  Even the USA has to make 
choices (e.g., the NASA budget was severely 
 
 
DOUBLE FEEDBACK 
105 
 
cut in 1983).  But costs continue to mount as techniques are perfected and 
scientific demands become heavier.  The vital fact is that technical progress is 
much faster than economic growth.  For some years the latter has leveled off 
almost everywhere except in Japan (we shall have to look at this in more 
detail).  But technical growth is exploding in all directions and needs 
financing.  Can one expect, however, that in three or four years the money 
spent on technical projects will bring the fresh economic growth that will cover 
the investment made? 
 
 
In the main the system works as follows.  Technique makes economic 
growth possible.  But it demands such enormous funding by the economy that 
the economy reacts by putting a brake on it through forcing it to make 
choices.v  The following facts make this inevitable. 
 
 
First, technique takes up projects concerning which no one can say 
whether they will have any economic value.  Space is an example.  The 
building of rockets and satellites undoubtedly has benefits for some firms and 
workers.  It might also attract foreign orders.  The rocket Ariane can carry a 
Brazilian or Nigerian satellite.  It thus brings profit to France.  But it has no 
economic value, none that consumers can use.  At the very most there are 
some salaries and profits, which will be used up eventually, but this is money 
made for nothing. 
 
 
Second, the growth of techniques means diminution for the secondary 
sector and temporary gain for the tertiary.  But the tertiary sector creates no 
economic value.  Services are useful but they do not produce anything.  This 
is constantly forgotten.  Here again technical growth produces no real wealth. 
 
 
Third, technique has external effects and its costs are thus much more 
complex.  The more it progresses, the more it creates global problems, 
pollution, potential dangers, the exhausting of nonrenewable resources.  If we 
are to find the real costs we have thus to take into account the precautions 
that have to be taken and the cost of looking for substitute materials.  When a 
technique carries with it great risks of toxification, protection has to be 
provided and institutions must be set up to exercise control.  These are 
hidden costs.  It is the famous question of the internalization of external 
factors. 
 
 
Fourth, techniques produce increasingly powerful and expensive 
armaments.  Someone might intervene and say that this is a simple matter for 
political decision.  But that is false, for one must apply here the same 
argument applied above to space.  Making these weapons provides jobs and 
makes exports possible.  It thus helps the balance of 

 
 
106  
UNCERTAINTY 
 
trade.  But in this case the negative effect is global.  Most of the countries 
that buy arms are Third World countries, and the purchases plunge them 
increasingly into debt.  (In 1985 Latin America had an external debt of 
$300 billion.  For all Third World countries it amounted to $620 billion.  I 
find it hard to grasp what these figures mean.)  Economically, the whole 
thing is increasingly impossible.  In other words, these techniques mean 
growing difficulties and impasses in economic life.  Concretely and within 
budgetary limits financiers and economists have to say to technicians that 
they cannot do all that techniques make possible.  They have to choose.  
At one and the same time it is not possible to make very expensive 
surgery possible for everyone, or to provide every hospital with every form 
of modern equipment (lasers, scanners, ultrasound, etc.), and yet to 
supply all the necessary hospital beds.  In relation to technique the 
economy acts as a brake or buffer; that is, it represents negative 
feedback. 
 
I deal with this problem in the present chapter because positive and 
negative feedback increase uncertainty.  We do not know what is the true 
impact or effect.  We do not know how far state support is restricted 
economically.  We do not know exactly how feedback functions as a 
whole.  No one can hazard a guess.  At best we can only be aware that 
the phenomenon is global and that the effects are uncertain.  In any case, 
the whole technical system today is subject to this feedback, which both 
complements the system and also tends to derail it. 
 
 
                                                 
i See M.  Barrère, "Les limites-du secret scientifique," La Recherche 151 (Jan.  
1984). 
ii The U.S.  government spent $250 million for basic research alone in 1985. 
iii See P.  Papon, "Pour une prospective de la science," Recherche et 
Technologie: les enjeux de l'avenir (Seghers, 1983); P.  Fasella, "Une stratégie 
européenne Pour la recherche," La Recherche 150 (Dec.  1983); G.  Price, "The 
Politics of Planning and the Problems of Science Policy," Science, Technology 
and Society 2/5 (1982); D.  Collin Gridge, "Decisions on Technology and Policies," 
ibid., 3/2 (1983). 
iv Cf.  J.-J.  Salomon and G.  Schmeder, Les Enjeux du changement 
tecnhologique (Economica, 1984), which deals almost entirely with this problem in 
the USA. 
v We shall discuss this point in detail in our study of economic absurdity; see 
chapter XI below. 

 
 
CHAPTER IV 
_____________________________________________ 
 
Internal Contradictions 
 
A final factor that increases uncertainty regarding the future of techniques 
and their progress consists of the internal contradictions of the technical 
system and society.  The first contradiction arises out of the fact that on 
the one hand the conflicts which divide multinational concerns, 
supranational movements (Islam, Communism), and nations are now 
extremely violent, a violence both expressed and enhanced by the 
multiplicity of techniques, and yet that on the other hand the violence of 
the confrontations masks the nullity of the stakes.  This may well sound 
scandalous, but it is the exact truth.  People are opposed to one another 
at every point but only to do the very same thing.  The conflicts have no 
real point; there is simply a passion to lay hold of nothing.  We have 
reached the extreme limit of progress (that of modernity or ultratechnical 
nature) when the object plays a role by its mere absence, being the 
fictitious stake of a mimesis (Girard) of appropriation.  At the beginning of 
this chapter we need to understand that it is "the presence of the 
absence" of a purpose in all the conflicts that renders them the more 
violent.  Terrorism is typical.1  Studying the point, which would merit a 
separate book, leads us to three themes: thresholds of reversal, fragility, 
and compensations. 
 
 
 
107 
 
 
108   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
1.  Thresholds of Reversal 
 
Ivan Illich was the best if not the first of those to emphasize thresholds, 
and I myself have studied elsewhere the difference between finitude, 
thresholds, and self-limitation.2  The threshold of reversal is an essential 
concept in our age.  The first model came a century and a half ago with 
the law of diminishing returns.  This is very simple.  When we increase 
quantities in any field to gain greater results, a time comes when the 
process reverses itself and a lesser result is achieved than that sought.  
This law is a decisive one in studying technical progress.  We will take 
some simple examples.  The desire fully to rationalize political and 
economic organization and the desire to rationalize human behavior will 
always lead to a point of reversal and an explosion of the irrational.  The 
process of rationalization leads to a specific irrationality.  "The rational 
and total organization of the conditions of life produces of itself the 
arbitrary and irrational rule of organization.”3  What is irrational is the 
actual desire to rationalize!  The most familiar and vivid example is Soviet 
planning.  But we must take note of similar effects in relation to the spread 
of computers.  The introduction of computers into schools and homes 
might make things more efficient but this turns inevitably into irrationality.  
Why, for example, save time if the time thus saved is empty and 
meaningless?  The more accurate our clocks are, the less we know the 
value of time.  It is the clocks, I would say, that prevent us from using the 
time that we have and reflecting upon it. 
 
 
We thus arrive at a vital global formulation given by Janicaud: "The 
power of the rational is subject to the law of reversal from the rational to 
the irrational to which no one has the key and of which no one can finally 
say what is the meaning.”  Technical power is the ideal model of this 
reversal.  It is this which in effect associates rationality and power, and in 
its unlimited growth, which is regarded as valuable in itself, leads to the 
basic irrationality of destruction, privation, and insoluble disorder.  But 
given the extreme complexity of the technical system, we are unable to 
foretell what is the threshold of reversal, the more so as it might be an 
accident that brings it to light.  The transition from the rational order to 
incoherent disorder which will not create 

 
 
INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS 
109 
 
future order is totally unpredictable.  We cannot formulate or quantify it.  
Taylorism, which was supposed to promote the happiness of workers (I 
am not jesting!), is a first example of total reversal.  But our system of 
maximum programming by technique leads to much more serious crises.  
We need to meditate on Janicaud's formula that reversal becomes the 
limit that no coherence or relation can remove.  It is a constitutive 
limitation of the power of the rational.  It is clear enough that already in 
our world, production does not keep pace with the raising of capital 
devoted to it.  But we shall have to return to this point.  Let us give a few 
more examples of thresholds. 
 
 
Beillerot has fully demonstrated this reversal in the excess of 
pedagogy.4  This has the aim of making life easier for children, of 
promoting their psychological, moral, and intellectual development, of 
transmitting knowledge with less difficulty.  But the perfecting of 
techniques in some sense means.  total control of the children, which is 
logical.  The more pedagogy becomes scientific and technical, the more 
efficient it is, and the more it takes complete possession of the pupils.  At 
each stage in their development the children meet specialists, and the 
same will soon apply to adults, too, as they pursue their education.  
Pedagogy supposedly has nothing to do with the acquisition of 
knowledge.  It is a psychological and political action, a regulatory action.  
It is in the service of belief and duty.  Teaching and learning are with a 
view to belief and service.  Beillerot fully shows that the technicization of 
pedagogy, while certainly making it more efficient and better for the 
general good, also makes of it a perfect instrument of social control.  The 
more information I receive, the more I think I know, and confusion 
between the information I am given and my knowledge brings me into a 
"spiral illusion.”  The more I receive information, the less I think to believe, 
whereas experience proves the exact opposite.  The transmission of 
knowledge seems to serve the development of social adhesion, of 
democratic consensus as opposed to conflict.  Universalized (and 
diffused) pedagogy does not really serve democracy but the 
technoeconomy.  More extensive transmission of knowledge reinforces 
the adhesion of everybody to the same norms and values.  The more 
pedagogy becomes technically perfect and institutional, the more it 
becomes a political weapon of government.  It is the generalized 
pedagogical conformity that is significant.  All these theses needed to be 
proved, and Beillerot has done it.  The converse is true: Ignorant people 
 
 
110   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
cannot be brought under social control.  "Knowledge" is requisite for adhesion 
(and hence for manipulation and control). 
 
It is not just knowledge, techniques, and science that are not neutral, but also 
their transmission.  A perfected pedagogy is not neutral.  Management by 
knowledge increases social control.  A threshold is thus passed.  Pedagogy, 
which ought to liberate, becomes an instrument of blind and accepted 
servitude. 
 
 
I will give two other examples of thresholds of reversal.  The one 
concerns freedom.  What outbreaks of joy there were when freedom of radio 
transmission was granted in France!  It did not matter what ideas would be 
broadcast.  Groups that had not been able to speak could now be heard.  
What an advance in liberty!  But experience has proved the contrary.  First, 
capital had to be found and the state gave only a little initial support.  The 
independent local radio station, then, depended on a big newspaper or a 
financial or industrial corporation.  But this was not the most important 
feature.  Three kinds of independent local radio stations quickly developed.  A 
first group wanted to adhere to the original ideal of providing relatively fresh 
local and national news and serving the cause of culture and education by 
discussions, commentaries, etc.  A second group corresponded to public 
groups whose choices and opinions are well known (e.g., Roman Catholics, 
Jews, or Socialists), and which had an audience in advance that was ready to 
support its radio (though it is not really the radio of those who do not speak 
but of the party or church speaking through its specialists).  The third, very 
large group of stations would essentially transmit only music (rock) and 
sporting news.  The problem that soon appeared was that money is needed 
to transmit.  The only true source of money is advertising.  But advertising 
needs a sufficient audience, and competition developed between groups one 
and three.  Statistics generally show the proportion between them to be one 
to ten.  The battle of advertising thus ran in favor of the rock stations, not the 
cultural and research stations.  The latter were for the most part either forced 
off the air or compelled to conform to the prevailing model of music and sport. 
 
 
This, then, is our divine freedom, the great advance made thanks to 
"independent local radio stations.”  We find a similar disaster in the case of 
private television channels: a lowering of the cultural level, a debasement of 
the public, and an increasing advertising invasion.  I will leave on one side the 
question of "national private radio stations.”  In the case of true local radio 
stations, centralized stations of a capitalist type easily carry the day.  
Freedom brings about concentration.  A final relevant factor that has to be 
taken into account is the power of the transmitter.  The more powerful the 
transmitter, 

 
 
INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS 
111 
 
and the larger the area it can cover, the more chance it has of being heard.  
Once again we find technique and finance triumphing over culture.  Long live 
freedom! 
 
 
The centralization produced by decentralization is my final example of a 
foreseeable reversal.  I will look only at the technical and not the political 
aspect of this phenomenon.  We know the theses of B.  Lussato and his 
distinction between the macrocomputer ("the large cauldron") and the 
microcomputer ("the small cauldron").5  He sees well the problems raised by 
the former but still seems to have illusions regarding the latter.  The important 
thing is to disclose correctly that the computerization of society, the passage 
from the computer to telematics, brings with it, whether it is suitable or not, a 
concentration.  But no matter what the qualities he finds for microcomputers, 
he cannot deny that we find the same results as in the case of independent 
local radio stations, and that large computers carry a great deal of information 
that they pass on to one another (correlation analyses).  He says rightly that 
the true distinction does not lie in the different sizes of the machines but in 
their degree of centralization.  Large computers are an advantage in 
important economic and financial operations, in a society in which there is 
already a concentration of powers, and in the manufacturing of everyday 
products.  But these are the three decisive elements in our society.  We 
cannot hope that microcomputers will ever become a means of 
decentralization, personalization, or invention.  We have only to see how they 
are used (e.g., CB or Minitel) to realize that personal autonomy is of no 
interest whatever to the public.  The technical instrument is a game, which 
allows us to divert ourselves and to make jokes (or frauds). 
 
 
The microcomputer is not going to lead to freedom but to conformity 
within the technical system and to smoother acceptance of the system.  It will 
acclimate us to the computerized world.  I think that Lussato's distinction 
between "the large and the small cauldron!' is false.  The small serves the 
large.  It is the toy which the technical society provides in order to make more 
acceptable the concentration that is taking place in every area of the 
computer system. 
 
 
I prefer the probings and reservations of M.  Ader,6 who points out that 
the medium of computers remains united even though their usage permits a 
certain amount of decentralization.  We see the effect of decentralization very 
well in banking, but it goes hand in hand with a national centralization of 
accounting.  The debate is not so much 
 
 
112  
UNCERTAINTY 
 
between organization and the computer, as it was a few years ago.  The 
computer can adapt itself to organization but does not condition it.  The 
economy and the efficiency of a system can justify centralization.  But 
centralized instruments can have geographically scattered branches 
throughout a region, and the microcomputers in these branches can all be 
linked up in a network, so that centralization advances.  Naturally, there 
can be advantages for individuals.  At work a computer can increase 
efficiency, take care of routine tasks that make few demands, and make it 
possible to engage in higher types of employment.  But Ader shows that 
there are also negative effects (accelerated pace, loss of competence, 
greater inflexibility, increase in mistakes).  In particular there is a demand 
for sustained, intense, and exhausting attention that is hard to achieve, 
and then incontestable physiological ailments (vertebral and visual), and 
mental problems that are now seen to be connected with the automation 
of tasks in this field (sleeping disorders, personality disorders, depressive 
tendencies, etc.).  The net result is a significant rate of absenteeism (A.  
Wisner). 
 
 
I have given these last illustrations in order to show that if we want to 
achieve awareness of the internal contradictions in the technical system 
we have to take into full account the great multiplicity of facts.  To put it 
simply, we might say that the more these instruments bring us together, 
the more we are distant and strangers.  The telephone has done away 
with the habit of visiting people, of engaging in true human contact; it has 
ruined the art of writing letters, and sending keepsakes -lovers phone one 
another instead of writing.  We see here a limitation.  Technical 
instruments are very good for technical operations; the phone is excellent 
for making appointments or passing on brief instructions.  But these 
instruments become demonic -when they invade one's whole life and 
replace such human activities as talking with someone face to face. 
 
 
Telematics accelerates the process of driving us apart (by the very 
fact of the rapidity of communication).  Communities will finally have to be 
redesigned so as to make possible uniform networks.  Real meetings will 
become rarer than ever.  We will see one another only by way of 
machines.7 
 
 
Lussato hopes that he can fight against this in favor of the 

 
 
INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS 
113 
 
microcomputer.  But all that he proposes (including simplifying structures, 
restoring autonomy to city districts, opposing bigness in every field, 
repopulating small towns and villages) will be possible by the 
microcomputer's opening up the villages; the small, decentralized 
computer units will allow all this.  These proposals are all good, but they 
do not take into account the global reality of society nor the fact that the 
microcomputer has entered into the technical system.  This is the problem 
which computer scientists for the most part fail to see.  They are 
convinced that the mere presence of their enormous system combining 
the macro- and microcomputer will by its very activity (the creation of 
networks, etc.) create a new society and bring urban, industrial, capitalist, 
political, and technical organization.  This simplistic hypothesis is based 
on the fact that computer scientists are the first to submit to fascination 
with their technique.  They completely ignore the solidity and rigor of the 
technical system.  They do not realize that their technique will serve this 
system and even in modifying it will reinforce its distinctive logic. 
 
2.  Fragility 
 
A second contradiction in the technical system arises out of its fragility.  
First we have the fragility of all big organizations.  I have already 
discussed this in an earlier work (The Technological System).  The bigger 
an organization becomes, the more accident prone it is.  The links among 
the different sectors are more numerous, and it is at such links that 
breaks occur.  This is true no matter whether the organization is economic 
(multinational companies) or political (Napoleon's empire or the USSR).  It 
naturally applies to the technical system, which grows unceasingly and 
absorbs more and more areas. 
 
 
Let me deal with an objection to this growth of fragility.  Technicians 
say that the bigger and more complex a system, the more chances it has 
of finding resources and compensations to make up for an accident.  If 
one organism cannot deal with a matter in a crisis, another one will.  To 
some extent this is true, but suppose that the system is  not centralized, 
that it is complex but not complicated, and that internal communications 
function perfectly.  This might mean that the system can respond well to 
an accident, but I would reply that in these circumstances the accidents 
are more numerous and more serious.  Experience also shows that big 
organizations that are centralized are also with a few exceptions 
complicated and that information circulates in them very badly in spite of 
computers.  Centralization also has its 
 
 
114   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
own weaknesses.8  The more there is, the greater the impact of each 
incident on the rest as the center spreads it.  Individual means of solving 
problems also fade through collective distribution.  Solutions do not come 
by way of individual disentangling; no one can now find the right 
response.  in a word, we need to denounce what is now called 
decentralization, the rather feeble lie of pseudo-decentralization in 1982-
83, decentralization by the computer or electricity.  Branches have to be 
set up to give an appearance of decentralization. 
 
 
Julien Bok has excellently explained the trend toward centralization 
in his study of hierarchy and the principle of least difficulty.9  He shows 
here that large groups have a hierarchical level that we must not exceed 
(eight echelons, he thinks, is the greatest number for maximum 
efficiency).  "If an organization grows and keeps its structure of n 
hierarchical echelons, at first its power increases N times, but when the 
maximum is passed, its power decreases drastically.  Should the number 
of echelons become NC, the power will move toward zero.  Internal 
quarrels will reduce the organization to total impotence.”  The reaction 
then will be to harden the constraints and increase the central power (as 
we well know).  But this leads to even greater impotence.  "When an 
organization has the maximum structure and increases its power, the 
introduction of another hierarchical echelon reduces individual production 
by half....  But even if individual production is reduced, an organization 
with many echelons and individuals will have greater total power if it 
corresponds to the optimum structure.  Here lies the explanation of the 
trend toward gigantism.  The sense of power is felt by individuals even at 
the bottom, and they find in it protection and reassurance.  Finally, an 
organization sees its power grow in constant relation to the growth of 
discipline.”  We are very far here from the illusion of decentralization and 
autonomy.  This is found where the thresholds of reversal and the fragility 
of big organizations meet. 
 
 
How many times have we experienced fragility as a result of the 

 
 
INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS 
 
115 
 
weather.  In France the winter of 1985-86 was not too severe.  But railroad 
traffic was often interrupted.  Many people were without electricity because 
cables snapped due to an accumulation of snow and ice.  Icy roads interfered 
with cars and trucks and resulted in supply difficulties.  There was nothing 
unusual about these problems.  Similarly, hot and dry summers empty our 
reservoirs and cause many individual problems that we need not recount.  
Another feature of this fragility is that it is not only so common but it is also 
accelerating.  The more perfect the system becomes, the more it has to 
function at the maximum of yield, speed, and efficiency.  Therefore, this is 
also a factor in fragility (hence Formula I cars are much more fragile than 
standard cars). 
 
 
To return to the question of weather, a little snow and ice seldom 
prevented people on horseback or in carts from going on their way!  But 
high-speed trains and powerful automobiles are brought to a halt.  If we 
consider all aspects, we see that minor failings or flaws have major negative 
consequences (cf.  Seveso, the pollution of the Rhône, etc.).  If an error was 
made with a nineteenth-century nonautomatic machine, it caused only a 
temporary stoppage, but an error in programming modern computers can 
have incalculable consequences.  The speed of our machines makes them 
much more fragile and magnifies the consequences of the least mistake. 
 
 
Though it might seem astonishing, the faster the functioning, the slower 
the response to an unexpected event. 
 
Because of the interpenetration of technical constraints, we lose the 
possibility of responding to events in time.  Materially, adaptations have 
become too slow.  Techno-organizational integration paralyzes 
economic reactions.  This is a relative paralysis in comparison with the 
speed of the development of environmental factors which we must, 
reckon with if we are to keep our powerful, integrated instruments 
functioning.  To this first result of techno-organizational integration we 
must add a second that is even more surprising, namely, the 
acceleration of events and the multiplication of disruptions.  The 
combination of these two simultaneous results is what leads into an 
impasse.  Beyond a certain point in integration the relation between the 
two reverses itself.  Events explode as the mega-machine falls into 
paralysis....  The more numerous and diverse the variables in a technical 
system, the more events of which it is conscious and the constraints of 
which it must accept.  The greater then is the probability that a variable 
will develop at any given instant....  As variables multiply, the average 
gap that separates fluctuations tends to diminish....  The pace of the 
events 
 
 
116   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
to which a response must be made tends to increase....  When a certain 
number of integrated instruments has come into use globally, a threshold 
is reached beyond which variables enter into synergy and snowball.10 
 
 
That is Granstedt's remarkably perspicacious theoretical analysis of 
the fragility of the technical system.  But the strange thing is that 
experience shows how accurate is this analysis of complexity and size.  
Hypothetically, one can conceive that the technical system might 
decentralize itself, decomplexify itself, reduce itself to fluid interconnected 
networks, and hence become both less fragile and less rigid.  But 
experience shows that all technique is made up of more than networks, 
and that it proliferates in powers, means, and products, so that no 
simplification or synthesis seems to be possible in fact.  For this reason it 
is all the more fragile.  We have to remember this when we evaluate the 
power of terrorists.  (it should be added that we do not have here a form 
of discouraging pessimism, for the noting of limits and the recognition of 
fragility are the most necessary forms today of a "positive pessimism.")  
The growth of technique augments the vulnerability or fragility of the 
socioeconomic system.  This is a factor which reduces the global fruits of 
technical progress.  As Giarini has well seen, vulnerability is the situation 
in a socioeconomic system whose functioning and survival can be 
challenged at any moment by accidental events due to human actions 
(errors, sabotage) or natural phenomena (earthquakes, landslides, etc.).   
Naturally, we must not confuse the vulnerability of a system to disasters 
with the probability of such disasters.  But we have to realize that the 
more a society within which such a system develops is troubled (like our 
own), and the more extended and complex it is, the more chance there is 
of disasters.  In 1943 it was relatively difficult to blow up pylons for 
high-tension wires, but now the network is twenty times greater and it is x 
times easier to do it.  Vulnerability goes hand in hand with greater 
uncertainty and lesser reliability.  Insurance companies are right.  The 
risks that are most readily insured are not the very rare ones, which 
involve large amounts in a restricted market and thus prevent the law of 
greater numbers from functioning.  They are the very probable ones (like 
automobile accidents), for in these cases the companies know where they 
are.  In the case of nuclear accidents they do not know at an. 
 
 
A special study is needed of the fragility of computers.11  With 

 
 
INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS 
 
117 
 
the speed of production even a short breakdown can be disastrous.  At 
Peugeot one hour's breakdown can mean the loss of 100 vehicles.  
Computers are reliable enough (only one breakdown per 1,000 hours), 
but in an average company that uses 200 computers this comes to one 
breakdown per day.  Breakdowns go hand in hand with automation and 
complexity. 
 
 
We must also take into account the following fact: The more 
concentrated a system is, the more it needs specialized subsystems.  As 
we have already seen, the relation between these subsystems is the 
weakest link in a system, whether this be organized in traditional style or 
by a computerized network.  In a specialized system, a single breakdown 
(e.g., in a computer) can stop everything.  In this analysis of fragility we 
must remember fact as well as theory.  A technical system does not 
develop in a pure universe.  It faces many dangers: nationalization of 
affiliates, pollution, interruptions of supplies, political blackmail, etc.  To 
reduce the vulnerability of the system there is needed a large measure of 
agreement upon political and economic organization, a reduction in 
violent opposition, and a social structure on which the technostructure can 
rely.  Private and corporate interests must not quench devotion to the 
general interest.  “A large and high-energy society is infinitely more 
vulnerable to social blackmail."12 
 
 
A final aspect of fragility that we need to consider is the more rapid 
appearance today of new techniques that have to be integrated.  This is 
an important factor in our world.  It is simply an application of a rule that 
came to light in 1950, namely, that anything that technique can do ought 
to be done.  So long as innovations were on a human scale and could be 
adjusted to existing techniques and structures, this was no great problem.  
But in recent years the explosion of new techniques has totally upset the 
techno-industrial as well as the bureaucratic and political scene.  We have 
not yet mastered the upheaval.  We need to examine the problems that it 
causes in the economic and financial world.  In reality most of the fragility 
from which we suffer comes from unlimited technical growth, regarding 
which there is, as we have seen, less and less wisdom in putting the real 
question of feasibility. 
 
 
We cannot absorb indefinitely the repeated shocks of overwhelming 
techniques.  The more novel and powerful a technique is, the more it 
disturbs the world, and the more, in doing so, it contributes to the fragility 
of the technical system.  In response it is not enough to 
 
 
118   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
reduce the dimensions, to reduce the scale, to make domestic robots.  
The scale does not affect the reduced impact of frequent innovations on 
the system.  Indeed, the age of "small is beautiful" is now past.  There is a 
new orientation to the grandiose, to the network of networks, and finally to 
a global network (cf.  Bressand and Distler). 
 
 
As I see it, these are the aspects of growing fragility and vulnerability 
in our technical system and therefore in our society as a whole.  One 
might object, of course, that each time one of these phenomena comes to 
light, an attempt is made to deal with it, as with negative effects.  But we 
have here a fragility that is hard to discern and a vulnerability that 
threatens the whole system, so that they are not easily isolated and 
nullified. 
 
3.  Compensations 
 
A final internal contradiction in the system that we need to note, and that 
will lead us back to a point already studied under ambivalence, is that the 
technical system increases what one might call countercompensations, 
and especially scarcity.  Dumouchel has made a fine study of this scarcity 
in the economic sphere.13  He begins with an analysis of classical thinking 
about the economy.  Scarcity is ambivalent; it may be either positive or 
negative.  It may cause violence, but it is also the basis of trade.  The 
fundamental fact is the parsimony of nature that drives us to progress.  If 
scarcity is both the basis of the economy and the cause of violence, we 
must distinguish between relative scarcity and extreme scarcity.  This is 
taken up by politicians.  Reduction of growth leads to scarcity, which in 
turn engenders disorder and conflict. 
 
 
Dumouchel insists, however, that we cannot be satisfied with earlier 
economic and political analyses of scarcity.  Having studied it in primitive 
societies (following Sahlin), he concludes: "No quantity of goods or 
resources banishes it, no parsimony of nature defines it.  Scarcity is 
woven into the web of interpersonal relations.  The structuring of social 
space either permits or does not permit the appearance of scarcity.  
Scarcity is purely social.  It exists only in the network of intersubjective 
exchanges which give rise to it.  It is simply a matter of social 
organization."14  Having interpreted the phenomena of scarcity in terms of 
sacrificial mimesis, he rightly shows that it institutes the 

 
 
INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS 
119 
 
modem world as the sacred did the primitive world.  Modern scarcity is 
produced by excess of production, by the universalizing of mimetic rivalries.  
Social and technical changes today have brought scarcity by destroying the 
traditional obligations of solidarity and opposing the social consequences of 
human actions to the individual consequences. 
 
 
Scarcity rests on the renunciation of the obligations of solidarity, on the 
abandonment of individuals to their own fate.  There is a general belief that 
conflicts and misery are due to scarcity and a general commitment to the 
pursuit of personal interests.  In this kind of world the worst violence is 
supposedly rational. 
 
 
Neirynck, too, has offered us a profound study of shortages in a society 
of abundance.15  There is a reality of abundance that has ceased to be a 
chimera; it has become an incarnate myth.  But it is not absolute; it is for a 
minority.  (The gross national product for the 450 million people of Africa in 
1980 was only half of that for France.)  It is explained that the abundance of 
the developed countries is necessary for the Third World, and Neirynck 
formulates a new beatitude: "Blessed are the satiated, for we have to feed 
them in order to nourish the hungry.”  In other areas he shows that 
abundance is a trap, that essential services are deficient, compensated by 
forced over consumption of useless services. 
 
 
The inability to organize services in the technical system is not due to 
chance.  This system is based on the excessive using up of resources of free 
energy.  It is known how to increase the productivity of primary and secondary 
sectors by using more energy.  But services do not benefit from an injection of 
energy-they deteriorate.  "Neither education, medicine, nor banking is a true 
service according to consumer expectations when computer terminals are 
used and abused in teaching, diagnosing, and informing.”  Neirynck gives 
many examples of this shortage, and I think it is essential to regard them as 
compensations for our enhanced power, efficiency, and abundance. 
 
 
The above studies lead on to what follows.  There is an absolute scarcity 
(close to famine) and a relative scarcity (by comparison with the rest of the 
possible consumption).  In both cases, however, scarcity is a matter of social 
organization.  The most obvious example-the object both of studies and of 
inflammatory speeches-is the fact that the technical power which engenders 
wealth and abundance in the West has Third World poverty as a 
compensating factor.  It would  be absurd to fall at this point into a 
propagandist discourse accusing of 
 
 
120   
 
UNCERTAINTY 
 
the West.  Talk of this kind involves moral judgments.  It implies that we 
Westerners are robbers or wicked people.  But the phenomenon has 
nothing whatever to do with moral virtues or vices.  It is no individual's 
fault if technical growth demands more and more raw materials which 
have to be readily accessible at a good price.  By various processes 
which we shall examine, this leads to the impoverishment of the Third 
World, the unbalancing of the economies of the various countries in it, 
and 
the 
sociological 
disintegration 
of 
their 
society, 
that 
is, 
proletarization.16  At issue is not just the simple fact-often denounced-that 
we do not pay enough to the Third World for raw materials.  Even if we 
paid full price, this would solve nothing.  The example of oil is plain.  The 
incredible wealth of the oil emirs does not prevent proletarization in their 
countries.  It has also grown very clearly in Nigeria. 
 
 
In reality it is the technical system itself which produces the global 
proletarization (as well as the poverty) of the Third World.  Here, then, is a 
compensation.  Our abundance by way of technique entails this 
proletarization.  (It is ridiculous to say merely that we are robbing Third 
World countries of their wealth and that this wealth is the basis of ours!)  
Yet this is not the only form of compensation.  We shall have to point 
briefly to others.  Thus we have on the one hand an abundance or 
superabundance of things, of consumption, of information, of tools, but on 
the other hand we live in real poverty as concerns land, air, water, and 
nature.  On the one hand we have a superabundance of human contacts 
(but superficial and artificial contacts), and on the other hand a poverty in 
relation to animal contacts which, unconsciously felt, explains the love of 
townspeople for cats and dogs, since it is not possible to think of human 
beings without animal contacts.  In spite of the optimists, we cannot live 
surrounded only by other human beings, in a desert of concrete and 
mechanical objects.  Naturally, we have to be adaptable; we have to be 
able to live in different circumstances.  But an adaptation of this kind 
means regression to the most elementary human stage.  Scarcity of 
space is forced upon us whether we like it or not; the more people there 
are, the less space there is.  As regards scarcity of air, all the specialists 
agree that it is not just city air that is polluted, but, that the upper layer of 
the atmosphere now contains what are becoming dangerous levels of 
carbon.  As regards water, both surface water and ground water, there is 
growing pollution of all accessible reserves and a progressive reduction of 
the amount of water available.  As regards nature, we have lived thus far 
in an 

 
 
INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS 
121 
 
environment that was made for us, but we are now making our own 
environment without nature.  This enormous transformation brings a 
superabundance for which the compensation is a basic scarcity, the 
unavoidable result being an economic seesawing, a seesawing of 
humanity itself, of which we are now seeing the first signs. 
 
 
In this situation there occurs a kind of transfer, which is also one of 
the symptoms.  Mere objects, machines, no longer count as such, for we 
cannot live in that kind of world.  Barthes and Baudrillart showed long ago 
that we use symbols, and the system of objects shows that everything is 
different from what it now is.  There is no true symbolizing in the primary 
sense.  What we have is the creation of a fictional world in which our 
religious sense incarnates itself.  Objects like television, computers, bikes, 
and rockets acquire a fabulous dimension by reason of the sense of their 
power, their ubiquity, their domination, the unlimited access that they give, 
their secret, which remains strange to us, and the sacred awe that we 
experience face to face with nuclear fission.  This complex is typically 
religious.  The religious and the sacred that we have chased out of nature 
are now transferred to objects.  Be it noted that the transfer is not quite 
the same.  We originally related our religious feelings to our natural 
environment.  The tree, the fountain, the wind, the animal were the focus.  
We invested them with a formidable greatness and they became sacred.  
But the things that compose our human environment now play this role.  
We ourselves have not changed.  We still relate our sense of the sacred 
to what constitutes our environment.  We adore and use with joy and fear 
that which forms our environment, making sacrifice to it.  It is the 
environment that has changed.  But how far we are from the supposed 
dedivinization of the world!  It is simply that the world we now know bears 
no relation to the human world which up to half a century ago seemed to 
be eternal. 
 
                                                 
1 On this vital theme cf.  P.  Dumouchel and J.-P.  Dupuy, L'Enfer des choses 
(Paris: Seuil, 1979).  We find there the very illuminating formula that if I do not see 
that I am blind, I am blind.  This formula might be applied to the illusion of 
technical progress and the violence of the conflicts all around us. 
2 See Ivan Illich, Tools for Conviviality (New York: Harper & Row, 1973); J.  Ellul, 
Les Combats de la liberté (Paris: Centurion, and Geneva: Labor et Fides, 1984), 
pp.  70ff.; cf.  idem, The Ethics of Freedom, tr.  G.  W.  Bromiley (Grand Rapids: 
Eerdmans, 1976), pp.  344ff. 
3 Janicaud, La Puissance du rationnel (Paris: Gallimard, 1985); B.  Charbonneau, 
Le Chaos et le Système (Anthropos, 1973). 
4 Beillerot, La Société pédagogique (Paris: PUF, 1982).  See also the remarkable 
book of Jézéquel, et al., Le Gâchis audiovisuel (Éditions Ouvrières, 1987), which 
shows that in television the more noise there is, the emptier it is. 
5 B.  Lussato, Le Défi informatique (Fayard, 1981). 
6 Martin Ader, Le Choc informatique (Denoel, 1984). 
7 On the positive and negative effects of the computer, cf.  Robert Castel, La 
Gestion des risques (Ed.  de Minuit, 1981), who points to the danger of collective 
instrumentalization.  The computerization of the management of populations at 
risk transforms our relation to illnesses and handicaps.  It leads globally to a loss 
of personal identity rather than to a gain in administrative knowledge.  Obfuscation 
results rather than an accentuation of concern 
8 Lussato gives an interesting example of the effect of the over-big in the realm of 
computers.  Around 1975 with the search for bigger and more powerful computers 
it was found that at a certain threshold static multiplies and causes aberrations.  
No matter what the combinations, this static cannot be eliminated.  It is inherent in 
the size of the system.  Beyond a certain threshold Grosh's law is no longer valid.  
An over-big system has an internal resonance that makes it uncertain.  Once the 
threshold is crossed, growth becomes vertiginous as the size and complexity of 
the machine increase.  It seems to me that this principle applies to the whole of 
our technical society.  Static does not stop multiplying, and it is so diverse and 
numerous that neither politicians, economists, nor sociologists can deal with it. 
9 J.  Bok, "Le principle de moindre difficulté," in Colloque de Cerisy, 
L'Auto-organisation (Paris: Seuil, 1983). 
10 See Granstedt, L'impasse industrielle (Paris: Seull, 1980), pp.  107-12. 
11 Cf.  Yves Lasfargues, "De la prime A la panne," Le Monqe, Sept.  2, 1987. 
12 Rufus E.  Miles, Awakening from the American Dream: The Social and Political 
Limits to Growth (New York: Universe Books, 1976), a fine analysis of 
vulnerability. 
13 See Dumouchel, L'Enfer des choses (Paris: Seuil, 1979), Part 2. 
14 Ibid.  Naturally, Dumouchel does not deny an objective scarcity, e.g., due to 
famine. 
15 See Neirynck, Le Huitième Jour de la Création.  Introduction à l'entropologie 
(Presses  polytechniques romanes, 1986). 
16 I studied this ineluctable process in Changer de révolution (Paris: Seuil, 1982). 

 
 
PART II 
 
DISCOURSE 
 
If we want to uncover the vast enterprise of bluff into which technique has 
plunged us, it is obvious that we must begin by analyzing the basic 
elements of the discourse1 that is common among technocrats, 
technologists, and technolaters (I will not say simple technicians or 
scientists).  For it is this discourse that incessantly surrounds and 
envelops us.  We are entering into the field of what Janicaud calls "the 
technicism of technodiscourse": 
 
Technodiscourse is a discourse which is not strictly technical or 
autonomous, a parasitic language which is based on technique, 
which helps to spread it, or which, for lack of anything better, 
makes any radical retreat, any specific questioning of the 
contemporary technical phenomenon, nearly impossible.  .  .  .  
Every technique has its own vocabulary, codes, and listing of 
events, problems, and operating scenarios.  This is not 
technodiscourse; it is not strictly scientific, philosophical, or 
poetic.  .  .  .  In large part it is a functionalizing of audiovisual 
language; it is advertising.  It involves technocratic "thinking.”  It 
is the excitation of computer scientists à la Servan-Schreiber.  It 
is 
politico-ideologico-audiovisual 
puffery 
regarding 
global 
competition, productivity, etc.  If it abounds, is this not because it 
has a function within and on behalf of the technical world?  It 
undoubtedly has a social and technical function.  We have only to 
think for a moment what the technical world of the West would be 
like without advertising.  .  .  .  When we consider that society is 
being technicized, we see that technodiscourse stimulates 
 
 
 
123 
                                                 
                                                
1 See Langdon Winner, "Myth Information in the High Tech Era," Science, 
Technology and Society, 4/6 (1984).  This very judicious article shows to 
what extent advanced technique has become mythical. 
 
 
124  DISCOURSE 
 
and shapes the process.  It plays the part of relaying information 
perfectly and accelerates the process of technicizing the whole 
planet.  .  .  .  It blocks access to an understanding of 
technoscience.  .  .  .  There takes place a work of 
autosymbolization which tends to recodify all reality in an 
informational, manipulable glaze.2 
 
 
With these magisterial thoughts of Janicaud as an introduction, we 
can now try to analyze some specimens of technodiscourse, showing in 
each case to what extent it is totally fictional. 
 
 
2 Janicaud, La Puissance du rationnel. 

 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
Humanism 
 
All technodiscourse either is or seeks to be discourse about humanity, 
about human primacy and objectives.  It does not merely seek to assure 
us of happiness, nor does it discuss power.  (There is never any question 
of power in this pious talk.)  Its theme is true human fulfillment, which it 
rates very highly.  Nothing is more important than the human race.  The 
more technocratic the author, the higher the rating of humanity.  Julian 
Simon entitles his book L'Homme, notre dernière chance (Humanity, Our 
Last Chance).1  This is admirable, but what follows is all about technique 
in a context designed to reassure us.  Michel Poniatovski's study of new 
technologies has the subtitle La chance de l'homme.2  This is a common 
theme.  We have not yet achieved true humanity.  Technique, especially 
the "new technologies," can now offer us a chance we could never hope 
for.  All technical activity orients us to a greater humanity.  It is not just a 
matter of supplementing but of achieving. 
 
 
We are far distant here from the supplementing of the soul that 
Bergson thought to be necessary.  The issue now is the realizing of 
human potentialities that the limits of society, morality, and the body have 
thus far negated.  In the enthusiasm of unlimited discovery we can now 
overcome these barriers.  It is self-evident that technique purely and 
simply serves humanity, and that the race is now on the verge of 
miraculous adventures.  We are embarking on a new Odyssey.  "There 
where Ulysses faced the wine-dark sea of Homer is a technological, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
125 
 
 
126   
DISCOURSE 
 
economic, and strategic ocean which invites us to new and countless 
explorations," says A.  Bressand, for naturally technocrats are no 
strangers to the humanities: they love to adorn their speeches with 
phrases from Pascal or Shakespeare.  Their discourse not only glorifies 
the race; it refers to the classical humanities.  There is no contradiction, 
only enlargement and greater profundity. 
 
 
This humanist discourse submits all things to humanity, the measure 
of all things (yes indeed) and sovereign over all these marvels.  The first 
man to walk on the moon fulfilled at last what had been the dream of the 
race from the very first.  One might also note that all technical progress is 
said to correspond to a basic desire of the race from the very first.  We 
always wanted to fly like birds and control fire and plumb the ocean 
depths, and- if anyone throws prudent doubt on such assertions the 
answer is triumphant: We wanted it because we did it.  In all the vast 
array of techniques exploding on every hand we human beings with our 
unique nature and genius and sovereign freedom are the ones who 
wanted it.  It is our free will that has produced it all.  And if we were free, 
we will now be even more so thanks to these aids.  There can be no 
concessions on this point. 
 
 
Human freedom supposedly increases with every technical advance.  
This is perfectly clear and simple.  We can do what we could not do 
before; is that not freedom?  For each wish we can now choose among a 
hundred objects that might meet it; is that not freedom?  We have great 
labor-saving devices; is that not freedom?3  Is it not freedom to escape 
the ancient biblical sentence that we must work and earn our bread by the 
sweat of our brow (Gen.  3:17-19)?  We can now move easily and swiftly 
from one point to another.  Is that not freedom?  Each year we have new 
hopes for life.  Is that not freedom?  I could go on for a long time.  No 
matter where we turn in what is said about technique, we find the same 
proclamation.  And since it is always stated that freedom is our very 
essence, we ultimately find a certainty that we are now more human than 
ever before.  Furthermore, everything is made for us in this purely 
technical world.  If industrial cities were ugly, fetid, and unhealthy, there is 
now set before us the dream city: Technopolis.  "Respect for the site and 
the high estimation of nature are clearly advanced in descriptions of the 
new scientific cities.  In this green, technological, radiant matrix the 
people of tomorrow can be gathered and reborn....  Mastering the future 
by technology, finding a place for people in an 

 
 
HUMANISM 
127 
 
environment of machines, and promoting harmonious sites ...  that is the 
project.”4 
 
 A new spirit of enterprise is appearing that is the opposite of the 
spirit of the 1950s, when the model in business and daily life .vas 
the "organization man" who was fully integrated into the 
technostructure and suburbia.  The new culture values risk 
taking.  We have a right to make mistakes.  Progress is only by 
experimentation....  Individualism is valued....  Individualism and 
a spirit of initiative are no longer associated with a conservative 
ideology.  Modernization becomes a factor of consensus. . . . a 
loose antibureacratic structure, a spirit of enterprise, teamwork, a 
constant renewal of creation.5 
 
 
It is surely a dream when a sociologist as informed as A.  Touraine 
discovers that our society has become individualistic again, that the 
individual has primacy, and that technique and the individual are 
associated.6  What more could we want for humanity? 
 
 
The development of technique is for humanity alone.  (We are not to 
include God, massive structures, or the state.)  Everything is oriented to 
humanity and its happiness.  Humanity is the measure of all things, even 
where there is excess.  This is the first time that the philosophical ideal 
will be realized.  Again, the whole person will come to expression with all 
its potentialities.  Nothing is ruled out; there can be no repression.  Even 
what was once regarded as an aberration, like homosexuality, will be 
accepted.7  In other words, this technical individualism fulfils humanism 
and achieves all that theologians and philosophers have advocated and 
demanded.  We must not forget that theologians, on the basis of Genesis, 
have explained that in ourselves, by an act of the Creator, we have an 
inventive genius, and that like creation, we are as yet only possibilities 
posited by God.  Creation is not yet perfect or fulfilled.  It is we who 
according to the divine plan are to 
 
 
 
128   
DISCOURSE 
 
perfect it.  it is we who are to fulfill possibilities and develop potentialities.  We 
will do so thanks to technique. 
 
 
If I understand the matter, for 500,000 years there have been no fully 
human people, only embryos.  True human beings have emerged only during 
the last century.  This is in keeping with one aspect of the thinking of Marx, 
who argued that up to 1880 humanity had had only a prehistory, and that true 
history would begin with the coming of the Socialist city.  On different 
premises, but with the same result, technique has been regarded as the 
fulfillment of human nature since the early 18th century, when this nature was 
based on reason and even confused with it.  Supposedly, we are completely 
rational and we express ourselves necessarily in rational works.  Science is 
not enough, for it is not strictly a work; it is knowledge.  We have to go a step 
further to achieve humanity.  We have to master the irrationality of things and 
impose on them practical reason.  It is not by chance that the discoveries of 
the 18th century were in the first instance technical discoveries before being 
"raised" to the level of science.  At this stage again we must thus glorify the 
profound unity between humanity and technique.  Uninterrupted humanistic 
discourse!  All technique has human well-being as its end, allowing us fully to 
realize and express ourselves. 
 
 
A question remains.  This century of technique was also the century of 
the "Rights of Man" that are an integral part of modern humanism.  I am 
always astonished that this expression commands universal assent and 
everyone finds it perfectly clear and self-evident.  The French Revolution 
spoke of the "rights both of man and of citizen.”  The rights of citizen, I 
understand-in any given regime various rights are ascribed to each member 
of the body politic.  For example, there is the right to property.  This is clear.  
Jurists also speak of subjective rights, the rights of creditors, or the rights of 
parents, or the rights of minors, or the rights of suspects.  This, too, is clear.  
But the "rights of man"?  This implies that we have rights by nature.  But what 
is human nature?  And what does the word "rights" mean?  Until the contrary 
is proved (which would be hard to do), the word "rights" is a legal term and it 
can have only a legal sense.  This means on the one side that rights can be 
claimed and that there are sanctions against those who violate rights.  But a 
right also has a very precise sense which it is the task of jurists to define.  
Each right has only one possible sense.  But when we consider what has 
been included under the "rights of man," we have to ask what is the precise 
content of the right to happiness, the right to health, the right to life, the right 
to information, the right to leisure, or the right to education.  Such rights have 
no definite content, and the same might be said about many other striking 
declarations. 

 
 
HUMANISM 
129 
 
 
Let us press on.  If we are talking about the inherent rights of human 
nature, of simply being human, how is it that on the one hand we include 
among such rights the fact that government must not impose upon us an 
ideology or religion, yet on the other hand one of the rights is the right to 
participate in the truth, which is univocal?  No matter whether this be 
Communist truth or Muslim truth!  There is complete disagreement among 
people, and to me this seems to indicate that these famous rights are not 
intrinsic to human nature.  This leads us to a more comprehensible legal 
conception.  Thus the right to property is recognized by government and 
granted to those dependent on it.  Furthermore, these famous rights are 
written in a charter.  They are not an integral part of human nature.  It is 
just that certain political forces agree to state in concert that they 
recognize that their citizens have certain rights.  On the basis of this 
agreement the rights are then granted to the people.  But it goes without 
saying that powers that do not grant or recognize these rights have to 
have a different view of humanity, society, and power, and of the relation 
among them.  One can neither summon them nor force them to change 
this.  I would also like to be told by jurists what sanctions can be taken 
against those who do not grant these rights.  Who can bring to justice the 
delinquent powers, states, or societies, and before what tribunal?  If no 
one knows how to answer this question, then the expression "Rights of 
Man" is without real content. 
 
 
But readers might ask what this digression on rights has to do with 
technique.  The answer is that rights are part of the humanism which is 
integral to discourse about technique.  Furthermore, the idea of human 
rights appeared at the same time and in the same country as modern 
technique, and I do not think that there is much that is accidental in 
history, certainly not here.  It was not by chance that human rights were 
proclaimed in the very place and at the very time that techniques burst out 
(after horrible wars).  The "dignity of man"8 was asserted at the very time 
when humanity was acquiring the greatest power.  Humanity thus 
completed itself, and with all tranquility of spirit the most humanistic of 
discourse became possible. 
 
 
But before advancing further, let us digress again, looking at the title 
of a book that was renowned in its day: L'Homme, le capital le plus 
précieux (Humanity, the Most Valuable Capital).  This title fits in well with 
both humanism and technique.  In the whole process human beings are 
the main (capital) factor.  Everything depends on them.  They 
 
 
130   
DISCOURSE 
 
are also capital in another sense.9  People are the only true riches, said 
Jean Bodin, who thought that the strength of a country lay primarily in the 
number and quality of its inhabitants.  Rom an industrial standpoint this 
means that people are apparently the most important factor in production, 
on which all else depends.  They are thus the most precious factor.  They 
have to be protected and used wisely.  What they can give must be 
obtained and not lost.  Capitalist exploitation is wrong because it wastes 
people, making the conditions of life so impossible that they die young.  
What are we to say about capitalists who squander their capital in this 
way?  To describe people as a resource, as capital, means that they must 
be treated well, like financial or mechanical capital.  People are the most 
precious capital of all.  This thesis is in line with the humanistic discourse 
of the age. 
 
 
But what remains of this humanistic discourse, considered from any 
angle, when we look at the reality of the world since 1900?  What we see 
is deadly exploitation, the armed invasion of the whole world by 
colonization, two monstrous world wars with millions more dead than ever 
previously, concentration camps, police states, a mad development of 
torture, blind terrorism, scores of local wars during the past fifty years, 
and finally an imbalance of wealth and poverty that makes a joke of the 
wealth of the nobility in comparison with the misery of their peasants.10 
 
 
In other words, what we actually experience is the very opposite of 
humanistic discourse.  We must apply here the law of interpretation to 
which I often refer.  In a given society, the more people talk about a value 
or virtue or collective project, the more this is a sign of its absence.  They 
talk about it because the reality is the opposite.  If there is much talk 
about liberty, it is because the people do not have it.  The darker the 
reality, the brighter the speech.  But readers might ask what technique 
has to do with the horrors of the century that I listed.  Technique is not to 
blame for concentration camps and acts of terrorism.  No, it is 

 
 
HUMANISM 
131 
 
not the direct or immediate cause.  But it does make possible the broader 
scale of these disasters and it also leads up to the political decisions.  It is 
because technique is always demanding more and more raw materials 
and makes possible better methods of control that there are police states.  
It is because technique provides more efficient means of killing that there 
are millions of dead.  Nor is the making of these means of killing simply a 
political decision.  Military techniques have to be developed in order to 
improve peacetime techniques.  The one is linked to the other.  
Technique also gives such possibilities of action to political organisms 
that they are induced to become totalitarian.  None of the atrocities of our 
age would have been possible without technique.  Technique is not 
responsible?  No, that is true; people alone are responsible.  But look!  
People have put all their passion and hope and desire into the 
development of techniques and techniques alone.  This is the result.  And 
at all cost we must now try to hide the brutal reality and the link between 
this reality and technical growth.  This is why technocrats engage in the 
humanistic discourse which is a perfect introduction to the technological 
bluff. 
 
 
By way of a final word which sheds light on all that precedes, I may 
point out that the author of the work with the fine humanistic title: 
L'Homme, le capital le plus précieux, was Stalin, who gave practical 
expression to his discourse in the gulag. 
 
 
                                                 
1 As noted earlier, the French title differs from the English: The Ultimate Resource. 
2 Michel Poniatovski, Les Technologies nouvelles: La chance de l'homme (Plon, 
1986). 
3 It is regarded as bad taste to point out that unemployment is the price, and who 
are more completely free than the unemployed? 
4 See Yan de Kerorguen in "Technopolis," special number of Autrement (1985). 
5 Ibid.  The only problem is that Silicon Valley has become overpopulated with a 
very high density of population, and that a sub-proletariat inhabits the examples of 
technopolis in Japan. 
6 See A.  Touraine in A.  Jacquard, ed., Les Scientifiques parlent (Paris: Hachette, 
1987). 
7 The only embarrassment is when total permissiveness proves to be destructive.  
If drugs give pleasure, why not use them?  Boredom makes us subhuman and will 
kill us. 
8 This common term, which has to have a moral and perhaps a metaphysical 
sense, shows to what degree there can be no question of "right" in all this. 
9 Gabriel Dessus showed twenty years ago what this evaluation of people implies 
in "De l'inéluctable mesure des incommensurables, et de ce qui peut s'ensuivre," 
Revue française de recherche operationelle (1964). 
10 I will not speak of totalitarian ideologies since we find these earlier, e.g., in 
Islam and medieval Christianity.  Nor am I saying that previous societies were 
better with their slavery, cannibalism, human sacrifices, etc.  It is no use arguing 
that in earlier days people did not know about such horrors but now we do know 
about them with our marvelous means of communication, and they make a terrible 
impression.  This is not true.  Our marvelous means of communication tell us only 
what we are meant to know.  It took ten years to know about Hitler's concentration 
camps and twenty years to know about the gulags, though we can now learn at 
once about police atrocities in South Africa 

 
 
CHAPTER VI 
 
Is There a Technical Culture? 
 
1.  Imperatives and Hesitations 
 
Technique is here.  It is everywhere.  It is not represented merely by 
some useful objects.  The whole field of computers is a challenge to our 
thinking.  Are we able to think about the technical phenomenon?  Are we 
able to think this "thought" of the computer?  Can we continue to nurture 
culture on the ancient soil, a culture that can be popular (but the people 
have changed) or lofty (but does it not then lose its grip on reality and 
take refuge in dreams and ideas)?  We have always conceived of what 
we call culture within and on the basis of our material, social, everyday, 
concrete world.  Technique is here, it is our environment.  Can we 
abstract ourselves from it?  That is our problem. 
 
 
The projects of enthusiasts for technical culture-politicians, scientists, 
or technocrats, also professors and entrepreneurs -have, along with 
nuances which we shall note, three fundamental aspects: the acquisition 
of technological knowledge, the adapting of the young to the technical 
environment (not just manipulation, but making them comfortable in it), 
and finally the creation of a psychological mood that is favorable to 
technique, an openness to everything pertaining to it.  These are the 
general orientations.  But we must try to analyze the currents and 
motivations. 
 
 
First, among the promoters of technical culture we may distinguish 
between the minimalists and the maximalists.  The minimalists want to 
preserve all ancient culture with its orientation to art and literature, that is, 
a classical intellectual education, and add to it a knowledge and use of 
techniques, bringing them into the existing structure.  The maximalists 
postulate the totality of technique and its demands, which are vast 
enough and which imply a global questioning 
 
 
 
132 
 
 
IS THERE A TECHNICAL CULTURE? 
133 
 
and the invention of a new culture on a technical basis and with a 
technical content which is both its object and its means. 
 
 
Naturally, the maximalist trend is the most interesting to study.  It is 
also winning the day.  The triumph of the microcomputer has contributed 
to its expansion and the sense of its inevitability.  The many tasks that this 
remarkable machine can perform and the multiplying of information that it 
makes possible have carried away its creators.  After all, culture is simply 
the transmitting and organizing of information, and since everything is 
changing in this domain, there must also be a change of culture.  A 
dazzling task! 
 
 
The interposing of the technical object between us and the world 
takes on another sense.  Whether in the domestic, educational, medical, 
or commercial field, the value of consumption lies less in the actual cost 
of what we buy than in that of the progress of knowledge.  We are moving 
into an economy based on the production and circulation of immaterial 
goods, that is, knowledge and information.  The important thin- is the  
 
reappropriation of the knowledge of which industrialization robbed 
us....  After many centuries of divorce between highly specialized 
technique and nonspecialized culture, the technopole now mediates 
between what some know and what others do.  There is thus a 
return to the technical culture that has marked each stage of human 
development....  In this attempt at reappropriation we benefit from a 
second-degree technology whose goal is to make access more and 
more simple to technologies that are more and more complex.  .  .  .  
These are the facilitating technologies.  They restore to us access to 
knowledge, but they also reestablish contact with other people.  
These are the interceding technologies.  Overcoming space, 
telecommunications enable us to talk to anyone on earth.  
Overcoming time, recordings (audio and visual) provide us with a 
living memory of humanity the past and the future.1 
 
 
According to the above analysis, the twin axis of this technical 
culture is, first, the use of machines and the access to knowledge, and, 
second, communication with others.  These are the two elements in any 
culture.  But there is more to it than that.  What the creation of a new 
culture finally implies may be learned from the remarkable theory of 
networks advanced by Bressand and Distler.2 

 
 
134  
DISCOURSE 
 
 
We are beginning to get used to the idea that we can no longer 
picture the world as made up of fixed things or objects but that we must 
think of everything, whether in physics, economics, or sociology, as in 
flux.  But the new theory now thinks of things, not in terms of (transitory) 
flux, but in terms of a new organization of the whole world in the form of 
networks, which differ totally from the new worlds that ten years ago were 
imagined according to the model of fixed techniques.  The logic of 
networks is closer to that of language than to that of territory.  The 
distinction is a good one.  As a result of the computer, everything now is 
not flux but a network of information.  Every human activity is now set 
within a network or an intersection of many networks that are combining 
and will finally become a global network, it is thought, which will be the 
agent and expression of all possible combinations of networks.  We have 
here a supple and constantly changing force which before our very eyes, 
without our being aware of it, is structuring a new world.  The 
indispensable thing is to realize what is going on, to learn the new rules of 
the game, to create a new culture.  If we succeed, we will be citizens of 
this new world.  If we fail, we will be its slaves.  "The computer plays a 
role in the production of knowledge in anthropology and sociology, since, 
by its artistic and generally creative use, it is bound to have an impact on 
culture, to obstruct the perceptions individuals and social groups have of 
themselves; in brief, to expand profoundly on the imaginary.”3 
 
 
But it is not merely the creative capacity in these areas that we have 
to take into account.  We have to understand that there will be a 
transformation of all human activity.  Microcomputers permit everywhere 
things "made to order" and hence mean the disappearance of products 
for the "masses" and a transformation of intelligence around the networks.  
In the economy, for example, we can think of an alliance between 
material production and immaterial information.  This is a summons to the 
creativity which has to produce a new culture and which is absolutely 
necessary if we are to have the ability to use all the possibilities of 
computerization in daily life, at work and in friendly relations.  Only a new 
technical culture will enable us not to be like savages transplanted into 
the modern world. 
 
 
We have to translate technical invention into social practices and 
new modes of thinking which seek to make every relation transparent.  
This transparency is correlative to an information society and it brings all 
information and all knowledge within the reach of all (so 
 
 
IS THERE A TECHNICAL CULTURE? 
135 
 
long as they have, in effect, a suitable culture).  But this culture is not 
idealistic.  It is in the process of making out of simple spectators (like 
ourselves) those who are competent to use complex machines, and then 
the "computer freaks," who are able, for example, actually to invent new 
possibilities and problems for microcomputers.4 
 
 
But the culture which is being created is not a direct human product.  
It results from the interfacing of the group and the machine.  This interface 
allows individuals to master problems of communication that presuppose 
the transmission and processing of information. 
 
 
Naturally, this culture cannot remain enclosed in a limited world, in 
the circle of a province.  Transmission and processing take place 
everywhere with startling speed.  A culture of networks is possible only on 
an international scale.  Based on the universality of knowledge, which is 
accessible to all and in all places, and also on the speed of relations, this 
culture has to be international.  Naturally, the visionaries of this network 
culture have only scorn for what has thus far been regarded as culture: an 
intellectual, nonpractical culture, the expression of an elite, an 
intellectualism of the parlor, a dusty university collection of outdated 
knowledge, an "ethereal virginity" of the intelligence which leads to the 
"fantasy of human relations, a relational society," and similar amiable 
notions.  Everything that has thus far been produced in the form of culture 
must be scrapped.  And if some people are obstinate, within ten years 
they will be just as illiterate as those who could not read or write in the 
19th century.  The ability to use the computer will replace reading and 
writing.  The illiterates are those who do not adapt (Bressand and Distler). 
 
 
At a more modest, more concrete level, the first step is the 
development of a technical culture, beginning with education.  We will not 
stress the fact that "Technology" is becoming a separate discipline in our 
schools and that professional instruction is emerging from this "ghetto.”  
In primary schools children are being initiated into science and 
technology, and colleges have systematic instruction in technology (in 
mechanisms, in automatism, in electronics, in management and 
administration, embracing the dimensions of conception, manufacture, 
and use).  High schools have detailed instruction in industrial techniques 
and mechanics.  As we foresaw in 1985, computers are being brought 
into the schools and colleges.  Students will have to learn how to use 
computers, since these are now educational tools, aids to pedagogy.  
Curriculum restructuring is making technique central.  History 

 
 
136   
 
DISCOURSE 
 
becomes the history of techniques, and living languages become,'modern 
languages.”  But more important than curricular change is the educational 
transformation stressed by Beillerot which involves "an innovative 
apprenticeship mingling an ability to adapt to the unknown with the 
transmission of knowledge."5 
 
 
Pedagogy (learning how to learn) is a central feature of this 
technicizing of instruction, which implies a culture of practical intelligence 
in place of reflective or critical intelligence.  At issue here are social 
changes that professionalize and rationalize anterior actions.  Instruction 
will now have a practical aim, inculcating the ability to do a job.  Normally, 
then, teaching will be a more or less complex technique and those who 
teach will be technicians.  The main function of (technical) knowledge is to 
be a major element in production.  All branches of knowledge are to be 
productive.  The best and most appropriate pedagogy, then, is the 
technique that prepares young people to enter the cycle of productive 
forces but that is also a force in ideological reproduction.  It is no use 
appealing to Bourdieu.  The double current of an appeal to the growth of 
productive forces and an appeal to the necessity of ideological 
reproduction leads inevitably to educational changes with a view to 
adapting education to social needs. 
 
 
Beillerot emphasizes, however, that this raises serious problems.  If 
knowledge goes hand in hand with the social economy, its organized 
transmission in every area responds to an imperative of the social 
structure.  But we cannot rest content with the original form.  What is 
obvious in our society is the rapid obsolescence of all knowledge.6  And 
the knowledge transmitted is only a fraction of what is acquired.  It is also 
impossible that the last to be acquired should be transmitted.  Older 
knowledge has to be transmitted first, so that the knowledge of the 
schools has little in common with that of science.  Finally, Beillerot raises 
a vital problem when he points out that in the consumption of knowledge 
there is a struggle to give it a use value so that it may function as an 
instrument of exchange.  Teachers must have an ambiguous practice: at 
the same time form the mind, give access to a certain culture, and 
transmit practical knowledge that can quickly be put to use.  This might be 
done in two ways.  An effort might be made to bring traditional values into 
the setting and practice of techniques.  This is 
 
 
IS THERE A TECHNICAL CULTURE? 
137 
 
the great illusion of certain humanists.  They think that we can maintain 
the existing culture and superimpose techniques upon it.  They think that 
we can infuse traditional values into technique.7  The other way, which is 
more concrete and efficient, is that of popularizing science among both 
pupils and the public, who must be brought into technique at all costs.  
The object of this popularization is at the same time the circulation of 
knowledge and justification.  The public must accept gigantic 
expenditures on science by being persuaded of its certain usefulness. 
 
 
Roqueplo has shown that popularized knowledge is not the same as 
scientific knowledge and that knowledge in the schools (the first to be 
popularized) is determined by higher education.8  Giving knowledge a 
form in which it can be exploited and understood is part of the work of 
research if this is to justify its funding.  But popularization never transmits 
anything but discourse, and technical discourse is not scientific practice.  
Scientific knowledge cannot give birth to a culture, for it changes its 
nature when it transforms itself into discourse and forgets the conditions 
of its own production.  Popularization cannot pretend to be anything other 
than a socializing of science that leads to a hierarchy of knowledge.   
 
 
 
However that may be, there is much popular interest in science and 
techniques, primarily in medicine, then in the natural sciences, and next in 
sociology, with the atom, space, and biology running well behind 
according to a French survey in 1981.  We find a good example of 
popularization in the magazine Culture technique, which is trying to 
reintroduce the technical sphere into culture.  A special number under the 
direction of M.  Jocelyn de Noblet (1983) was devoted to the USA.  It first 
described the birth and evolution of the great technical innovations there, 
with reflection on the technocratic image, the tradition of "know-how.”  It 
then noted the changes that technique had brought into American society: 
business competitiveness, personal computers, combined research.  But 
none of this had much to do with culture.  The theme was simply the 
diffusion of knowledge and the socioeconomic consequences. 
 
 
Much more important is the observation of a kind of mass 
technoculture, which J.  Chesneaux has fully analyzed.9  It is 
characterized 

 
 
138  
DISCOURSE 
 
and diffused in many ways.  There is linguistic change, the American myth 
(high tech, technology, patchwork, network, the look, the feeling, etc.).  But it 
also follows a mechanized model: we program, we decode, we link up, we 
process messages; we make everything visual; even dance is mechanical; 
the setting is more important than the text; we are interactive in an interface, 
we are in a network.  Psychological jargon is also prevalent: megalo-, schizo-, 
maso-, sado-.  Relations either structure or destructure.  We are always in 
relation: to money, to the body, to death.  We are "situated.”  These 
peculiarities of vocabulary are signs of cultural change in which innovation is 
valued as such.  The "culture of modernity," as Chesneaux rightly calls it, is a 
product of industry with the sanction of the state.  It is the creation of a 
throwaway, consumer society.  It reflects the domination of currents and 
circuits over objects in transnational space thanks to the computer, which with 
other means of communication is the great agent of this technoculture that 
functions by segmenting knowledge and by eliminating those data that are not 
regarded as useful in this very formalized context. 
 
 
Knowledge is modeled on the stock of information, and its acquisition is 
dictated by the logic of the computer.  This is what students must learn at 
school if they are not to be illiterate.  But in spite of the promise of 
intercommunication, communication is always to and among people.  This 
technoculture rests on the enormous mass of information, a saturation which 
makes it impossible to isolate, to assimilate, to establish relations and 
perspectives, in particular to grasp facts during their life.  Information is 
splintered and ephemeral.  The confusion in the use of words aggravates the 
ambiguity.  Information in the true sense is the active investigation of data in 
terms of individual needs and interests.  A mass of data as such, available in 
bulk, is of no significance, but this jumble is what is called "information" (J.  
Chesneaux). 
 
 
These, then, are the main directions in the attempt either to bring 
technique into culture or to create a technoculture.  I would note in summation 
that techniques have always played a part in culture.10  But the problem is 
that 
size, 
number, 
speed 
of 
development, 
omnipresence, 
and 
omnicompetence now make it impossible to insert techniques into a stable 
culture.  On the contrary, techniques are now encircling and swallowing up all 
that has constituted culture from the beginnings of human history.  At any 
rate, we must take into account two basic considerations regarding the 
relation between culture and technique. 
 
 
The first has its basis in the position of Gehlen (and of many 
 
 
IS THERE A TECHNICAL CULTURE? 
139 
 
theologians of the same period), who wanted to rehabilitate technique, 
setting it among other cultural fields because it expresses one dimension 
of being human.11  Gehlen had an anthropological view of technique.  He 
made humanity and technique coextensive.  Human beings as he saw it 
have been technicians from the very first.  Technique is a mirror of 
humanity.  We project ourselves into it and in it extend our nature 
artificially.  The human organism offers the key to technique.  This 
continuity of humanity and technique finds itself backed by an instinctual 
theory, namely, that we satisfy deep instinctual drives by engaging in it.  
This obviously means that there is coincidence between technique and 
culture.  But the mistake of Gehlen and many other philosophers is to 
think of technique "in itself" without considering that the actual technical 
phenomenon today has nothing whatever in common with the techniques 
of earlier societies.  An abstract ideology of technique bears no relation to 
knowledge of the present-day world.  I have quoted this thesis only 
because it is the expression of a whole current of thinking. 
 
 
The other consideration, that of Roqueplo, is much closer to reality.12  
For him technical culture means knowing well the milieu in which we live.  
Those who do not have this culture do not know their own milieu and are 
doubly alienated.  They have no mastery over their environment, and they 
are permanently dependent on those who have this "knowledge.”  
Technical culture means having the knowledge and the know-how which 
can give us personal mastery over our environment and control over the 
activities of those to whom we have to have recourse.  The absence of 
this culture is a cause of generalized alienation.  I will not insist upon the 
fact that the extension of techniques rules out an "onmitechnological 
culture" 
(in 
surgery, 
computers, 
electricity, 
mechanics, 
genetic 
engineering, chemistry, television, etc.).  That is a mere fantasy.  Much 
more serious is the fact that the practical technical knowledge to which 
Roqueplo refers has nothing whatever to do with culture.  This raises, 
then, the central question: What can we call culture? 
 
2.  What Can We Call Culture? 
 
Our only solid finding thus far is that all that we have encountered in 
discourse regarding technical culture really has nothing whatever to 

 
 
140  
DISCOURSE 
 
do with culture (as we have seen, the proof lies in the ironical way in 
which technocrats speak about the bookish, Jesuit culture of the 19th 
century).  In this context I will not attempt a definition of culture.  I will 
simply offer two models that seem to me to correspond to the historical 
and sociological reality.  The first model is that of E.  Morin,13 who begins 
by noting that culture plainly oscillates between an absolute sense and a 
residual sense, between an anthroposociological sense and an 
ethico-aesthetic sense.  In both cases the first sense is closer to 
Anglo-Saxon thinking, the second to Mediterranean thinking.  We must 
also think of culture as a system that enables us to communicate 
dialectically both an existential experience and a body of knowledge.  
Thus culture is neither a superstructure nor an infrastructure but a 
metabolic circuit that links the two.  Morin then offers this essential 
definition: "Culture is an informational and organizational sphere which 
ensures and maintains human complexity, both individual and social, over 
and above the spontaneous complexity to which society would give rise 
were it deprived of this acquired informational and organizational capital." 
 
 
The second model is that of an author who is not at all close to 
Morin, namely, Roland Barthes.14  Barthes does not think we should 
define culture as an attempt to acquire more knowledge or even as the 
maintaining of a spiritual patrimony, but rather, along the lines of 
Nietzsche, as the unity of artistic style in all the vital manifestations of a 
people.  This demands an increasingly stricter stripping away of all that is 
accessory and an investigation of the unity of style.  We must voluntarily 
set aside many nuances, peculiarities, and possibilities in order to present 
the human enigma in its sparse essentials.  We must introduce a style 
where life offers us only confused and disorderly riches; it is the unity of 
style that defines culture.  Culture rests on a tragic sense of life that is 
forcefully mastered, and this mastery is culture, which does not seek the 
origin or end of things but the reason for them.  This culture is not just that 
of an elite.  It may be the work of artists, writers, and thinkers, but it can 
be born only if there is in the people a profound culture, a communion of 
style between life and art.  Thus we are not to distinguish between an 
aristocratic culture and a popular culture.  The former is impossible 
without the latter, and the latter feeds upon the former. 
 
 
These two models show how far we are from the ridiculous image 
that the technologists construct of culture and to what degree 
 
 
IS THERE A TECHNICAL CULTURE? 
141 
 
television is not an instrument of culture any more than the 
microcomputer.  These two models are truly at the center of our problem.  
At the same time one might think that they rule out an essential source of 
culture, that is, popular culture, artisan culture, maritime culture, peasant 
culture, etc.  For we have to remember that all culture has its source in 
the profound myths and rites of popular creativity.  Yet the criticism would 
be incorrect, for both models presuppose this popular infrastructure and 
on this basis engage in a process of abstraction and of explication.  
Technical and computer activity, however, genuinely excludes all the real 
creativity and spontaneity of the stable group which is in contact with the 
harshness of life.  We find such culture in embryo among rebellious, 
marginal, and racial groups, which appear for this reason to be 
dangerous. 
 
3.  A Technical Culture Is Impossible 
 
A technical culture is essentially impossible.15  To make it possible, as we 
have seen, technologists reduce it to an accumulation of knowledge.  If it 
were nothing more, technical knowledge could certainly replace literary 
knowledge.  But as Morin finely points out: "The crisis in the humanities 
lies first of all in the area of knowledge.  The predominance of information 
over knowledge, and of knowledge over thought, has disintegrated true 
knowledge.  The sciences have contributed greatly to this disintegration 
by extreme specialization.  Science can only create an aggregate of 
operational knowledge....  By its relational and relativist character it saps 
the base of the humanities....  In developing objectivity, science develops 
a permanent duality between the subjective and the objective.”16  This is 
why developing technological instruction in place of the formation and 
transmission of culture is such a serious matter.  Practical knowledge 
glues individuals to the concrete with no intellectual capacity apart from 
an operational one.  The massive information transmitted by television 
falls into a sidereal void of nonculture and therefore has neither place nor 
meaning.  Even if those who watch television retain all that they see, they 
finally know nothing and understand nothing because there is neither the 
intellectual means nor the cultural structure to give the information place 
or relation, and to make it count in the global scales.  Beillerot makes this 
point when 

 
 
142   
 
DISCOURSE 
 
in relation to education he differentiates true knowledge from a mere 
accumulation of facts: "We cannot reduce the spread of knowledge to 
increased consumption."17 
 
 
Let us now look at a second aspect of this radical contradiction 
between technology and culture.  We can deal quickly with one feature.  
What is called culture in our society is totally subordinate to the economic 
imperative.  Children have to be prepared for jobs.  This is a culture of 
utility.  Instruction and education play a corresponding part.  Culture is 
also linked today to machines.  "The culture of modernity is a product of 
industry with the sanction of the state.”  Our cultural products or cultural 
industries obey increasingly the logic of economics: big runs, 
standardized manufacturing, lowering of costs, mass consumption, 
capitalist concentration, futuristic commercial methods, homogeneous 
products distributed worldwide.  This may be seen most plainly in the 
subjection of television to advertising. 
 
 
"The game of modernity brings heavy technical materials into play...  
The avant-garde tries to escape this culture of passive consumption but 
identifies itself totally with new techniques.  .  .  .  Economic constraints 
are more and more influential. . . .  Technical imperatives have priority.  .  
.  quantitative thresholds are merciless.  [Even a good book will not be 
published if the editors think it will not sell, as I myself know.] Technical 
culture is all-powerful even though it is finally subject to the imperatives of 
profitability, competitiveness, and productivity.”18  I would add to these 
fine observations of Chesneaux a most judicious remark of Lussato to the 
effect that bad culture is chasing out good.19  Everything in the cultural 
field is becoming the object of information, whether accounting or data 
processing.  Lussato, though he is favorable to the computer, looks at the 
music or drama transmitted by the media, where in an overwhelming 
manner the very worst, the most vulgar, the most titillating, the most 
pornographic, is chasing out a culture of quality.  But it is not just a matter 
of art and the intellectual world.  Once the harmony of a city is broken, its 
inhabitants lose the habit of loving it; they soil and degrade it.  But it is not 
possible to insert an added culture into a degraded environment.  The 
result is "a shapeless mush of a divided culture, piled up in this cultural 
concentration camp." 
 
 
To be sure, the subordination of culture to technique and to the 
economy does not mean that we ought to separate it off and make it 
 
 
IS THERE A TECHNICAL CULTURE? 
143 
 
again an idealism detached from the real world.  All true culture has 
integrated the economic life of its time, but it has not depended on it (in 
spite of Marx's generalization).  It has transcended it.  For example, 
harvest festivities relate to an economic event but they give this event a 
universal character, a higher sense, linking it to a social universe and 
finding for it an aesthetic form.  This is but one of many examples of the 
relation between economics and culture.  But today this is radically 
excluded, and this is the link with what Roqueplo has shown in terms of 
impossible discourse.  The question that Roqueplo was asking pertained 
to the prime minister's decision in 1972 to move the accelerator of CERN 
(the European council of nuclear research) to Geneva.  What did he need 
to know to make this decision when it was a matter of technical 
investment?  "Was the knowledge needed for the decision the same as 
that deployed in the technology to which the decision related?  ...  If 
various forms of knowledge were involved (economic, political), what 
language would ensure their convergence?  But if there is no common 
language, how can those concerned talk to one another?"20 
 
 
Now, as Roqueplo shows with various examples, the problem is that 
the interlocutors do not speak the same language.  The prime minister will 
talk about such things as exports and diversification.  The technical field is 
restricted to the functions that administrators desire for it.  There is a 
technico-technical language, a politico-cultural language, and an 
economic language.  Each involves a "local" knowledge that can 
communicate with knowledges used locally in its neighborhood.  
Technicians cannot have any other language or knowledge.  There is no 
communication with a culture, no ability to master technique.  Common 
discourse is impossible. 
 
 
Whether we like it or not, for technique all language is algebraic.21  
This has come to light plainly with the development of the computer 
system.  As Jousse says, technique's ambition is to make the whole world 
algebraic.  But if algebra becomes the universal language 

 
 
144   
 
DISCOURSE 
 
into which all other languages must be translated, then there can be no other 
communication.  Communication between people will be destroyed and no 
culture can be created, for culture has to rest on the specificity of a language.  
The technical system implies a universal use which will attach itself, without 
taking root, to the various cultures and civilizations.  Culture cannot be 
universal, for human beings are not universal.  We all have a place, a race, a 
past, a formation, a specific time.  But surely there does not have to be an 
annihilation of all that has thus far been regarded as culture.  Not at all!  It is 
just that each culture is made obsolete.  It lives on under the technical 
universal but no longer has any usefulness or meaning.  We can still speak 
our own language.  We can read the poets and great writers.  But all this is 
simply an amiable dilettantism.  The astonishing thing is that what is fully 
achieved with all this is the judgment of the nineteenth-century middle class 
that art, literature, the classics, poetry, etc., are simply a matter of pleasure 
and distraction and bear no relation to serious matters.  They are pleasant 
whims when important matters have been settled. 
 
 
But one might say that we are speaking only of older and outdated forms 
of culture.  Technique is merely eliminating these older forms and will create a 
new culture.  That may be, but there are some basic antinomies.  We have 
pointed out already that technique is universal, whereas culture cannot be.  
We must now go further.  Technique means speed, always greater speed.  
So much so that we now have to admit that there is no longer any uniform 
time; there is our time and there is machine time, which counts in billionths of 
a second and which cannot be correlated with our time.22  Machines 
command machines in this time, linking "elementary particles" under human 
direction of the network.  But all this is the very opposite of a culture.  A 
culture gives meaning to time.  It corresponds to human speed, which has not 
changed through all the generations. 
 
 
We cannot manufacture a culture as we do computers.  It builds itself up 
generation by generation with successive contributions, in successive stages, 
and by successive, matured, and integrated adaptations.  Arising out of 
everyday life, it presupposes critical reflection on that life, on customs and 
relations (to the world, to people, to different races, to objects) -reflection that 
demands distancing oneself from this life in order to appreciate it and give it a 
cultural form.  No matter what means we might employ, these various 
operations cannot be done fast.  But how can we put technique at a distance 
so as to engage in critical reflection?  Technique will have advanced and 
changed a dozen times 
 
 
IS THERE A TECHNICAL CULTURE? 
145 
 
as we do it.  It will not be the same.  In thirty years philosophical works on 
it will have neither meaning nor value.  And they are no more than books 
and philosophy.  We are still very far from building up a culture. 
 
 
Once technical operations are in billionths of a second and even the 
best machines are out of date in a few years, no distance, reflection, or 
criticism is possible.  Technique also excludes distance and blinds us.  
Piveteau seems correct when he says "that extensive television viewing 
anesthetizes the reflective action of the conscience and inhibits speech.  
It makes speech a residual act....  it kills the aware and responsible adult 
and infantilizes."23  These are not the conditions of the creation of a 
culture.  Correlatively, Morin in an unusually fine statement says, 
"Ideologues are incapable of conceiving not only of society but also of 
technique.  Scientists are incapable of thinking not only of humanity but 
also of science.  Nullifying these great problems can result only in 
intellectual nullity."24 
 
 
It is above all technique that nullifies the problems both by its speed 
and also by its organization in networks.  The intellectual and cultural 
tragedy of the modern world is that we are in a technical milieu that does 
not allow reflection.  We cannot look at the past and consider it.  We 
cannot fix on an object and reflect on it.  The technical object 
encompasses us even though we know nothing about it, and reflection is 
impossible.  We ought to discuss intellectual and mental knowledge.  We 
ought to make it a matter of experimentation.  We ought to reflect upon it 
and incorporate it into the experience of life.  But this process is no longer 
possible.  It is ruled out by the very means that technique uses to spread 
culture, by the speed of information, by the confusion between the image 
and the reality, by what is called mass culture (which excludes any 
possibility of reflection), by the impossibility of communicating humanistic 
knowledge, everyday experience, and techno-scientific knowledge. 
 
 
All culture presupposes coherence between reality and knowledge.  
But reality is determined today by various technical imperatives, and the 
knowledge accumulated in data banks is not accessible to me.  "We have 
the spread of a new type of ignorance amid an accumulation of 
knowledge" (E.  Morin).  Furthermore, all culture is of necessity the culture 
of a group, of society.  It implies a group dimension and interrelation 
between group members.  But technique combats this on two levels.  On 
the one hand everyday technique tends to increase loneliness 

 
 
146  
DISCOURSE 
 
(through the means of communication) and makes it unnecessary to 
establish contacts.  People drive alone in automobiles.  The telephone 
only simulates meetings.  Television isolates.  The keyboard enables us 
to give orders without personal contact.  We have a collection of 
individuals without interaction (except in terms of technique or by means 
of it).  This fact rules out any possibility of culture.25  The other side of the 
same phenomenon is the discovery that the new techniques form 
themselves into a network that can be self-sufficient and exclude us 
altogether.  Networks are abstract, invisible, imperceptible.  They impose 
themselves on real life and condition it.  They evolve with a speed that is 
beyond us.  They thus eliminate any possibility of culture, since any 
culture that might be set up cannot express human life or stability. 
 
 
The network is a significant feature of the new world of technique.  
But the individual network is only one part of a larger network that links all 
networks and that is even more abstract and inaccessible.  There can 
thus be no culture outside the network.  But we have to have a very 
superficial and childish view of culture if we think that the images, the 
information, and the exchanges that the networks authorize have anything 
whatever to do with a culture.  The very idea of a fluid, all-encompassing 
network rules out humanity's dominant position.  Human beings are 
simply within the network.  As one network combines with others, their 
reality reduces both human subjectivity and human independence.  We 
can only rely on the networks, which even as they increase our power 
reduce our independence, since without them we can literally no longer 
do anything.  Basically, the attempt to create a counterculture or 
subculture in the 1960s, an attempt which finally failed when it came up 
against the structures of our society, is no longer conceivable to the 
extent that technique functions in networks.26 
 
 
IS THERE A TECHNICAL CULTURE? 
147 
 
 
Finally, we must follow Mirabail when in his study of telematics he 
shows that it is endangering all Western culture by generalizing what 
used to be the concern only of specific economic or social sectors. 
 
Telematics is systematizing the reorganization of knowledge, 
overthrowing ideas and methods of work, and bringing to an end the 
break between two worlds, but prefiguring dimly the existence of the 
second.  Nothing can really be said about this second world [my 
italics] . . . . We run the risk of vague thinking that is incapable of 
defining either the meaning or the nature of the new social-cultural 
objects....  Culture becomes documentation. . . .  Everything is 
potentially stored in the memories of computers. . . . If thought is in 
disorder today, it is because telematics contributes to a 
reorganization of everything that can be expressed, of all discourse 
that has meaning.  It is revolutionizing language. . . .  For what 
society or people?  Why symbolic data processing?  The obfuscation 
of questions is all the easier now that the system in place is a 
signifying system which by way of response points to the objects 
signified which the new services are.  But nothing demonstrates that 
the intrusion of symbolic languages, of systems of signs which 
computerized systems are, really describes a space or a time for us, 
a world of meaning which is our symbolic history, even if we imagine 
the accurate covering of anthropological questions by technique, and 
the field of symbolic constellations of the imaginary by videotex on 
terminal screens.27 
 
 
I have referred at length to Mirabail because no one could better 
describe the conflict between culture and technique and the impossibility 
of a technical culture. 
 
 
Culture is necessarily humanistic or it does not exist at all.  It is 
humanistic in the sense that humanity is its central theme and sole 
preoccupation.  It is simply an expression of the human.  It has human 
beings (and not what serves them) at its heart.  This includes, of course, 
all that they put in the form of questions about the meaning of life, the 
possibility of reunion with ultimate being, the attempt to overcome human 
finitude, and all other questions that they have to ask and handle.  But 
technique cannot deal with such things.  It functions merely because it 
functions.  It is self-reproductive.  Each technical advance serves first to 
produce new techniques.  It is itself the center of attention and allows of 
no questioning outside the mechanical sphere.  It is not interested in what 
serves humanity.  Its only interest is in itself It is 

 
 
148  
DISCOURSE 
 
self-justified and self-satisfying.  It cannot occupy itself with the human 
except to subordinate it and to subject it to the demands of its own 
functioning.  Culture exists only if it raises the question of meaning and 
values.  In the last analysis one might say that this is the central object of 
all culture.  But here we are at the opposite pole from all technique.  
Technique is not at all concerned about the meaning of life, and it rejects 
any relation to values.  It cannot accept any value judgment, good or bad, 
about its activities.28  Its criteria of existence and functioning are 
qualitatively different.  It cannot give meaning to life nor give insight into 
new values.  On any approach we have to say that the terms culture and 
technology are radically distinct.  There can be no bridge between them.  
To associate them is an abuse of meaning.  It is nonsense.  But this does 
not hamper the authors of politico-technological discourse.  They want not 
only technical efficiency but even more the halo and glory that centuries 
of spiritual and intellectual life have fashioned around the word culture. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
                                                                                                              
1 V Scardigli, La Consommation, culture du quotidien (Paris: PUF, 1983); idem, 
"Les cités scientifiques," in "Technopolis," special number of Autrement (1985). 
2 A.  Bressand and C.  Distler, Le Prochain Monde (Paris: Seuil, 1986). 
3 Pierre Levy, Vers un 1984 informatique?  (1984); idem, Les Présents de 
l'Univers informationnel (Centre Georges Pompidou, 1985). 
4 See Jean-Louis Gasse, La Troisiéme Pomme: inicro-informatique et révolution 
culturelle (Paris: Hachette, 1985). 
5 J.  Beillerot, La Société pédagogique (Paris: PUF, 1982). 
6 There are many examples.  Half of our medical knowledge is out of date every 
five years.  Ten to twelve percent of techno-scientific publications are out of date 
each year.  It is estimated that human knowledge doubles every five years, and in 
1985 as much scientific information was published as between 1550 and 1950. 
7 Cf.  the books of Jean Onimus.  But J.  Cazeneuve in effect raises the same 
issue in L'Homme téléspectateur (Denoel, 1983), when he asks why traditional 
values are not admitted into shows. 
8 P.  Roqueplo, Le Partage du savoir.  sciences, culture et vulgarisation (Paris: 
Seuil, 1974). 
9 J.  Chesneaux, De la modernité (Maspero, 1983). 
10 For a fuller discussion see Ellul, Technological System. 
11 For a good analysis and criticism cf.  D.  Janicaud, La Puissance du rationnel.  
Cf.  also Geistler, op.  cit. 
 
12 P.  Roqueplo, Penser la technique (Paris: Seuil, 1983). 
13 E.  Morin, Sociologie (Paris: Fayard, 1984), pp.  109, 345. 
14 R.  Barthes, "Culture et Tragédie," Le Monde, April 4, 1986. 
15 The only interesting part of M.  Henry's La Barbarie deals precisely with this 
contradiction between culture and technoscience. 
16 E.  Morin, Sociologie, p.  374. 
17 Beillerot, La Société pédagogique. 
18 J.  Chesneaux, De la modernité, pp.  116ff. 
19 Bruno Lussato, Le Défi informatique (Paris: Fayard, 1981). 
20 Roqueplo, Penser la technique. 
21 In Le Partage du savoir: science, culture, vulgarisation (Paris: Seuil, 1974), 
Roqueplo demonstrates clearly that if scientific information is be truly 
appropriated, it has to make itself understood in a context in which is to be plainly 
pertinent.  The great problem is that there are two languages, an analytical and a 
functional, an operational and a strategic.  Does this twofold structure of language 
leave any room for a technical culture?  What matters is that we should all have a 
functionally pertinent knowledge in our own fields that permits mask over the 
relevant phenomenon.  At issue, then, is a "local" knowledge.  But how can there 
be a technical culture in these circumstances?  There is only understanding 
between specialized groups of technicians. 
22 See A.  Bressand and C.  Distler, Le Prochain Monde (Paris: Seuil, 1986). 
23 Piveteau, L'Extase de la télévision (INSEP 1984). 
24 E.  Morin, Pour sortir du XXe siècle (Nathan, 1981); cf.  idem, Sociologie (Paris: 
Fayard, 1984). 
25 See C.  Lipovetsky, L'Ére du Vide.  Essai sur lindividualisme contemporain 
(Paris: Gallimard, 1977). 
26 One might add that a technical culture would have to arise out of an existing 
culture; it cannot come into being ex nihilo.  In Europe the problem is that there no 
longer is any European culture.  During the last fifty years art and literature have 
been destroyed (cf.  Ellul, L'Empire du non-sens [Paris: PUF, 1980]).  Instruction 
has replaced apprenticeship (which united the values of life and knowledge).  
There has been a univeralizing of cultures which has fragmented them; cf.  
especially the Americanizing of Europe.  (I am not hostile to America but only to 
invasion by its worst elements.) The habits, customs, implicit languages, and 
rituals which made up European culture, along with art and literature, have been 
overthrown.  Today the great concept of a multiracial France, with the Islamic 
invasion, is destroying the coherence of French culture 
27 Mirabail, Les Cinquante mots clés de la télématique (Privat, 1981). 
28 This is why all the studies of medical and scientific ethics are useless and 
absurd.  I will quote a saying which shuts off all discussion: "What is not scientific 
is not ethical.”  This gem of wisdom comes from jean Bernard. 

 
 
CHAPTER VII 
 
Human Mastery over Technique 
 
It is plain that an essential aspect of technological discourse holds to the 
basic thesis that we enjoy full mastery over technique.  Technique is 
supposedly a passive instrument.  Human beings have created it, they 
know it, they can use it as they wish, they can arrest it or develop it.  A 
computer does only what it is programmed to do (though this is 
increasingly doubtful), just as a car goes where the driver wants it to 
go-except in the case of accidents!  I am not concerned about Three Mile 
Island or Chernobyl here, but rather about the multiplication of risks that 
are beyond our control.  There were comparatively very few horse-and-
carriage accidents in the 18th century.  Today in France alone 1,000 
people per month are killed in automobile accidents and 35,000 seriously 
injured.  Whether we like it or not, the risks are greater and the number of 
accidents is also greater.  Their number has become, as it were, part of 
the structure of society (involving aid, medical organization, pensions, 
insurance, care for the injured, medications, etc.).  Each accident is an 
instance of "technique," represented by machines, escaping human 
control.  At this simple level, therefore, we can say that human beings do 
not always control technique.  And the more swift and powerful and 
gigantic technique becomes, the more serious and numerous are the 
instances when human control is absent.1 
 
 
I will not take up again the question of the neutrality of technique.  
Since 1950 I have shown that it is not neutral.  At that time this thesis was 
violently contested but it has now become almost a banality.  It is 
generally admitted that science is not neutral, and even more so 
technique.  But this means that we cannot treat technique like a single 
technical object.  To compare a car or a television station to technique 
 
 
 
 
 
149 
 
 
150  
DISCOURSE 
 
is ridiculous.  To say, however, that technique is not neutral is not to say 
that it serves a particular interest (as the left often alleges).  It is to say 
that it has its own weight, its own determinations, its own laws.  As a 
system it evolves by imposing its own logic.  But even though it is 
recognized not to be neutral, many people still continue to talk about our 
total mastery over it. 
 
 
In the first place there are innumerable champions of a political 
mastery over technique.  Roqueplo defends this thesis more skillfully than 
most, believing that politicians give the orders and technicians carry them 
out! 
 
The problem is to know whether the city that the technicians are 
building is viable.  Technique has an impact on politics and has to be 
politically criticized.  This is precisely the phenomenon we are 
beginning to witness.  This political criticism-of technique goes to the 
very heart of technique as it is practiced in what are called 
developed countries [its aggressiveness toward nature, the 
technocratic Jacobinism of its macroachievements, its artificial 
sophistication]....  The emergence of ideology is supposedly the sign 
of a transformation affecting the very reality of technique, that is, 
what results from it....  Things that would have taken their own 
course yesterday no longer do so....  In these conditions there is 
room for new perspectives.  [We can] socio-culturally break the web 
of facts in which culture has enclosed technique....  Some 
technologies enable us to escape from the impasses to which 
"autonomous technique" has led us. . . .  The question is whether we 
are to continue in the same direction or to change course by 
inventing different technologies.2 
 
 
The argument is, then, that criticism of existing technique is as such 
a changing of this technique, that today's technique is a product of our 
culture and a change of culture will mean a change of technique (cf.  the 
preceding chapter), and that it is by technique that we will master 
technique-a common theme, especially among those who discuss the 
computer, which, as a second-degree technique, is supposedly an ideal 
instrument whereby to control technique and give it a new direction.  The 
old question remains: Who is to take care of the caretaker?  Now, the 
above theses belong integrally to a specific view of society.  For many 
authors society is self-creating.  It is the mainspring 

 
 
HUMAN MASTERY OVER TECHNIQUE 
 
151 
 
of autonomy- Thus science and technique will master themselves.  An 
orderly decision is enough to establish social control.  This view is 
accompanied by an invincible belief in the uncontested supremacy of 
human beings.  When appeal is made to the "force of circumstances," the 
habitual response is that it is we who create circumstances. 
 
 
I will not enter into a new discussion of human autonomy and 
freedom, for in this book I do not want to deal with philosophical 
questions.  I know, however, that in the technical society and world, 
events and structures are constantly occurring that no one intended.  We 
can obviously reduce technique to its usefulness and use in business, in 
what helps business function better.  Technique then becomes a kind of 
patrimony that can be managed.  Reduced in this way it comes under 
human control.  It is a good tool -no more!  One could keep going.  But 
reduction of this type is quite untenable, for it ignores 99 percent of the 
technical phenomenon.3 
 
 
Let us pursue the question of human mastery over technique.  
According to Salomon, technology is one social process among others.  
The technical world and the social world are not two different worlds.  
Technical change is a model for society and society for technical change.  
Technical innovation comes from within the economic and social system.  
It is a human work; supposedly, then, it is not beyond human control 
except as we allow it to be.  A society is defined not so much by the 
technologies that it can create as by those that it chooses in preference to 
others.  The process of selecting among techniques is economic, political, 
social.  What we do with the fruits of technology depends on our values.  
There is no inevitability about technical change; neither its pace nor its 
direction is predetermined.  We do not have here a process to which 
individuals and society have to react by adaptations to technical change.  
Technology itself is a social process in which individuals and groups 
always make the choices.  This is Salomon's perspective.4  We shall 
indeed see that choices have to be made; however, these choices are not 
an expression of values or freedom but of other pressures which we 
cannot avoid! 
 
 
Salomon has a program for the "unfettering of Prometheus.”  We 
must spread to everybody the information that makes everybody able to 
choose.  He is happy that there are institutions for the evaluating of 
techniques and their social and economic consequences.  We need to 
make education uniform so as not to make a division between those 
 
 
152  
DISCOURSE 
 
who have techno-scientific knowledge and those who do not.  We must learn 
to see that technology is not a preserve of technicians but a social process 
which like any other is not outside the control of everyone. 
 
 
Scardigli also discusses freedom of choice and the human ability to 
control technique.  In our world, he says, the individual is the basic social unit.  
After an excellent exposition of the question, he ends his book on an 
optimistic note.  He thinks that there can be, and already is, an attempt to 
reappropriate techniques.  He, too, is oriented to information and education.  
We benefit from second-degree technology, which gives us increasingly 
simple access to increasingly complex technologies.  These are facilitating 
technologies.  They give access to knowledge and offer equal contact with 
others.  There exists an everyday technology which makes possible a 
reappropriation of power, a collective affirmation of diversity, a personal 
conquest of autonomy.  To be able to choose is the result of gaining new 
access to knowledge.  Technique entails a capacity for homogenization but 
consumers come up with effective responses.  New techniques (of 
communication) must be submitted to users, who will decide on the content.  
We are always free to disconnect our phones and shut off our television sets.  
We are always free to take a trail back to nature. 
 
 
I might cite other texts which reaffirm human freedom.  If I have selected 
those of Salomon and Scardigli it is precisely because these two in their 
works have very well described the threats of technique, its power relative to 
humanity and society, and the rigor of its development.  But they are not 
prepared to yield to despair, and they thus take a leap into a kind of wishful 
thinking, of metaphysics, of belief.  It is not possible, they think, that we 
should not be masters of the process.  Naturally, other writers who do not 
have the same lucidity engage in wild outbursts of enthusiasm when they look 
at human sovereignty, at human mastery over this vast apparatus. 
 
 
Let us consider for a moment how empty are some of the theses.  Do we 
really think that public bodies can master techniques?  It is amusing these 
days (July 1986) to be able to state that a very profound report presented to 
the government by a commission composed of state councillors and tax 
inspectors concludes that the French agency for the supervision of energy is 
quite useless in view of the absence of any real work or results, and that the 
same applies equally to the center for the study of systems and advanced 
technologies and the agency for the evaluation of research.  In reality these 
agencies and commissions do not have mastery and critical reflection as their 
objective but simply the acceleration and growth of technique. 
 
 
The truth is that attempts of this kind simply follow the line  

 
 
HUMAN MASTERY OVER TECHNIQUE 
 
153 
 
 
of the great hope of mastering technique in the 1960s and 1970s, of 
technology assessment.5  E.  Q.  Daddario and his committee finally 
found the reply to the great hope.  The program was clear: identify the 
potential interests of applications of research and technology, specify the 
means of utilization, discover the secondary and harmful effects before 
they become unavoidable, and inform the public of these effects so that 
the necessary measures can be taken against them.  These were the four 
aims; one cannot say more.  The principles of action were also good.  
Errors arise in the application of science, technique, and morality.  The 
power of decision must be shared equally among the citizens.  These fine 
suggestions led to debates, conflicts of influence, discussion of the terms 
used, and finally the establishment of the Office of Technology 
Assessment.  But amid the debates the project became increasingly less 
ambitious and more oriented in fact to the growth of research and 
development.  Above all, "technology assessment" became a process of 
self-justification, an attempt to sway public opinion, much the same as 
happened in the case of "human" and "public relations" after the war.  The 
system of "public relations" is in fact a technical system which, since 
coming into existence, has never given evidence of even the least 
effective control, of even the least reduction in the technical enterprise 
because of the risks, to which it has never alerted public opinion or the 
electorate.  Once again we see here what ought to be done but what is 
not done because of the combination of the techno-system, economic 
interests, and political forces. 
 
 
In reality, mastering a technique or techniques is becoming 
increasingly difficult, especially since we remain globally unaware of the 
problem.  An interesting point to note, then, is that there is great concern 
to master technique when we run up against very commonplace moral 
questions raised by it: bioethics, artificial insemination, in vitro fertilization, 
etc.  In such matters it is worth creating commissions of ethics and control 
(which do nothing) and holding discussions (like the international colloquy 
on bioethics in April 1985) which set up norms and points of reference 
that are no more useful than the human rights charter, since in spite of all 
the good intentions these techniques are simply part of the totality of the 
technical system and cannot be controlled unless the whole be controlled. 
 
 
It is an absolute rule, moreover, that any technique that exists 
 
 
154   
 
DISCOURSE 
 
will be applied, as Chesneaux finely shows from two standpoints.6  First, 
according to the new computerized mechanization: with machines with digital 
commands, no more slack periods (as Bressand and Distler also observe to 
the glory of technique), the operators have to obey the machines and their 
programs.  The subordination of people to machines is just as great as 
before, but with the difference that people are no longer the glorious 
conductors of the orchestra; the machines are in sole control.  Automated 
machines and industrial computers exert absolute power in real time and at a 
distance.  Their control of real time is instantaneous and global.  Furthermore, 
at a distance the machines control the operators no matter what the situation.  
Work is desynchronized (variable schedules) and delocalized (terminals at 
home).  The modern machine is a hierarchical entity which precisely 
conditions both materials and people, disciplining both body and soul.  The 
total work time can be reduced, but the internal pressures are more severe.  
The more advanced the technique, the more it speeds up production and 
imposes a restriction on delays. 
 
 
On the other extreme, workers are losing power as automation destroys 
the unions.  Automation-computerization means an expropriation of 
knowledge from the working class and therefore a reduction of its power in 
collective bargaining, Professional training, once the work of a lifetime, is now 
no more than knowing how to adapt to devices that are temporary and 
constantly changing.  At the same time the system entails an increasing 
diversification of the labor force.  The working class is splitting up into small 
fragments.  The proper functioning of an automated tool might need the input 
of six distinct categories of workers who are dissociated in time and space 
and interests, with no possibility of communication among them: those who 
Plan, those who program, those who install (often by subcontract), those who 
maintain (often by subcontract), those who engage in centralized production, 
some merely keeping watch over the functioning, others intervening in case of 
breakdown or malfunction, and finally, those who service and manage the 
centralized equipment. 
 
 
In reality, there is no common expertise, in many cases no meeting at 
the place of work, no collective interest to protect.  The whole working class is 
slipping toward precariousness, fluidity, becoming unskilled, and insecurity in 
employment.  Forms of precarious work are increasing (interim agencies, 
subcontracting).  All this is in the industrial sector of high technology, but 
there is also a large sector that has not been modernized and is very 
precarious, suffering from terrible 

 
 
HUMAN MASTERY OVER TECHNIQUE 
 155 
 
economic disasters (shipyards, textiles, metallurgy).  It is to the changing 
of employment patterns in industry that we must ascribe the unions' loss 
of membership and influence.  The more industry is automated, the 
greater the loss will be.  In France, with few exceptions, the unions did not 
realize what was happening in the 1970s.  They carried on with the same 
aims and strategy as in the 1930s, and like the political parties they have 
suffered total dislocation.  If I have stressed this point, it is because the 
unions might have hoped to become the supreme instrument for 
achieving mastery over technique.  Joint worker-management control is 
the way.  But computerization in big business, far from aiding joint 
worker-management control, has become a major obstacle because of 
working-class change.  The unions no longer have any hope of mastering 
techniques, let alone redirecting technique. 
 
 
Furthermore, if we return to Scardigli how modest is the freedom 
which consists of choosing our car or taking a trail!  (Real though this 
freedom may be, yet to those who know the real countryside in which 
there are no ski slopes or roads, how ridiculous it sounds!)  As in the 
preceding chapter, the real debate is this: What do we mean by freedom, 
and what do we mean by mastery?  On a ship it is the captain or skipper 
who is master.  And what is proposed here is no more than the freedom 
of sailors to put on gloves or not in order to make the maneuvers that are 
ordered.  Lagadec in much more concrete fashion shows what is the 
desirable direction.  We have to recognize the reality of major risks.  This 
entails a general awareness, a policy of prevention, the use only of 
techniques whose risks have been assessed, and an orientation to new 
attitudes and practices on the part of those concerned, when it has been 
shown how impotent industry, state, citizens, and experts really are.  We 
have to take up the challenge.  Lagadec is thus much more prudent than 
all the other authors who deal with technique, but he still thinks that 
mastery is possible.7 
 
 
I will not proceed to criticize the innumerable writers (Toffler and 
Servan-Schreiber are popular examples) who exult in human power, for I 
could only repeat what I have already said, showing that no one can in 
fact master technique and drive the technical system.8  Teaching half a 
million French children to use computers only forces 
 
 
156  
DISCOURSE 
 
them into the system and takes from them any critical power or global 
understanding.  I will simply emphasize the incredible contradiction, which 
ought to leap to our eyes, between the supposed human mastery over 
technique and the commonly asserted ability of technique to do anything.  
Thus Castoriadis rightly notes: "the unwitting illusion that technique is 
virtually omnipotent-an illusion which dominates our age-rests on another 
idea which is not discussed but concealed: the idea of power."9 
 
 
It is in effect a common basic conviction that technique can fulfill all 
our desire for power and that it is itself omnipotent.  This is certainly an 
illusion, says Castoriadis, but it is all the more interesting for this reason.  
Here we have the absolute belief of the modern world which implies our 
absolute renunciation of mastery; we delegate power to technique.  
Thanks to it we have achieved an unequalled power.  But the greater the 
power is, the harder it is to maker it.  A high-powered car is much more 
difficult to control than a normal car.  If this is true of a single machine, it is 
even more true of a complex system which constantly becomes more 
powerful, more complex, more complicated, and apparently more rational.  
Even though the rationality be merely apparent, we renounce the critical 
use of reason precisely because all reason seems to be concentrated in 
technique and techniques.  "Seeing the world as object or image, we 
establish the domination of science and technique, an essential 
configuration of which is the reign of the quantitative.  In principle we can 
represent all this accurately, that is, calculate it."10 
 
 
But beyond a certain degree of power we enter the sphere of the 
incalculable.  "The incalculable is simply the unconditional promotion of 
power, unceasingly measured and reevaluated."11  But precisely when we 
come up against almost absolute power, against the technique which can 
do unheard-of things, we cannot master it.  We feel this unconsciously.  
We thus experience a terrible fear.  We sense that power is closed to 
basic questioning.  If technique can do anything (as we are all convinced), 
we cannot stand up to it.  We are not its master.  This obscure feeling 
explains the enthusiasm, the delirium, the frenzy which has greeted the 
computer and its many applications.  At last we can calculate the 
incalculable.  We can master power with greater power.  Humanity has 
discovered this. 

 
 
HUMAN MASTERY OVER TECHNIQUE 
 
157 
 
 
But one thing is lacking.  We have not become the masters of the 
computer.  The means by which to achieve domination is on the side of that 
which we have to dominate.  What all those who think they can master 
technique lack is a basic understanding that technique is simply power, that 
no one can master power, and that by its very nature power forbids all 
questioning and slips away from all attempts to seize it. 
 
 
Those who want mastery over technique also fail to ask what is meant 
by mastery.  Mastery is an ability to dispose at will one's potential.  If it does 
not mean this, it is nothing.  It has thus to be a nontechnical power that is 
greater than technique and that enables us at our pleasure to direct, brake, 
accelerate, or modulate the technical system.  But none of those who 
arrogantly talk about mastering technique dare think in such terms.  All that 
they put forward are timid propositions for the decentralizing of decisions or 
the creation of a monitoring commission that can simply regulate one small 
technical phenomenon (like television, but still only in its programming) and 
nothing more. 
 
 
This is what Gabor understands very well when he analyzes the 
impossibility of mastery, recalling the three main features.12  First, rational 
autonomy is less and less referred to those who command machines and 
corporations and is more and more dependent on the self-regulation of 
technical networks (as I pointed out above).  Second, chronological 
acceleration does not allow of any controlling body or will or any vision of the 
final reality of technique (experience showing in effect that any attempt at 
mastery is always too late).  Finally, the great extension of the scale of the 
social effects of technical progress, along with the diversity, is such that we 
cannot pass value judgments or appreciate what it would be good to achieve 
by technical means.  For mastery it is necessary to know in what direction we 
are going, but the polydimensional nature of modern technique is such that an 
absence of possible orientation rules out all mastery. 
 
 
As Janicaud notes, there is at the moment a basic reversal.  The power 
of the rational, which was the origin of technique, since rationality made it 
possible to judge and measure technique, has become the rationality of 
power.  Power (mechanical, quantitative) is at one and the same time both 
the objective and the justification.  We systematically explore the possible.  
We stake everything upon it as the potential for development increases.  Why 
research?  Because it is fashioning tomorrow's power.  But will there be a 
search for power ad infinitum?  Janicaud quotes Rescher, who predicts a 
cessation of serious synthetic 
 
 
158   
 
DISCOURSE 
 
research in favor of analytic discoveries, when power will be halted at its 
maximum point.  But Rescher is making the same mistakes as I made ten 
years ago. 
 
 
Power has in fact been halted at a certain point (e.g., an aspect of 
industrial mechanization), but it is an illusion to think that the "micro," the 
universe of chips, involves anything but a search for power.  Power 
remains the same.  It involves a new subordination of the individual to 
machines over which there is less and less control.  The innumerable 
mistakes of computers in all branches of life today show how impotent we 
are face to face with the inerrant network.  (I realize that I will be told that 
the mistakes are human errors, not computer errors; we want the 
machine to be powerful and infallible!) 
 
 
Confronted by this reality, we are forced to take refuge in wishes and 
desires and hopeful programs, as I showed in Changer de révolution.  As 
André Gorz wrote, "The inversion of tools is a basic condition for the 
transforming of society: the development of voluntary cooperation and the 
weakening of the sovereignty of communities and individuals presuppose 
the installation of instruments and methods of production which can be 
used and controlled at the level of the commune, which will generate the 
economic autonomy of local collectives, which will not destroy the 
environment, and which are compatible with the power that producers and 
consumers ought to have over production and products."13  This is in line 
with the ideas of Murray Bookchin regarding the introduction of anarchist 
thinking into the technical system.14  It is also in line with the excellent 
earlier analysis of Georges Friedmann in La Puissance et la Sagesse, or 
the even earlier concept of "conviviality" in Ivan Illich's Tools for 
Conviviality. 
 
 
In conclusion, I will refer to Lagadec's program.15  Lagadec would 
banish everything unreasonable (the opposite of the rational!).  It is 
unreasonable to launch out into innovations when we do not know the 
risks, or to take from citizens their ability to judge.  We must find new 
liberties, producing slight innovations, increasing the possibilities and 
means of choice.  We must make decisions political again16 and not leave 
power in the hands of experts.  Security functions should be 

 
 
HUMAN MASTERY OVER TECHNIQUE 
 
159 
 
discharged by high-level technicians and not by responsible political 
delegates.  New institutional measures should be adopted to safeguard 
the independence of the areas of expertise.  The objective of security 
should be defined by those concerned.  Finally, we should open up the 
process of decision (though to some extent this is incompatible with 
making it political!).  He recognizes that traditional democratic procedures 
are no longer suitable.  The watchword "participation" is strangely illusory.  
But the idea of participation is taken from the arsenal of advocates of 
microcomputers and of those who believe that we can master technique.  
But even were there institutions for citizen participation in decision 
making, who would participate?  It would be people who are manipulated, 
who have been shown what to do by the media, who receive enactments 
of news that they are incompetent to judge.  A.  Jacquard (Les 
Scientifiques parlent), too, argues a need for collective reflection in which 
there would be general criticism.  But this, he says, involves an effort to 
inform.  In response I contend that information is not enough.  There has 
to be awareness and a critical spirit. 
 
 
I concede that the participation of all people in all decision-making 
would be the ideal solution.  But this is an impossible solution.  It is not 
even made conceivable by modern psychological and intellectual 
development (in which we are all specialists at something).  With best 
wishes Lagadec calls for the reinvention of democracy.  Who would not 
agree with his formulation that the alternative is either the abandoning or 
the reinventing of democracy?  We have to come to terms with reason, he 
says, that is, with rigor, argumentation, criticism, debate.  We can engage 
in an ultimate act of will, the refusal in spite of everything to yield.  If we 
want to avoid the collective and personal loss, are we not finally forced to 
affirm our freedom? 
 
 
Forty years ago Bernard Charbonneau said much the same, but no 
one would listen to him.  Faced with the triumphalist affirmation according 
to which we are now summoned to master technique, we can measure 
the impossibility of the task, noting what would be required to accomplish 
it and how great an illusion it is to think that it is anything more than 
wishful thinking. 
 
                                                 
1 See Patrick Lagadec, La Civilisation du risque (Paris: Seuil, 1981). 
2 P.  Roqueplo, Penser la technique (Paris: Seuil, 1983).  Cf.  Lech Wzacher, 
"Towards a Democratisation of Technological Choices," Science, Technology and 
Society 1/3 (1981). 
3 This fact renders completely useless an otherwise good book like that of J.  
Morin, L'Excellence technologique (Publi Union, 1985). 
4 J.-J.  Salomon, Prométhée empétré (Paris: Pergamon, 1981). 
5 See Derian and Staropoli, La Technologie incontrôlée?  (Paris: PUF, 1975).  For 
a good bibliography cf.  T.  T.  Liao, "Technology Assessment," Science, 
Technology and Society 2/6 (1982). 
6 J.  Chesneaux, De la modernité (Maspero, 1983). 
7 Lagadec has the courage to quote some official texts, such as a 1955 report 
which says that the most satisfactory solution to the problem of mental health 
regarding the use of nuclear energy is to raise a new generation which has been 
taught to accommodate itself to ignorance and uncertainty (La Civilisation du 
risque, 111, p.  49). 
8 Cf.  Ellul, Technological Society, idem, Technological System. 
9 Castoriadis, "Développement et rationalité' in Le Mythe du développement par 
Candido Mendés (Paris: Seuil, 1977). 
10 Janicaud, La puissance du rationnel. 
11 Ibid. 
12 Dennis Gabor, Innovations: Scientific, Technological and Social (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1970). 
13 A.  Gorz, Écologie et politique (Paris: Seuil, 1978). 
14 Murray Bookchin, Post-Scarcity Anarchism (Palo Alto: Ramparts Press, 1971). 
15 Lagadec, La Civilisation du risque. 
16 Lagadec: obviously suffers from illusions at this point.  On the one hand the 
political class would have to be destroyed, along with the ideologies of left and 
right, and on the other hand the famous power of choice would have to be 
renewed, an illusory goal in politics; cf.  Sfez, La Décision. 

 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
 
Rationality 
 
I think we may take for granted what Janicaud has written about the 
power of the rational, into which I offered some insights in the last 
chapter.  I will not repeat myself here but will look at another aspect.  
Rationality is part of the reassuring discourse and also of the proof of the 
inevitability of technique.  Technique clearly results from science, which is 
purely rational.  Deduced by rational operations, technique, too, is 
rational.  But reason implies humanity.  Rationality is what humanity and 
technique have in common.  As technique is the product of a process of 
rationality which is specifically human, how can we say that there is any 
contradiction or that technique has eluded us and shown itself to be bad?   
 
 
Have we not seen, indeed, an endless progression in rationality from 
the single individual machine functioning rationally to a group of rational 
machines and then to a corresponding ordering of society which shows 
obvious progress as compared with the social incoherence of previous 
centuries?  Since the eighteenth-century philosophers, the political world 
has tended toward rationality with democracy, and it is taking the risk of 
finding fulfillment in the rationality of the computer. 
 
 
The rational has made strides in every sector of human and social 
life.  This is reassuring, for we know what to expect from the rational.  
Technique, obeying rationality, becomes an expression and instrument of 
human reason in our society.  When from time to time a nonrational event 
takes place in the technical system, it is always a one-time accident, an 
unfortunate mistake, a negligible fact.  Even when such accidents 
become common (as in the case of automobiles), they can be rationalized 
by statistics and integrated into rational tables of prediction for insurance 
purposes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
160 
 
 
 
RATIONALITY 
161 
 
 
Some years ago Gabriel Dessus concluded that we have to evaluate 
human life in terms of money.1  Money is the only way to rationalize the 
acquisition or loss of human life.  Technique demands this in order to be 
truly rational.  We dare not say this too often, because it is so shocking, 
but it corresponds to reality.  And what is so reassuring as the rational?  It 
is reassuring because it is both understandable and certain.  Implying the 
development of a series of linked operations, it can be fully grasped.  If, 
then, the world is to be grasped (i.e., understood and mastered), it must 
be rational.  All that we ask of people in this society must be rational.  It is 
rational to consume more, to change immediately what is worn out, to 
acquire more information, to satisfy an increasing number of desires.  
Constant growth is rational for our economic system.  We can take the 
ordinary actions of 99 percent of the population in a so-called advanced 
country and we shall find that the key to them is always rationality. 
 
 
And does not this rationality assure us of technical mastery?  
Contrary to what I said earlier, are not those who have mastered dozens 
of machines of increasing complexity helping to forge a global mastery 
over technique?  Is not this situation clearly much better than that which 
our ancestors could know, immersed as they were in a world of nature 
and then of society?  For nature seems to be essentially irrational, made 
up of accidents, of incomprehensible renewals, of the unexpected, of a 
lack of obvious causality, of chance phenomena, and we are tempted to 
ascribe coherence to all these things by using myths, to detect the 
presence behind the phenomena of forces upon which we can act and 
which we can command instead of the phenomena themselves, such 
forces as gods or demons made after the human image.  That was an 
early way to humanize and rationalize nature. 
 
 
Nature perhaps has its own order, but this translates always into 
terrible disorder for us.  We have only to look at the Lisbon earthquake 
and Voltaire's poem about it.  Society, too, is irrational, with its kings by 
divine right, its dividing up into age groups (I do not mean the class 
distinctions of Marx), its functional classes, its clans and castes.  And all 
this is explained and justified in part, and upheld in part, by the total 
irrationality of religion, with its gods whose reactions and favors and 
retributions and angers cannot be known or foreseen.  If the centuries 
prior to the 18th were centuries of obscurantism, it was because nature 
itself is obscure, the basis of power is obscure, and death is obscure. 

 
 
162   
 
DISCOURSE 
 
 
In face of this situation, how can we fail to see that the rational, as a 
victory over the irrational in thinking, conduct, and society thanks to 
techniques, is the great triumph of humanity?  The eighteenth-century 
philosophers showed very well that reason brings light, that it dispels 
obscurity and the incomprehensible.  Science and its minstrels, like Victor 
Hugo, confirmed this in the 19th century. 
 
 
Today we have moved into the technical age, and what we say about 
rationality is no longer the same.  It is no longer a matter of fighting against 
religious irrationality or the extremes of nature.  It is a matter of projecting 
human power on the whole universe, on every culture, on nature in its totality, 
thanks first to the machine and then, gloriously, the whole array of 
techniques.  It is a matter of showing that this power, this domination over the 
irrational, this subjugation to the rational, is a fulfillment of the very being of 
humanity.  It is very remarkable indeed that the projection of the rational over 
the universe always leads back to humanity.  As the technical system is 
rational, humanity has to be rational in turn.  We begin with a philosophical 
conviction about human nature and we come back to an ethical command to 
identify ourselves with the universe that we have created.  This explains the 
countless numbers of the abnormal, the marginal, the handicapped, and the 
maladjusted who must either be brought to the level of our world's rationality 
or put on one side, maintained by society but without having anything to do or 
being able to mix in society. 
 
 
No previous society has had to set aside as much as 10 percent of its 
population.  This is the result of the coming of technical rationality.  It is also 
remarkable that opposite routes lead to the same affirmation of rationality.  
For example, what is rational behavior from an economic point of view?  For 
some it is planning, mastering economic phenomena, calculating raw 
materials, hours of work, prices, production, needs, tools, etc., so as to fix at 
will the rhythm and growth of the economy.  Rationality is the power to 
impose upon economic facts and dominate them.  Yet the advocates of 
economic liberalism are no less rational.  The economy as they see it 
functions according to its own laws, like nature (in physics, chemistry, or 
biology).  Reason for them is discovering the rationality of these laws, 
whether of the economy or anything else.  Economic life is rational in itself.  
The various elements combine according to what may be seen to be rational 
principles.  Wealth that we can calculate rationally is the result.  The vital 
thing is not to interfere with the free play of the laws.  Progress is in 
understanding, not in domination.  But there is no less rationality.  Both 
economic systems think that in their different ways they are expressing 
supreme rationality.  This fact is remarkably confirmed by the new 
 
 
RATIONALITY 
163 
 
interpretation of a global system of communications which with 
innumerable interconnections will encircle the planet with a network.  The 
word network is a favorite one at the moment and we can foresee the 
(unavoidable?) time when the many networks will finally be agencies of a 
central brain.2 
 
 
We are no longer dealing here with the supercomputer which 
imposes its will by means of a centralized system, but with a complex 
system of financial and information networks, of transport, and of abstract 
shifts, which finally converge on the central brain, which is bound to 
appear even with no centralized or authoritarian intervention.  This 
network will have to have a rational understanding of all that happens and 
to give out its impulses, which are also rational.  The computer, which 
might lead to local initiatives, cannot avoid interconnections that inevitably 
mean centralization. 
 
 
From another standpoint the triumph of rationality comes with the 
computer and all the machines that derive from it, which have for a long 
time been called thinking machines.  We could not have said this thirty 
years ago but today we are close to it.  Naturally, a computer does not 
function like a brain.  But fifth-generation computers fully imitate all the 
operations of the human intellect, including the association of ideas, 
rectifications in the course of reasoning, and self-programming.  The 
following question arises very seriously.  Since the 19th century the 
machine has replaced physical motions, human muscle.  Are we now 
confronting a new step in the replacement of people by their own 
creations, that is, the replacement of their intellectual operations?3  On 
the rational plane, we are indeed.  But it is forgotten that our own rational 
thinking is not the product of an organism separate from our being.  It is 
nourished by memory (as might be said of computers, since they record 
what they have done and have recall) and by foresight (as computers, 
too, are beginning to make forecasts that will influence their functioning).  
But human memory and foresight differ from those of computers.  They 
include memories of joys and successes and failures, and the foresight is 
mingled with hopes and fears. 

 
 
164  
  
DISCOURSE 
 
 
In other words, except in algebra there is no such thing as purely rational 
human thinking.  Even our most rigorous thinking is inevitably intermingled 
with opinions and sympathies and antipathies and feelings.  How often our 
reasoning and knowledge reflect the causes we advocate!  Our thinking is 
never pure.  That of computers is always pure unless it is programmed to take 
into account a specific feature.  Yet even though its thinking is rational, there 
is often an irrational factor in the way that one poses a problem (to the 
computer!) or in the choice of the problem that one poses. 
 
 
Machines can certainly understand the intellectual problems that people 
pose.  They have to break them down into simple questions but when that is 
done they do much better than any of us.  Yet no real comparison is possible.  
And we grant that problems are raised by what is called artificial intelligence. 
 
 
An aspect of the technical universe which is not wholly without interest is 
the loose way in which terms are now used, as if laxity in vocabulary were 
compensating for rigor in technique.  I have often cited the wrong use of the 
word technology.  I might also refer to "star wars," which is a very inexact 
term for the strategic defense initiative.  There is also the "conquest of 
space," which is a wild exaggeration, or the "mastery of energy.”  Above all 
we have this phrase "artificial intelligence," which dates back to 1952 and the 
very first computers, when P.  de Latil was talking about "artificial thinking." 
 
 
The phrase has come into general use, but strictly we can use it only to 
the extent that we carry out a reductionism of intelligence and obey a 
mechanism.  On the one side there is a reference to systems experts, and I 
agree that here, in a limited number of cases which can be put in 
mathematical terms, the systems experts might imitate an intellectual 
operation.  We shall see the limits of this later.  But the abuse begins with the 
general assumption that computer operations can be compared with every 
intellect or that computers can do all that the brain does. 
 
 
M.  Arvornny defines artificial intelligence as any reproduction by a 
computer of the processes of the human brain.  In practice, however, we see 
that the reference boils down to the systems expert, and that it is hard to 
isolate that which specifically constitutes artificial intelligence within the totality 
of the computer industry.  If it is just a matter of recording the experience 
gained by experts and putting it at the disposal of all, there is nothing there 
that can be described as intelligence.  So long as we recall that we are far 
from producing computers that talk and listen and reflect as we do, I will grant 
in exchange that computers can do some things much better than we can 
 
 
RATIONALITY    
 165 
 
do ourselves.  But it is going much too far to say that the computer has 
brought a (total) revolution in intelligence,4 which would mean that our human 
intellect ought to bow to the new order, or that in the sphere of thinking 
everything is possible for computers, from writing a Proust novel on its own to 
having intuitions like those of Einstein.  This was the thesis of Hubert A.  
Simon, who won a Nobel prize for economics.5 
 
 
I will take up Simon's article, since it is fully in keeping with the thinking 
of those who talk about artificial intelligence.  Simon has three main points.  
First, if we can devise computer programs that can display in their data banks 
facts and the underlying patterns, we shall be able to understand the process 
of discovery.  And the computer will be able to make discoveries itself, for a 
discovery is not a true innovation.  It is the result of a laborious process 
gradually enacted on the basis of immense documentation and through 
knowledge of prior models.  There is no real intuition.  Intuition is simply the 
ability to grasp instantly the significance of a given situation.  The key to it is 
recognition.  Experts recognize the indices that give them instant access to a 
vast body of knowledge.  Computers are also capable of this recognition and 
are thus capable of intuition (note the reductionism).  We have only to reduce 
the complex processes of thought to simple operations that computers can 
manage.  Combining them, they will then reproduce more complex 
configurations. 
 
 
Second, computers can be programmed to simulate human emotions.  
We have only to work out programs that include symbolic input similar to that 
which the nervous system receives in connection with emotions.  The 
computer system will then have the same ability to deal with emotions as the 
human brain.  Simon adduces the example of a computer that can simulate 
perfectly fear or anger or paranoia in response to certain stimuli.  But can we 
really think that the thousands of different emotions, which are often hard to 
differentiate (friendship, sympathy, love, affection, etc.) but which make up 
the fabric of human feelings, can be analyzed so well and reduced to such 
simple input that they can be entered into computers?  Here again we have 
an oversimplistic view of human reality.  But according to Simon’s conditions, 
a computer might write a Proust novel.  With a sacred simplicity Simon 
argues that it is enough that the computer has as good a knowledge of 
French as Proust and that it can be furnished with analogous experiences to 
those that excite our emotions.  That is all; a combination of French and 
emotions means that anyone might write A la recherche du 

 
 
166   
 
DISCOURSE 
 
temps perdu.  But a point which gives me pause is that Proust decided to 
write this work.  Can computers make the same decision?  According to 
Simon we come up here against the "revolt of the robots.”  One day the robot 
that is given an order will reply: "No, I want to write a novel!”  The decision of 
the artist or writer is a specific feature of the human intellect and it is beyond 
the reach of the computer. 
 
 
Third, according to Simon computers can do anything in the intellectual 
realm.  They can understand and interpret, since understanding is simply the 
process which uses a variety of things stocked in the memory in such a way 
as to interpret new data of experience another example of reductionism.  It is 
conceded that computers are not yet capable of nonverbal understanding, of 
noting in what is said the intonations of anger, joy, etc., but in principle this is 
said to be quite feasible.  Finally, computers can organize their own programs 
as well as their execution.  There exists a computer (though I have found no 
trace of it except in this article) which can study a problem, work out new 
ways of solving it, and then, if successful, analyze what it has done, and use 
its experience to modify its program so as to know how to solve similar 
problems it might meet in the future.  In other words, it is capable of 
heuristics.  We see, then, that with these declarations of the Nobel 
prizewinner we are well ahead of systems experts. 
 
 
My main objection is that all these marvels are imitations of the 
operations of a brain that is taken out of the skull and that functions in a jar 
(certainly with nerve endings) full of physiological serum.  Intelligence is more 
than the ability to assemble and use knowledge or to solve problems or to 
memorize.  Intelligence is a total human activity.  It is nourished by human 
relations, by accidents, by fatigue, by (nonsimulated) joy, by the desire to 
write or to calculate, by the selection of knowledge for a particular project, by 
psychological obsessions, by the wish to please or hurt people.  The intellect 
is not algebra.  I also reject completely Simon's abstract view of intuition.  The 
intellect can be excited or it can be bored.  In other words, it is a function of 
living people.  The computer may be able to simulate but it can never do more 
than simulate-it is not alive.  The most perfect machine has nothing human 
about it.  The simple fact that the computer can only simulate human 
intelligence shows that it is not intelligent. 
 
 
Simon ultimately ignores three essential aspects of human intelligence.  
The first is imagination.  Without imagination there is no intelligence.  But the 
computer is not capable of imagination, especially in the dimension that 
Sartre and Castoriadis, for example, have given it.  The second aspect is 
spontaneity.  All intellectuals know that ideas spring up on matters to which 
they have devoted little attention.  All at 
 
 
RATIONALITY 
167 
 
once a kind of evident truth illumines them.  Thought has been secretly at 
work.  Such ideas then give rise to strict intellectual exercises.  This is an 
integral part of intelligence, but the computer is never grasped by 
impromptu ideas that arise out of dreams or street encounters or the play 
of colors or nostalgia or hope.  The computer can never record such 
things. 
 
 
A third feature of intelligence is its general grasp of a situation, 
relation, problem, etc.  This grasp is indivisible.  That is to say, one might, 
of course, analyze it, but adding up the units of understanding (or 
communication) 
that 
analysis 
yields 
in 
no 
way 
restores 
the 
comprehensiveness of the intellectual grasp.  Five notes of music tapped 
out separately do not constitute a musical phrase.  The computer can 
never restore the phrasing of general intelligence.  As regards Proust, this 
leads us to a very simple question.  Do we really think that the computer 
could write as Proust does about what is evoked in him by the 
"madeleine"?  Undoubtedly, it is a matter of recollections, and these can 
be stored in the memory of a computer, but they are evoked by an 
experience that the computer cannot have, and they, are ordered and 
linked and developed in a way that is quite beyond the computer.  This is 
why it is absurd to talk about artificial intelligence. 
 
 
Moving on from Simon's wild dream, we might refer to a very 
reasonable special number of La Recherche on this theme.6  It is not now 
a question of Proust or Einstein.  The reference of artificial intelligence is 
to systems experts, to games of strategy, to the simulation of medical 
reasoning, to recognition of writing (though this is contested),7 to the 
understanding of speech, to the representing of existing knowledge, and 
to a certain capacity for learning.  All that is remarkable enough.  We also 
find in the articles an indication of two important limitations.  It is only 
abstract thought that can be assimilated, interpreted, and imitated by the 
computer.  The more thought refers to life, the less accessible it is.  It is 
only on the level of theoretical knowledge that the computer can measure 
and simulate.  It is paralyzed in the field of practical knowledge.  In no 
operation, then, do we really have intelligence.  Yet following current 
usage, and with a certain pride, this special number of La Recherche 
bears the title 'Artificial Intelligence."8 

 
 
168   
 
DISCOURSE 
 
 
In sum, human thought feeds on our experience of life as we register 
and interpret it.  Imagination, fantasy, myth, intuition, and experience 
transform themselves into thought.  Computers can imitate the human 
brain, but the human brain is not a separate entity-it is part of a body.  
The experiences of this body provoke the reactions of the brain and set 
the rational process going in one or another direction.  To be sure, novels 
(and we must not forget that Italo Calvino had a story to this effect twenty 
years ago) can depict an amorous computer and pretend that it behaves 
much the same as we might do, but this is no more than amusing science 
fiction.  Computers do not have the dreams or fears or desires that feed 
and stimulate human thought.  This is why they may imitate one of the 
operations of the brain, but no more. 
 
 
It is for this reason that computers cannot produce anything that 
might be called art except in the purely formal sense of putting one color 
or one note next to another.  Genius lies in the heart.  Songs of despair 
are the most beautiful of songs.  Some immortal songs are pure sobs.  Is 
that romanticism?  Not at all!  We have here the origin, development, and 
aspirations of all art.  In spite of the claims of some modern painters and 
musicians, the computer has no place in art.  We shall leave it at that. 
 
 
To put it simply, the most perfect machine is purely rational, but 
human beings are not.  They are not rational in their feelings and opinions 
and conduct, and they do not find it easy to live in a purely and 
exclusively rational milieu.  Who of us has not been frightened by reading 
about utopias, whether of the 16th century or the 19th, with their perfectly 
mechanical organization, their closed world in which there are no 
accidents, but everything is foreseen and regulated?  No one wants to live 
in them.  And whenever people find themselves in an over-rational 
society, irrational behavior breaks out at once.  Imperfect though it may 
be, our Western society is already infinitely too rational.  We have to 
submit to rules and constraints and exercises in collective discipline, and 
we thus react against the excessive rationality.  The more a society wants 
to be rational, the more we express irrational urges.  This is exactly the 
problem that we raised earlier.  How can we lead people to live well and 
happily in the rarefied air of rationality without external constraint or force? 
 
 
RATIONALITY 
169 
 
 
Yet we must also consider the complementary aspect of this mistake in 
discussions of rationality.  The universe that is constructed according to a 
rational design, with rational means, and with an ideology of rationality, leads 
to the astonishing result of such irrationality that I can even speak (see below) 
of the unreason of the technical society.  We have here a kind of monster.  
Each piece is rational but the whole and its functioning are masterpieces of 
irrationality.9 
 
 
We must demonstrate this in detail, for it is obviously not the view of 
technocrats, who are not in the habit of looking at a complex whole or taking 
note of significant details that are not in keeping with the general plan.  We 
are well aware that the general plan enables us to shut out after a time facts 
that do not fit into it.  Such facts are simply understood as aberrations or 
accidents.  But they are precisely the facts which should claim our attention if 
we are to focus not on what we pretend is happening, but on what is really 
happening and what will tomorrow become the significant whole.  These facts 
reveal a notable institutional, economic, and political tendency, all according 
to techniques, toward a striking irrationality. 
 
 
The most rational of systems increases social maladjustment and 
retardation and multiplies the number of marginal people.  Devices that are 
meant to give greater freedom engender maximum inevitability.  Acceleration 
of the evolution of the system produces a worsening of crises.  Multiplication 
of means leads to disappearance of ends.  Growth of universal power 
augments social powerlessness.  For individuals the means of power act as 
prostheses which weaken the natural use of functions. 
 
 
The more technique advances, the more it is supposed to serve human 
progress, but the more in reality it brings human regress.  The wealth created 
by technique is collective, fleeting (in need of constant renewal), and 
dependent.  The more devices seem to be obvious and useful, the more they 
reduce the human condition to absurdity.  The more progress there is, the 
more repetition there is.  Change accelerates sameness.  In a shadow theater 
we see constant transformations from the same to the same by miraculous 
means.  The sameness consists of permanent change according to an 
immutable principle.  There is a remarkable development of chaos and the 
irrational in a superfluity of rationality, order, and taxonomies. 
 
But that is not the end of what I have to say about disorder, chaos, 

 
 
170  
DISCOURSE 
 
and irrationality.  We are now said to be in a stage of recuperation by which 
order will be born out of disorder and (in communications) information out of 
noise.  This is a seductive thought and true enough physically.  But I find it fits 
best in politics and for social life as a whole.  The new science is based on 
this principle (cf.  the works of E.  Morin), but I am not so sure whether the 
same is true of technique.  For in the technical domain, which is our own, 
rationality is necessarily operational and instrumental.  It is the rationalizing 
which results in technical exploitation of the earth and which reduces all 
things (human beings included, as we have seen) to objects of calculation for 
representative thinking (Heidegger). 
 
 
When it is justly argued that reason and rationality are (metaphysically) 
very different, two considerations result.  First, although technique may derive 
from rational operations, the great discourse about rationality which is now 
commonplace has as its aim the vindication of technique by means of, as well 
as in the eyes Of, a higher authority, that of human reason.  We in the West 
who are trained in reason have no answer to this discourse with its intentional 
confusion between veridical reason and pragmatic reason. 
 
 
But Dumouchel and Dupuy have well shown that the violence that is 
done under the sign of instrumental technical rationality is in truth, and more 
profoundly, the product of a constant tendency which simply has no means of 
expressing 
itself, 
"the 
omnipresence 
of 
mimesis 
which 
provokes 
dehumanization and the cold and indifferent rationalization of human 
relations."10  This is why it is not evident to me that the new science can be an 
alibi for the new technique or can validate it.  All that science can do is solve 
one of the essential human problems, that of adjustment to the chaos caused 
by the very rationality of technique.  This is why I prefer to speak about the 
unreason or unreasonableness rather than the irrationality of technique. 
 
 
My affirmation is that the rationality of technique and all human 
organization plunges us into a world of irrationality and that technical 
rationality is enclosed in a system of irrational forces.  Hence it is not a matter 
of finding reassurance in discussions of rationality, which can never be more 
than excuses and vindications.  Rationality has been able to justify all things 
(as it previously did religion): centralization, rationalization, Taylorism, and 
also concentration camps, which provide the cheapest labor in the world, 
force opponents to work for the regime, and when they die salvage their hair, 
teeth, etc.-a masterpiece of rationality!  In technical operations pure rationality 
can lead to all kinds 
 
 
RATIONALITY 
171 
 
of aberrations.  Yet it has its place in the justifying discourse which seems 
reasonable enough to the public when technicians or politicians address 
it.  Since it is the decisive argument in administrative commissions, we 
have to take it very seriously.11 
 
                                                 
1 Gabriel Dessus, "De l'inéluctable mesure des incornmensurables, et de ce qui 
peut s'ensuivre," Revue française de recherche operationelle (1964). 
2 Cf.  J.  de Rosnay, Le Cerveau planétaire (O.  Orban, 1986).  This is a master 
piece of illusions about networks, depicting the many innovations which make a 
network function like the nervous system -a comparison in which I take a naughty 
pleasure since I envisioned it myself prior to the coming of computers in 1950, in 
Technological Society.  A technological tornado, which will do little good! 
3 Computer translation is an example.  But there are limits.  Only restricted 
Translation is possible, and it needs to be reviewed by human translators.  Cf "La 
Traduction automatique," La Recherche 152 (Feb.  1984); also Makoto Nagao, 
"La Traduction automatique," La Recherche 150 (Dec.  1983). 
4 See "La Révolution de l'intelligence . . . " Science et Techniques (1985). 
5 Cf.  the very important article in Le Monde aujourd'hui (April 1984). 
6 La Recherche 170 (Oct.  1985). 
7 The computer can understand and recognize a single letter as it is written by a 
given person and might thus read this person's writing.  But different people write 
letters differently, and even the same people form letters in various ways, so how 
are computers going to read what they write? 
8 Sometimes the situation is purely comical.  An article in Le Monde dealing with 
adaptation to artificial intelligence raises only the health problems of those 
working with computers.  The computer is artificial intelligence and adapting to it is 
just a matter of better spectacles and seating.  In contrast I would recommend the 
article by H.  S.  Dreyfus, "Why Computers May Never Think Like People," 
Technology Review (1986).  The intelligence does not function merely in terms of 
facts, meaning does not lie merely in words, and intelligent action derives from 
knowing what we are; this is impossible to program 
9 On this point cf.  B.  Charbonneau, Le Chaos et le Système (1973), who shows 
plainly that the more perfect the system becomes, the more chaos develops 
around it and within it as a counterstroke. 
10 P.  Dumouchel and J.-P.  Dupuy, L'Enfer des chases. 
11 By way of transition to the next chapter see the notable article by J.  Sheppard 
and T.  Johnston, "Science and Rationality," Science, Technology and Society 2/3 
(1982) and 2/4 (1982). 

 
 
CHAPTER IX 
 
A Sketch of the Ideologies of Science 
 
1.  Classical Ideology 
 
There has always been an ideology of science, not in the strict sense of 
ideology that we find in politics, but in the way in which the public, 
especially the "cultured" public, with whom ideologies have their birth, has 
accepted and depicted science, attributing to it certain qualities and 
arriving at a general representation of it.1  Those who share this ideology 
do not know science.  They cannot follow its methods and experiments.  
They trust in the summary explanations that they are given.  They also 
see certain results in the form of techniques, which at first they did not 
understand, thinking that these results were the direct fruit of scientific 
research.  The automobile, the railroad, the vaccine for rabies are all 
applications of science. 
 
 
The ideology which has developed is hardly shared by scientists 
themselves.  Scientists plunge into the reality of scientific research and 
seldom have any general attitude to science.  Nevertheless, when they 
break out of the frontiers of their own special field they are ready enough 
to accept the views that are passed on to them by a favorable and even 
enthusiastic public. 
 
 
It seems to me that one could write a veritable history of the common 
ideology of science.  I would distinguish five periods from 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
172 
 
 
 
A SKETCH OF THE IDEOLOGIES OF SCIENCE 
 
173 
 
1850 to today, passing very rapidly over the first four, which will serve simply 
as a benchmark. 
 
 
The first period is characterized by what is called scientism (it is usually 
stressed 
that 
true 
scientists 
did 
not 
share 
this 
characterization).  
Schematically, scientism amounts to the notion that science discovers and 
will discover all truth, truth being equated with the concrete reality of the world 
in which we live.  This world is finite.  It can be analyzed, understood, and 
explained.  Reality obeys fixed laws which enable us to predict events, since 
these always repeat themselves in the same way.  Science evolves 
unceasingly toward "more," so that finally it will grasp everything and exhaust 
all problems.  There is no mystery; nothing is unknowable.  The laws of 
nature are never broken, that is, the laws as science has established them.  
This idea of total knowledge was present even among disciplines that one 
could hardly call scientific in the strict sense.  As late as 1930 I knew a 
historian who told me that when we have searched all the archives in France 
down to the last detail, we can know everything that happened there from the 
historical point of view in the 18th and 19th centuries. 
 
 
Science, it was thought, is never wrong.  It advances by accumulating 
certain knowledge.  When a scientific theory proves to be inadequate, it is 
replaced by a better one, but there can never be a scientific error.  There is 
only progress.  In the educated world between 1860 and 1900 people lived in 
a kind of enthusiasm that was not without a certain intransigeance.  In the 
name of science they had to shatter false ideas, religions, cultural traditions, 
myths.  All products of the imagination in the ages of obscurity had to be 
replaced completely by the light of science. 
 
 
But this enthusiasm waned around 1900, and a second period came 
between 1900 and 1918, bringing not strictly a new ideology but a weakening 
of the common scientism.  Less was said about science; it was not extolled so 
much.  I see two factors in this regard.  The first is habit.  The educated public 
had become accustomed to the marvels of science.  They did not yet know 
the big discoveries that risked changing everything (e.g., those of Einstein), 
but they were less captive to the glorious future of knowledge and light and 
elucidation.  Habit made them still convinced of the absolute value of science 
but without wanting to examine everything closely.  Anatole France still has a 
scientistic view in his works, but if there is unbounded appreciation of science 
there is not the same readiness to contend for it.  This is also the time of 
scholarly conflicts, the battle waged around the church in the name of 
scientism.  Scientism is so deeply entrenched, however, that Roman 
Catholics do not dare attack science.  Science still seems to be impregnable. 

 
 
174  
  DISCOURSE 
 
 
The other factor that brings with it a certain distancing of opinion and 
waning of interest is obviously World War 1.  The main preoccupation of the 
majority of the people is clearly not science but the war itself.  Yet in the case 
of the conflict with the Roman Catholic Church, it is significant that science is 
not challenged as progress in weapons of destruction is noted.  Cannon and 
machine guns and planes have nothing to do with science.  No attention is 
paid even to the importance of technique.  At issue are the political order (as 
though politics were totally responsible for what takes place) and the 
economic order (as though the war were merely the result of conflicts of 
economic interest, and the improved weapons were merely products of arms 
manufacturers and the great economic powers).  No note is taken of the fact 
that capitalists can produce and sell only the results of technical research.  
Capitalist interests-and we see here the full influence of Marx's thinking-are 
held solely responsible for every product.  In this period, then, the passion for 
science is less central and its radiant image less striking.  Scientist ideology 
persists, but in a minor key. 
 
 
After the war, we see another facet of the ideology.  It bounces back in 
other forms.  I would say that in 1900 truth was central.  After 1920 happiness 
is central.  Science will assure us of happiness.  Note is taken of the 
spectacular progress in medicine and surgery.  People profit from the great 
industrial machine.  The products of science, by way of technique, make their 
way into every sphere of life.  There is an acceleration and multiplication of 
means of transport.  The prophecies of Hugo are frequently recalled to the 
effect that the material rapprochement of the nations would lead to mutual 
knowledge, which in turn would mean that they can no longer hate and make 
war.  Consumer goods increase, and here again, thanks to science, the 
standard of living rises spectacularly in spite of the 1929 crash and 
unemployment.  Once again science escapes responsibility for the problems, 
which are attributed to poor economic functioning.  Up to about 1936 no one 
doubts that science is destined to ensure human happiness.  Huxley brings to 
light a different aspect, but at the time he is not taken seriously except by a 
very small minority of young intellectuals who dabble in technical problems 
and offer no challenge to science. 
 
 
It has to be said that attention remains fixed on the discoveries and the 
traditional approaches of science, and the great debates of physicists and 
mathematicians are ignored.  The names of Planck and Heisenberg are 
vaguely familiar, but most people are totally incapable of knowing anything 
about their findings or the implications.  For the majority, science is obviously 
good and oriented to human happiness.  This view explains the desire during 
this period to describe as scientific 
 
 
A SKETCH OF THE IDEOLOGIES OF SCIENCE 
 
175 
 
certain disciplines which had previously belonged to the humanities.  Hence 
we find a "scientific" sociology, psychology, or economics.  These disciplines 
now use the methods of the natural sciences, and especially mathematics.  It 
is not just a matter of rigor and clarity, but rather of the conviction that these 
sciences can help us to escape from the muddle of political decisions and 
lead the nations to a more rational organization that will guarantee happiness. 
 
 
During this period, in spite of some movements in literature and art 
(surrealism, cubism, etc.) which discover the value of the irrational, the 
collective conviction is still that rationality is the path of progress and that 
progress will ineluctably translate into human happiness.  The growth of 
consumption and ease of travel (automobiles) make possible the projection of 
a future in which human beings will be at once more free and more happy.  
More free, for the growth of consumption will liberate them from the bondage 
of scarcity and bring with it political modifications.  This is the time when the 
theory develops that abundance of consumption will make dictatorships 
impossible and bring a trend toward democracy.  Abundance certainly means 
wider choice and therefore more freedom.  The automobile also allows people 
to travel at their own time and pleasure.  At the same time the idea of 
happiness undergoes a change.  It is no longer spiritual or idealistic.  Tied to 
consumption, happiness is well-being.  It involves the great discovery of 
comfort.  And the general belief is that comfort, consumption, and freedom 
are all the fruits of applied science.  In some circles a distinction begins to be 
made between basic science (which the average citizen regards as useless) 
and applied science, from which derive the marvels of modern society.  With 
its roots in actual experience, the ideal of science is thus strongly positive. 
 
We now come to the fourth stage.  After 1945 the ideology of science 
undergoes a crisis, which has many elements.  Above all, we might say that 
the discovery of penicillin does not compensate for the trauma of Hiroshima.  
We enter a long period of an ideology of doubt and defiance regarding 
science.  It is odd to have to note the contradiction between the many 
scientific discoveries from 1945 to 1975, along with astounding economic 
growth (the glorious thirty years), and inversely, on the psychological and 
ideological plane, the attitude of withdrawal, and for the first time a lack of 
enthusiasm.  Ideologically, this period is characterized differently depending 
on the level one examines.  On every hand there is profound change.  We 
see it first among scientists themselves.  There develops among them a kind 
of doubt, so that one might almost speak of a crisis of science, which would 
be inaccurate as regards its development, the progress of its 

 
 
176   
 DISCOURSE 
 
methods and results, but not wholly wrong ideologically, since scientists, too, 
obviously have their own ideology of science.  Thus there is less talk of the 
equation of scientific discovery and truth.  Truth is no longer a primary goal of 
science.  I think we might analyze the ideological crisis in two ways. 
 
 
First, the consequences of previous theoretical discoveries have 
developed among scientists.  Thus account is now taken of phenomena that 
were earlier evaded (disorders, tornadoes, floods, noises in communications).  
Entropy is accepted.  Scientifically there is recognition of a decisive 
phenomenon like feedback.  It is admitted that observers, being in the same 
system as the object they observe, affect it by their very presence.  The 
ancient notion of inseparability has been renewed.  An extreme view is that 
facts as such do not exist; we ourselves construct them as we observe.  Such 
things alone, of course, do not mean a crisis in science.  On the contrary, 
there has been a great advance of knowledge, and science has scored new 
victories.  That is true.  At the same time scientists have come up against 
complex, if not complicated, phenomena and theories that do not have the 
beautiful simplicity of Newtonian physics.  What seems to be characteristic is 
the greater number of books written by scientists to justify their work, to find 
for it different foundations from those of the 19th century, to relate this 
infinitely more complex science to a philosophy, to a general conception of 
the world, or to deduce from it a morality, a rule of conduct.  For the most part 
such works have come out after 1970, but the important point is that they are 
a kind of response to an earlier disquiet in the scientific community. 
 
 
This disquiet does not merely concern the new complexity but also the 
sense that the more riddles we solve and the more the field of research 
widens, the more numerous and difficult are the problems.  Earlier the 
universe was thought to be finite, so that the number of problems was also 
finite.  When every question had been answered, the goal of knowledge 
would be attained.  But now the universe becomes more complex and varied 
the more we know.  The quest, then, seems to be endless, and no final result 
seems to be possible in any branch of science.  This is just as true in the 
"exact" sciences as in the humane "sciences.”  This is the age when doubt 
arises as to whether we can really apply rigorous mathematical methods.  
Human phenomena seem to be too complicated and elastic for them.  The 
previous epoch comes under the accusation of reductionism.  In history it 
used to be thought that a strict economic analysis would explain political 
movements, but now we have moved on to much more uncertain and fluid 
inquiries, for example, the history of attitudes.  Various studies and 
challenges will 
 
 
A SKETCH OF THE IDEOLOGIES OF SCIENCE 
 
177 
 
produce attempts at explanation and generalization.  One theory is that 
science advances, not by accumulation of knowledge, but by paradigm 
shifts that result in a scientific revolution.  An effort is also made to relate 
science to a transcendent truth; it is no longer self-sufficient.  An 
interesting point is that this effort does not come from philosophers or 
theologians (in spite of Teilhard), but from scientists themselves (e.g., the 
Princeton Gnosis).  The conclusion is that there is no such thing as a 
scientific method, a nature of science, a criterion of what is scientific.  No 
one can say what belongs to the category of science.2 
 
 
But there is another source of disquiet that is less scientific and more 
ideological.  During the war, from 1940 to 1945, weapons multiplied 
indefinitely.  In addition to the atomic bomb, techniques deriving directly 
from scientific advances appeared in every field.  Chemistry and biology 
were harnessed.  Bacteriological warfare became possible, or warfare 
using defoliants.  Science was everywhere, and it served every end.  The 
great question that was raised was that of the close bond between 
science and technique, and since technique was put in the service of the 
powers, the judgment gained ground that science does not have clean 
hands.  Scientists are no longer ascetic and objective seekers of truth but 
(perhaps involuntarily, yet unavoidably) the creators of weapons of war on 
the one hand, and on the other hand the creators of innumerable products 
(e.g., medications) whose effects we cannot accurately evaluate.  There 
is no such thing as pure science.  One can even say that pure 
mathematics does not exist.3  Science is implicated in the totality of 
impure activities (politics, war, the police). 
 
 
No doubt we are horrified at the scientific experiments conducted by 
Nazi scientists upon prisoners, but so long as the patients are willing we 
accept as normal the experimentation upon people in the areas of 
surgery, of certain new products, and of genetics.  People can be 
manipulated, but not with a good conscience.  These are the various 
elements which, as I see it, constitute during this period the premises of a 
crisis in the ideology of science, in the scientific world and milieu.  
Naturally, this does not in any way halt research.  Yet some scientists 
(e.g., in America) are in fact proposing a moratorium on scientific 
research in order to try to get a clear view of the situation. 

 
 
178   
DISCOURSE 
 
 
Among the public there is still astonishment at the extraordinary 
discoveries of science since the early days of the "conquest of space.”  
We have seen a wide distribution of the technical results of science (e.g., 
television).  Yet as I noted at the outset, the astonishment goes hand in 
hand with very great fear.  And the ideology which is developing 
expresses itself in the wide sales of Orwell's 1984 and science fiction.  It 
may be noted that between 1960 and 1975 the stories in science fiction in 
the USA always end in disaster and are basically pessimistic.  People in 
the West have a belief in the absolute power of science.  This is now the 
central theme rather than truth or happiness.  There is a conviction that 
science can do anything, but not in the sense of positive greatness or 
success for the human species.  It can do all things for either good or evil. 
 
 
There is thus spreading abroad the consoling conviction that 
everything depends upon the way in which we use science (e.g., political 
decisions), that is, within our own ability.  But there is ambiguity about the 
value and the positive nature of science.  The writings of the period give 
evidence 
of 
both 
unlimited 
confidence 
and 
widespread 
fear.  
Comparisons begin to abound with the language of Aesop.  The only 
feature that is uncontested is the omnipotence of science.  All things are 
now within reach.  It is very important to note the difference between the 
convictions of scientists and those of average citizens.  We see this 
especially in the ecological movement.  Ecology at first was a scientific 
discipline.  But nonscientists seized upon certain findings and hypotheses 
as a weapon with which to attack Western "civilization.”  It would take us 
too far afield to study here the roots of this political movement, the conflict 
of generations, the fear of losing touch with nature, the effects of 1968, 
etc.  But the movement of refusal, of rejection of all the orientations 
resulting from science and its technical application could take on its true 
dimension only by basing itself on certain aspects of earlier ecological 
research.  The success of the ecological movement between 1967 and 
1975 manifests very well the ideology of fear facing technical power. 
 
2.  The New Ideology 
 
After 1975 we find a complete reversal of ideology respecting science.4  
We note at the outset the strange phenomenon of the difference 
 
 
A SKETCH OF THE IDEOLOGIES OF SCIENCE 
 
179 
 
between the situation and the ideology.  For at the very moment of crisis 
we encounter afresh a triumphalist ideology.  But it is different from those 
that preceded; it is much more refined.  To understand it we must first 
recall that the bond between science and technique has become much 
tighter, less fragile, and also bilateral.  Science has often been depicted 
as sovereign and independent, producing secondarily and almost 
incidentally this or that orientation which has a technical consequence, so 
that technique is totally dependent on science.  In fact, this view is 
completely impossible.  In order to advance, science needs technical 
products that are increasingly extraordinary and sophisticated.  Spatial 
discoveries are the fruit of space techniques, without which we would 
know no more than a century ago.  The same is true in the microscopic 
sphere, in nuclear research, and in biology.  Computer science is 
obviously decisive.  It is thanks to more powerful computers that scientists 
can do the calculations that are necessary in their research.  I was greatly 
mistaken in 1980 when I wrote that the speed of calculation and 
information that computers had then reached was such that no great profit 
could be foreseen from further advance.  It is true that in ordinary use no 
more is needed, but scientists have embarked on gigantic calculations 
which demand much more efficient 

 
 
180   
 
DISCOURSE 
 
computers and systems, and it is in response to this need that progress 
has been made.5 
 
 
Technique furnishes scientific research not only with the means of 
exploration but also with countless new materials without which both 
experimentation and research itself would not be possible.  But another 
dimension comes to light at this point.  This equipment is enormously 
expensive.  It is often beyond the resources of a single nation.  Except for 
the USA and the USSR, nations have to join forces to provide for science 
the means of investigation that it demands, as in the case of the 
cyclotron.  In general, states have to budget for these costs; sometimes 
they will bring in private financiers.  But science has to reciprocate.  If the 
state spends millions to put a laboratory in space or to install a giant 
accelerator or to construct an experimental reactor, it is obviously not for 
the love of science or of truth.  Like any investment, the investment in 
science has to pay off.  Expenditures of this kind must yield returns.  By 
way of technique, then, science has to furnish results in economic terms.  
I would add that things do not really go that way.  We do not provide 
science with the tools it needs on the condition that it yields satisfactory 
economic results.  The movement is precisely the opposite. 
 
 
One can see that certain scientific discoveries bring great 
possibilities of economic growth, in agriculture, management, and 
industry.  This growth of return with lowering of costs is called 
development.  Since 1950 scientific research has been linked to 
development: the famous R and D.  The one conditions the other.  
Scientific research brings economic development, but that development is 
essential if research is to have what it needs.  Since 1970, of course, and 
especially 1975, there have been doubts about this linkage, which many 
economists have contested.  But we should not forget that public opinion 
is always formed well after the analyses of specialists.  For the average 
politician, then, as well as for the average citizen, the expression "R and 
D" needs no discussion.  It is supported also by researchers in the exact 
sciences, who know very well that if they cast doubt upon it they risk not 
being able to continue their work.  Ideologically, we find here an 
agreement between scientists and public opinion (contrary to the general 
rule). 
 
 
But science ceases to be free.  It is henceforth polarized.  It has an 
absolute duty to serve the national economy.  Certainly we have not yet 
reached the time when politicians can fix a goal for scientists or order 
 
 
A SKETCH OF THE IDEOLOGIES OF SCIENCE 
 
181 
 
their field of research.  But if the imperative is less restricted or detailed, it is 
none the less strict.  It is a life-and-death question in the rivalry between 
nations and also for science itself.  There is no longer any science for 
science's sake.  We now have science for development's sake.  We have only 
to look at the different budgets for different sectors of research to see this.  
And it is firmly implanted among the public by the media.  We can see this 
from television, in which almost every news program has a sequence on the 
glory of combined science and technique. 
 
 
We thus have a belief in science that is oriented to national greatness, 
not through patriotism, but through the simple need to get a slice of the pie.  
The link between science and technique is not viewed negatively as in the 
preceding period but very positively.  The words have changed; we no longer 
hear about progress, for example.  But the thinking remains the same; growth 
is the only way to emerge from the economic crisis, from unemployment, etc.  
This is commonly said by both the right and the left.  But the only means of 
growth is competitiveness thanks to higher productivity, and only scientific 
research can ensure higher productivity.  This is the simple logic which is 
constantly propagated.  And it is all very ambiguous, since in effect, to 
develop the new consequences of scientific discoveries, new investment, new 
enterprises, and the recruitment of new personnel are needed. 
 
 
Thus science itself has an economic effect.  And the more science, as it 
deals with phenomena that were previously beyond our grasp or vision, 
becomes complex and incomprehensible, not merely for average people but 
for nonspecialists in the narrower sense, the more it becomes an object of 
positive and optimistic beliefs.  Certainly fear is not absent, but it is nothing 
like as great as in the preceding period.  For we are engulfed and convinced 
by the daily miracles around us.  Hardly have we assimilated one advance 
before another is proposed which surpasses and annuls it.  Am I not talking 
about technical products?  Without doubt, but these are always the results of 
scientific work to the degree that the frontiers of science are much less 
clear-cut.  Is design a science or not? 
 
 
Physics immediately has technical applications, and the relation is even 
closer in computer science.  This ideology rests on the double fact of 
immediate exploration linked to absolute incomprehensibility.  In some 
measure, of course, it was always thus.  We do not need to know how an 
automobile engine works, and even less the scientific principles behind its 
origin, to be able to drive the car.  But the existing situation is much more 
radical.  The more we advance, the more the products are complex and 
incomprehensible.  A television station is more abstract 

 
 
182  
DISCOURSE 
 
than an automobile engine and a computer more complex than a television 
station.  At the same time the use is much simpler.  We will finally arrive at a 
robot that can respond to voice commands by way of the analysis of scientific 
data (e.g., in linguistics). 
 
 
We thus live in a paradoxical situation which enforces a certain ideology.  
The machine that will be the easiest to manipulate (I refer, of course, to those 
in public use) will be the one that needs the greatest investment and the most 
elaborate research!  In average thinking this confers a concrete legitimacy on 
science.  Clearly, technique does not do it alone.  We know that we are in the 
presence of more than technique.  What we have here is a sort of complete 
renewal of life and society.  We are directly affected by marvelous products 
that are offered to us by the most elaborate scientific research.  We certainly 
do not know the calculations or hypotheses or details of this research, but we 
have a sense of the extreme closeness of everyone to the scientific world.  Of 
course, the computer plays a big part at this point. 
 
 
Science is no longer confined in distant, unknown laboratories.  It is 
present among us.  This happens to be considerably reinforced by the 
political impetus toward the public and the young.  Children must not only be 
taught at once to use technical instruments (the computer) but also given a 
love of scientific research.  The future depends on their being qualified in 
techno-science.  Parents and children must be convinced of the preeminence 
of science.  This is presented as a matter of destiny.  Young people must be 
fashioned for tomorrow's society, which will inevitably be scientific and 
technical.  It is simply not considered that precisely in making young people 
first and foremost into scientists, we are transforming a possibility or a trend 
into an inevitability. 
 
 
But we must look at another vital aspect of this new ideology.  More than 
ever, through the social transformation that it entails, science is becoming not 
merely the discovering of nature but the response to everything that disquiets 
or troubles us.  There is thus developing an ideology of science that I would 
call a soteriology.  The present-day ideology of science is an ideology of 
salvation.  That is, science is our only recourse, and any negative aspects are 
strenuously contested.  Science alone holds the future to our society.  No 
matter what problem may arise the inevitable answer will always be: Science 
will take care of it.  This is obvious in medicine.  With the incredible 
discoveries in all areas during the last twenty years, the average person now 
thinks that medicine will have an answer to everything that attacks us.  The 
media not only tell us of new remedies but offer explanations, no doubt 
greatly simplified, of the scientific research that led to them.  The same 
applies to space research.  Along with the spectacular aspects 
 
 
A SKETCH OF THE IDEOLOGIES OF SCIENCE 
 
183 
 
there are explanations of the themes of research, the conditions, and the 
hypotheses.  All this gives to the average person some sense of the vastness 
of the domains in which science works.  To be sure, even in the past some 
people thought that science was answering our questions.  The great 
difference was that up to the beginning of the century the problems that 
people used to come up against were for the most part the traditional 
problems of human life from early days.  We were used to these.  We had 
some defenses and responses, not always effective but.  reassuring.  Science 
was useful, but it was not alone. 
 
 
Today the dimension, quantity, and quality of the problems that we meet 
with in our society have all completely changed.  Famine is universal and 
well-known.  There is economic disparity between the centers of growth and 
underdeveloped countries.  The power of destruction is enormous.  The 
speed of change is increasing.  We must adapt to an incessantly changing 
environment.  Traditional models of society, morality, humanity, art, culture, 
etc., are disappearing.  It is easy to see that the old remedies for our 
problems and the problems of the world have lost their efficacy.  Politics is 
totally outdated.  Education needs to be completely revised so as to integrate 
the computer and television.  Relations between people are ridiculously 
ineffectual.  The older legal system which regulated society is absolutely 
useless face to face with the new problems posed by the new applications of 
science. 
 
 
We can no longer have any confidence except in science itself.  It is our 
only recourse.  It alone can bring salvation for the individual and the race.  It 
is science that calms the anguish of the anxious.  It is science (not useless 
accords and treaties) that will respond to the threat of war.  We get some idea 
of this with the reasoning that we now hear increasingly: "War has become 
impossible thanks to the multiplication of nuclear weapons of destruction.  No 
one today dare risk unleashing a global war, knowing that a first attack would 
call forth an annihilating response.  War is thus impossible.”  I will not contest 
the validity of this reasoning.  I am simply saying that it is part of the 
ideological arsenal regarding science.  With the system of the interstellar 
destruction of ballistic missiles, science can even provide an answer to the 
nuclear threat itself.  It is not generally recognized that this second point 
cancels out the first.  But coherence is of no concern in ideology. 
 
 
In the same way it is evident that science (and not treaties) will solve the 
problems of pollution.  Each time more profound scientific research is needed 
(as in the case of the catalytic converter on cars).  But strides have already 
been made.  The Great Lakes and some big rivers have been cleared of 
pollution.  We know how to go about it; we have only to give free rein to 
scientific discovery.  As already said, 

 
 
184   
 
 
DISCOURSE 
 
discoveries come so fast in every area that in a few years we can be sure 
that many threats will have been averted.  Science is our absolute 
recourse.  We thus find a remarkable situation.  In earlier scientism, 
science thought that it could suppress God and prove his nonexistence.  
But this was true only of a minority.  Today, this is not a goal.  But with the 
development of the idea that science is our only recourse, we have 
reached the same end in the popular mind by another route.  God serves 
no purpose in the situation in which we now are.  Science, thanks to 
ideology, has now become divine as never before.  This is precisely the 
greatest danger.  Kaplan put it well when he said that the danger is not so 
much the biologizing of ideology as the ideologizing of biology.6 
 
 
Naturally, all this is accompanied by the rejection of pessimistic 
opinions or alarming facts.7  To some extent one might say that people 
today do not want to see or know.  After the long period of anxiety there is 
now a period of calm.  The nuclear threat is still there, but the marvels of 
new techniques, especially in entertainment, have obliterated it.  Here is 
one reason why the ecological movement has suffered reverses and 
setbacks.  (There are other reasons, of course, linked to inconsistencies 
within the movement.)  We do not want to listen because we infinitely 
prefer the immediate advantages that science offers to the, diffuse and 
distant threats.  The positive propositions of the ecologists are obviously 
less effective than what science enables technique to achieve, and it also 
seems quaint to want to protect seals or whales.  As for the threats to the 
human race, people basically do not believe them.  They are not 
concerned if the Amazonian or African forests are disappearing, and acid 
rain does not bother them much.  The public has a fantastic sense of 
impotence in the presence of gigantic threats.  It thus refuses to think 
about them or to be informed about them.  We can do nothing about 
them.  We have confidence in science with all its promises for the future. 
 
 
The world in which we live becomes increasingly a dream world as 
the society of the spectacle changes bit by bit into the society of the 
dream.  It does so by the diffusion of spectacles of every kind into which 
the spectators must integrate themselves, but also by the dream of a 
science which is plunging us into an unknown and incomprehensible 
world.  This will no longer be the world of machines.  In that world we 
 
 
A SKETCH OF THE IDEOLOGIES OF SCIENCE 
 
185 
 
had a Place, we were at home.  We were material subjects in a world of 
material objects.  The new world is no longer the familiar world of prodigious 
electronic equipment.  In that world we were in a setting that was astonishing 
from many standpoints but that was still accessible and could be assimilated. 
 
 
What is changing in an incomprehensible way is the very structure of the 
society in which we find ourselves.  This is a direct effect of science.  But the 
average person has no awareness of it, does not know what it is about, 
cannot understand the change that is taking place, but is aware only of being 
on the threshold of a great mystery.  In our society information is becoming 
the key to everything.  It is more useful to produce and spread good 
information than material goods.  The wealth of a society is measured now by 
information rather than by products.  But all this is very hard to understand 
and to take in.  We are moving into an unknown world, which will be 
organized in a very different way from that of the past five thousand years.  
We are moving into a society that will no longer be one of institutions, stable 
groups, and hierarchies, and in which we all have a clear place.  As already 
explained, we are moving into a society of networks.  It is on different points 
of these networks that we find ourselves situated, belonging to many 
networks at the same time.  But it is very unsettling to be situated in a fluid 
and apparently unstable world about which we know nothing.  It is no longer 
power that seems to be the primary qualification of science; it is this transition 
into a world that has nothing in common with anything that has gone before. 
 
 
Yet the old social system is not dead.  We continue to go through the 
rites of politics.  We live in a bureaucracy.  We still have a "normal" pedagogy 
that needs to be "adapted.”  The only trouble is that we do not know to what 
to adapt.  Even specialists cannot understand exactly what this society of 
networks will consist of.  If we are farsighted enough, we know that state 
structures and national boundaries will disappear.  There are already some 
impressive facts.  With the development of techo-science, economic 
calculations no longer have any value.  In science we juggle with billions and 
the question is not one of profitability.  Once a new avenue of scientific 
research is seen, work must be done in it without any knowledge whether it 
has the least justification economically.  It is typical that artificial economic 
justification is found later (e.g., for research into the Concorde). 
 
 
This ideology of a divine, soteriological science in association with a 
dream world is reinforced by what we anticipate and by what is about to come 
seemingly with no human direction and in obedience to none of the existing 
classical laws.  Science is becoming capable both 

 
 
 
186  
DISCOURSE 
 
of absolute novelty and also of the regulation of a world, as is only proper 
for a deity.  Like all deities, it has an oracular power.  We ourselves can 
no longer will or decide.  We leave this to the beneficent science in which 
we believe. 
 
 
Nevertheless, in spite of all the progress, we still have an uneasy 
conscience.  Should we halt research?  J.  Testart raises a crucial 
question: Should we continue genetic engineering in all directions, or 
should we pause to reflect?8  Research scientists at once blasted the very 
thought, in particular jean Bernard, their guru, who stated that in no 
circumstances must scientific research ever stop.  Yet I think that 
Charbonneau was right when he stated that this is the only important 
question in our society.9  Testart was claiming a logic of nondiscovery and 
an ethic of nonresearch.  At much the same time in California Peter 
Hagelstein, a brilliant physicist doing laser research for "stars wars," 
announced that he was giving up his research work for reasons of 
conscience.  We should stop pretending that research is neutral, that only 
its applications are good or bad.  Can we find a single example of 
nonapplication of a discovery when it responds to an existing need or to 
one that it creates itself?  It is prior to discoveries that ethical choices 
should be made.  What genetic engineering makes possible is beyond our 
power to imagine, and it affects not merely one aspect of humanity but the 
totality of our being, of couples, and of the social order.  There is the rise 
of frequent meeting between the ardor of the research scientist to explore 
all possibilities and the exorbitant or insignificant demand of this or that 
person, as we have seen already in the explosive growth of pregnancy 
terminations. 
 
 
Charbonneau is right to emphasize the importance of dissociation 
between procreation and sexual pleasure.  But contraceptives had 
already achieved this, and genetic engineering is only another way to 
achieve sexual pleasure without consequences and procreation without 
any relation to love.  But Charbonneau also shows that society cannot be 
content to let things slide.  Given the consequences, society, that is, the 
state, must regulate.  It must say what is useful and what is not, and set 
up a model in the general interest, or society's idea of it.  Faced with such 
a realization and such a warning, we can no longer submit to the 
incoherent results of science.  If we do not judge in advance, once a 
process starts it will roll on to the end.  We ought to have judged before 
splitting the atom.  If we do not judge, the reaction 
 
 
A SKETCH OF THE IDEOLOGIES OF SCIENCE 
 
187 
 
of refusal on the part of the human species that is powerless to know 
what it is doing, or what it is, will simply take the form of a frenzy against 
which the progress of a science that is as ignorant of ends as it is efficient 
in means will furnish increasingly powerful weapons. 
 
 
This is incontestably the process.  Scientists warn us of it.  Alas, 
others have done so already.  We recall Carrel and Rostand earlier.  More 
recently there was Oppenheimer, who specifically refused to continue 
research leading to the H-bomb.  Then in 1974 eleven American 
scientists issued an appeal inviting their colleagues to declare a 
moratorium on genetic engineering.  But in 1975 150 specialists in 
California decided to suspend the moratorium.  They tried to impose 
security regulations and limits on genetic experiments, but in this regard 
no one listened to them, any more than they had done to the famous 
committees on scientific ethics.  Let us entertain no illusions.  Scientists 
will not accept philosophical, theological, or ethical judgments.  Science 
simply leaves by the wayside those scholars who have scruples of 
conscience.  It goes its inexorable way until it produces the final 
catastrophe. 
 
Excursus on Science and Faith 
 
The fine book by Henri Allan sheds a decisive light on the debate 
between science and faith (or religion, myth, mysticism).10  He recalls that 
science has full power and reason in its own domain and in terms of its 
objectives, but that it cannot go further and ought not to pretend that it can 
reduce the whole of the human to itself alone nor to swallow up para-
scientific phenomena, let alone to deny their existence.  Scientists must 
recognize their limitations and must not try to achieve a synthesis of 
science and religion as do the works that he loathes (Princeton 
Gnosticism, the Taoism of physics, or the 1970 Colloquy of Cordoue).  
But the "spirituals" (if we are not to use the term mystics, which I do not 
like) should not in turn try to annex science in order to prove their validity 
(e.g., using Heisenberg's principle of uncertainty to prove free will).  Each 
to his own!  There is nothing new about that.  But on the condition, 
however, that neither excludes the other; on the contrary, that dialogue is 
seen to be indispensable.  The differences are irreducible, and Atlan 
sternly criticizes the reductionism of science.  But relationship (dialectic) is 
essential.  Thus science needs an ethics 

 
 
188  
DISCOURSE 
 
but is unable to found or build one.  Faith and the thinking of faith obey 
different rules from scientific thinking, but they are still the rules of reason. 
 
Atlan advances an excellent formulation when he ascribes 
questions to science and answers to spiritual disciplines, but questions 
and answers of a different order from those of science.  I might reverse 
this and say that science gives the answers and spiritual disciplines put 
the questions, but they do not meet.  Spiritual disciplines are weak on 
action and strong on explication.  They enable us to found law, ethics, 
and the family.  Science is strong on action (techniques) but, contrary to 
the belief of the last hundred years, weak on explication.  The two human 
disciplines need to listen to one another and to accept the fact that there 
is another reality in addition to science, that ultimate reality cannot be 
grasped, but that we must approach it in different but equally valid ways.  
I am less happy with the idea that it is all a game: the game of scholars 
and the game of mystics, each following their own rules.  I know that this 
conception has the useful aim of preventing us from taking ourselves too 
seriously, and that every approach is relative.  But my reservation is that 
we can join in a game or not; whether we do so is not important.  But 
science and spirituality are imperative human activities that we are not at 
liberty to opt out of as we please. 
 
 
                                                 
                                                                                                              
1 In discussing ideology I am using as sources for the present period various 
reports and specialized works after the manner of Bretonnoux, "La Perception du 
message télévisuel dans un groupe témoin" (thesis, University of Bordeaux, 
January 1985), and more generally I am drawing upon the daily press and 
television (which hide their bias from the public) and the statements of politicians, 
who accurately express the views of average citizens. 
2 See A.  Chalmers, "The Case against a Universal Scientific Method," Science, 
Technology and Society (1985). 
3 See Didier Nordon, Les Mathématiques pures n'existent pas (Actes Sud, 1981).  
Since 1960 there has been an urgent need for a professional code of ethics in 
research.  Most important is the Japanese plan (1987) for a big gathering of 
scientists to propose that research no longer be oriented to the power of 
production but to the frontiers of the human, the environment, resources, 
demography, etc. 
4 The simplistic ideology of science is not yet truly outdated.  We even find it 
among young people; cf.  Patrick Tort, La Pensée hiérarchique et l'évolution 
(Aubier Montaigne, 1984), which rightly takes issue with the sociobiology of Eden 
Wilson, but which is simplistic when it argues for a pure, ideal, uncompromising 
science and tries to show that no ideology can be engendered by science (only by 
 
ideology) and that science (that admirable goddess) is distinct in nature from 
ideology.  Alas, this might be true in the pure air of metaphysics, but nowhere 
else.  Happily by way of compensation we have the very moderate M.  Le Lannon, 
whose article on the relation of science and life I value for its strictness of thought 
and lucid humanism ("Le décalage entre la science et la vie," Le Monde, Jan.  
1984).  This article shows how scientific discovery at once becomes a certainty 
which as soon as it is known becomes a peremptory argument in an ideological 
thesis before being supported by other facts (cf.  DDT and the discovery of 
cereals by the so-called green revolution).  Scholars and research scientists no 
longer belong to themselves, he says.  They are in the service of causes that are 
so big and so right that they must be upheld even when in error.  He recalls the 
disastrous experiment in Kazakhstan which rendered millions of acres useless 
because experts had not taken account of the peculiarities of the climate or the 
characteristics of the people.  The same is true of the Aswan Dam, which had to 
be cost-effective regardless of the evil but foreseeable consequences.  He also 
points out that in the Third World Brazil is the country in which agriculture is most 
advanced but famine is also most serious.  Unexpected numbers and "means" 
replace slow statistics, abstract space replaces local realities, the ardor of 
research causes forgetfulness of the time when science did not compromise with 
ideology and the collective wisdom that is more measured but also more universal 
than the philanthropy of the hour was under the control of the diversity of people 
and places.  Cf.  the fine book by J.  Klatzmann Nourrir dix milliards d'hommes?  
(Paris: PUF, 1983). 
5 See W.  Mercouroff, "Quelle informatique pour la Science?" La Recherche 146 
(Aug.  1983). 
6 Kaplan, in A.  jacquard, ed., Les Scientifiques parlent (Paris: Hachette, 1987).   
7 Cf.  P.  Thuillier, "Les origines de l'antiscience," La Recherche (1986), and the 
important discussion of science and anti-science at Paris in 1982, J.  Testart, La 
Recherche (1982). 
8 Cf.  his article in Le Monde, Sept.  10, 1986; idem, L'Oeuf transparent 
(Flammarion, 1986). 
9 B.  Charbonneau, "La question," Réforme (Oct.  1986). 
10 Henri Atlan, A tort et à raison, intercritique de la science et du mythe (Paris: 
Seuil, 1986). 

 
 
CHAPTER X 
 
Experts 
 
The final aspect of the discourse of technological bluff that I will take up is 
that of resorting to experts.  Naturally, experts are indispensable in our 
society, but above all they are in the public eye and command public 
confidence.  The word of the expert is what counts.  After that word is 
spoken, there is no need to say more, for we, whoever we are, do not 
have the competence or training or information of the expert.  Like 
technology assessment, experts stand in the way of the public.  I am not 
accusing them of bad faith or machiavellianism; they do so unwittingly.  
Nor am I denying their competence; they are the best specialists in a 
given scientific matter.  They are not always engaged in research, but 
they are often linked to research bodies and their role in a concrete matter 
is to offer their opinion.  We find them at all levels.  Government has its 
experts for every issue, and on an important question it will sometimes 
appoint a commission of experts whose reports are often published.  
Each public body will also have its experts. 
 
 
Experts assess the feasibility of a project, its dangers, its secondary 
implications, its costs, etc.  They will often give their advice in "impact 
studies.”  Experts also figure at trials, or on television, each with a special 
field.  In fact, it now seems to be impossible to do anything without the 
advice and report of an expert. 
 
 
Chesneaux puts it well when he says that at "a great remove from 
popular technoculture there is the technoculture of experts.  The former 
fills a social void and is for leisure hours.  The latter forms the very 
backbone of modernity.  Experts live on the postulate of the objectivity 
and rationality that are the basis of the neutrality of scientific advice."1 
 
 
 
 
 
189 
 
 
190  
DISCOURSE 
 
 
He points out that when the French government plan for advanced 
techniques was being drawn up, each of the seven sectors that had 
priority in stimulating growth was entrusted to a committee of experts.  
Then in the application of the plan, mastery was needed in such matters 
as management, norms of production, industrial psychology, marketing, 
etc., and these areas, too, were put in the hands of experts.  Then society 
had to be guided so as to be able to assimilate the innovations (urban 
living, publicity, social Control), and more experts were needed.  The 
result in the three basic areas was a whole host of experts with 
innumerable institutes and centers.  There was no alternative.  To be able 
to follow so vast a program information had to be shared and 
programmed, and only the combined abilities of experts could do this.  It 
was a matter of informational integration as each expert became more 
and more specialized. 
 
 
The greater and more complex the context, the more extensive the 
integration,2 both at the general level of society and within each unit of 
production.  As the technical, social, financial, monetary, political, and 
ecological variables increase for each unit, posts have to be set up for 
observation, evaluation, and expert study.  Governments can hardly 
decide anything without commissions of experts.  This is one of the 
aspects that is neglected in criticisms of the governments in African 
countries. 
 
 
Reciprocally, the -public will not accept a new product or a change of 
networks unless experts succeed in passing on information about it.  
Experts prepare the papers for the government, and when a decision is 
made, they make the link to the technostructure that will apply it to the 
public.  Within the public the groups that want a mature and enlightened 
opinion, unions and consumer groups, also have to call in their own 
experts. 
 
 
What I said about Africa is not true everywhere.  Some technical 
elements in Latin America have come out in support of the technocratic 
tendency that is inherent in the dynamics of power.  The global tendency 
to transfer decision making from political sectors into the hands of 
technocrats may be seen throughout the continent.  Brazilian technicians 
do not all fight for technological autonomy.3  This brings to light the 
ambiguous role of experts, which we see when we look at union 

 
 
EXPERTS 
191 
 
experts or the experts of ecological groups, etc.  The great problem into 
which we are plunged is that we do not have only one category of 
experts, but at least two, often at odds with one another.  We shall come 
back to this point. 
 
 
Lagadec considers another difficulty.  Experts are at home with 
things that go well and recur.  Their primary ability is to describe 
phenomena, to experiment, to reproduce, to measure.  Any major risk, 
being exceptional and aberrant, causes them problems.  Accustomed to 
working with relatively stable states, they come up against limited 
situations that cannot be reproduced.4  E.  Morin takes up the same point 
and confirms it.  Experts can solve problems for which there have already 
been solutions in the past.  They are powerless when they come up 
against new problems.  They come to see how poor are the general ideas 
that go hand in hand with their specialized vision.5 
 
 
These two factors entail great difficulties.  Experts owe their social 
status and credibility to the ideology of science.  The public is certain that 
what science says is true.  When there are serious accidents, the bodies 
responsible again call in experts.  The experts assure us that there is no 
risk.  But too many experiences are gradually spreading doubt about this 
and confirming what I wrote in an article about Chernobyl, namely, that 
what alarms the public is the uncertainty.6  What experts say is not 
incontestable.  But this fact means disaster for the system.  Furthermore, 
experts, as we have said, are very specialized.  But most of the problems 
posed by technique today have many facets and complex nuances that 
cannot be dissociated.  We run up against the same difficulties here as in 
political economy when we try to take all the external factors into account 
(e.g., the costs of complexity and those of ecological troubles).  We 
cannot assign one question to one expert and another to another, for they 
are all interrelated.  We cannot have one study to find out how noxious 
dioxin is, another study to find out how it spreads, and another to find out 
the possibilities of evacuation. 
 
 
Finally, experts are traditionally guardians of the objectivity of 
science, independent of opposing interests.  They have a duty to speak 
the truth.  But the public has now found out that experts, too, are part of 
the power game, that they belong to organizations, that they plead on 
behalf of these organizations.  This is exactly in keeping with the 
technostructure as Galbraith analyzed it.  Experts who belong to an 
 
 
192  
DISCOURSE 
 
organization always justify it, for it is from the organization that they 
receive their power and authority.  Experts are thus an indispensable part 
of the technical system, for they are exponents of technological discourse.  
They tie everything together.  They engage in technological discourse 
themselves, but they do not correspond to the image that they are trying 
to project.7  According to the severe formulation of Morin, technocratic 
competence is that of experts whose general blindness enwraps their 
specialized lucidity. 
 
 
I will take some simple examples from actual experience.  There is 
first the great problem of experts contradicting one another.  One expert 
says that a nuclear facility poses no real danger, but another, equally 
competent, draws attention to the many dangers.  This was true when 
experts for the French nuclear power program came up against experts 
from the ecological movements.  But we find it in other areas as well.  I 
will not speak of experts at trials, whose role is really to present the 
scientific arguments in favor of the one party or the other.  Living under 
the reign of experts, we actually live in a world of uncertainty.  We need 
only refer to the discussion of weapons techniques (Twenty-Sixth 
Congress of the International Institute of Strategic Studies, October 
1984).  Everything is up in the air, especially as regards the strategy of 
nuclear deterrence.  What is the real issue, the strategy of technique or 
the technique of strategy?  None of the experts could say. 
 
 
There are also debates among experts about problems of 
effectiveness regarding the nuclear weapons of the USSR and the USA, 
or 

 
 
EXPERTS 
193 
 
in economics between those who support a particular measure and those 
who oppose it.  Here again the task of experts is to supply scientific 
arguments for the one side or the other.  I have often heard it said that 
only government experts are reliable.  The others are troublemakers.  We 
may simply note that this argument implies that an expert's ability is not 
scientific but depends on the government stamp.  But this is contrary to 
the role that experts are supposed to play.  There are many 
contradictions, too, in chemicals and pharmaceuticals.  Experts in one 
country may decide that a medication is harmless when those in another 
expressly forbid it. 
 
 
I could go on indefinitely.  The implication is that scientific truth is not 
simple, that scientific-technical truth is even less simple, and that only 
approximate results are possible.8  Let me give another example.  For big 
construction projects in certain areas impact studies are required.  What 
will be the effect on the total environment (plants, animals, water, climate, 
etc.)?  At first such studies were meant to be decisive, but soon they 
came to be regarded as merely advisory.  A case in which I was 
interested was a plan to build a harbor and marinas at the north end of a 
big lake in a very beautiful cove surrounded by steep dunes.  An impact 
study was conducted by a very qualified expert selected by the 
government.  This expert agreed to an imposed three-month limit for his 
study(This was the first mistake, for if he was to evaluate all possible 
effects of the vegetation he needed to study a full year's cycle.)  His 
report was not favorable.  The water in the cove was not deep enough, 
there was not enough movement to dissipate pollution, the prevailing wind 
would wash filth toward this point, etc.  On every count the project 
seemed to be totally inadvisable.  Yet the report concluded that under 
these conditions it was still very feasible! 
 
 
On another, very different matter, I myself was once on a ministry 
commission of experts.  After two years of work on very complex issues, 
we began to draw up our report, but the minister told us that the report 
had already been completed by secretaries who were present at the 
meetings and took notes.  The text was read to us, and it bore no relation 
whatever to our own conclusions.  The experts rebelled 
 
 
194  
DISCOURSE 
 
and made the minister back down, so that our report became the official 
one.  But the minister then introduced legislation which embodied not our 
conclusions but those that he had dictated to his secretaries and that ran 
directly contrary to our advice. 
 
 
Again, experts often come up against questions which have never 
arisen before and on which they have only fragmentary data, the 
situations being totally unexpected and unforeseeable.  (An example is 
the problem of milk for infants among some African peoples; it took time 
to realize that this milk was veritable poison in these areas.)  The result 
can be terrible blunders by some experts.  I recall that thirty years ago 
when the development of the Third World was at issue, the experts (apart 
from René Dumont) concluded that we must industrialize the Third World 
as quickly as possible, replace traditional plants with stronger ones, and 
help the Third World to increase its supply of energy.  Industrialization 
would be in terms of the developed world, and the same technology 
would have to be transferred.  Under the heading of aid, many machines 
were thus sent which served no useful purpose (e.g., trucks which had no 
paved highways on which to travel).  Industrial agriculture was also 
overdeveloped at the expense of subsistence crops.  I could run off a 
whole list of what were later seen to be mistakes. 
 
 
At the time, however, no one dared to say that first of all we must 
develop subsistence crops so as to provide in this way (and not by aid) 
enough basic food, or that we should not export our techniques but find 
simple technical means that do not use much energy and are adapted to 
the needs of the countries.  To say such things was to run the risk of 
general abuse.  The experts, the leftist rulers, and the elite of Third World 
countries would all say that such an attitude had only one real objective, 
that of maintaining Western superiority and keeping the Third World in 
colonial subjection.  Only later were the blunders seen to be such, along 
with many others, such as giving food aid, which is disastrous for a 
country because it prevents the development of local agriculture.  Efforts 
did begin later to produce "appropriate techniques," adapted to the 
conditions in each country.9  But the invasion of the Third World by 
multinational corporations brought new conditions of exploitation.  Thirty 
years too late it was seen that the problem was not that of aid and 
transfers according to a financial 

 
 
EXPERTS 
195 
 
and commercial plan.10  What was needed was the conception of a global 
economy into which the Third World countries would be integrated as 
participants and not just as suppliers of raw materials or labor.11  But this 
is only to say that the task of experts can be very difficult and their efforts 
fumbling. 
 
 
As a last example I will take Chernobyl.  As in the case of Seveso, 
information about this event was very confusing.  But I am not dealing 
here with the problem and difficulty of information, as is usually the case.  
I am dealing with the question of experts.  We had on television an expert 
who explained that there was no need for alarm, that the "cloud" had no 
chance of reaching France, that its radioactivity (in becquerels) was weak, 
that the accident did not seem to be serious, etc.  The aim was clearly to 
reassure the public.  This is where my inquiry starts.  Is it the role of 
experts to reassure the public or to speak the truth?12  As the days 
passed it had to be acknowledged that the cloud was covering most of 
Europe (except France).  Some people began to ask why the Germans 
were much more alarmed than the French, and the answer was that they 
had fixed the limits of tolerance to radioactivity much lower than France.  
But were the Germans and the Atomic Institute of Vienna right about this?  
Why, if it is a purely scientific matter, do some fix the threshold at one 
point and others at another point?  Which experts are right?  I also noted 
that the television experts used the term becquerels in measuring 
radioactivity.  Since I had never heard this term before I suggested that it 
did not do much to enlighten listeners.  I noted, too, that when the nuclear 
power program was adopted in France, the French experts had 
themselves disagreed about fixing the threshold of tolerance. 
 
 
I was treated very roughly by the experts of the nuclear power 
authority, who told me that I was very ignorant not to know what a 
becquerel is, since it had been adopted as an international measure three 
years before.  They also denied formally that there had ever been, any 
variation.  But I was not satisfied.  Radioactivity had in fact been 
measured successively in four different ways, and it was now measured 
 
 
196  
DISCOURSE 
 
in becquerels.  But since only experts had access to tables equating the 
different scales, to talk in terms of becquerels amounted to no more than 
disinformation.  I argue that it is often the true role of experts to 
overwhelm people from the height of their scientific superiority and in 
reality to disinform them. 
 
 
As regards the second point, the experts in this case had very short 
memories.  At first, around 1952, they talked about a threshold of 
absolute safety.  They then changed their vocabulary and began to speak 
about a threshold of tolerance, which is not the same thing at all.  As 
regards the threshold of tolerance, between 1955 and 1962 it was 
changed no less than four times (according to government circulars), and 
raised each time.  It is true that there were no more changes after 1962.  
But this was exactly in step with the adoption of the nuclear program.  I 
might cite many other examples of dubious estimates on the part of 
experts. 
 
 
What are we to think of all this?  Certainly I would not say that 
experts are incompetent-I am convinced of their competence.  I also 
cannot say that they are not serious.  They are very respectable people 
and do not talk at random or take risks.  Not for a moment would I say 
that they are not honest.  They undoubtedly follow their conscience and 
not orders.  But granted all this, and their appointments and qualifications 
by recognized bodies, we have to realize that they are in ambiguous 
situations.  They are scientists who have their opinions, and contrary to 
what is often thought, modern science is less and less clear and univocal, 
and convictions derive often from opinions based on such and such 
experiments and findings.  They have to talk about their science to 
politicians who cannot understand everything.  Necessarily, then, they 
have to give their opinion.  But they have also to talk to the public at large, 
which has little or no understanding at all.  They have to help them to 
accept a project, to calm their fears, to interest them in a new project, etc.  
Their science is thus the platform from which they proclaim orientations 
that are accepted as truths and that will finally shape opinion.  In these 
circumstances they cannot be fully credible to the critical mind.  Engaging 
in technological discourse, they end up as its slaves and have to follow 
the common path of progress. 

 
 
                                                 
                                                                                                              
1 Chesneaux, De /a modernité p.  130.  Cf.  also Helga Nowotny, "Experts and 
their Expertise," Science, Technology and Society 1/3 (1981); idem, "Experts in a 
Participatory Experiment," ibid., 2/2 (1982); cf.  also studies of contradictions at 
the debate on nuclear energy at Autriche. 
2 See Ingmar Granstedt, L'Impasse industrielle (Paris: Seuil, 1980), p.  123. 
3 See A.  Mattelart and H.  Schmucler, Communication and Information 
Technologies: Freedom of Choice for Latin America?  tr.  David Buxton (Norwood, 
NJ: Ablex, 1985). 
4 See P.  Lagadec, La Civilisation du risque (Paris: Seuil, 1981), p.  148. 
5 E.  Morin, Sociologie, p.  64. 
6 See J.  EIlul, "L'Incertitude," Sud-Ouest Dimanche, June 1986. 
7 But the human expert is now relieved by what is called the expert system.  In 
addition to individual experts there are now expert systems, a new computer 
program, which will reproduce the approach of the individual to problems in that 
individual's area of competence.  These systems reason by inference from various 
items of knowledge supplied by specialists in relation to limited fields.  A great 
mass of information is recorded so that the best possible response will be offered 
according to the knowledge available.  These systems also record the experience 
of experts and their ways of reasoning.  They equate knowledge with fact, and on 
this basis construct their arguments.  There are two stages in the constructing of 
such systems, that of logical inference, and that of data base.  The process of 
inference is that of expert reasoning as various applicable rules are considered 
and the best are chosen.  There are also "meta-rules" supplied by experts who 
state their strategies of choice between the different possible rules.  A new step in 
computers is needed for this, that of "the knowledge of knowledge.”  Experts need 
to engage in a long study of their own methods (excluding intuition) so as to 
provide precise and adequate rules of reasoning for the computer.  These 
systems can function to some extent in medicine, geology, and engine failure, but 
not so well in artistic expertise.  Cf.  La Recherche 151 (1984); Tohru Moto-Oka, 
"Les ordinateurs de la cinquième génération'' La Recherche 154 (1984); H.  
Gallaire, "Les systèmes experts," La Recherche 133 (May 1982). 
8 The danger of the expert was admirably brought to light by J.  Klatzmann, who 
shows that a statistical figure advanced by an expert is repeated without control 
by a string of authors.  He cites a hundred examples; one is convincing enough: 
an expert wrote that 50 million people died of hunger in 1981, whereas the total 
number of deceased in that year, from all causes (wars, sicknesses, age, 
catastrophe, etc.) was at most 46 million.  There were perhaps 10 or 11 million 
who died of hunger.  But the figures of the expert were repeated by all the journals 
(see Nourrir dix milliards d'hommes?  [Paris: PUF, 1983]). 
9 We must not think that everything has been put right.  Recently the advocates of 
"appropriate techniques" have been accused of preventing development and of 
preventing African countries from reaching the technical level of modern 
countries. 
10 The apparently fair notion that we should pay for Third World products at their 
true price, and not, as is customary, much below this, is in fact disastrous, for to 
pay more for cocoa, coffee, etc., is to encourage the local growers to produce 
more and to grow even fewer subsistence crops. 
 
11 See jean Touscoz, et al., Transferts de technologie (Paris: PUF, 1978). 
12 As regards radioactivity there were incredible conflicts between experts after 
the accident at Windscale in Cumbria.  Some (nuclear experts) said that there 
was nothing to fear, but others (biologists and the medical center at Seascale) 
said that there was everything to fear (Le Monde, Nov.  1983). 

 
 
PART III 
 
The Triumph of the Absurd 
 
In this part we shall run up against many themes that have been dealt 
with in profound and learned works.  I am familiar with a number of them.  
But I am not going to engage in a compilation or a new scientific work.  I 
will deliberately adopt the attitude of an average citizen who puts 
questions that intellectuals always avoid, the simple questions of common 
sense.  I know that scholars and philosophers take a poor view of 
common sense, yet I want to keep to this elementary level, for in the 
learned studies that I have read it is plain that common sense is 
deliberately set aside, that it is never even taken into account.  Now as I 
see it, if we reject common sense, we open the gate to nonsense, to 
absurdities and fantasies.  Common sense seems to me to be a 
necessary expression of reason, and it is reason that we must apply 
constantly as we evaluate what technique proposes and what technology 
declares to 
 
 
We have seen already that it is not because technique makes a 
pretense of rationality that reason remains intact.  Rationality has made 
great technical progress possible, but it is reason that has allowed us to 
survive, to live, and progressively to affirm our humanity.  We have simply 
not to let ourselves be submerged by scientific knowledge nor reduced to 
a common sense that is mere ignorance, that will not listen or know, that 
is closed-minded.  I think that it is this simplistic view of common sense 
that has led to its condemnation.  People of common sense end up being 
those who, anchored in simple certainties, refuse to question them and 
wrap themselves in a mediocre middle-class ignorance.  The common 
sense that I esteem is that of Flaubert's Bouvard and Pécuchet, who 
themselves, let us not forget, claimed to be followers of science! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
197 
 
 
CHAPTER XI 
 
Technical Progress 
and the Philosophy of the Absurd 
 
In France and elsewhere, in the postwar years, the philosophy of the 
absurd developed.  This was apparently a contradiction in terms: the 
absurd and wisdom seem to be incompatible.  But for a long time 
philosophy has not corresponded to its etymological sense.  The 
philosophy of the absurd developed along with existentialism and within it.  
it did not, of course, characterize existentialism as a whole, but was 
related to the existentialism of Jean-Paul Sartre.  Its main orientation was 
that life and all activity and human thinking was absurd; they make no 
sense, nothing makes sense.  To live is a pure fact.  There is no meaning 
in what happens, nor are we to search for meaning or to attribute it.  
History makes no sense, it is going nowhere, it obeys no rules, it has no 
permanence.  Good and evil do not exist; hence no morality is possible 
except a morality of ambiguity.  Relations with others also have no 
meaning; in every respect they are completely impossible.  One person is 
not and cannot be understood by another, and does not and cannot 
understand another.  There is permanent misunderstanding.  What we do 
is foolish to others even though perfectly reasonable to us.  It is 
impossible to communicate.  The glance of others is the worst thing to 
endure; hell is other people.  We are in an absurd situation from which we 
cannot escape.  Every attempt to escape is absurd.  There is no fixed 
point of view from which to evaluate an event or an act.  There is no 
supreme being to which to refer.  Only what exists is real.  But this, too, is 
as shifting and uncertain as water or sand.  Nothing has form.  We might 
view this as freedom; after all, it does not matter what we do.  Doing this 
or that is of no significance.  We are free 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
199 

 
 
200  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
to do the one thing or the other, for both are indifferent.  Choices do not have 
to have reasons.  They simply are. 
 
 
All this leads, of course, to disjointed and contradictory behavior.  In the 
relations between men and women, uncertainty reigns, for we have only to be 
"honest" with ourselves.  Honesty with the self is the only thing that is not 
absurd.  We have to be fully ourselves each instant.  I may love a woman or a 
man and give myself up to this love.  But I must be on guard lest this love 
become a habit, a good, a loyalty.  I must look out for the moment when I 
cease to love with passion, force, exclusiveness, etc.  At that moment I can 
honestly say that love is over and break it off.  What about the other in all 
this?  As stated already, we can have no true relation with the other. 
 
 
It is just the same in politics.  I belong to the social body and therefore 
whether I like it or not I am in politics.  I cannot not be.  Being honest with 
myself implies this.  But there is no just politics (justice does not exist).  There 
is no doctrine to which I may adhere.  Political engagement is only for the 
moment.  It is what I think I must do or defend at the moment.  Hence I may 
change my political position according to circumstances, impressions, or 
emotions.  Sartre constantly changed his (always momentous) statements; 
sometimes he could write contradictory articles only two weeks apart (e.g., on 
the crises in Hungary and Czechoslovakia).  Sincerity and commitment are 
only for the moment.  There can be successive forms of sincerity in every 
area of life.  Naturally, it is argued that even science cannot give us certainty 
of any kind.  At a roundtable discussion Sartre made the famous 
pronouncement to celebrated physicists: 'As a philosopher I know much 
better what matter is than any physicists." 
 
 
In this kind of wilderness where no orientation is possible there is only 
one reality: our human being.  We must aid this, as the doctor does in The 
Plague by Camus.  Medicine, of course, is also absurd, but it is the only 
activity one can select.  Sartre, too, involves himself on behalf of the poor and 
the unfortunate, but not out of pity, charity, or virtue, only on the condition that 
his action has no value and gives him neither meaning nor justification.  
Nevertheless, if I do not do it, suicide is ultimately the only option.  This, too, 
is an absurd act that is not obligatory.  Everything and nothing are the same.  
Hamlet's question is no question.  We can simply stay in the corner into which 
we are driven. 
 
 
Naturally, this philosophy of the absurd means rejection of all previous 
philosophy, which tried to find meaning and points of reference for the 
appreciation of life and coherence of human thought.  The philosophy of the 
absurd gives rise to a plentiful literature (novels and plays) which is both 
striking and passionate.  Thus we have the plays 
 
 
 
TECHNICAL PROGRESS AND THE ABSURD 
 
201 
 
of Camus (e.g., Caligula), those of Sartre (Dirty Hands, Devil and the 
Good Lord), then those of Ionesco.  But on the same basis there are two 
different developments.  In literature, for example, we move on from the 
drama of the absurd to absurd drama.  In Camus and Sartre we still have 
a plot and personal relations as in classical drama.  These lead the 
audience to the conclusion that in effect life is absurd and has no 
meaning.  But this was not enough.  There was thus a movement to 
drama which would itself be absurd.  The absurd would not just be 
demonstrated; an example of it would be given.  The characters would 
now exchange meaningless and incoherent words with no beginning or 
end.  Then onomatopoeia would be used.  In Beckett we see the 
transition from the theater of the absurd to the absurd theater.  There, 
characters are still speaking and acting, but their words are continuously 
overlaid by booming music.  In May 1986 Paris even staged a play lasting 
for two hours in which the two characters exchanged sounds that did not 
make any discernible sense.  In novels we have the school of the new 
novel (which is now said to be outmoded, but which still persists).1  This 
has neither story nor characters, and also no punctuation, so that there is 
no understanding it without the key.  One of the specialists says plainly 
that there is no meaning and that we are not to seek one, that there is no 
story, that ultimately there is no author, and that even the reader does not 
exist as a subject (I am not exaggerating).  There are only structures and 
structural games. 
 
 
The second development on the basis of the philosophy of the 
absurd is nihilism.  Nothing has value.  We must reduce everything to 
nothing.  Nihilism can be explained as such (Cioran), or it can take a 
theoretical form which leads in art, for example, to the view that the artist 
must produce a non-work and ultimately no work at all.  But the nihilism 
which derives from the philosophy of the absurd can also affect those who 
are not philosophers or artists, leading some to suicide (cf.  suicide 
among young people) and others to terrorism (who join hands with the 
nineteenth-century Russian nihilists and whom Camus views with much 
sympathy and understanding in Les justes).  Naturally, I am not saying 
that actual terrorists in the world today have even a slight knowledge of 
the philosophy of the absurd.  My point is simply that this philosophy has 
penetrated much more deeply than we think and created a climate in 
society as a whole in which terrorism could develop.  Nor must we forget 
that some terrorists (e.  g.  the Baader gang) were in fact intellectuals.   

 
 
202   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
 
The philosophy of the absurd flourished in a political climate which 
explains it in part: the Nazi occupation, fear of the Gestapo, the impotence felt 
by the resistance, and the discovery of the frightful atrocities in the 
concentration camps when the war ended.  In these conditions, in this excess 
of evil, one can understand why philosophers could say that life is absurd and 
that there is no solution (not even with the liberation and its painful aftermath).  
There are no righteous causes; there is no good or evil.  Human beings are 
atrocious.  Caligula is representative, and Malraux has to fall back on the 
history of (ancient!) art to try to find meaning in humanity and its history. 
 
 
Finally, it is possible that this philosophy of the absurd has had some 
influence on scientific thinking.  This might seem to be incredible.  Yet if we 
look at the hypotheses of the last twenty years in physics and biology (e.g., 
cybernetics, feedback, or the main concepts of communication), we will be 
surprised to find in research such notions as loops, vortexes, and 
turbulences; we have also heard about research on the odd form of a 
candle's flame.  But what has all this to do with the absurd?  Simply this, that 
there is a complete reversal in the understanding of this order of phenomena.  
Thus in communication, noise used to be a purely negative notion.  It 
prevented information from being transmitted and received.  But all that has 
changed.  Noise is now an important if not a decisive factor in communication.  
It is itself information and it must be integrated into the theory of 
communication.  Similarly, in physics there used to be a clear distinction 
between order and disorder (even though this meant abuse of the laws of 
thermodynamics).  Disorder was simply perturbation.  Like noise, it has a 
negative connotation.  But all that has now changed.  Disorder has become a 
positive phenomenon and it must be integrated into research in physics (not 
eliminated from it).  Physicists are beginning to say that order can finally 
come only from disorder (as information does from noise). 
 
 
As Henri Atlan says, then, physicists are situated "between the crystal 
and the smoke.”  Smoke is not an unimportant phenomenon.  It has a form 
that obeys laws even though these are more obscure than those of the 
crystal.  No doubt all this is true (I do not have the competence to judge) and 
it is certainly appealing.  But if we leave the sphere of abstraction it becomes 
a vindication of disorder.  And I understand this vindication very well.  
Physicists do not reach it, I think, by pure scientific research.  As in the case 
of all scientific hypotheses, I believe that scientists, belonging to a society and 
culture, are inevitably influenced by them.  We live today in a very ordered 
and coercive society (even though it is morally lax).  We have to break free 
 
 
TECHNICAL PROGRESS AND THE ABSURD 
 
203 
 
from it.  We have to arrive at a new appraisal of disorder, to deal with 
order by putting disorder in the scales against it.  I can understand this.  
But it means introducing the absurd, which is the surest form of disorder.  
And I fear that in economic theory the insertion of loops will not in fact 
justify a certain absurd economics.2 
 
1.  Technical Absurdity 
 
Granted the above summary outline, I want to advocate the following 
thesis.  Over against the philosophy of the absurd stood the sciences, 
which were not at all absurd.  Technical expansion in particular seemed to 
be a model of rationality, strictness, efficiency, and exactitude.  There was 
nothing absurd about it; quite the contrary!  In combinations of techniques 
as well as in economic systems everything was reasonable and rational.  
Undoubtedly, one might say that in a too organized and systematic 
environment people were maladjusted and had incoherent reactions (e.g., 
that of violence).  This came out in 1968 with an attack on the whole 
techno-economic setup.  But it was the human reactions that were 
absurd.  The technical system remained coherent. 
 
 
Now the new thing in recent technical evolution as I see it is that the 
techniques developed in the last decade (principally in the area of 
computers, telematics) are themselves leading to absurdity.  They 
produce and demand absurd behavior on our part; they put us in absurd 
economic situations.  At its extreme, modern technique is linking up with 
the philosophy of the absurd in a way that was not foreseen.  It might 
always be said that this is our own doing.  Human beings are present in 
all these situations and developments.  I repeat, however, that it is the 
flood of techniques that makes us absurd.  To give a minor example, 
which must not be taken too seriously or used as a proof, some modern 
films carry authentic background noises (e.g., of a street or airplane) and 
these are so loud that though we see the characters talking we cannot 
really understand what they are saying because of the noise.  We catch 
only a word or phrase, so that we cannot say any more that the noise 
creates information.  Yet the words that are swallowed up by the noise, 
and concerning which we know only that they are spoken, do stir the 
imagination, and we imagine what the characters might have been 
saying. 
 
 
In this context I am not going to engage in an abstract and 

 
 
204  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
theoretical study of my thesis that modern technical growth induces the 
absurd.  I will simply give some examples that will form concrete matter for 
reflection.  A first example is the absurdity of the inexorable constraint of 
technical growth.  Things are produced that we do not need, that serve no 
useful purpose.  We produce them because technique makes them possible 
and we have to exploit the possibility.  Inexorably and absurdly we have to 
follow this direction.  In the same absurd and inexorable way we also use 
things that we do not need.  Let me give three examples. 
 
 
There has been a great propaganda campaign in France on behalf of 
the expansion of the telephone network.  The number of people with 
telephones has doubled in the last ten years; there are now twenty million 
instruments in service.  Unfortunately, the level of use is very low-the French 
do not use the telephone.  Statistics show only an insignificant number of 
calls.  Should development be arrested then?  Not at all!  Ignoring the 
statistics, the technicians decided that we must have twenty-five million 
telephones by 1985.  This means one instrument per family.  But it also 
means a further decline in average use.  To make good the deficit someone 
then has the bright idea of creating situations in which people are obliged to 
use the phone.  This is one of the most important motifs in the creation of the 
system for which there has been tremendous international propaganda, that 
is, the Teletel (an electronic telephone directory).  This combines telephone, 
computer, and television (to promote this system free computer consoles 
might be provided).  With this system it will be possible by phone to obtain a 
telephone number, the times of trains and planes, the price of goods on sale, 
cinema and television programs, etc.  To force people to use the system the 
printing of directories, timetables, etc., will be stopped.  Subscribers will then 
be forced to use the phone, the statistics of average use will improve, and 
inevitable technical progress will be justified.  We have here an absurd series 
of developments which are all dictated by the compulsion to apply 
sophisticated technical instruments that we do not need. 
 
 
Incidentally, throughout these pages I keep coming up against the 
expression "we do not need.”  I am not unaware of the innumerable 
discussions among psychologists and sociologists concerning natural, 
artificial, inward, and cultural needs, etc.  I will not go into these abstract 
analyses.  I do not deny that what was not originally a need (e.g., drinking 
iced drinks) may become just as natural a need as one dictated by physiology 
when we adapt the habit and keep it up long enough.  I will restrict myself to 
some simple facts.  When I learn that shops in the USSR are full of certain 
industrial products that no one is 
 
 
TECHNICAL PROGRESS AND THE ABSURD 
 
205 
 
buying, I infer that there is no need for these products and little chance that a 
need will develop.  The same applies to telephones in France.  But once an 
advanced technical product is created, the important thing is to force 
consumers to use it even though they have no interest in it.  Technical 
progress demands this.  One might say that this depends on the people who 
make the decisions, and that after all they might take a different course.  But 
this is not so.  If our country is to remain among the most advanced, we have 
to follow the march of progress and invent even better gadgets, that is, 
gadgets that are even more absurd and useless, in order to stay ahead of 
competitors. 
 
 
Electrical energy offers us a second example.  After the war the word in 
France was that we must produce as much electricity as possible to replace 
coal.  Great hydroelectric projects were undertaken.  Every small stream in 
the Pyrenees and the Alps had its power station. 
 
 
After 1955 there was too much electricity.  The stations could not run at 
full capacity and were not profitable.  There was thus a tremendous campaign 
urging the people to use more electricity.  Big buildings were put up heated by 
electricity and using enormous amounts.  A tariff was introduced whereby the 
price went down with increased use.  But suddenly around 1960 it became 
clear that the growth of use had become exponential and there was a need 
for more production.  Thus the nuclear program was launched, but not without 
violent conflicts between the engineers and the ecologists, who were not all 
idealists but included physicists, biologists, economists, etc. 
 
 
A study conducted by the Center of Economic Studies of the University 
of Grenoble in 1971 concluded that the price of a kilowatt hour from nuclear 
power stations was three times greater than that projected in studies 
(propaganda!) by Électricité de France, which had promised a lowering of 
rates, and that the program as it was envisioned would surpass actual needs 
by 1985.  Naturally, no one paid any attention.  The remarkable thing is that 
the commission on energy for Economic Plan IX concluded in 1983 that the 
nuclear program ought to be halted because production was already 
outstripping need and the price was of the order calculated by Grenoble in 
1971.  But the first reaction of some groups was not that the program should 
be halted but that a new campaign should be initiated to incite the people to 
use much more electricity even if only to use up what was being produced 
and not for any useful purpose.3 
 
 
The absurdity here does not lie merely in the arbitrariness of the 

 
 
206  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
procedures but in the actual situation of total inability to see what is 
necessary and has meaning.  I am not saying that those who set up the 
vast nuclear program were dishonest.  Nor am I saying that the report on 
Plan IX was made by partisans.  I regard its authors as good and honest 
technicians.  My point is that they are simply unable to see exactly what is 
our situation, what will be the needs in two or three years, etc.  The 
absurdity lies in the prediction itself 
 
 
A final example of the inexorable processes to which improvements 
give rise may be found in television and radio.  I might deal with this on 
two levels.  The first is that of the big existing systems, the "chains.”  My 
simple question is as follows.  The networks have extraordinary 
equipment (enhanced by satellite television), which has to be used.  They 
have to transmit; this is an imperative.  They must transmit most of the 
day: news, shows, songs, discussions, interviews, films, advice on health, 
cooking, etc.  They must transmit something fresh every day.  Thus they 
are in a terrible bind-they must!  It does not matter what they transmit so 
long as the screen is not empty.  But it is impossible each day to find 
something genuinely true, beautiful, intelligent, and fresh, something 
worth showing and repeating.  Hence the screens are full of inanities.  It 
does not matter what is put on so long as the screen is not empty.  
Whether it causes the viewer to laugh or to shudder, it does not matter so 
long as it is new.  People are thus brought in who may not have any real 
quality but who are more or less well known or recommended.  The 
demands of viewers are easy.  They do not want people of genius who 
are too much above most of them.  They want honest mediocrity.  It is 
within this basically unimportant range that the stations have the best 
chance of-finding people to put on.  The main thing is to have something 
fresh.  That alone is what counts.  When real intellectuals are found, they 
have to speak at a level that can only do them dishonor.  A novelist who is 
a best-seller is a safer bet.  But a new one is not always available.4 
 
 
We thus have a deadly combination of equipment that makes 
demands and that also gives a hearing to people without quality.  Every 
hour viewers see the poorest of shows on almost all stations.  We need in 
this regard Kierkegaard's profound analysis of the masses and the crowd, 
which mean mediocrity, baseness, and falsehood.  The media cater only 
to the masses and the crowd, and they have this conglomerate 
 
 
TECHNICAL PROGRESS AND THE ABSURD  
 
207 
 
of individuals as their implication.  The level is all the lower as the number 
reached is the greater, and the technical equipment demands that the number 
be constantly greater.  This is my final example of the absurdity caused by 
technical equipment itself. 
 
 
We referred above to similar experiences with what is called free radio in 
France.  Freedom is badly served.  Once again we see an instance of 
technical absurdity.  We have the instrument, the equipment, but there is 
nothing to transmit.  The same is true of CB radio, on which the messages 
are ridiculous and childish.  Communication is being perfected.  It has 
become swift, global, accurate, etc.  But unfortunately there is nothing to 
communicate except what is banal and inane.  Yet the equipment is there; we 
have to cater to it. 
 
2.  Economic Absurdity 
 
There is no need to recall that economic life in our world is wholly organized 
in terms of techniques.  As I see it, the global situation is as follows.  We still 
have an economic model in terms of the industrial system in which the 
primary function of technique was to promote industry.  The movement is 
from investment to mass production to mass consumption to mass returns or 
profits, which are then reinvested.  One can follow the circuit in different ways.  
If a good part of the profits is reinvested, with salary reductions and eventual 
unemployment, we have a liberal and ultimately a Keynesian approach.  If we 
focus on consumption, a great deal of cash has to be distributed among the 
public so that they can buy more, and this will result in increased production 
and then increased investment.  This is a socialist approach.  We increase 
wages, give good grants to the unemployed, and encourage investment by 
favorable interest rates (unless it is the state itself that is in charge of industry, 
which is meant to have a stimulating effect on the whole industrial complex). 
 
 
These are the two positions in outline.  I beg to be excused for stating 
what is so obvious, but it is precisely as things are reduced to the most simple 
and elementary level that their absurdity suddenly appears, as we shall see in 
a moment.  For this whole system has come up against a new technical 
development which upsets the placid approaches.  The new factor is 
productivity, that is, producing more with less work.  This can make itself felt 
in two different ways.  First, there is competitiveness with others, with rivals, 
or internationally with other industrial countries in the search for global 
markets.  According to the liberal logic the best will win, and we should thus 
lot the 

 
 
208   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
most efficient business squeeze out the others.  But efficiency can take the 
form either of making the best use of equipment or of producing new goods, 
whether improved forms of older ones or totally new ones hitherto unknown.  
According to the socialist system there is no competition, so that there are 
fewer problems in the domestic market, with fewer failures but also less 
innovation and progress.  Yet socialist countries are now inevitably 
competitive with capitalist countries on the international market.  They cannot 
live in isolation but have to sell their products so as to achieve a balance of 
trade. 
 
 
Thus far everything is familiar and in order.  But what I have written is no 
longer wholly accurate.  The technical changes of the last twenty years have 
altered things.  First, automation and computerization have brought with them 
unimaginable possibilities of productivity, so that there can be no hope at all 
of absorbing in new work the unemployed who have been put out of work by 
the new machines.  In the industrial sectors the possibilities of productivity 
have become almost infinite.  This means that economically it is the machine 
and not human labor that produces value.  Human labor has become 
increasingly unnecessary, and it is possible to imagine that in another twenty 
years we shall be moving toward absolute unemployment..5 
 
 
Now the economic logic has not changed.  On the one hand, firms must 
be as efficient as possible, and on the other hand it is hoped that the 
unemployment problem will be solved by an economic upturn and by new 
ventures.  But the new ventures will have to employ as few people as 
possible to be competitive.  Socialist countries will either have to withdraw 
from the circuit (which is becoming impossible) or follow the same logic.  
Pumping in additional money to revive the economy is no solution.  But what 
about new products such as talking computers, tapes, domestic computers, 
flat-screen televisions, cars with automatic pilots, etc.?  When we consider 
the nature of these inventions, however, we see that they demand hundreds 
of researchers and millions in investment, but we also see that they are only 
gadgets that do not really meet any kind of need, not even an urgent desire.6 
 
 
I realize that a broad statement of this type will bring a reaction from any 
conscientious technician, yet when in the innumerable studies that I have 
read I compare the real usefulness of, for example, computers (and their 
derivatives, i.e., office automation, telematics, robotics)-their usefulness in 
keeping accounts, in aiding scientific 
 
 
TECHNICAL PROGRESS AND THE ABSURD 
 
209 
 
research, in inventory control, in memory, etc.-I am compelled to say that 
hundreds of the objects that are now set before the public are useless 
gadgets and that there would not be an adequate market if only useful goods 
were produced.  Thus we have many objects that are only for amusement or 
to cause a little surprise.  We are adding superfluity to superfluity, and it is 
solely in this domain that we are creating new goods.  The very definition of 
political economics has been upset, but the reasoning is the same, as if 
nothing had happened.  It is true that putting on the market one of these 
astonishing, sophisticated, magical toys gives a business an important 
advantage, but the market is soon saturated, interest in the little miracle 
evaporates, and something new has to be manufactured. 
 
 
Similarly, production in the whole area of computers can give a country 
an impressive advantage (e.g., Japan from 1970 to 1981), but the whole 
situation is absurd.  The country has an advantage only so long as it is the 
sole producer.  Once six other industrialized countries begin to imitate Japan 
in the hope of achieving the same success, the basic question (which French 
politicians who have entered this path seem incapable of asking) has 
obviously to be posed: Who is going to buy all these things?  Do we imagine 
that we French can capture the Japanese or American market?  If all 
industrialized countries begin to produce the same goods, there is no hope of 
capturing on a long-term basis a profitable market with them.  The only hope, 
then, is the Third World.  But the Third World is not interested in these 
products and does not have the money to pay for them.  The example of the 
Japanese, then, is a bad one.  This is apparent once we look at the economic 
situation globally, at the world economy (it is a world economy, and not, as is 
wrongly-said, an international economy). 
 
 
We here come across a great contradiction which startles us.  On the 
one hand are the economies of the developed countries, which function as I 
have said, and on the other hand the economy of Third World countries, 
which is going from bad to worse, since even the most necessary, immediate, 
and vital needs are not being met.  On the one hand are economies which 
can function only as false needs are stimulated and gadgets created, and on 
the other hand an economy which cannot respond to famine and the minimal 
needs of civilization.  The absurdity reaches a climax when specialists have 
only one remedy for the Third World, namely, to put it on the same track as 
ourselves, to bring it into the industrial circuit, and to aid it, as Rostow said, to 
break free from an economic standpoint.  How absurd all this is when we see 
concretely the results of this system of ours! 
 
 
We are truly in the presence of erratic economic thinking (and 

 
 
210   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
sadly, we have to say, economic practice).  If our system functions as it 
does, it is because it has accepted integrally the primacy of technical 
innovation and the law by which it is technique that permits economic 
progress .7  Obsession with technical innovation brings our system into a 
series of logical follies and puts it out of step with the economies of 
people in the Third World which are very diversified and fragile and which 
demand very accurately adjusted technical and human intervention.  The 
idea that computers can enable the Third World to break free is crazy.  
But the course of technical primacy is leading us even further.  We are 
now beginning to talk about countless gadgets.  This means that we shall 
be talking about sheer waste.8 
 
 
I am not referring here to the enormous daily waste which is often 
denounced and which easily scandalizes us (e.g., the excess food which 
is thrown out by restaurants even though it is perfectly healthy, or the 
crops that farmers destroy because they are not paid enough).  I am 
talking about the waste ineluctably produced by technique (e.g., the 
regular replacement of equipment, cars, motors, refrigerators, television 
sets, etc., often because people have to have the latest model).  The 
great law that we must not stop progress operates both at the individual 
level and at the national level.  The best example is the constant 
replacement of weapons.  There is no end to the production of more 
powerful and sophisticated armaments even though it is known that they 
will have to be replaced six years later. 
 
 
What we have here is techno-economic absurdity in its purest form, 
for the goods that are produced are totally negative.  If we use them, the 
result is negative because of the enormous destruction they will cause, 
and if we do not use them they serve no useful purpose except that when 
we discard them we can sell some of them to underdeveloped countries!  
I am well aware of the economic argument.  They keep the wheels of 
industry turning and supply jobs.  On this reasoning the pharaohs who 
built the pyramids were great economists! 
 
 
But technique is responsible for other forms of waste as well.  We 
will not take up again the wastage of raw materials.  I am thinking more of 
the waste of air, water, space, and time.  These are vital elements and 
dimensions of human life even though they have no economic value, 
 
 
TECHNICAL PROGRESS AND THE ABSURD 
 
211 
 
and we are wasting them at a frantic pace.  Absorbed in technique, we never 
have any time.  Demographic growth within half a century will fill all the 
existing space on earth.  I will not stress these points.  The facts are well 
known and incontestable.  But they are so serious that they are always 
carefully obscured. 
 
 
A third form of waste is much less tragic but by no means negligible.  I 
refer to certain spectacles which are purely technical and justified only by 
technical imperatives but which the West now regards as obligatory.  Thus we 
have races for Formula I cars in which each model will cost millions and be 
used only once, not to speak of the enormous waste of fuel.  The only 
justification 
that 
is 
given 
is that experimentation brings technical 
improvements, but the improvements in engines and tires are only for the 
racing cars themselves or for some sports cars that can travel at high speeds 
without danger, when the great need today is to reduce speed because of 
accidents.  We might also speak of the remarkable improvements in giant 
trimarans which serve only to improve the techniques on boats that no more 
than the privileged few can afford.  This technical justification is totally absurd.  
Nothing justifies the enormous expenditure on pure luxuries. 
 
 
Another aspect of economic absurdity has to do with the size of the 
numbers which we juggle.  Thus the American budget deficit ran to nearly 
$200 billion in 1983, or 6.6 percent of the gross national product.  One has to 
ask whether there is any sense in trying to formulate an economic policy that 
has to include a deficit of this kind, especially as the social costs of technical 
progress, which will surely increase it, are not taken fully into account.  Then 
there is the stupefying phenomenon of the indebtedness of almost every 
country in the world.  How can we integrate this into a world economy?  The 
sums owed by Third World countries are staggering.  Latin America owes 
$300 billion and in a few years the debt for all developing countries will 
amount to $620 billion.  The total charge will in fact be $700 billion, and there 
was a net loss of $200 billion in 1982.  But these countries refuse to accept a 
policy of austerity and limit servicing their debt to a percentage of their 
exports (which in turn results in a limitation of their exports!). 
 
 
We have to realize that these exorbitant costs and economic problems 
derive solely from the rapidity of technical growth (and not from this or that 
economic organization).  Third World countries have to pay 67 percent of the 
value of their exports to service their external debts (most of which are due to 
the purchase of armaments).  None of them will ever be able to pay off the 
whole debt.  Either the creditors will have to write off the debt or 50 percent of 
Third World countries will default.  There is no similarity here with the 
Marshall Plan, for this 

 
 
212   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
borrowed money does not serve in any way to equip the countries 
economically according to their level and for their benefit. 
 
 
In these circumstances how can we envision a global market that will 
function "normally"?  Third World countries that grew fabulously rich through 
oil (producers in the Near East) in ten years did not really know what to do 
with their money.  This throws serious doubt upon the whole theory of 
breaking free economically.  There is no longer any economic rationality or 
logic.  I might almost say that there is enough money in circulation in the 
world; it surely ought to serve some useful purpose! 
 
 
But almost all countries are crushed by the weight of their military 
expenditures (Third World countries as buyers, producing countries because 
they are launched on this endless course of the most efficient technique).  In 
1983 the USA spent some $600 billion on weapons, or five times its industrial 
investment. 
 
 
I could pile up facts of this kind.  They all go the same way and show 
that the thrust of techniques in all areas is toward an economics that is neither 
possible, predictable, rational, nor capable of global organization.  The only 
chance that economists see is to proceed faster and faster in the rapid 
adoption of all techniques (no matter what their significance or use) so as to 
be sure of keeping ahead of others once they appear.  But no one can 
construct an economy in these conditions.  Those that pretend to be planned 
economies in socialist countries with authoritarian planning present an 
interesting study.  On the one hand is the planned and controlled and 
governed sector which is backward, outmoded, and inefficient, and on the 
other hand is a sector in which free rein is given to technical development, in 
which there is research in weapons, rockets, space, and the nuclear field.  
But in this domain we find the same disorder, the same absence of 
coherence, foresight, and rationality.  It is a remarkable fact that an excess of 
technique always leads to absurd situations, to an impasse from which it is 
impossible to see any exit.  The facts are beyond the possibilities of human 
consciousness. 
 
 
In face of these realities I take an opposite view to that of politicians (like 
Mitterrand), who believe that it is by the most efficient "advanced technology" 
that we shall achieve universal growth (I would say universal disorder!) and 
solve the problem of unemployment.  If I am not deceived, that is also the 
view of one school in the USA, the high-tech Democrats who believe that high 
technology will lead us out of the economic impasse.  What we have here, I 
think, is a mistake in diagnosis.  We are not just in an economic impasse but 
in general disorder.  Politicians and economists of that kind are really 
dreamers.   
 
 
TECHNICAL PROGRESS AND THE ABSURD 
 
213 
 
They "believe"; they have a kind of religion of a radiant technical future.  
They do not engage in reasonable reflection.  This religion is simply a 
confirmation of absurdity. 
 
3.  Human Absurdity 
 
I am dealing here with a question that seems to be properly philosophical.  
Do we become more human thanks to techniques?  Will there be a kind of 
transformation of the human species?  Will technique enable us to fulfill 
the ancestral human goal?  This was the belief of, for example, Teilhard 
de Chardin.  I have tried to show how at one point (modern art) technique 
has brought a radical break.9  Using the most modern techniques in 
music, painting, sculpture, and architecture has resulted in products that 
might be called art (it is a matter of definition!) but that have nothing 
whatever in common with the aim of the race for the last five millennia in 
doing work that we think of as art, that is, works with meaning (that is to 
be given or found), with beauty, with harmony, lofty works that give 
happiness.  Modern art is the exact opposite of all that.  We will not say 
that technical art is not art, but that what is achieved, far from being a 
fulfillment of the human goal from antiquity, contradicts it and negates it. 
 
 
But that said, the question remains: will we become more human?10  
I will give an example that I have often adduced because it seems to me 
to be very significant.  In the 1960s, at the beginning of genetic 
engineering, a French journal asked a number of Nobel prizewinners 
(biologists, chemists, geneticists, etc.) about the new techniques and 
about the human model that one could hope to achieve by manipulations 
of the embryo.  But not one of these important scientists could give any 
answer.  Except for banalities like making people better or more 
intelligent, they could not say what human model seemed to them to be 
desirable. 
 
 
In reality we do not really know what we are talking about when we 
say that we must become more human.  (For Hitler it meant Aryan genetic 
selection.)  We do not know what to do with these remarkable and 
marvelously efficacious methods.  This means that although we do not 
want to create Frankensteins, we are creating we know not what.  Yet that 
is not my present point.  The immediate question that arises for 

 
 
214   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
me in the presence of the effects of existing techniques on people 
(whether infant or adult), and their probable development, concerns the 
type of person that is created by the millions without the slightest genetic 
intervention.  I would describe this person according to my own 
encounters as fascinated, suffering from hallucinations, and distracted. 
 
 
People in our society, once obsessed with work, are now fascinated 
by the multiplication of images, the intensity of noise, and the spreading of 
information.  In all three areas we have the effects of techniques on all of 
us even though we might not be too fond of television or shows.  We 
cannot escape these effects.  I think of the general growth of noise in all 
forms of modern music.  (This is not at all the same question as that 
above.)11 
 
 
It might be said that all this is not the fault of technique but of the 
people who use it and who turn up their sets to the maximum (when not at 
concerts).  But this is the very thing that troubles me, namely, that 
listeners demand that they be offered an overwhelming music which shuts 
out all awareness.  This is the element of fascination.  The listeners are 
like those on drugs who cannot want anything else.  And to me the worst 
and most significant aspect of the situation is the development of the 
Walkman.  It is an absurdity that young people cannot live a single hour 
without this music which batters their skulls.  They are so intoxicated by 
the noise which effaces all else that they need it even in trains or cars.  
They cannot escape its magnetism, which prevents them from being 
aware of the external world, from receiving other impressions, from living 
in the real world, and from breaking free from their obsession.  This noise, 
and we cannot really call it anything else, is doubling the noise of the 
urban environment.  There is general agreement as to the harmful effects 
of permanent noise (e.g., that of automobiles or machinery).12  Some 
attempts are made to fight it.  But music is now forcing upon us an equally 
powerful noise which is all the more obnoxious because it is a matter of 
choice. 
 
 
The invasion of images is to the same effect, not just those on 
television or films, but those of advertising, which is not just the neutral 
and immobile advertising on posters but the mobile and active advertising 
of attractive animation.  Images both capture the attention and dissipate it.  
We are grasped by a universe of ridiculous possibilities that are forced 
upon us.  I am not saying that this advertising makes all 
 
 
TECHNICAL PROGRESS AND THE ABSURD 
 
215 
 
buyers buy the product.  That is not the question.  The point is that the 
multiplication of invading images sets us in a wholly artificial world.  In this 
world no reflection, choice, or deliberation is' possible.  Such advertising is 
not in any sense innocent.  If it succeeds, this is because it takes the reality of 
people today, their wants and desires, into account.  When we analyze the 
main themes, we see that there is violence.  Many advertisements, urging us 
to be modem, portray what are basically images of aggressiveness, conquest, 
power, and violence.  Then men and women are shown to be idyllically 
happy.  There is also a strand of advertising which stresses friendship, 
conviviality, and intimacy, especially when pushing products which least 
promote such things. 
 
 
Computers are now indispensable helpers to the degree that the very 
excess of information threatens to result in disinformation.  Happily, 
information is now received, recorded, assimilated, and always at our 
disposal thanks to the memory of the system.  This is a marvel, but it means 
that we ourselves are dispossessed.  The computer is not just an instrument 
that serves to answer our own questions.  It has its own function, and we 
have lost the power to choose what information to keep and combine in it.  
That operation is not at all the same as having things done by the computer.  
It is qualitatively different to the degree that in our own handling of information 
a subjective quality is present that is not there in the machine.  This factor is 
what enables us to make decisions on the basis of information.  I am not 
referring to solutions to a problem (which computers can give) but to 
decisions which cut the Gordian knot. 
 
 
These examples-they are no more than that-should help us to see what I 
mean by saying that people are fascinated.  The environment of noise and 
images is so invasive that we cannot continue to live in a distant, mediate, 
and reflective way, but only in an immediate, obvious, and hypnotically active 
way.  We have here three features of absurdity in the existential sense. 
 
4.  Conclusion 
 
As a result of these sketches of modern technique, I cannot say that human 
beings are absurd in themselves, nor that society is absurd in itself This 
would mean adopting a metaphysical position.  But we are certainly in the 
process of becoming absurd, even in a philosophical sense.  This is a totally 
new experience in human history and we must try to probe its significance. 
 
 
The first point that we can be sure of is that no philosophy of 

 
 
216  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
technique is possible.  Nor is any technical culture, in spite of the great 
pretensions of some modern humanists.  There can be no philosophy of 
technique because technique has nothing whatever to do with wisdom.  On 
the contrary, it is solely an expression of pride.  It makes excessiveness 
finally possible (as we have seen), an excessiveness that on the one hand 
rolls on without our wanting it or participating in it (there is a difference in this 
regard from Dionysiac excess, which was human, and also from all that 
Nietzsche wrote on the subject).  On the other hand, technique attains a 
dimension so exorbitant that we cannot even record its products, let alone 
direct them.  We need machines to record what other machines are doing.  
Only computers can record sounds and photographs from the planets.  Only 
the complex machines of microphysicists can record the phenomena that 
calculations tell us exist.  As Nils Bohr could say: "Matter, the real, is what my 
machines permit me to record." 
 
 
Hence our own machines have truly replaced us.  We cannot make a 
philosophy of them, for a philosophy implies limits and definitions and defined 
areas that technique will not allow.  A philosophy constructed in terms of the 
technique of 1950 (e.g., that of Pierre-Maxime Schuhl) has no value or 
meaning at all in 1980.  At root the problem is to some extent the same.  On 
the one hand is the rapidity of change in techniques, on the other hand is 
qualitative change (e.g., with the transition from steam energy to electricity or 
from the industrial system to that of the computer system). 
 
 
But if there can be neither a philosophy of technique nor a technical 
culture, what are the tendencies and orientations of people (intellectuals) as 
they embark on this venture?  I think I see two obvious reactions: the search 
for compensation and the search for justification.  As we are disoriented, ill at 
ease, and anguished by the constant upheavals in the environment due to 
technique, we look for compensations, which usually take the form of escape.  
I am not referring to the extreme and simplistic escape in drugs or drink, but 
to escape in religion, in the irrational, which seems to us to be all the more 
necessary as the world becomes more dangerous and incomprehensible.  
Along these lines we may refer to the explosive quasi-religious beliefs which 
are appearing everywhere, the belief in parapsychology, the return to a 
narrow religious mysticism (clearly discernible in Islam), the hope for an 
opening up of the world to unknown worlds from which will come meaning, 
happiness, and help-the extraterrestrials.  The unheard-of success of E.T.  
bears witness to this.  The fact that so stupid a story could not only move the 
masses but also be taken seriously by intellectuals shows how disoriented we 
are and how far from any 
 
 
TECHNICAL PROGRESS AND THE ABSURD 
 
217 
 
possibility of philosophy.  The other aspect of out reaction is the search 
for justification.  This does not usually take the form of a direct justification 
of the technical phenomenon or technical progress.  it is usually indirect 
justification by way of politics or by an intellectualism which outbids the 
situation.  The supreme justification, I would say, is that of absurdity (or 
nihilism).  Nothing makes sense; nothing has value.  Hence technical 
development has as much value as anything else.  I have often heard this 
said during the 1980s. 
 
 
To reach this conclusion we must deal with a more specifically 
philosophical question which arises directly out of what I have said.  The 
self, the person, cannot constitute itself, or exist, or have a history, or 
freely become itself, unless it enters into the game of the possible and the 
necessary, of freedom and necessity.  There is no individual, no human 
being, no self, if there is no freedom, no possibility.  It is no good living if 
there is no margin of freedom on which the self can constitute itself.  
Conversely, freedom is not real unless the self comes up against a 
necessity or a group of necessities.  The play between these two realities 
is what makes human existence possible. 
 
 
We are caught in a web of determinations, but we are made so as to 
control and utilize them and to achieve freedom in this way.  The self is 
already itself (necessity) but it has also to become itself (possibility).  A 
self that is without possibility is desperate, and so is a self without 
necessity.13  If possibility, in giving itself free rein, upsets and destroys 
necessity (e.g., in the case of general transgression of all physiological 
rules or social norms or values), so that the self bursts out without 
safeguarding a necessity to which to return and refer (as in nondirective 
pedagogy), we then have the despair of possibility.  The self becomes an 
abstract possibility which flounders and exhausts itself in the possible 
without going anywhere. 
 
 
On the other hand, if the self thinks only in terms of necessity, 
considering that everything is foreordained and ineluctably necessary, 
there is again despair, real despair.  Kierkegaard uses a very simple 
comparison to show the link.  The lack of possibility is like the babbling of 
an infant.  Only the sounds are there.  Necessity gives us the sounds, but 
only possibility gives us the words.  There is no freedom except on the 
basis of necessity and in terms of necessity, but there is no reality (known 
and recognized by us) except in the struggle for freedom.  This 

 
 
218  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
is true both for the individual and for the social body.  Being itself, it is 
necessary, but relative to the future, it is a possibility. 
 
 
This dialectical game, however, has been fundamentally disrupted, or, I 
might say, destroyed, by the universalizing of technique on two levels.  First, 
technique has become that which enables us to do things.  It is both universal 
and absolute possibility.  It enables us to walk on the moon (and to me this 
makes sense when we think of what "being on the moon" has meant from the 
standpoint of folklore and myth and popular appreciation).  It makes possible 
speed, instantaneity, (false) immediacy, power, etc.  It can achieve all that we 
imagine or desire.  To come up against an obstacle seems to us to be a 
scandalous thing.  We find it abnormal that there should be something that we 
cannot do, for example, cure cancer or create life ex nihilo.  But this brings us 
under the radical judgment that if everything is possible then nothing is 
possible.  Nothing is possible for the self because it is the object that is 
possible.  As Castoriadis put it, absolute power is impotence. 
 
 
"Thus possibility seems greater and greater to the self; more and more 
becomes possible because nothing becomes actual [with the reality of the 
self].  Eventually everything seems possible, but this is exactly the point at 
which the abyss swallows up the self. . . . The instant something appears to 
be possible, a new possibility appears, and finally these phantasmagoria 
follow one another in such rapid succession that it seems as if everything 
were possible, and this is exactly the final moment, the point at which the 
individual himself becomes a mirage."14  There is no longer any reality (the 
question of modern physicists) because reality is a synthesis of the possible 
and the necessary, and there is no longer (in appearance, in illusion, in 
phantasmagoria) anything necessary.  This is one of the reasons for our 
modern anguish. 
 
 
But the opposite is also true.  If technique makes everything possible, it 
becomes itself absolute necessity.  I said thirty years ago that technique was 
our modern fate or destiny.  I think that events have largely confirmed this.  
We cannot evade technique.  It has laid hold of every domain and activity and 
reality.  Nothing at all is beyond its grasp.  It is causa sui.  Ordinary common 
sense expresses this in the saying that we cannot stop progress.  But this 
popular phrase has now become the last word in all consideration of these 
phenomena.  When it is a question of dangers, costs, etc., at the end of the 
argument scientists and technicians close the debate by saying that we 
cannot stop progress. 
 
 
There is, therefore, something absolute and incontestable 
 
 
TECHNICAL PROGRESS AND THE ABSURD 
 
219 
 
against which nothing can be done, which we have simply to obey, namely, 
technical growth (for in our society progress obviously means growth).  In 
other words, there is no other possibility for us.  We have no freedom 
face-to-face with technique, for freedom here means the .freedom to say yes 
or no.  But who can say no to space probes or genetic engineering?  It is here 
that we come up against an absolute determinism (not in our genes or 
culture!).  This is the source of the basic despair of modern humanity.  This is 
the key to it.  We despair because we can do nothing, and we are vaguely 
aware of this even though we do not know it.  This is the reason for drugs, as 
we well know, and for some aspects of hippies. 
 
 
But we have not taken the final step.  This happens when people, 
instead of being in anguish and despair, set about to justify the situation.  In 
this case they take note of only one aspect of the phenomenon.  We thus 
have those who theorize about the absolute freedom that technique gives us.  
These people deny (or refuse to see) the other side of the matter.  They also 
overwhelm us with a totally inhuman responsibility.  For if technique gives me 
sovereign freedom and I can truly do all things, then I am responsible for all 
things-for massacres in Argentina or Afghanistan, for Third World famines, 
etc.  Suicide is the only option.  But the same is true for those who want to 
look at the other aspect, the absolute determinism of history and a strictly 
mechanistic interpretation of politics and economics, with no possibility or 
intervention of an act of freedom.  The weighty, imperative necessity of 
technique is here transformed into a "has to be.”  For this determinism has 
enough imagination to despair of possibility and enough possibility to discover 
impossibility.  Conscience, then, disappears.  There is only bondage in luxury 
or in misery, in conformism or in the concentration camp.  Either way, 
philosophers, looking at things along these lines and moving on from 
existence to metaphysics, greatly worsens our human condition under 
technique. 
 
 
One more step remains.  What happens when instead of noting and 
justifying either liberation by technique or determinism, we take note of both 
at the same time?  What happens when, without any dialectical relation 
between them, without any tension or conflict but only identity, we see that 
what might have liberated us has become our fate, or that what is in effect our 
destiny might be lived out and accepted by us as our liberation?  What 
happens when we discern that in this technical milieu the possibility is the 
necessity and the necessity is our only possibility?  This is real absurdity.  But 
it is an absurdity from which we cannot escape.  We are not dealing now with 
a philosophical thesis or an accidental example (for which examples to the 
contrary might be 

 
 
220  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
adduced) but with the very nub of the situation.  We have rejoined by 
another route the philosophy of the absurd about which we spoke at the 
outset, but we are no longer in the realm of metaphysics.  We have here a 
kind of ontology of the world fashioned by technique.  On this basis the 
examples that I have given in the preceding pages are no longer isolated 
cases.  They are truly exemplary and immune to contradiction.  Such, in 
my view, is the significance of the absurd in the technical world. 
 
 
                                                 
1 I studied all these phenomena in detail in L'Empire du non-sens: L'Art et.  
la société technicienne (Paris: PUF, 1980). 
2 Cf.  Henri Guitton, De l'imperfection en, économie (Paris: 
Calmann-Lévy, 1979). 
3 We will return to this interaction in more detail when we study unreason 
below. 
4 Cf.  the excellent work of Jézéquel, Ledos, and Regnier, Le Gâchis 
audiovisuel (Éditions Ouvrières, 1987), who show that those who think 
they know the television public align themselves with the most stupid 
viewers.  The obsession with ratings, aggravated by private television, 
enforces a deterioration in quality 
5 Cf.  Informatique et Emploi by the Economic and Social Council, 1984.  
We shall take up this problem in more detail in chapter XVI below. 
6 We shall examine the world of gadgets in chapter XIV below. 
7 Has not a famous economist stated that the actual crisis, following a 
Kondratieff cycle, will resolve itself like prior crises by a major technical 
innovation around which the whole economy will function?  As the 
automobile led us out of the crisis of 1930, the computer will lead us out 
of that of 1980. 
8 I will study waste in chapter XV below. 
9 See Ellul, L'Empire du non-sens. 
10 The most important book in this area appears to me to be Vance 
Packard, The People Shapers (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1977). 
11 We will look in detail at the matter of fascination, and especially the 
influence of rock music, in chapter XIX below. 
12 Cf.  J.-C.  Migneron, Acoustique urbaine (MLS, 1980), who insists 
especially on the serious nature of background noise. 
13 On all this cf.  Kierkegaard, The Sickness unto Death, ed.  and tr.  
Howard V Hong and Edna H.  Hong (Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1980), Part One; and, of course, the debate on nature and culture. 
14 Ibid., p.  36. 

 
 
CHAPTER XII 
 
Unreason 
 
It is obvious that we do not plunge into unreason for pleasure or out of 
vice.  We always have reasons.  There is a process which leads on from 
apparently sane and acceptable premises to unreasonable conduct and 
plans.  This process is so coherent that if one denounces the premises 
themselves, the argument fails.  We must first try to understand the 
principles behind this unreason before giving some examples. 
 
1.  Dissociation 
 
As E.  Morin has well seen, the whole problem is that of our modern way 
of thinking.  In the realities of the world and society we dissociate and 
separate those things which can certainly be distinguished but which are 
in fact complementary and inseparable.  Thus we separate the individual 
and society, or myth and reality, or tradition and innovation.  Our mode of 
thinking is also reductionist and one-dimensional.  We are prepared to 
see only one object, to reduce what we can see to a single dimension, to 
eliminate all difficulties and details and singularities.  Formed by science, 
technique, and the media, our thinking is not, global and complex, like 
reality-it is disabled. 
 
 
It has become ridiculous to refer to the great human, humanist, or 
moral problems, for the thinking of the specialists of "technical culture" is 
incapable of either conceiving of them or stating them.  This is connected 
with the fact that scientific thinking is more and more compartmentalized, 
formalized, and operationalized, and that technical thinking is wholly 
dedicated to functions and functionality.  As the dominant thinking is so 
contemptible, so, naturally, is the rest.  In principle the "technical culture" 
cannot think in terms of genera! 
 
221 
 
 
222   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
problems or reflect upon them.  It cannot even think about itself.  It is for 
this reason that in scientific and technical circles, outside the areas of 
specialization, we find the most shallow of general ideas and the most 
summary of evaluations, as when scientists and technicians take up 
positions on politics or economics.  We find an advocacy that is as 
pathetic as it is dramatic.1 
 
 
This lack of thought, stemming from the severing of reality according 
to the "arithmomorphic logic" denounced by Georgescu-Roegen2 has two 
vital consequences: the irrationality of basic choices and indefinite 
accumulation.  In this astonishingly calculated world the basic choices are 
made in accordance with a perfect logic, but they are not thought out.  To 
think them out in relation to alternatives other mental features are needed 
than those set forth above.  The conceptual tools of a rationality that 
applies only to itself are profoundly inadequate, the more so because in 
our society the tools of scientific research are subordinate to power, which 
gives its orders in a totally irrational way.  The congenital, structural 
weakness of techno-scientific thinking is linked to the irrational imperative 
of power.  Techno-scientists serve military ends (we shall return to this 
matter).  The technologizing of discovery works in tandem with the 
interaction of science and technique according to the forecasts of 
research and development.  Rationality is operationalized (the theory of 
systems, computerization, design), and all this destroys even the 
possibility of global and introspective thinking.  All this leads to indefinite 
accumulation which can apparently never stop.  There is expansion in 
every 
direction 
at 
the 
same 
time. 
 
This 
makes 
everything 
incommensurable.  Evaluation (let alone judgment) is impossible.  It is 
beyond the capacities of reason, though this problem is never raised.  On 
these grounds we need to return to great and simple options.  The 
unlimited progression that is already part of the technical process3 is even 
more accentuated by the phenomena of economic and military rivalry.  
There is no limit to what each nation wishes to achieve at the expense of 
others in these two 

 
 
UNREASON 
223 
 
areas, and governments act as if it were a matter of life and death.  The 
search for power and productivity gives meaning to the social 
instrumentalizing of nature by technique.  The social resources behind 
this search tend to make it indefinite, for competition has no need to come 
to a halt. 
 
2.  Paradigms 
 
It seems to me that there are five main themes or paradigms at work in 
this descent of the technical world into unreason.  The first paradigm is 
the desire to normalize everything.  This is an older trend, though it used 
to be no more than a trend.  The need is to create norms for everything, 
for the normalizing of the constitutive factors of society and humanity 
alone permits an integral application of techniques and at the same time 
universalization.  Language must be normalized.  This is especially 
necessary for computers, even to such details as punctuation and 
writing.4  (I am not dreaming!)  Only the normalization of meaning makes 
intellectual exchange possible and prevents misunderstandings.  A 
normalized language alone can be of service, and this is the motive 
behind the search for normalization. 
 
 
Aptitude for work, interchangeability of employment, and education 
all have to be normalized in the same way as bolts or weights.  In the end 
everything will be normalized.  But the norm, which supposedly 
corresponds to a normalizing human instinct, must never be imposed by 
fiat; it demands consensus.5  Thus what was invented for the industrial 
normalizing of detached pieces now applies everywhere.  It might be 
argued that this is not a serious matter.  It is simply a sequel to the 
industrial age.  I do not think that is quite true.  We have here the spirit of 
general technicization.  The pseudo-diversity of means, of media, and of 
computer creations, etc., is simply within an increasingly global 
normalization.6 
 
 
The second paradigm of unreason is the obsession with change at 
all costs.  This is the popular form of the myth of progress.  Once we are 
in an era of progress we can never rest.  The constant argument is 
 
 
224   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
that to stop is to regress.  This argument is always used against the 
theory of zero growth.  But it means that we must always be doing 
something new and never be left behind.  From this standpoint change is 
good in itself.  We have to change all the objects of daily life.  Nothing is 
made to last.  Whatever lasts (even in human relations) belongs to a 
world that is totally past. 
 
 
As we see, people are constantly changing partners, television sets, 
personal property, cars, etc.  There is no reason for it; change imposes 
itself Ideas change along with information.  Governments change, art 
changes, and in art the new style must not borrow anything from the past, 
so that it becomes totally dislocated.  In opera, for instance, we find lively 
debates about the staging of Wagner or, in 1985, Aida.  An interesting 
phenomenon here is that we cannot change the music or the plot, yet 
change has to be made.  Something new must be done or the operas 
cease to be of any interest.  The solution is to change what is not 
fixed-the setting.  Hence the setting becomes the important thing.  It 
effaces the music.  What has been changed is the interesting thing.  We 
thus have grotesque baroque fantasies.  Wagner was writing operas 
about the families of great modern industrialists.  Intellectuals debate 
such novelties seriously, and their conclusion is always that the 
experience was interesting and revitalization was necessary.7 
 
 
The third paradigm of unreason is growth at all costs.  We all know 
this obsession in all areas.  Growth is thought to be good in itself.  No one 
asks why, or for what, or whether it is useful, or who it serves, or what will 
be done with the excess.  The lack of interest in such questions is a sign 
of unreason.  Growth is self-justified.  It might have been foreseen that 
growing too many tomatoes here or peaches there or corn elsewhere 
would make it impossible to sell them, but so what?  Everybody wants to 
grow at all costs and throw increasing quantities on the market and finally 
in the ditch.  We find the same in every sphere.  John Stuart Mill made a 
reasonable point when he argued that increasing production is an 
important goal only in backward countries.  In more advanced countries 
the essential economic need is better distribution, one of the inevitable 
means being severer restriction as regards population.  If the earth would 
lose much of the charm which it owes to things that the unlimited increase 
of wealth and population 

 
 
UNREASON 
225 
 
takes from it simply to make a larger population possible, but not one that is 
better or happier, Mill hoped sincerely, for the good of posterity, that we would 
be content to remain stationary except as necessity did not permit.8  But we 
did not listen to this wise advice.  Growth is now for growth's sake.  But 
growth is in contradiction with growth (e.g., that of population with that of the 
standard of living).  We thus engage in a never-ending pursuit of which we 
are the witnesses and agents. 
 
 
We need to ponder the truism that unlimited growth is not possible in a 
limited world.  According to Jouvenel's calculations, if the number of vehicles 
continues its exponential growth, by the year 2000 all France will be covered 
by automobiles.  It might be replied that that will never happen because we 
will have the sense to stop before it is too late.  But it was between 1970 and 
1975 that we ought to have perceived the negative effects of economic 
growth and the excessive growth of the costs of this growth.  Then came the 
report of the Club of Rome and the deregulation of the international monetary 
system: a beginning of wisdom.  But as the crisis ended this was swept away 
again and obsessional growth recommended.  The human race has never 
given historical proof of the wisdom that is needed.  We always want more, no 
matter what the damage or the costs. 
 
 
It might also be replied that the world is not really finite or limited since 
there are millions of galaxies and we have only to colonize them to find plenty 
of room.  I am not joking; some authors seriously make this point.  But for the 
moment, in spite of satellites and the space lab, there is no conceivable 
possibility of an emigration of millions of people to Mars or Venus.  In twenty 
years it will not be conceivable.  Hence the limit remains, and it is unreason to 
think that we can ignore it. 
 
 
The fourth paradigm of unreason is that of speed.  Curiously, a contrast 
has sometimes been made between the industrial age when speed was 
demanded (Taylorism, etc.) and the technical age, when machines are 
certainly faster but they are said to save time for us, so that we can live and 
work at a more relaxed pace.  Now it is true that many tasks which demand 
accelerated work can be performed today by machines.  At the same time life 
globally is forced into increasing speed simply because of these machines.  
The problems of pace and rhythm have certainly not been solved.  An 
anecdote will show how imperative speed is. 
 
 
In 1983 M.  Le Garrec settled some delicate matters by circular.  When 
attacked, he replied that if he had followed regular procedures 
 
 
226   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
and consulted all competent commissions and representative bodies, this 
would have caused serious delays and affected wages and measures 
against unemployment.  That argument is typical of the technocratic 
mentality.  Legal procedures are undoubtedly slow.  Reconciling interests 
slows down the decision-making process.  Government processes are 
slow.  This is always the argument of dictators.  Democracy is slow.  That 
is why we have now to make a parody of democracy.  Like Le Garrec, we 
have to settle things quickly without observing the procedures that restrict 
us. 
 
 
Our judgments have to be as quick as our machines.  But reason 
puts two questions.  Is it a bad thing to adjust decisions and actions to our 
human speed?  (Specialists in computers say that this is impossible!)  Is it 
a bad thing to lose time on political and social relations so as to achieve 
genuine consensus by grass-roots negotiation rather than arriving at 
authoritarian decisions by way of the hierarchical echelons? 
 
 
Everything must now be done fast, whether we refer to decision, to 
actions, to judgments, or to human relations.  A few years ago I calculated 
that if the USSR were to launch a nuclear missile against France, we 
would be told at once of its departure.  But it would arrive in six minutes.  
Six minutes for the president to learn of it and descend to the shelter to 
reach the red button!  At best the president would have, therefore, no 
more than a single minute to decide whether to start a nuclear world war.  
This is an illustration of the human condition in the technical world.  It is 
no longer a matter simply of going faster (as in L'homme pressé by P.  
Morand) but of deciding and acting faster.  Parodying Galbraith's famous 
phrase, one might say that we have control over the machines; we now 
have to follow them! 
 
 
The final paradigm of unreason is the implicit one that all judgment 
now depends on techniques.  This is part of the autonomy of technique.  
No judgment is admissible that might hamper the progress of science or 
technique.  There can be no independent moral judgment (this is bad!) or 
rational judgment (this is unreasonable!).  As regards moral judgment, 
morality is very uncertain, and in a society like ours there are no longer 
any basic principles from which to derive the actual consequences.  
Furthermore, moralists seem to be out of touch with the age and only a 
few are ready to confront it (cf.  the studies of Fourastié or Jankélévitch).9  
As regards rational judgment, the arguments can easily be turned around. 

 
 
UNREASON 
227 
 
The question of armaments provides the model of unreasonableness.10  
What sense does it make to manufacture and sell more and more 
powerful weapons?  There are two questions here.  Ten years ago a 
minister gave me an answer: France has to be armed and defended.  For 
this defense it cannot risk being dependent on others.  It must provide for 
its own needs.  We thus make our own weapons and keep them up to 
date (the principle of competition).  But this means that older ones have to 
be discarded.  Again, once our industrial capacity is geared to produce 
weapons, we make more than we need.  Hence we export those weapons 
that are outdated and new ones that are surplus to our own needs.  This 
concludes the argument.11  It all hangs together.  Our whole problem with 
technique receives here a clear and unequivocal response.  The irrational 
nature of the presuppositions (the entity of France, the threat hanging 
over it, its isolated capacity, etc.) is completely ignored. 
 
 
A further question is whether it really makes sense to manufacture 
more than we need.  But here we come under the double logic of 
industrial and technical functioning and the profit motive (which is present 
in socialist countries too!).  One might also ask whether it makes sense to 
think that in the era of the superpowers, the USSR and the USA, France 
can provide for its own weapons and security.  The idea of absolute 
sovereignty surely makes no sense in the age of multinational 
corporations and the structuring of a global rather than an international 
economy.  (All governments today are having the same experience!)  
Again, is it reasonable to sell armaments to Third World countries?  They 
squander their resources to buy weapons to the detriment of their true 
development.  Yes, it is replied, but we cannot let the weapons rust, and 
there are also the demands of foreign trade.  Even though the sale of 
arms is not the most important export, as often alleged, it represents 15 
percent of exports, and we cannot accept a deficit of that size.  But I press 
the question of what is reasonable.  Is it reasonable to think that if we arm 
and overarm Third World countries they will not go to war?  This is what 
we have seen happening over the last thirty years.  And it is only a 
beginning.  Eventually the Third World will inevitably turn on the 
developed countries.  We are arming the Third World to a point of 
 
 
228  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
recoil when we will pay the true price.  My judgment here is not a moral 
one, but such is indeed unreason.  In this whole area there has been for 
many years an inability to think reasonably. 
 
3.  The Main Areas of Unreason 
 
Apart from armaments it seems to me that there are three principal areas 
in which unreason is almost axiomatic: pollution, the Third World, and 
nuclear technology.  A characteristic of these three areas (as in many 
others) is a total failure to look ahead.  This is very strange, since we 
have on the one hand the many forecasts to which we have referred 
already, but on the other the decisions taken by many public or private 
bodies, and by individuals, in which the future in no way affects the actual 
motivations.  Theoretically it is calculated that in twenty years there will be 
so many inhabitants of the earth, that everything will be done by 
computer, etc.  There is a kind of foresight that is based on what is 
approved in advance and that in no way challenges what is being done 
today.  Even if forecasts run contrary to choices already made, the 
chosen course is blindly followed with no self-critical ability.  We have 
seen this in the field of armaments.  The same is true in the three other 
areas of unreason.  Unreason, strictly speaking, is here a refusal to look 
ahead to the future.  "After me the deluge" is our practice.  One of the 
high French technocrats put it very elegantly when I talked with him about 
the pressing problem of atomic waste; he replied that after all, we can 
leave such problems for our children to solve. 
 
 
As regards pollution, there is no more room for debate.12  There is 
now general agreement about the danger of the accumulation Of C02 in 
the atmosphere,13 about acid rain, about the pollution of water tables 
throughout most of Europe, about the pollution caused by automobile 
exhaust, about the introducing of heavy metals into our air and water, 
about the pollution of our large lakes and inland or semi-inland seas (the 
Mediterranean and the Baltic), about the pollution even of the Atlantic, 
about the danger of the accumulation of chemical or nuclear poisons, 
about the dangers posed by the deactivating of nuclear power 

 
 
UNREASON 
229 
 
stations, and about the almost unimaginable pollution of great rivers like 
the Rhine, not to speak of the pollution that is not so directly felt like that 
of noise, which is so crucial a matter for us in the West,14 and the pollution 
caused by the density of human relations or the excess of information, 
though it might be argued that this is not really pollution. 
 
 
Face to face with these countless facts, with these risks which we do 
not regard as major risks because they are not terrifying accidents, but 
which are still major risks over the long haul, nothing is done.  The 
example of radioactivity is typical.  It is said, of course, that the 
radioactivity emitted by X-ray examination or power stations or nuclear 
tests or even accidents like Three Mile Island and Chernobyl is small.  
Each time calculations are made to prove this point.  But I have never 
seen it asked what happens when some rays are of average or even long 
duration as well as short.  Let us take those of average duration (a few 
years).  Obviously, the radioactivity they emit will build up.  On each 
occasion the, radioactivity may not be dangerous but the cumulative 
increase may become so.  It might also be said that the amounts do not 
exceed those that people receive who live in granite areas (like Brittany or 
Auvergne).  But some biologists have shown that in such areas there is a 
much bigger ratio of congenital malformations (e.g., goiters).  Are we not 
exposing the total world population to these major risks over the long 
haul? 
 
 
If we extend the question of pollution to certain aspects of ecology 
we again come across major risks.  We recall that in ecology there are 
two different circles which do not coincide.15  One group is mainly 
interested in ecological balance, and this means that everything in nature 
has a kind of sacred character.  The destruction of rare animals and lands 
is a crime.  Everything in nature is good; human intervention is always 
reprehensible.  The other group is both narrower and broader.  The 
important thing here is our own ecological niche.  We risk destroying 
ourselves by destroying our ecological milieu.  Our niche is an order of 
both nature and society.  We are not concerned with nature alone.  If we 
disturb its balance too much, we will have to bear the dreadful 
consequences. 
 
 
Forests provide us with an example.  Four-fifths of the world's forests 
are in Latin America, Siberia, and Equatorial Africa.  Two of these 
 
 
230   
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
areas are poor in energy.  Energy is expensive, and the forests offer a 
source that is close to hand.  Throughout the world three hectares (almost 
7.5 acres) of forest are cut down every second, or 288,000 hectares 
(720,000 acres) a day.  Roads are being made through the Amazonian 
forest, and in addition it is the victim of mining and settlement schemes.  If 
we carry on like this, the world's forests will be gone in fifty years.  But 
trees mean oxygen (along with the surface of the sea, which is itself 
threatened by oil, etc.).  Mad deforestation is leading to the loss of our 
source of oxygen and to the increase in deserts, which do not arise 
merely through drought but perhaps even more from the need for wood in 
these zones.  Without realizing it, people are making deserts of their own 
border areas by burning wood.16 
 
 
At the Nairobi Conference it was recalled that two billion people in 
rural areas use wood for heating and that four hundred million of these 
are in zones in which wood is scarce.  In fact 53 percent of all Africa is 
rapidly becoming desert.  One might speak of an ecological disaster 
which puts all of us at risk.17  But we pursue in total thoughtlessness our 
triumphant ascent in space and computers.  Who can tell us to stop 
producing dioxin or engaging in deforestation?  These things are 
indispensable.  We are sawing off the branch on which we are sitting.  But 
we fail to see what we are doing. 
 
 
There is taking place on a world scale what we have already 
denounced in battles against developing18 the coast of Aquitaine.  Take a 
forested area, with different kinds of undergrowth, a lake on one side and 
the sea on the other, and a developer comes along.  How will he gain 
access?  He puts roads through the forest.  Picturesque developments 
are needed (e.g., marinas).  Ditches are dug for water, gas, electricity, 
and telephones.  The undergrowth gradually disappears.  Lots are divided 
out.  Advertising stresses the pure and tranquil lake, the marvelous air, 
the unlimited forest, the lonely beaches.  Trees are cut down to make way 
for the many lots.  Building goes on and on.  The trees constantly fall.  
The water in the lake grows stale.  The beach swarms with nudists.  
Nothing is left of what brought the people here.  All that 

 
 
UNREASON   
 231 
 
was beautiful and healthy in nature is no more.  Tourists have 
congregated, living on a myth.  Development has done a mighty work and 
the promoter has reaped handsome profits.  We have here an illustration 
of the logic of technique combined with that of money and power. 
 
 
I realize, of course, that some attention is being paid to pollution.  
There is reaction to it on three levels.  The first is to prevent it, for 
example, by catalytic converters on cars, or the many ways of purifying 
smoke or sewage.  I concede that in most of the individual cases it is 
quite possible to prevent pollution, but we have also to consider that the 
public is slow to accept these measures and that there is much 
negligence and a refusal by industry to apply them.  Often, too, the 
authorities fail to do anything, as in the case of noise.  Thus it would be 
easy enough to reduce the noise made by motorcycles, but no French 
government is prepared to do anything that might provoke demonstrations 
by young people.  Again, when purifying is costly, industries threaten to 
raise their prices, which would make them no longer competitive; thus 
adequate measures of prevention are abandoned. 
 
 
The second reaction is curative.  Some American lakes and some 
rivers have been cleaned up.19  But only in the USA is there enough 
money to achieve this result, since the cost runs to millions of dollars. 
 
 
The air in London, it seems, has become much cleaner over the last 
hundred years.  Well and good, but this is only a single instance among 
thousands.  Experimentation will certainly produce methods of eliminating 
organic wastes, which produce methane.  China has taken vigorous 
action since 1980.  It is in this area that cleaning up is easiest, but France 
has done very little.  Here again there is need for a heroic decision to 
make the cleaning up of pollution a primary objective of politico-industrial 
action. 
 
 
But this leads us to the third reaction, that of legal measures, the 
passing of decrees and agreements to prevent pollution.  Unfortunately, I 
agree with Bressand and Distler that the law no longer has any place in 
the comprehensive technical system!  In a socio-technical situation 
 
 
232  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
it is totally outdated.  We have only to see how impotent are the laws 
passed against noise or for the protection of fragile areas or for the 
purifying of sewage.  We have only to see how poor has been the 
application of successive treaties on nuclear nonproliferation, or how 
impossible it has been to reach agreement to check the over-polluting of 
the Rhine.  Thus in 1986 France decided not to apply a plan it had 
already accepted to bury the trailings from the Alsace potassium mines 
which were being dumped in the Rhine.  The excuse was that another 
plan had to be studied.  Similarly, the representatives and people of the 
upper Rhine fought a depollution plan so as to save money and jobs in 
the area.  The cellulose of Strasbourg as well as the potassium mines are 
important sources of pollution.  The Bonn Convention was signed in 1976 
but not submitted to the Assembly for ratification until 1983, and it was 
then denounced in 1986.  Twenty million cubic meters of silt laden with 
heavy metals arrive at the delta of the Rhine, along with fifteen million 
tons of salts, not to speak of nitrogen, detergents, phosphates, etc. 
 
 
Now only four countries need to reach an agreement about the 
Rhine, but it is still impossible.  What hope is there, then, for cleaning up 
the Mediterranean?  No one even dreams about it.  It is also impossible to 
arrive at an international agreement on acid rain.  Even if an agreement 
were signed, who would observe it?  Who would supervise its 
observance?  What sanctions could there be against a delinquent country 
if that country were the USSR, West Germany, or France?  We have 
already seen the general inability to stop nuclear proliferation.  Hence we 
can have little hope.  Pollution will continue to develop at the pace of 
technical growth.20 
 
 
The Third World is our second place of unreason.  There are warning 
signals, but no one heeds them.  Here again I am speaking only of what is 
obvious.  We all know the misery of the Third World.  Developed countries 
with 30 percent of the world's population have 95 percent of its wealth.  
This is a well-known fact.  What is not taken into account is that the 
misery is growing in spite of all that is said.  It is growing on three levels.  
The first level is that of the runaway demographic growth in the Third 
World-a growth which cannot be accompanied 

 
 
UNREASON 
233 
 
by equally rapid growth in the means of living.  To say, as is sometimes 
done, that by cultivating all possible land with plants that have higher 
yields, and by distributing the resources equally, the standard of living 
might be raised, is both true and ridiculous, for within the actual structure 
of the Third World this is not even conceivable.  The second level, an 
objective one, is the increasing impoverishment due to the using up of 
raw materials by our technique, the spread of transnational factories 
which require a labor force and transform peasants into an urban 
proletariat, and the reduction of local growers to poverty by competition 
and aid-things which are already obvious.21  The third level, a subjective 
one, concerns poverty in comparison with the high standards of living in 
rich countries (as is now known) and depression in the Third World.  Poor 
countries are miserable countries.  But the technological gap between the 
rich and the poor is widening at an incredible speed. 
 
 
From a human standpoint the Third World can never catch up with 
the developed world.22  The well-known example of Southeast Asia is 
irrelevant because the reference is to Singapore, Taiwan, and South 
Korea and not to the true Southeast Asia of Cambodia, Vietnam, Laos, 
and Thailand, which are in an economic slump such as none of them has 
known for the last two centuries.  Even Third World countries that have 
grown wealthy through oil do not know how to use their wealth because 
they do not have adequate economic and political structures.  There is no 
widespread industry or development.  What we find are government 
monopolies and a few localized instances of modernity. 
 
 
Relations between the Third World and advanced countries are 
becoming closer and closer because of communications techniques and 
the need of the advanced world for all that the Third World can produce.  
These relations unavoidably engender violent feelings of frustration.  In 
face of this, we can say that all the policies of advanced countries to deal 
with the situation have failed.  Nowhere is there any rational cooperation 
between the two worlds and never has it been seen that the same policy 
cannot be applied everywhere.  The problems of black Africa are not the 
same as those of North Africa, India, or Latin 
 
 
234  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
America.  But everywhere we see deterioration of the environment, and 
everywhere it is a mark of the failure of political aid and also of enormous debt.  
(We shall have to come back to the numbers.) 
 
 
Naturally, everybody is concerned about so tangled a situation, and it is 
rightly seen that if this or that country stops payment on its debt there will be 
repercussions on the whole economy of developed countries as well.  But no one 
dare go to the political extremes that the situation demands.  Reasonable 
responses and decisions (which are not satisfying, rational "solutions") have to 
rest on a generosity, a spiritual (and not an economic) sense of solidarity, and a 
sense of economy (i.e., economizing) of which we do not seem to be capable. 
 
 
The West implicitly refuses to give up its own extravagance and expansion 
of high tech.  It tries instead to soothe its conscience (cf.  J.-J.  Servan-Schreiber) 
by arguing that it is precisely these factors that will enable the Third World to get 
out of the impasse.  This is a technological bluff!  But in view of this refusal, this 
total absence of all that is reasonable, what can we expect? 
 
 
We could take things calmly so long as the Third World had no mobilizing 
ideology.  An anticolonial revolt in this or that country was not too serious a 
matter.  But today the Third World has a mobilizing ideology: Islam.  Islam has 
every chance of succeeding in opposition to communism, which was imported 
from the West.  Being of the West, communism is failing little by little in Latin 
America (except in Cuba and Nicaragua) and also in China, which understands 
that it must abandon communism if it wants to be the third great power.  But Islam 
belongs to the Third World.  With astonishing speed it is winning over black Africa 
and growing in Asia.  It is a unifying, mobilizing, and combative ideology.  We are 
now engaged in a true war waged by the Third World against the developed 
countries: a war expressed increasingly in terrorism but also in peaceful invasion. 
 
 
Clearly, the Third World, even if it were to reunite all its forces, could not 
engage in a declared, frontal war on the battlefield.  It could not engage in the 
trench warfare of 1914, nor in the war of movement of 1940, nor in the cold war of 
1947, nor in economic war.  It will never have enough military power nor economic 
superiority (as has been seen with oil).  But it has two fantastic weapons: the 
fanatical devotion of its suicide squads and the guilty conscience of public opinion 
in the West concerning it.  The strange thing is that Europe, although it cannot 
decide on the drastic reasonable measures that are needed to make the world 
livable, has a permanent guilty conscience.  On the one hand, then, we have the 
Third World terrorism which can only grow worse and which cannot be stamped 
out so long as the terrorists are ready to sacrifice themselves. 

 
 
UNREASON 
235 
 
 
When everything becomes dangerous in our world, we will be on our 
knees with no power to resist.  On the other hand, there is inevitably a 
growing infiltration by immigrants (workers and others) whose misery 
attracts our sympathy but who also create among us strong nests of Third 
World militants.  Intellectuals and the churches, for various reasons, are 
allies of these immigrants and try to open the gates to them more widely.  
Any measures taken by the authorities to stop them coming in or to 
control them run up against a hostile public opinion and hostile media.  
But their presence in Europe and the associated spread of Islam will 
undoubtedly lead to the disintegration of Western society as a whole.  
Because of the unreason that has been so evident among us for the last 
twenty years, in twenty-five years or so the West will find itself globally in 
exactly the same situation as the white minority in South Africa as it faces 
a black majority.  This will have been the long-range effect of 
technicization on two levels, as we have shown.23 
 
 
The final instance of unreason obviously lies in nuclear technology.24  
I will not take up what has become the classical argument that there is a 
link to the production of nuclear bombs, that there is the danger of a 
multiplication of atomic armaments, that nuclear power stations always 
involve risks, and that taking them out of service is difficult, as is also the 
disposal of wastes.25  Instead, I will cite only one example of the danger. 
 
 
236   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
 
A supergenerator is dangerous because it has no moderator.  The 
rise in power is a thousand times faster than an ordinary nuclear power 
station.26  A chain reaction can occur much more easily.  The Super-
Phoenix uses 5,000 tons of liquid sodium and 5.5 tons of plutonium, but a 
serious accident can be caused by only a fraction of these amounts.  In 
the case of the Super-Phoenix a meltdown would release several 
thousand times more radioactive products than the first atomic bomb, 
especially of plutonium, which in the form of aerosol is fatal even in a 
dose of only one milligram.  One might say that there has never been an 
accident of this gravity.  But what may be said with certainty is that once 
there are many machines of this kind, a major accident is bound to 
happen (Puiseux). 
 
 
Having said that, I will simply make two observations.  The argument 
for the absolute necessity of the nuclear program in France was that it 
was the only way to achieve energy independence once all hydroelectric 
possibilities were exhausted.  This argument presupposed an 
ever-increasing demand for energy.  It was taken for granted that to be 
more civilized we must use more energy.  The use per person became an 
indication of progress.  In 1981 the average person in America was using 
twice as much as the average person in France, and the use in Holland 
and West Germany was also more than in France, though not in Japan, 
and certainly not in Ethiopia or India.  The growth in energy use was 
supposedly related to human happiness, though in fact it often 
represented a loss of happiness.  "We have here plain evidence of the 
irrationality of this kind of development that is said to be a model of 
reason and efficiency.  American agriculture is a typical example, since it 
now uses more energy than it produces.  Pimentel has shown how 
inefficient is the agriculture that is making such headlong progress.  In 
1940 in the United States 150 kilocalories of corn per hectare required 
124 kilocalories of energy, but in 1970, 526 kilocalories of energy were 
required to produce 250 kilocalories of corn per hectare."27 

 
 
UNREASON 
237 
 
 
We must also consider the inconveniences (not to mention the possible 
accidents).  A nuclear power station generates so much energy that a 
stoppage (not to speak of a dangerous accident) can paralyze life in a whole 
region.  Knowing that the production of energy is concentrated in a few units 
poses the problem that all ideas of decentralization, local autonomy, etc., 
become futile.  Since everything depends on one powerful center, the rest is a 
matter of mere words.  Furthermore, this concentration carries the risk of 
great variations in a world in which there are so many imponderables.  In 
addition, the complexity of the techniques, which are constantly being 
perfected, means that increasing recourse must be had to experts.  The 
general public can no longer really understand or act in what has become an 
indispensable element in its life-style. 
 
 
Inevitably, the nuclear program means centralization, as we have said, 
along with a regression from democracy.  But investment in it is also 
long-term and expensive, while the life of the installations is short in relation 
to the initial costs, and there is no possibility of retreat if the enterprise seems 
to be a failure.  Finally, this system of producing energy increases the gap 
between developed countries and the Third World.  According to a German 
study it would take $5 trillion to provide adequate nuclear generators for the 
Third World.  Poor countries are forced into an impossible choice between 
increasingly expensive oil (though the price has stabilized for the moment) 
and a crushing nuclear investment.  Rich countries, however, can go nuclear 
and thus achieve a large measure of freedom from oil (which is produced in 
the Third World).  These are commonsense arguments which are often used.  
But they do not carry the day against the great magico-technical achievement 
of the splitting of the atom. 
 
 
I will simply insist on two final aspects. France congratulated itself on its 
nuclear program at the time of the first oil crisis.  But thanks to this program it 
began to produce more energy than it consumed.  As we stated earlier, the 
result was a publicity campaign to increase the use of electricity and a 
reduction of prices for higher use.  But then came a lean period when the 
French were using too much energy and there was a need to economize and 
produce more.  We thus have the topsy-turvy course: First too much, so a 
campaign for greater use; then greater use and too little, so increased 
production.  At the moment we have reached saturation.  We must now use 
more electricity so as to save other fuel; the nuclear generators will produce 
enough.  But we cannot stop them or put them in reverse.  We have to 
consume, whether there is a real need or not.  Électricité de France is 
pushing operations that use the maximum of electricity, even though the use 
may be exorbitant 
 
 
238  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
and of no real benefit (e.g., the reaching of 20,000° C at the Centre de 
Recherche des Renaridères).  What Mectricitè de France demands is 
absolute truth for the French government.28 
 
 
At this point we come up against a basic reality for the whole 
technical process.  If we do not increase use, what is to be done?  True, 
we can export electricity.  This has already begun, but the difficulty is that 
the export capacity is irregular.  The importing countries want a regular 
supply, but this is impossible, since we have an excess in summer but 
just enough in winter, when the use is higher.  A new solution is to store 
electricity (which hitherto seemed impossible) by electrolysis of water, 
hydrogen offering the most powerful chemical for the storing of energy.  
Thus a new technical process has come on the scene, but it is also a 
good example of the absence of mastery and the unreason in these 
areas.29 
 
 
In my view, however, another potential danger of nuclear power 
stations is a more serious matter-the danger of attacks on them.  It is 
obvious that terrorists (to use a more restrictive term) will finally make 
these their objectives of choice.  I stated earlier that such attacks can 
come only with development.  As terrorists perfect their methods, 
explosions at nuclear power plants will produce incommensurable fallout.  
Naturally, whole buildings would not explode in view of the solidity of their 
construction, but it would only be necessary to put a bomb in the right 
place for a disaster to result.  It is said that security is tight and constant.  
But in view of the instances of security being breached, as in the case of 
the U.S.  Marines in Lebanon, I have serious doubts whether the security 
is tight enough.  Nuclear plants would need to be put in fortified zones 
with special police protection, and there would also need to be a network 
of police surveillance covering the whole population, since measures to 
discourage real terrorist nests are not enough.  The multiplying of nuclear 
plants means a fantastic 

 
 
UNREASON 
239 
 
multiplying of military risks.  It is not possible to say that halting the 
program would have been unreason because attacks were not then as 
they are now.  To continue the halted program today is unreason.30 
 
4.  Complementary Examples 
 
I will select just a few other examples from the many available.  There has 
been much talk of the use of computers in farming,31 especially in raising 
cows.  Each cow would have a collar attaching it to its little computer, 
which would provide all the necessary information about this particular 
animal: what it eats, how much, how much compared to the average of 
previous days; its daily yield of milk, again in comparison, etc.  This is 
absolutely marvelous.  Farmers can know every detail about every beast 
in a herd in which even the worst cow produces 8,000 liters a year.  It is 
true that all the articles that refer to this little masterpiece recognize that it 
is very expensive (about 20,000 francs) and that it will not be profitable 
unless one has a fair number of cows, at least forty.  Several farmers 
have sometimes combined to make up a herd of a hundred, the number 
at which the computer becomes really useful.  There is thus a trend 
toward concentration, the organizing of larger farms, etc.  It is said that we 
want to keep up the income of the average farmer, but in spite of what is 
said, many serious 
 
 
240   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
thinkers argue that we have too many farmers and that a mere 5 percent 
of the population could farm all France.  Long live unemployment!  In any 
case, by encouraging small farmers to incur the considerable expense of 
follies like computers on cows we are leading them into increasing debt 
and lack of control over their own vocation, since they will not be able to 
regulate the price of their products. 
 
 
While we are on the subject of technique and agriculture, let us 
speak about another modern marvel: the system of forecasting yields.  
Thanks to satellites, we can get very clear images of fields, forests, etc.  
To interpret the pictures much preparatory work is needed in the 
comparison of various kinds at different distances.  We also have to have 
electronic instruments to measure the temperature of a field or forest.  
The difference in temperature between the side of a leaf that faces the 
sun and that in the shade shows exactly how much water it needs or how 
severe is a drought.  Finally, data are needed from observation of each 
field so as to discover, for example, the average size of corn leaves.  
Complex instruments, not hands, are used for this purpose.  Bringing the 
three sets of data together we can forecast three months in advance what 
will be the yield of a given area and how much return the crop will bring.  
But in my view this wonderful operation is sheer unreason when we 
remember that a hailstorm can batter down a field of corn in ten minutes, 
or a tornado can flatten a field of wheat, or a violent wind with rain can 
blow down a field of oats.  Such things can all happen, and often do, in a 
three-month period.  Those fantastic instruments are, in fact, useless 
gadgets. 
 
Need we return to the medicalizing of life?32  Too many medications, too 
many doctor visits, too much hospitalization, illnesses due to excess 
medication-these are familiar themes on which there is much agreement.  
What worries me, however, is the prevailing notion that even the well are 
sick though they do not know it, so that we have the opposite of the 
situation in Balzac's Le médecin de campagne.  Today we live in anxiety 
and fear.  Our technical milieu makes us afraid of sickness.  We resort to 
the doctor-sorcerer-magus.  We stuff ourselves with tranquillizers, 
hypnotics, analgesics (I am no exception). 
 
The important issue here is that of human quality.  We today do not know 
how to suffer.  We cannot tolerate the slightest pain.  We cannot mobilize 
our own resources to combat anxiety or fear.  We need 

 
 
UNREASON 
241 
 
help for the least little thing.  The intensive development of medical 
prevention, which is useful in dealing with ailments like cancer and AIDS, 
helps to nurture this fixation, this obsession.  Due to the excess of care, of 
medical and surgical methods, we cannot face up to ourselves and take 
responsibility for ourselves.  When something goes wrong, we cry for 
help, we seek protection, shelter, tutelage.  Overprotected, we joyfully 
hand ourselves over to others.  We claim the right to health, but this right 
coincides with the right to rest, to vacations, so that the world today is full 
of people on the move. 
 
Twenty years ago there was one migration a year, namely, for the 
summer vacation.  But now there has to be a winter vacation.  Indeed, 
there are approximately four holiday migrations per year.  At Christmas 
1985 some 500,000 automobiles left Paris.  We have to recall that this 
number, which means about one and a half million people, presupposes 
an absolutely unreasonable expenditure (or waste) of money on vacations 
of at least a week in the mountains.  To prevent traffic jams many police 
had to be mobilized and centrally located helicopters were also needed to 
direct things.  The provision of these elaborate but useless services 
involved a secondary waste imposed upon society as a whole.  People 
left the city en masse, traveled en masse, and arrived at the snows en 
masse.  We have here total unreason in which individual unreason 
corresponds to the collective unreason of society.  It is made possible and 
inevitable by the enormous technical machinery now at our disposal. 
 
I might continue for a long time listing individual instances of 
unreasonable behavior.  They all translate finally into the devaluation of 
the word and of language, which I have examined elsewhere.33  This 
devaluation may be seen in various orientations like that to which I 
referred earlier, that is, people speaking in films or on television, but their 
words being lost in the background noise of the street or music or general 
conversation.  This noise supposedly makes it authentic.34  We recall the 
theory that information is born of noise.  What information do we have 
here?  Two kinds, but the background noise is what is significant.  The 
human word has no importance at all.  This is in keeping with the 
generalizing of unreason.  But perhaps we should look more deeply.  The 
point may be that in modern society, which is essentially the 
computerized world, our older classical language is no 
 
 
242  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
longer adequate.  How can we talk about that for which we no longer 
have an adequate language because the methods of observation that 
condition it are no longer adequate?  From the standpoint of information 
theory, what is at issue is a shadow zone constituted by the question of 
the creation of signification. From the standpoint of the postulate of 
determinism, what is at issue is a shadow zone projected by the question 
of the emergence of the new.35  Face to face with this problem, may it be 
that the unreason of today is the reason of tomorrow?  But what dangers 
do not then lurk on the horizon? 
 
Rom these flashes of what I still call unreason, one may conclude that six 
dominant features are appearing secondarily in our society.  I will simply 
list these and not develop them, for we shall come across them 
incidentally further on.  The first is the almost total disappearance of ends 
that have been thought out and clearly conceived (at all levels).  The 
second is the fading of human interest in the concrete sense.  The third is 
the equation of the good and technical progress.  The fourth is the 
combination of very complex multiple interests (classical economic, 
political, and social interests being largely outdated).  The fifth is our 
inability to grasp a situation globally, or if we are outside a given situation, 
to take a longer or broader view.  The last is our total inability to rectify our 
mistakes by analyzing the path we have taken and seeing the factors at 
work on it.  We have looked at one aspect of this final point in discussing 
double feedback.  But we are far from having examined the whole range 
of the absurd. 
 
 
                                                 
1 It is necessary to note, however, some attempt at generalization and reflective 
thinking since the 1960s; cf.  T.  Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 
2nd ed.  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970); Bernard d'Espagnat, A la 
recherche du réel (Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1981).  The most grotesque of 
hundreds of examples of scientists speaking out on political issues was that of 
Frédéric Joliot-Curie on using bacteriological weapons in the Korean War. 
2 Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen, The Entropy Law and the Economic Process 
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1971). 
3 Cf.  my study of the geometric progression of technique in Technological 
Society. 
4 An interesting little example derives from the fact that I write my letters by hand.  
In the USA computers sort the mail.  Some of my letters never arrive, and an 
engineer friend told me why.  To the computer my I looks like a 7 and my 7 like a 
2.  I have to adjust my 1 and 7 to the way the computer writes them. 
5 The Association française pour la normalisation (AFNOR) was formed in 1918, 

                                                                                                               
                                                                                                              
arguing that industrial normalization enabled us to win the war. 
6 Cf.  the important speech by the president of AFNOR, Feb.  12, 1975 
7 A recent example was the staging of Hugo von Hofmannsthal's Venise sauvée 
at the Avignon Festival According to the review by Michel Cournot in Le Monde, 
July 22,1986, it was impossible either to see or to hear because a thick smoke 
filled the stage and the characters were at the back, speaking in false mechanical 
tones, so that one could not see who was speaking or to whom.  What counted 
was the smoke! 
8 John Stuart Mill, Principles of Political Economy (Toronto: University of Toronto 
Press, 1965). 
9 Yet there is a confused sense of the need.  We see this from the many 
commissions on the morality of communication, on medical ethics, on the ethics of 
research, of genetic engineering, etc., though naturally these lead to nothing 
concrete as regards either decisions or conclusions.   
10 .  Cf.  H.  Eijkelhof and E.  Boeker, "Weapons," Science, Technology and 
Society 2/1 (1982). 
11 It may be noted in passing that for France the age of glory in this regard is 
perhaps over.  Fewer weapons were exported in 1985 and almost none in 1986.  
But only four or five contracts had to be canceled to achieve this result. 
12 Cf.  Andrew I.  Sors and David Coleman, eds., Pollution Research Index: A 
Guide to World Research in Environmental Pollution, 2nd ed.  (Detroit: Gale, 
1980). 
13 C02 in the atmosphere increases by 0.5 percent per year.  Doubling it would 
increase the temperature by 10° C.  at the poles, upset the atmospheric 
circulation, perhaps make deserts of the temperate regions, and interfere with the 
productivity of the oceans. 
14 Already in 1975 there was a study of the danger of noise for workers.  Cf.  
Laverrière, Repenser ce bruit dons lequel nous baignons (La Pensée universelle, 
1982); and F.  Caballero, Essai sur la notion juridique de nuisance (Pichon, 1981). 
15 Of many works cf.  especially the special number of Science, Technology and 
Society 3/1 (1983), entitled "The Finite Earth," an exhaustive study. 
16 I saw a small instance of this in my own town.  In a forest close by, the council 
allowed gypsies to camp and they used the wood for heating.  In less than five 
years the whole of the forest had gone and the earth was denuded. 
17 See the detailed study in J.  Gellibert's Bordeaux dissertation, "Le Choix de la 
biomasse comme énergie" (1986).  Gellibert also adds that deforestation brings 
erosion.  Thus in Nepal 240 million tons of arable land are washed away each 
year through deforestation. 
18 Le Lannon calls this déménagement de territoire, "the emptying of the area" [in 
French a play on aménagement for "developing"-TRANS.].   
19 Cleaning up is always possible (except for nuclear pollution) but only at the cost 
of much labor and expense.  Lake Michigan used to be one of the most polluted 
lakes in the world, but in 1975 seven treatment plants were set up, including the 
biggest in the world, the West Sewage Treatment Plant.  At a Water Ways Control 
Center technicians were on constant watch for the slightest variations of level in 
the sewers.  But this was not enough.  There was a need to drain off sewage and 
rainwater, and so in 1980 a tunnel was built to a big reservoir to divert water from 
the lake and make possible its recuperation.  Positively, this provided additional 
industrial activity, increasing the gross national product.  Negatively, it cost vast 
 
amounts of money.  If cleaning up pollution is necessary, it is also extremely 
wasteful! 
20 Cf.  Bertrand Goldschmidt, The Atomic Complex (American Nuclear Society, 
1982); H.  Blix, "Non-prolifération," Le Monde, April 1985; H.  Laverrière, 
Repenser ce bruit dons lequel nous boignons (La Pensée universelle, 1982); F.  
Caballero, Essai sur la notion juridique de nuisance (Pichon, 1981); B.  
Charbonneau, Nature du droit de la gestion des risques (1978); idem, Régime 
juridique de la lutte contre la pollution des eaux (1985); idem, Protection de 
l'environnement en droit de l'urbanisme (1984); De Rosnay, Biotechnologies et 
bio-industriels (Paris: Seuil, 1979). 
21 Cf.  my study of this question in La Révolution nécessaire, in which I explained 
that we should adapt industry to produce the necessary tools suitable to each 
country and its customs and modes of production.  But if such tools were to be 
distributed free, this would means a severe drop in our standard of living, and who 
would accept that out of solidarity with the Third World? 
22 See M.  Kamenetzky, R.  Maybury, and C.  Weiss, "Scientific and Technological 
Dimension of Development," Science, Technology and Society 4/2 (1984)-a study 
of the possibilities and limits of development in the Third World 
23 On the Third World cf.  especially J.  de Ravignan, La Faint, pourquoi?  (Syros, 
1983); J.-C.  Derian and Staropoli, La Technologie incontrôlée?  (Paris: PUF, 
1975); V Cosmao, Changing the World, tr.  John Drury (New York: Orbis, 1984); 
idem, Un Monde en développement (Éditions Ouvrières, 1984); F.  Partant, La fin 
du développement (Paris: Maspero, 1982); J.  Touscoz, et al., Transferts de 
technologie (Paris: PUF, 1978); A.  Mattelart and H.  Schmucler, Communication 
and Information Technologies: Freedom of Choice for Latin America?  tr.  David 
Buxton (Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1985); John K.  Galbraith, The Nature of Mass 
Poverty (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1979); Reports of the independent 
Commission on International Humanitarian Questions: La Déforestation et la 
Désertiftcation (Berger-Levrault, 1985); Famine, mieux comprendre, mieux aider 
(reconstruire le monde rural en Afrique) (Berger-Levrault, 1986); Ivan Illich, 
"Development: Its Three Dimensions," Science, Technology and Society 1/4 
(1981); M.  Moravcsik, "Mobilizing Science and Technology for Development," 
ibid. 
24 See J.  J.  Romm, "Scénario pour un conflit nucléaire," La Recherche 149 (Nov.  
1983). 
25 M.  Barrère, "On enfouir les déchets nucléaires," La Recherche 166 (May 
1985), examines all the proposals, shows they will not work, and puts the wastes 
in two classes, the less and more highly radioactive.  The issue of Aug.  1985 (no.  
168) took up the question again, discussing the criterion of least risk rather than 
maximum safety in the selection of sites.  Cf.  also G.  I.  Rochlin, "Le stockage 
des déchets nucléaires," La Recherche 122 (May 1981); idem "Que faire des 
déchets radioactifs?" Journées scientifiques de l'École des mines (1983). 
26 Cf.  the discussion organized at Paris in Sept.  1981 by the Groupe de Bellerive 
under the patronage of the French Academy of Sciences with the cooperation of 
the French Commission for UNESCO.  Dr.  Jochen Benecke, a German specialist 
on the safety of supergenerators, explained the concept of "hypothecality" put 
forward by Dr.  E.  Häfele, one of the fathers of the German supergenerator SNR 
300.  He stated that SuperPhoenix is a separate experiment and that the 
uncertainties are so great that populations are part of the experiment (Groupe de 

                                                                                                               
Bellerive, Énergie et Société [Paris: Pergamon, 19821, p.  488). 
27 J.-C.  Lavigne, Impasses énergétiques: Défis du développement (Éditions 
Ouvriéres, 1983); he gives many other examples. 
28 At all levels Électricité de France says that choices regarding energy must be 
political and not technocratic.  But the technocrats are also so convinced that their 
own solutions are right that any different choices are bound to be irrational and 
due to incompetence.  Thus any decision that deviates from their advice is 
self-evidently suspected of invalidity; cf.  Lucien Schwartz, "Syndicalisme, 
technocratie et politique," Le Monde, June 9, 1978.  But accidents have a 
sobering effect; cf.  M.  Barrére, "Des fissures dans le programme nucléaire 
français?" La Recherche 107 (Jan.  1980).  Le Monde, Sept.  30, 1987, carried a 
very interesting interview with the president of Électricé de France in which he 
recognized that they had been a bit too ambitious, that they would skip the year 
1988, that they would not press on with supergenerators, and that the age of big 
projects was over. 
29 Cf.  the research into solar energy, J.  Villermaux, "La chimie et l'énergie solaire 
(le probléme du stockage)," La Recherche 149 (Nov.  1983). 
30   I might list some of the points made in the excellent article by Paul Fabra, "Le 
dogme de linfaillibilit6 nucl6aire," Le Monde, Aug.  1986.  Fabra argues that the 
confidence of technicians and politicians who push the nuclear program inFrance 
calls for criticism.  They claim that an accident like Chernobyl is impossible in 
France even though they allow that human error can always occur (and what 
other error would there be?).  No doubt they have good technical reasons for their 
confidence.  We do not have the competence to dispute this.  But that is not the 
end of the matter, as we see from the report on the Challenger disaster in the 
USA, which led to the temporary suspension of the shuttle program.  What led 
those who drew up the report to question the confident NASA technicians was the 
deposition of the engineer who expressed doubts about the safety of a crucial part 
of the shuttle.  It is easy to cast a stone at this engineer for not sticking to his 
guns, but he, too, was a victim of the quasi-infallibility which previous successes 
had engendered at NASA (as among technicians in the French nuclear power 
program).  As regards the profitability of the stations, at the lower price of oil no 
other producers ofelectricity in the capitalist world are interested in additional 
nuclear power.  Most nuclear technicians argue that the low price of oil is 
temporary, but they may be wrong, since OPEC seems incapable of enforcing an 
artificially high price so long as there is no return of inflation. 
31 See R.  Bouchert, "Les fermes de l'an 2000 sophistication (Télématique 
agricole . . .)," La Recherche 119 (Feb.  1981). 
32 See Robert Castel, La Gestion des risques (Minuit, 1981).  The computer has 
made medicine more impersonal, for medicine depends on the computer and 
statistics.  Objectivity is justified in the name of efficiency, but it dehumanizes 
medical treatment. 
33 See J.  Ellul, The Humiliation of the Word, tr.  Joyce Hanks (Grand Rapids: 
Eerdmans, 1985). 
34 We find the same phenomenon in the modem theater in which the least 
important and most neglected thing is the text itself. 
35 See Henri Atlan, “L’Emergence du nouveau et du sens," in L’Auto-organisation, 
Colloque de Cerisy (Paris: Seuil, 1983). 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER XIII 
 
The Costs: The New Relation between 
Technique and Political Economy 
 
We would do well to recall for a moment the successive relations between 
technique and economics.1  In my first studies of technique I noted two 
periods in its relation to economics.  In the first period it was taken for 
granted that economic life was determinative.  This is what provoked and 
permitted the development of techniques.  The market and producers 
created a demand.  Machines had to be made to meet their needs and to 
achieve the ends that accumulated capital made it possible to project.  
Industry controlled technique.  The transition came as little by little 
commercial capital became industrial investment.  Technique at this stage 
was subordinate, governed by economic growth.  It simply followed. 
 
 
But little by little, in what I see to be the second and last stage of the 
evolution, technique became more independent and autonomous.  It first 
began to develop in many areas that were not economic (e.g., in the case 
of techniques that are useful in scientific research).  Then it began to 
govern itself rather than responding to economic appeals or needs.  It thus 
became multiform, complex, and rapidly changing, obeying its own 
imperatives.  In other words, a technical innovation came about because 
the conjunction of ten, twenty, or fifty other combined techniques made it 
possible.  With the possibility came the fulfillment because there would be 
some research scientist who by experiment or theoretical calculation 
arrived at the combination of existing techniques and produced the 
innovation.  Whether the innovation has economic value or interest was 
now of no significance.  It was 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
243 
 
 
244   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
not a determinative factor.  The innovation was there; its application could 
always be discovered.  The great principle came to light that when a technique 
exists it has to be applied.  This is the stage which, since 1950, I have called 
that of the autonomy of technique. 
 
 
Reversing the previous situation, technique now became a driving force 
for the economy.  The creation of new techniques brought new possibilities of 
production, distribution, and consumption.  The economy followed technique, 
entering upon the new paths opened up by it.  Technique was not, of course, 
fully autonomous.  It had to take into account certain economic limits.  It was 
already creating goods whose economic usefulness was not immediately 
apparent.  But if it did not meet needs that were felt or foreseeable, it brought to 
light latent needs, and also, notwithstanding the debates about this, the 
creation of artificial needs.  It could be argued that since we kept up and 
eventually led in the game with much satisfaction, the needs were not as 
artificial as was said, that no distinction between natural and artificial needs can 
be upheld, and that after a period a need which is created by advertising but 
which becomes habitual is just as natural as those that are generally listed as 
such. 
 
 
All this went hand in hand with a raising of living standards, and 
economists took note of the changes, being forced step-by-step to find more 
complex models for the effects of technique on all sectors of the economy, 
including its structures.  But this work was possible only as the economy itself 
adopted the process, methods, and tools of technique and became more 
scientific, certainly, but also more technical.  The economy in action became 
the possibility of the constantly accelerated progression of technique.  
Economic science became the mode of managing and incorporating all the 
possibilities of techniques in a harmonious whole.  Yet between 1955 and 1975 
I began to see a certain discrepancy in this picture. 
 
 
I thus arrived at a new relation between technique and the economy.  
Although technique undoubtedly created values, it also caused much distortion 
between the various sectors of economic life.  There were also so many 
technical innovations that it seemed impossible to put them all into practice in 
the form of goods for sale on the market.  It was not that there was saturation.  
This has often been announced for one product or another, but it has never 
happened.  The impression arose, however, that economic reality and 
economic science were being outstripped by the enormous proliferation, that 
they could not rationalize it into a coherent economic whole, that the liberal, 
Keynesian, and socialist models were all inadequate, and that the new ones 
which were trying to take all the facts into account were increasingly 

 
 
 
 
THE COSTS 
245 
 
abstract and of relatively little use to a political economy.  In other words, the 
relation between technique and the economy seemed to be changing.  In its 
origin and creativity technique was still autonomous, but its concrete results 
were much less assured.  The economy was now serving as a buffer and limit 
for technical enterprises.  As always, there was the possible and the 
impossible.  But these were now measured by economic rather than technical 
capacity.  Technical growth became a function of economic possibilities.  This 
brought us to the fourth stage in the relation between technique and the 
economy, which I call the stage of the wisdom of political economics. 
 
 
 
Technique incessantly accelerates its innovative activity.  But it has 
ceased to be autonomous vis-à-vis the economy, the economic reality, and the 
functioning of this economy.  Economists are increasingly aware of this.  
Confronted by technical immoderation, by apparently unlimited proliferation, by 
the seriousness of the impact of techniques on the environment, by their 
overturning of the priority that elementary classical economies accorded to 
labor, raw materials, etc., political economics has begun to run into what seem 
to be insurmountable difficulties and therefore to raise some questions.  The 
first two, which are familiar ones and which I shall not stress, are as follows.  
First, we have discovered that not everything is possible.  Technique 
undoubtedly enables us to do this and that, but investment is needed which is 
of dubious profitability and which is so great as to make many projects 
impossible.  Thus it is impossible to make the most complex and costly surgery 
available to everybody and at the same time indefinitely to create more hospital 
beds.2  It is not possible to multiply satellites and at the same time to guarantee 
help for victims in every area.  I could give many more examples of choices that 
have to be made.3 
 
 
For economic reasons techniques are no longer indefinite creators of 
value.  Technique is still the most important creative factor but it is far from 
meeting all its own demands.  This leads us to the second well-known problem, 
namely, that for a long time too simplistic a view has been taken of the actual 
costs of producing goods; we must now take a more complex view.  The more 
techniques progress, the more they involve such difficulties as pollution, the 
exhausting of raw materials that cannot be renewed, social troubles, potential 
dangers, etc.  We have to take into account the compensations that must be 
paid, the precautions that must be taken, and the substitutes that must be 
sought if we are to estimate the real cost of products.  A technique that 
 
 
246  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
results in great risks of toxicity, for example, means that institutions have to 
be set up (e.g., specialized hospitals).  This is the well-known question of 
the internalizing of external factors.  It is a very difficult matter, for where 
are we to stop?  What risk is negligible?  What part of a problem cannot be 
imputed to a particular technique? 
 
 
We cannot answer such questions concretely.  But the very fact that 
economists have to consider such problems shows that they feel an 
obligation not merely to be scientific but to exercise a wisdom and 
moderation that stand in contrast to the immoderation of technique.  The 
situation will be aggravated, it seems to me, by the coming to light of facts 
that economists will have to take into account.  I might mention simply the 
fabulous growth of expenditures in all countries due to the development of 
techniques, directly because this becomes increasingly expensive both in 
feasibility studies and in onerous costs of production, which are now 
exceeding all bounds. 
 
 
Let us look first at the larger figures before taking detailed examples.  
The French budget now amounts to more than one trillion francs and the 
foreign trade deficit is 360 billion francs; public debt increases every year: 
614 billion in 1982, 900 billion in 1984, one trillion in 1985, 1.1 trillion in 
1986, representing 20 percent of the gross national product.  Interest alone 
on the debt amounts to $100 billion a year.  The American budget deficit 
was $220 billion in 1984 (6.6 percent of the gross national product).  
Foreign debt in France was 20 billion francs in 1980, 75 billion in 1982.  
The U.S.  Federal Reserve reports an "explosion" (Bourguinat) of trading 
deals on the various exchanges of up to $200 billion a day.  We have 
already seen that the indebtedness of black Africa amounts to $110 billion.  
Cuba alone (an interesting point) is in debt to the tune of $3 billion.  The 
debts of the Third World amounted to $1 trillion in 1985, with interest of 
$140 billion, which would absorb all the disposable revenues of the 
countries concerned.  This foreign debt increased by $620 billion in five 
years, and the countries as a whole would have to contribute 67 percent of 
their revenues to pay off the debt.' 
 
 
Throughout the world we find stupefying expenditures that no one can 
control.  Let us take some specific examples.  The Channel Tunnel is 
projected to cost 15 billion francs.  Computers to assure safety 

 
 
 
 
THE COSTS 
 
247 
 
for trains cost 1.5 billion francs.  An enormous infrastructure in the desert for 
satellite retransmission between Paris and Dakar cost 800 million francs.  The 
Villetts complex cost 5.5 billion, and one minute of computer images 
retransmitted by television costs I million francs.  In 1985 advertising expenses 
in France (including clips) amounted to 70 billion.  In a truly comic aberration, 
staging the opera Aida cost 25 million in 1984.  The estimate for the high-speed 
train to the Atlantic was 12 billion, but the price had doubled by 1982.  The 
Ariane space program (Ariane V carrying a satellite of 5 tons in high orbit and 
15 tons in low orbit) was estimated at 18 billion in 1986.  Columbus (a kind of 
space lab that can function autonomously or hook up with the American space 
lab) will cost 20 billion.  Hermes, a space shuttle, will cost 18 billion.  The space 
program as a whole will amount to 56 billion.  But we have to press on with it if 
we are to keep up.  There was rejoicing when in 1985 Ariane brought in 7 
billion francs worth of orders for launchings (including an American satellite), 
but we cannot deduct the 7 billion from the 18 billion cost, since each launching 
has expenses as well.  Furthermore, after several failures of Ariane, the 
number of orders diminished.  In 1982 Électricité defiance had a debt of 8 
billion.  A single launching of the U.S.  space shuttle costs $250 million.  I am 
not trying to give a full picture or to heap up statistics.  I simply want to show 
how enormous are the sums of money manipulated.  We are playing about with 
billions, and we have to ask what this entails. 
 
 
But first we need to recall firmly that these gigantic expenditures have their 
origin solely in the demands of technique, its production and application.  There 
are individualized techniques (including those needed for advertising, to which 
we shall return later).  There are also collective techniques (aviation, 
armaments, space, etc.).  Undoubtedly, most of the costs relate to the human 
element: salaries, pensions, subsidies, various services, insurance for 
damages, etc.  Yet most of these expenditures derive secondarily from 
technique or from the real or factitious needs stimulated by the technical milieu.  
From another standpoint, I realize that when a budget of 1,000 billion francs is 
split up among various departments and then among various services and 
branches, it is finally reduced to a human scale and there is nothing 
extraordinary about it.  Yet this does not mean that government expenditures 
are not of an order that we find it impossible to grasp.  We can neither imagine 
nor comprehend them.  We must also ask whether it makes any sense to 
engage in economic forecasting when it would need only two or three Third 
World debtor countries to refuse payment and the whole international financial 
system, from banks to states, would collapse.  Third World debtors can now 
cause global 
 
 
248   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
bankruptcy.  How, then, can we forecast a regularly functioning economic 
world market? 
 
 
We have referred already to armaments, but what do they mean from 
an economic standpoint?  The factories are running and there is 
employment.  But all countries are cursed by the weight of military 
expenditures: Third World countries as buyers, producer countries in the 
technical search for greater effectiveness, so that new weapons lose their 
value in less than five years and have to be replaced.  Thus in 1983 military 
expenditures in the USA were five times greater than industrial investment 
($600 billion).  With figures of this order (which make sense only to a 
computer) nothing is really represented and anything is "possible.”  One 
trillion today, why not two trillion tomorrow?  Some will say that a limit is 
imposed by the gross national product and the taxpayers.  But I do not think 
so at all.  At root the revenue from taxes is less and less important and will 
continue to be less and less important because what we have here is an 
abstract juggling.  The proof is that all countries are ultimately in debt 
internationally and that the billions on paper change nothing.  There is 
complete dissociation between the monetary and the real.4 
 
 
We have to see how the process of abstraction unfolds.  First, notes 
are covered by gold reserves, which do not circulate.  Then it is allowed 
that only 10 percent need to be covered.  Next, gold is dropped as a 
standard.  Money does not rest on a gold reserve but on the value of the 
goods produced in a given system.  Money represents the calculated value 
of the concrete products of human labor.  The value here is the economic 
value of exchange.  The goods produced are a monetary measure only as 
they are sold.  It is on this point that the whole theory of Marx rests.  The 
creation of goods is no longer primary.  Naturally, they still exist, but they 
are no longer the essential thing on their material side.  More and more we 
have the consumption of services, immaterial elements, images, sounds, 
collective goods (of a different kind from earlier collective goods) which 
serve as infrastructure and which are funded publicly.  These are not 
objects that the public can lay hands on to buy or sell.  They have no 
exchange value.  An Ariane rocket, a satellite, a cardiac transplant, a 
cyclotron: none of these things has exchange value.  Can we even say that 
any of them has "value"?  The 

 
 
 
 
THE COSTS 
249 
 
only value is that which results from the expenditure made to obtain them. 
 
 
In reality, however, almost everything which costs, which turns out to 
be very expensive, has a use value (airplanes, roads, etc.).  But Marx 
showed that use value does not enter into the calculation of economic 
value (for we cannot count as economic value that which farmers produce 
in their gardens to eat themselves).  At the same time all these high sums 
are due to things we all pay for.  We pay for the consumer society, for 
modern agriculture, for the unheard-of waste of paper pulp, for polluted 
rivers, for degrading the soil, for breakthroughs in leading high-tech 
communications (which weaken the postal service), for individual cars (the 
absurd and disastrous competition in making sophisticated and dangerous 
products), for Japanese motorbikes and video recorders with the imbalance 
in foreign trade, for out-of-season foods and Third World products that are 
the happy result of the green revolution.  We pay for all these things in 
money, which no longer represents anything, and also with imbalances, or 
harmful effects on the collective scale.5 
 
 
Furthermore, in these enormous budgets we have also to take into 
account the negative costs (reparations and compensations for pollution 
and nuisances).  In addition, two other factors are of increasing importance.  
The first is the disposing of wastes.  This problem is very complex, for if 
there are wastes at every stage from extracting raw materials to the 
finished product, the wastes are not of the same kind.  The environment 
can recycle some wastes, but this recycling takes time.  The important point 
is not the growing quantity but the lengthening of the time needed for 
recycling.  The waste products of modern industry are less and less 
capable of being reintegrated into the natural cycle (e.g., plastics apart from 
biodegradables).  We ourselves, then, must either eliminate or recycle 
waste products.  Simply controlling pollution from wastes cost the USA $17 
billion in 1985.  Some wastes can be put to use again (e.g., those that can 
reenter the biomass, which produces energy).  Others can be recycled by 
very complex operations (nuclear waste) which in turn give rise to fresh 
wastes!  Thus it is not possible to reduce to numbers the cost of the 
operations needed to deal with the millions of tons of daily industrial and 
domestic waste, especially as there is great variation from country to 
country.  But we certainly have here costs that are unavoidable with the 
growth of the population and of industrial production. 
 
 
The other great source of expenditure in our world, of totally 
 
 
250  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
unproductive expenditure representing a net loss from a monetary 
standpoint, is the covering of growing risks.  I do not refer merely to the 
enormous costs of insuring against automobile accidents but to making 
provision for risks of all kinds, for example, droughts or floods in a region, 
which make it necessary for public aid to be given to farmers.  Today we 
have to insure against an increasing number of risks.  We thus have to 
distinguish the level of the acceptability of risk from that of the coverage.  
Insurance has to determine what compensation can be paid for a known 
risk when damage has occurred.  What it guarantees is sanctioned by 
contract.  The covering of risks due to technical change cannot be the 
result of statistical calculation.  Nor is there any level of acceptability of 
risks as such.  It all depends on for whom, at what time, and in what 
conditions.  Each risk is a special case.  But how can we estimate the level 
of risk that a society is prepared to accept?  No calculations or data can 
provide an answer.  An interesting phenomenon is that after many failures 
to launch satellites by rocket, and in view of the costs of ever more perfect 
satellites (the last destroyed by the failure of Ariane cost $200 million), the 
promoters wanted to insure them, but because of the number and the cost 
the insurance companies were increasingly hesitant to agree. 
 
 
Unexpected risks of all kinds have become such that they form a 
system of their own.  The elements that compose them and the chain of 
events that leads to them are unforeseeable.  "To ask when a risk is worth 
running is from all appearances a question that lies outside the technical 
sphere in the true sense."6  This means that risks are properly a matter for 
political debate, I with competence on the one side and general 
participation on the other.  "There are only two ways of approaching the 
matter of the acceptability of risks.  We may compare the risks of a new 
project to those that exist in nature and talk about a normal level of 
acceptability (though this strictly technical approach reaches a limit in its 
hypothetical nature, there being no science certain enough to reduce 
contingency).  Or we may search for alternatives to the project and thus 
abandon the technical debate and deal with the rationality of the project in 
terms of political choices." 
 
This is enlightening, but I think that Salomon is wrong when he sets the 
technical and the political in opposition.  The politicians are always inclined 
to accept the conclusions of the technicians, the experts.  Furthermore, we 
have always to envision new and unexpected 

 
 
 
 
THE COSTS 
251 
 
risks.  Seveso, Bhopal, and recent transformer accidents were all unexpected.  
So is another possible risk.  Now circling the earth are at least 2,500 satellites 
launched since 1970, along with another 15,000 objects.  One or other of these 
falls back to earth from time to time, though we do not see them, since the 
engine finally explodes and they break into small pieces which burn up as they 
enter the atmosphere.  Nevertheless, after the accident in Canada in 1971 
most nations have stopped using nuclear-powered engines.  But the USSR 
continues to do so, and its satellites, when they go out of service, break up into 
two or three large pieces of one or two tons each, which cannot burn up in the 
atmosphere and thus fall to the earth.  These satellites have nuclear engines of 
50 kilos weight which do not burn up and the fragments of which are very 
radioactive.  But how can we insure against risks of this kind in these 
conditions?  What guarantee can there be?  Here is a new reason for growing 
expenditures that have no useful value. 
 
 
At one and the same time, then, we are in a society of absolute buying 
and selling and in a society of technical risks and increasingly abstract goods 
which cannot guarantee money and which have no value in themselves.  These 
goods and services are grafted at a second or third stage on operations that 
are strictly economic.  The only measure of these fantastic costs, of this 
exorbitant creation of abstract money, is the actual activity of growth, the hope 
of progressing, on the presupposition of going faster and faster.  It does not 
matter much whether what is produced is useful.  We have to produce, for this 
is the activity that gives money its value.  The activity has to be constantly 
accelerated to justify the expenditures.  This process is wholly in keeping with 
the thrust of technique.  But that also means that an "enterprise," with its 
structures and products, is not made to last.  The pace at which modern 
enterprises are changing is accelerating, their expectation of life is shortening, 
and capitalism (though not the social side!) is adapting, so that it gives the 
impression of extraordinary economic vitality.  New forms, like technopoles, are 
being invented, though these are already obsolete (as Silicon Valley soon will 
be).  We have to realize that one part of the enormous capital expended is 
destined to disappear without a trace.  Let us make no mistake–the economic 
flow from the industrialized countries to the Third World consists of capital that 
will be lost.  In the long run three-quarters of the earth will become 
economically sterile. 
 
Naturally, in these circumstances the fine old rural economy of the small farmer 
no longer exists.  This is openly stated on television.  When the building of a 
nuclear power station at Mezos in Landes (southwestern France) was 
announced, the commentator added that 
 
 
252   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
this would be the only economic center in the region.  That which had made up 
the life of many thousands of farmers up to that point no longer existed.  It was 
no longer worthy to be called an economy.  Nor did the natural environment 
count for anything.  Construction had to go on at all costs and France had to be 
subdivided.  I am not saying that provision does not have to be made for the 
growing population, nor that run-down houses should not be replaced.  I am 
simply saying that the rural areas are being devastated as the urban surface 
incessantly increases.  This is supposed to be a sign of progress. 
 
 
In the extraordinary growth of expenditures, we discern a sign of the 
competition among nations.  We find less and less internal competition between 
companies, for this would imply budgets in which money corresponds to value 
produced and sold.  But competition among nations need not pay heed to this 
factor, since the state can always turn out the billions needed.  As the nobility 
previously had castles and jewels for prestige and security, states today have 
big budgets.  To launch the first satellite, to be the first to land on the 
moon-these are goals for the state no matter what the expense in terms of 
money that does not correspond to anything.  And the rival state techniques 
can serve any end, producing goods and services that can be sold, feeding the 
competition in aircraft, rockets, armaments, etc. 
 
 
One has to find an opening for possible sales.  Technical production is not 
in terms of utility but of the possibility of international clients.  Only wealthy 
countries, of course, can play this game.  The amount of capital and the 
complexity of economic interrelations mean that there is a constant trend 
toward a wholly abstract system.  Capitalism is logically moving in that 
direction.  Profit alone can be the common denominator.  In the long run a 
business does not have to produce goods that make a profit; they simply have 
to make a profit (Gellibert).7  Transnational corporations have become so 
complex that in the long run we do not know whether they are making a profit.  
Abstract sums are spent, are reproduced, and are concentrated.  The same is 
true in large state enterprises, in which it is not obvious when hundreds of 
millions disappear.  The very size means abstraction. 
 
 
To take only one of many examples, it is interesting to note that Imperial 
Chemical Industry has made much more money by financial transactions on 
international exchanges than it has from sales of its chemical products in all its 
factories.  Gellibert refers not only to this instance but also to the joke about the 
Rotterdam oil market: "If there 

 
 
 
 
THE COSTS 
253 
 
is a market at Rotterdam it is not a market, and if it is a market it is not at 
Rotterdam!”  Representatives of the big corporations and oil traders negotiate 
constantly by telephone and telex.  In these negotiations cargoes change 
hands four or five times en route and tankers change their destinations, the 
result being what the trade knows as "paper barrels," that is, profits with no 
corresponding barrels of oil (Gellibert). 
 
 
I will be told that speculation has always existed.  I agree, but we still need 
to refer back to the important law (which people in general refuse to apply!) that 
quantitative growth entails a qualitative leap.  The billions of abstract dollars 
and the vast amount of equally abstract production entail such a leap.  This is 
inevitable when the national market has given way to the international market 
and the latter to a world market, when one lives on a cable-television planet in 
which economies are strictly interdependent and universal, and networks of 
communications and politico-social structures are under the universal 
despotism of this market.  All this is precisely the fruit of technical growth.  
Cable television, communications, universalization-these are techniques.  It is 
these techniques that are so expensive.  They constantly demand new 
investment as the competition among nations forces upon them techniques that 
are more advanced than can be applied. 
 
 
As the example given above shows, this situation has truly absurd 
consequences.  We recall the rise in oil prices in 1973-74, which produced a 
tragic crisis in the economies of all the developed countries.  Technical 
progress has permitted a progressive reduction in the price of this main source 
of energy.  But then the collapse of oil prices in 1985-86 brought a new 
economic crisis.  This crisis now affected Third World producers of oil (Nigeria, 
Mexico).  It was also a crisis within OPEC, with disagreements among the 
members.  It was a crisis for Great Britain, which no longer had its projected oil 
revenues.  It was a crisis for the international oil companies, which had stocks 
that they had to sell at less than they had expected.  If this world crisis was not 
as obvious as the earlier one, it was no less profound.  I also ask in passing 
whether, if it were possible to stop the traffic in cocaine, a similar world crisis 
would not result. 
 
 
To conclude, I will state this time my agreement with the financial analysis 
of Bressand and Distler when they show that finally there is no longer any 
financial substance (the sums themselves no longer count) but only networks 
and the flow of money.  Money does not have to be "saved" any more.  It is 
made to circulate indefinitely, in the abstract.  This means among other things 
that there can be no real financial regulation because, more and more, 
strategies of evasion are 
 
 
254  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
applied: to apply to what has become an immaterial domain, that of finance, 
the unlimited possibilities of innovation and strategic activity offered by the 
networks.  The above authors give some striking examples of the way to 
get around strict financial regulation.  Billions of dollars, which seem out of 
all reason to us, circulate (abstractly) in an incredible manner.  The total 
international oil flow represents the exchanging of something like $250 
billion in fifteen days on the New York stock exchange.  But of the $500 
billion per month only $35 billion correspond to commercial operations.  
The rest (about 95 percent) represent purely financial operations that are 
abstract and correspond to no concrete value.  The degree of abstraction 
keeps increasing, for example, with special drawing rights or substitute 
accounts (which ought to affect the syntax of the monetary networks).8 
 
 
Increasingly, then, we cease to have a world in which money plays the 
classical role and one can differentiate the government of people from the 
administration of things.  Henceforth, thanks to and because of technique, it 
is the creation, management, and syntax of networks that now offer to the 
world of business and government the real fields of action.  An enterprise 
will now define itself as an intersection of networks.  Thus we no longer 
have a vertical or horizontal integration of businesses but a system of 
networks (which makes possible the complex creation of transnational 
corporations).  This applies in the sphere of production, in the modes of 
access to multiple techniques, as well as in financing.  The concept of the 
network is often used in large firms.  To issue a loan, for example, there 
has to be a syndicate of banks under a single head, then the investment of 
the "paper" by the banks through their individual networks.  It is the 
combination of networks that makes the launching of a new company 
possible: networks of risk capital, of evaluation, of counsel, of mobilization 
of savings, etc.  Only computerized equipment makes it possible to do this 
on the necessary scale.  All financial and exchange markets are 
necessarily electronic markets.  They no longer engage in the 
money-changing operations of classical tradition.9  Like paper money, all 
these transactions represent only the Brownian movement of flow 

 
 
 
 
THE COSTS 
255 
 
and counterflow, for the market is no longer a place of meeting but a complex 
of services, rules, and electronic infrastructures.  This electronic market can 
instantly bring buyers and sellers together, bypassing the traditional 
intermediaries. 
 
 
Thus everything is faster and faster.  One instability replaces another.  All 
can participate thanks to their own microcomputers, buying and selling without 
going through a stockbroker.  (Democratization, it is said, but to whose profit?)  
Furthermore, the development from the credit card to the microprocessor 
enables all of us to enter into the exchange networks and of fully computerized 
payments (the use of plastic money).  By means of the terminal we can also 
manage our bank accounts (which we still need to have!). 
 
 
But this raises the central question: Do we not have here a transformation 
of economic normality?  Previously we needed a normal economic stability, 
with some controlled instability.  When instability became widespread, we 
called it a crisis.  But today we have come to consider as normal the 
widespread instability of the constantly shifting flow, and the need for stability is 
abnormal, since stability contradicts the brilliant march of techniques.  This 
march cannot tolerate the slowness of traditional economic operations (though 
stabilization may have value for the Third World!).  According to Distler, the 
mistake is to begin with a postulate of saturation of growth in the North and to 
reason in terms of reconversion and redistribution for the South.  (If this is a 
mistake, it confirms what I said about the widening of the technological gap.)  
This said, I take up again the thesis of a conflict between technical acceleration 
and the inertia of the traditional economy, which in both thought and operation 
is not on the same wavelength.  Hence this economy, rediscovering reality, will 
have to freeze the dance of techniques, by doing its real accounts, or else 
technique, completely gaining the upper hand, will lead economics into a world 
of abstraction, of unknown territory, and of crazy figures.  This is our true 
dilemma today, it seems, though few pay heed to it. 
 
 
Politicians certainly ignore the basic question: Are not our new, leading 
techniques the origin of the economic crisis (the very opposite of what 
politicians believe)?  This hypothesis (which is more than a hypothesis, for it is 
beginning to be demonstrated) was upheld between the wars by economists 
like Kondratieff and Schumpeter.  The essential thesis of the latter has 
resurfaced today, namely, that technical progress is the main dynamic factor in 
economic development, but that it is a destabilizing factor by reason of its 
timing, its rapid spread, and its many disruptive applications.  All the big 
technical innovations call into question whole sectors of traditional economic 
activity.  New 
 
 
256  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
materials displace the older textiles and steel.  The arrival of new products 
explains some of the stagnation from 1970 to 1980.  Replacements do not 
occur without crises.  Furthermore, for some new products (e.g., electronics) 
there is at first a great demand for labor, but then with innovations (the fruit of 
an accumulation of knowledge in various disciplines) there is a tendency to 
economize on labor, and revolutions take place in specific sectors.  The 
introduction of a new technique in an expanding system of production also 
causes structural crises of adaptation.  Techniques do not allow harmonious 
economic development; quite the contrary.  Policies of economic revival (often 
by the promotion of new techniques!) are no help so long as there is no 
understanding of the effects of technical evolution and the way in which it 
relates to income and investment policies.10 
                                                           
1 I am taking up again here what I said about economic absurdity above. 
2 Cf.  "The Soaring Cost of Health Care," Science, Technology and Society 6/1 
(1986), a study of health costs in the USA and the choices involved. 
3 See F Partant, "Campagne internationale sur l'endettement du tiers monde," 
Champs du monde, June-Sept.  1986.  The system is kept going only by new 
borrowing.  Rescheduling is not enough; Mexico had to be rescued afresh two years 
after rescheduling.  We are now in the second stage of the debt crisis (H.  
Bourguinat).  Oil is less costly, but everywhere there is waste. 
4 Cf.  especially H.  Bourguinat, Les Vertiges de la finance internationale 
(Economica, 1987), which contrasts the financial economy and the real economy.  
The new international finance no longer has anything in common with classical 
finance, due to the worldwide application of financial markets, all kinds of financial 
innovations, the globalization of the financial function, and computerization. 
5 For details, see J.  Chesneaux, De la modernité (Maspero, 1983). 
6 J.-J.  Salomon studies the interesting case of the Asilomar Conference which 
moved on from the utilizing of risky techniques to the problem of controlling the 
modalities and objectives of scientific research. 
7 J.  Gellibert, "Le Choix de la biornasse comme 6nergie" (dissertation, University of 
Bordeaux, 1986). 
8 Cf.  especially Bressand and Distler, Le Nochain Monde (Paris: Seuil, 1986), pp.  
187ff., 195.  Bourguinat, Les Vertiges de la finance internationale, emphasizes that 
the financial problem is increasingly difficult.  There is a striking contrast, he says, 
between the number and scope of plans to reduce debt and the beginning of their 
execution.  But if that helps to impede a solution to the crisis or to bring back 
inflation, that in turn can lead to protectionism and all the greater imbalance. 
9 For a good example of this transformation cf.  Bressand and Distler, Le Prochain 
Monde, p.  219. 
10 See C.  Reeman, "Les technologies modernes sont-elles A l'origine de la crise 
économique?" La Recherche 125 (Sept.  1981). 

 
 
CHAPTER XIV 
 
What Use?  The World of Gadgets 
 
When I was twenty years old, the question that I am asking in this 
chapter–"What use?"-was for me the horror of horrors.  In the period from 
1925 to 1935 only the abominable middle class, which was materialistic in 
fact though idealistic in word, incessantly asked and repeated this 
question.  Everywhere I came up against their triumphant logic: poetry, 
art-what good are they?  They could admire Picasso because his work 
was beginning to sell at high prices.  But history and Latin-what use are 
they?  We must certainly learn to count; that makes sense.  But change 
society?  To what end?  This was the question of the philistine.  The 
important thing then was to find a place in society.  Being red or leftist not 
only served no useful purpose; it was definitely bad.  "What use?" was the 
absurdly triumphant question of a middle class which no longer believed 
either in values or in God, which had a positive but no less limited spirit, 
and which regarded the making of money as the only useful activity.  
Anything that might contribute to this was useful; the rest was of no 
account. 
 
 
By way of reaction I was one of the generation that was greatly 
influenced by the surrealists and by Gide, who proclaimed the value of 
gratuitous acts, which were of value simply because they served no 
useful purpose and had neither origin nor goal but were simply because 
they were.  All this prepared the ground for existentialism and the 
philosophy of the absurd.  But at that time we had to crush the dreadful 
mentality of vulgar utilitarianism.  A little later, however, I myself had to 
put the same question but from a different angle.  The first time the issue 
was faster trains and automobiles.  When meeting a man who had driven 
100 kilometers per hour (in 1928) and cut fifteen minutes off some 
journey, I asked him what he had done with the fifteen minutes that he 
had saved.  He looked at me with astonishment. 
 
 
 
 
 
257 
 
 
258   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
Then when I heard that the Concorde had cut four hours off the flight across 
the Atlantic, or that the high-speed train had saved two hours on the run from 
Paris to Lyons, I asked again what people were doing with the time that they 
saved.  Were they beginning a symphony or a sonnet, or thinking up a new 
experiment in chemistry?  Were they simply enjoying the freedom of a stroll 
with no particular goal but in all the joy of liberty?  But no one was ever able 
to give me any answer.  They had perhaps taken a drink but in effect they had 
done nothing and had no vital experience.  They had simply filled up the time 
in an empty and insignificant way.  Or else they had profited by the time 
saved, as when a busy executive might squeeze three interviews into a heavy 
schedule, thus hastening the day of his or her heart attack.  And always with 
the anxious proviso to the very end of the journey that the airplane or train 
had to arrive on time! 
 
 
The time saved is empty time.  I am not denying that on rare occasions 
speed might be of use, for example, to save an injured person, or to rejoin a 
loved one, or to go back to one's family, or for the sake of peace in a decisive 
meeting.  But how few are the times when it is really necessary to save time.  
The truth is that going fast has become a value on its own, as is now 
acknowledged.  What we have here is L’homme pressé, as P. Morand so well 
describes him, but not really "pressed" by anything.  The media extol every 
gain in speed as a success, and the public accepts it as such.  But 
experience shows that the more time we save, the less we have.  The faster 
we go, the more harassed we are.  What use is it?  Fundamentally, none.  I 
know that I will be told that we need to have all these means at our disposal 
and to go as fast as we can because modern life is harried.  But there is a 
mistake here, for modern life is harried just because we have the telephone, 
the telex, the plane, etc.  Without these devices it would be no more harried 
than it was a century ago when we could all walk at the same pace.  "You are 
denying progress then?”  Not at all; what I am denying is that this is progress! 
 
 
Another incident that made me raise the question "What use?" was that 
of the first great massacres of the peasants, the kulaks, in the USSR.  I asked 
many friends who were close to communism what purpose was served by 
killing these peasants, who had no real idea what was happening in their 
country.  The embarrassed reply was always the same: They were capitalists.  
But all the evidence we had showed that this was not so.  They were 
counterrevolutionaries, then, who did not want their land to be collectivized.  
This was half true, but did it justify mass killings?  Did the reign of social 
justice, equity, peace, and freedom have to be inaugurated by massacres of 
which we knew both the horror and the extent in spite of censorship?  At that 
time I was 

 
 
WHAT USE?  THE WORLD OF GADGETS 
 
259 
 
still an innocent in politics, but even though I was taking up the despised 
bourgeois question I could not stop myself from putting it.  It is along the 
same lines that face-to-face with the fabulous technical progress of our 
day I put the same banal and vulgar question: What is the use of this 
immense mobilization of intelligence, money, means, and energies?  Of 
what use in truth?  The immediate utility is plain enough -dishwashers and 
robots save us time.  It always comes back, to that.  But it is quickly seen 
that we are invaded not merely by objects, as Perec showed, but by 
innumerable working gadgets.  There are individual gadgets and 
collective gadgets and gadgets of society as a whole, so that when I 
criticize them I stir up great, scandalized protests.  But before taking a 
look at gadgets we must first give a summary sketch of our needs.  For if 
objects are useful and correspond to true and original needs, they are not 
mere gadgets. 
 
1.  Needs 
 
The search for happiness is not new.  It is written into the U.S.  
Constitution, which is significant because the modern world opened with 
that declaration.  But long ago I showed that there is a great difference 
between the ideology of happiness (or the utopia) found among past 
millenarians and our own ideology of happiness.  It is a matter of means.  
Previously, the means did not exist to make people happy.  The quest for 
happiness was thus an individual matter, a matter of culture, spirituality, 
asceticism, and choice of life-style.  But for the last two centuries we have 
had the (technical) means to put happiness within the reach of all.  Yet 
this is not, of course, the same thing.  Happiness now consists of meeting 
needs, assuring well-being, gaining wealth and also culture and 
knowledge.  It is not an inner state but an act of consumption.  Above all, 
it is a response to needs.  Though it may be a commonplace, it is worth 
recalling that we must make a distinction (contested) between basic, 
primary, natural needs and new, secondary, artificial needs.  The lively 
argument against this distinction is that so-called natural needs are in fact 
modeled on a given culture.  All needs, it is said, are cultural, so that a 
supposedly artificial need, when absolutely anchored in a culture (like the 
need for a car), is just as pressing as a "natural" need.  As a rule, 
technical growth, in countries in which it has occurred, has enabled us to 
respond to the natural needs of food, drink, clothing, protection against 
heat and cold, shelter from bad weather.  I know that there will be reaction 
to this simple statement, for it is not true that in our world everybody finds 
these natural needs 
 
 
260  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
met.  My reply is also simple.  The difference from past centuries is that 
then, if there was famine, people had to accept it as fate and do the best 
they could to survive, but today famine, or the existence of the Fourth 
World, is a scandal that we must immediately halt. 
 
 
The difference in attitude brings to light the extraordinary change 
brought about by technique as regards access to happiness through the 
satisfying of primary needs.  But the same technical explosion incessantly 
produces new needs.1  That is the difficulty.  Happiness is harder to 
achieve because of the acceleration of the production of new and different 
needs which become the more intense as primary needs are met.  A 
young person wants a Walkman or a Honda because he or she does not 
lack food.  The new needs are also multiplying.  There are needs to 
compensate for the destruction of the traditional order: expenditures on 
nature, communication, cars, social life, leisure, sport.  There are the 
needs of desire which are triggered by technical progress and which are 
in rhythm with the proposed objects: the desire for pleasure, for leisure, 
for longevity, for health.  Though these needs are abstract and exist only 
because there are technical instruments, they are the constituents of 
happiness.  There is need of music for the Walkman, need of the 
computer, need of the telephone, etc.  E.  Morin rightly says that the 
progress of technical and industrial development is the constant creation 
of new needs.2  In other words, it transforms and extends our notion of 
well-being.  The transformation is more by quantitative increase than by 
qualitative modification.  Yet there are also qualitative modifications: an 
expansion of the consumption of the make-believe (cinema, television), 
and expansion of leisure in which eros plays a big part, so that life is 
eroticized. 
 
 
Finally, there is also the creation of a need to compensate in the 
form of techniques of well-being (jogging, dieting, yoga, camping, etc.).  In 
this case needs lead to well-being.  This is not done only for consumption; 
one is searching for a "better life" (according to the banal slogan), or for 
being "in shape" (pushed by advertising).  But there is a close connection 
between the better life or being in shape and technique, for we have to be 
in shape to be able to work.  An ethic of production finds inner expression 
in the concern for a better life. 

 
 
WHAT USE?  THE WORLD OF GADGETS 
 
261 
 
In sum, the problem of true and false needs, with the academic and 
stereotyped response, is outdated.  Merchandising has been made 
necessary by urbanization and made possible by technical progress.  Its 
corollary is the transformation of needs.  Basic needs are swamped by 
others.  Our life-style is made up of parts each of which is an object of 
marketing studies for the adjusting of needs and technical products.  But 
are they still needs?  asks Scardigli. 
 
 
Sometimes the needs seem to have been dormant for a long time.  
Thus 15,000 French couples asked for in vitro fertilization.  The need 
could not be there before the operation was possible, but from that 
moment there was an explosion of desire.  Consumers who are caught up 
in the system of "the production of objects, which leads to influence, 
which leads to the production of a need, which in turn leads to the 
production of secondary needs" are constantly on the watch for new 
objects.  They demand them again and again.  They rush novelty that will 
perhaps respond to their desires.  But the more complex than that.  As the 
framework of life is constantly modified, needs, too, are constantly 
modified.  To live in this society we are under pressures, but these in turn 
create needs, and the products meant to respond to these needs create 
new pressures.  We absolutely have to have an automobile or television.  
Television replaces the missing collective culture that was created by a 
living group.  The automobile enables us to leave the city and drive the 
freeway believing that it is the country.  Technicians never stop asking 
what is the new latent, unwitting, potential need that might be satisfied. 
 
 
Roqueplo gives an excellent example from a business report.  
Someone asked about the next need in plastics.  The embarrassed reply 
was that there was no need but there would have to be one.  Not to have 
a need is abnormal.  Yet this situation is more common than we think.  
There is a growing market for the new media (cable television, video 
recorder, videodisk, videotext), but those who resist are still numerous.3  
Pressure has thus to be exerted on these rebels.  They have to be 
consumers even though they have no need.  If no pressure is exerted, 
finding buyers will not be easy.  A 1985 report showed that dishwashers 
and freezers had not caught on in France: 95 percent of the households 
had refrigerators, 91 percent television, 72 percent cars, but only 30 
percent freezers and 20 percent dishwashers.4  Enough is enough! 
 
 
262  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
2.  The World of Gadgets 
 
What do I mean by gadgets?  In this context I am referring to mechanical 
or electrical objects which are amusing or entertaining and which we can 
take up or leave as we please.  The electric knife to carve up the roast is 
a gadget; the gas-powered corkscrew that opens a bottle all by itself is a 
gadget.  Always there is something of a game about them.  They 
correspond to an older reality.  I would say that the mechanical products 
of the 18th century were the first true gadgets.5  These were marvels of 
invention, finesse, material skill, and mechanical knowledge.  They might 
claim to be a scientific approach to the human mechanism.  But they 
could serve only to astonish, to provoke admiration, to surprise court 
ladies, and to divert philosophers.  They did not respond to any need, 
even a need for knowledge.  Whether we like it or not, they were games, 
learned and noble games, but still games. 
 
 
In its private dimension the gadget still has very largely the character 
of a game.  But I will not study this aspect here because I will deal at 
length with the question of play in our society in part IV below.  I will talk 
here only about useful gadgets.  What then, are the features of a gadget?  
It is a technically very complex instrument which represents much 
intelligence, a combination of learned techniques, and considerable 
investment.  It is now the main industrial product and an unlimited source 
of profit.  It is an object which always involves "very advanced 
composition," and always (according to an absurd usage which is 
hallowed by tradition) very sophisticated.  But a second feature is that the 
result of these efforts and skills does not correspond to any real need.  By 
the very nature of a gadget, its utility is totally out of proportion to the 
considerable investment that it involves.  Its services are completely out 
of step with the prodigious technical refinement of its conception.  In other 
words, it entails an application of high tech for almost zero utility.  This 
disproportion is what constitutes a gadget in the present sense.  This 
being so, it will be apparent that for me the gadget is more than an odd 
little personal object.  Yet I will begin with some examples from this area. 
 
 
We have quartz watches, which will not break down, which tell us the 
exact time without varying more than a second in a year.  What good are 
they?  Will they get us to meetings exactly on time?  Will they help us to 
get up in the morning more easily?  Will meetings we attend end precisely 
at the time announced?  Not at all!  These watches are no 

 
 
WHAT USE?  THE WORLD OF GADGETS 
 
263 
 
use whatever except perhaps for navigators (to plot their position).  What 
is more, they also come with remarkable extra features which might 
waken us up to a charming melody or enable us to do astonishing 
calculations.  An admiring friend told me one day that thanks to his watch, 
if I told him the day and year of my birth, he could tell me on what day of 
the week I was born and how many days I had lived thus far.  I thanked 
him for his kindness but had no interest in such data.  What is the point of 
so ingenious and learned an instrument when it obtains such absurd 
results? 
 
 
Many engineers, each more skilled than the other, are working on a 
flat-screen television so as to prevent the slight distortion caused by the 
curve.  Are we such lovers of art, such concerned aesthetes, that we 
cannot tolerate that slight distortion of the picture?  Let us go ahead then!  
But if others are like myself, ordinary watchers, they are quite satisfied 
with what they see.  What use, then, is a flat screen?  None at all to 
anybody.6  The same applies to the famous compact disc.  It will give you 
an hour of music without stop, and its use of the laser produces no 
background noise, no static.  What a marvel!  And we had it presented to 
us on French television (March 21, 1986) by some idiot who raved about 
the beauty, the grandeur, the technical progress which has made possible 
the reduction of size and noise, and who finished his stupid address by 
telling us to throw away our old music and our outdated recordings.  
Advertising, of course; people had to be induced to buy the discs.  But are 
we such informed musicologists or such lovers of music that the slightest 
speck of dust causes us to start?  What good, then, is all this buffoonery, 
this creation of pure music, this deifying of the laser? 
 
 
In reality, technique produces more technique whether it makes 
sense or not, whether it is needed or not.  We are pressed to buy it.  Thus 
there is the remarkable invention which enables us to see in a small 
corner of our television sets what is happening on other channels, so that 
we can better choose.  Another fine invention for nothing!  Then there is 
the remarkable oven which has a computer to tell us when the roast is 
cooked, or the microwave which cooks without heating up, as if there 
were the slightest need to invent a gadget of this kind except perhaps out 
of curiosity to see if it would sell!  Are our meals better?  Are our roasts 
better cooked?  Is our gratin better?  Obviously not!  The end result, then, 
is nothing.  There are also the household appliances furnished with 
"programs": electric ovens, washing machines, electric 
 
 
264   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
irons, etc.  Those who work them have to find the right button in increasingly 
complex operations, the usefulness coming to light only as they grow 
accustomed to them, that is, when the need has been created.  These things 
make life easier?  Not at all!  They go wrong, or we press the wrong buttons.  
And what about the freezer, which one out of three households in France now 
has?  It enables us to do our shopping (by car, of course) once a week.  What 
a simplifying of life!  How it lightens our burdens!  But how can we say that it 
really makes life better, shutting people up at home and breaking off many 
social contacts?  I concede that in the case of big-game hunters the freezer 
makes it possible to keep large pieces of meat for many months, or in the 
case of those with many fruit trees, it enables them to keep the fruit (also 
vegetables) "fresh" for a time.  But is this worth the cost?  (I could quote from 
memory the millions of dollars worth of food that was lost with the famous 
blackout in New York, not to speak of -the lesser one in Lyons, but these, of 
course, were accidents!) 
 
 
We may refer also to the marvelous videophone, the first network of 
multiservice videocommunications (May 1985).  The cost for the Biarritz-Paris 
network was 600 million francs for messages from 200 Biarritz centers (1,500 
in 1986).  This basically useless gadget has been called a new Concorde.  
The important thing according to M. Mexandeau is to give France 
state-of-the-art telecommunications technology.  How crazy is technological 
discourse! 
 
 
There is also the CB (citizens band), which provides entertainment on 
boring journeys.  As in every case, an attempt has been made to find some 
use for it.  If I see an accident, for example, I can immediately notify the police 
and the ambulance service.  But we know that it is mostly used to keep in 
touch with other unknown drivers who have the same gadget, and to carry on 
a conversation at a meaningless level, or perhaps to make or receive a 
proposition of a dubious kind.  Once again, then, we have a fine invention that 
is perfectly useless and idiotic and which might interfere with the useful 
communications of those who drive taxis or ambulances.  We might also refer 
to the use of telecommunications for erotic purposes.  The world of 
communication has become in fact an erotico-communicational world of 
science fiction.7 
 
 
Among other things that are socially reprehensible, such systems enable 
us to play with many lives.  But in this world social disfavor, does not exist, 
since it has other terms of reference.  This is still only a 

 
 
WHAT USE?  THE WORLD OF GADGETS 
 
265 
 
game, and we will return to it when we speak of play later.  What about 
the system which enables us from home to book theater seats, or to 
reserve a seat on trains or planes, or to know exactly when our train or 
plane leaves, or to find a telephone number that we need?  We could do 
all these things quite easily before.  The question, then, is whether such 
small gains are worth all that they involve in the way of laboratories, 
research, and capital.  After the marvelous promises, there were also 
failures to live up to them.  The system Claire de Grenoble went out of 
business in 1983.  Others are used only when people have time to spare.  
There is also a big gap between the freedom that no other media can 
offer, the possibility of playing at will (since I do not know to whom I am 
talking and no one knows my name) in a game of masks and 
pseudonyms, and the miserable poverty of the messages and 
conversations in contrast to the communicational riches of the media. 
 
 
Let us continue our slaughter of the innocents.  What use is the 
telephone which will enable us to see who is talking?  Is this so important 
(except in the case of two lovers)?  It does, no doubt, enable us to catch 
fleeting expressions which might change the meaning of words.  But all 
this gadgetry for a mere image!  There is, however, a better use for the 
videophone.  One simple call on it and we can be electronically guided 
through a town by the Tourist Office, arrange for a video, reserve a film 
for the desired hour, and make a doctor's appointment.  All that!  As 
Mitterrand has assured us, we have here the most advanced electronics 
and the true vehicle of economic recovery.  No more than that! 
 
 
Again, what use is the video recorder?  It enables us to see films as 
we want and to record television programs that interest us.  But do we not 
spend enough time in front of the television without adding to it, without 
doubling the brutalizing and dispossessing of the self which four hours of 
daily viewing produce?  As regards television, what good is the ability to 
capture by satellite programs from all round the world?8  Do we really 
need to see television from China, Pakistan, or Finland?  Do we 
understand these languages?  I have been in many countries where I did 
not know the language and the television sets in the hotels were totally 
useless.  Yet attempts are made to justify channels that receive foreign 
programs even though they could be suppressed without loss.  Is the 
price of a satellite worth the ability to listen to Dutch radio?  Absurd!  Pure 
gadgetry!  Another worthless gadget is the all-terrain vehicle with four-
wheel drive and big tires.  I concede that it is 
 
 
266  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
useful for ethnologists, but the rest of the time all that it does is crush the 
undergrowth, destroy silence and nature, rush about beaches, bring down 
sand dunes, and poison the pure forest air-and A this to save walking a mile 
or two on foot.  What use, except to wreck what is not already wrecked? 
 
 
It is on vehicles that the imagination of (very serious) inventors of 
gadgets has had free play.  One such gadget is the power window, which is 
useful only to spare us the exertion of turning the handle.  A computer at least 
ought to be on hand for such a noble task!  But that is nothing.  Seats can be 
adjusted electronically with four different "memories" so that different drivers 
can find at once the right position.  On-board computers can tell us how long 
we have been traveling, what our average speed is, what our gasoline 
consumption is, whether we are ahead of our schedule or behind it, and 
whether we are going faster than we planned.  Then there are remote 
controls which enable us to lock and unlock the car doors or to control the 
heating and cooling, so that the car will be just the right temperature in the 
morning even though we leave it out overnight. 
 
 
Nor is that all.  There is a gadget to detect sleepiness and sound an 
alarm, another gadget to record the tire pressure, and another to tell us that a 
car is passing, not to speak of the many anti-theft gadgets.  One of the most 
practical of these locks the brakes in such a way that a specialist has to be 
called in to unlock them.  I am not making this up.  I am simply selecting from 
the gadgets on display at the 1985 auto show.  The automobile is obviously 
the gadget of gadgets.  It is constantly being perfected so as to make it more 
expensive.  The performance obviously has to be improved.  Those who 
make cars have to provide work for studies on new engines.  Power is their 
glory.  They have to produce models that can cruise at 125 miles per hour 
(e.g., the Porsche 944 or the Ford Scorpio).  This is crazy but inevitable.  It 
might seem scandalous to call it crazy.  Yet what use is a car that can cruise 
at 125 miles per hour?  All highways have speed limits.  There is also no 
doubt, in spite of all the debate, that fatal accidents are due to speed.  The 
numbers prove the scandalous state of our lack of discipline.  How long will 
the slaughter go on?  Speed is active violence.  Faster, faster, but where to, 
and why?  We have full scientific certainty: A study by an organization for 
national safety on the highways shows that the number of victims seriously 
hurt grows 6 percent for every extra 6 miles per hour.  An American study 
shows a 47 percent increase when the speed is raised from 39 to 70 miles 
per hour.  A Swedish study of 28,000 accidents shows an exponential 
increase of risk with increased speed, with twice as many accidents 

 
 
WHAT USE?  THE WORLD OF GADGETS 
 
267 
 
for an added 17 miles per hour.9  It is thus idiotic to make more powerful 
cars.  But prestige is what counts.  Also foreign sales!  And above all, 
progress, technical progress!  To complete our study, however, we must 
now move on from the automobile to the home. 
 
 
What are we to say about that marvel, the electronic bathroom?  In 
the bathroom you are now to have a mirror that will tell you about the 
weather, the state of the roads, and how long your journey will take.  You 
can not only adjust the lighting but also start the radio and open and close 
various doors in the house.  On the way home, in the car, you can adjust 
the bathroom temperature to your liking.  Is not all I his truly marvelous 
and so obviously useful?10  But the whole house, not just one room, is 
now to be electronic.  There are, it is said, four different uses: 
entertainment and information-education (audiovisual), domestic robots 
(household appliances, heating), security systems (for protection), and 
external communications (to control robots and a second home).  The 
problem is that of interconnection.  For example, you might be watching 
television and a message appears on the screen about the washing 
machine or to tell you that the roast is cooked.  But central control is also 
possible.  The Japanese are working especially on alarms, dividing 
houses into zones, each of which is visualized on a screen.  A system of 
"simulation of presence" makes it seem to outside eyes that someone is 
home.  Specific alarms are integrated with a central system so as to 
detect a burst pipe, smoke, or a failure in the heating or refrigeration.  
(The total system costs about $70,000!)  We can easily see how 
indispensable such gadgetry is!  We are verging on the absurd when we 
are told that here already is the house of tomorrow.  You will pass it by 
like the rest! 
 
 
I could extend indefinitely this list of expensive and ridiculous 
objects.  I want to mention another one, the most common, the 
microphone.  Its utility is obvious.  It enables miserable singers who have 
neither voice nor talent to overwhelm rooms with their caterwaulings.  
Without this instrument they could only whisper little songs at wedding 
feasts.  They do not amount to anything.  But they have a mike which they 
clutch to themselves as a drowning person does a life jacket.  This being 
so, they are needed.  Today we have shows, mostly on television, for all 
hours of the day.  The time has to be filled up, and to keep an audience, 
the shows have to be constantly renewed.  There always have to be new 
games, singers, musicians, spectacles, etc.  Television has many critics.  
For my part, I admire the creators of 
 
 
268   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
television shows who art always producing something new, who give 
evidence of astonishing imagination and a vast knowledge of what is 
possible.  But obviously they cannot offer us new singers of genius every 
day without end.  They thus profit by the microphone.11  Any imbecile with 
rhythm, a very noisy band, baroque costumes, and psychedelic lighting 
can put on a show that will enrapture the crowd of young people who 
want only to become the fans of a new gesticulating idol.  But again we 
are entering the domain of games and shows that we shall have to study 
at greater length later.  Let us continue with our list of gadgets. 
 
 
If we pause for a moment to reflect, we realize that none of these 
objects is of the slightest use.  Yet they are bought enthusiastically.  
Publicity undoubtedly plays a part here.  Each gadget has its own 
advertising campaign.  We shall examine this, too, further on.  But 
advertising can succeed only on two conditions.  First, there has to be a 
favorable mood created from "higher up.”  Every computer gadget will 
succeed because it is carried by the mood of our society.  The computer 
is our salvation.  Put a microcomputer in any gadget and it is sure to sell.  
The second condition is that the object be as sophisticated as possible.  
The more complex the mechanism and the greater the number of 
programs, the more people are inclined to buy.  Rebates or incentives 
help.  Soon a fad is created.  Those who do not have pocket calculators 
or radio-controlled cars or video recorders are wretched folk whom one 
can neglect and despise.  Fads are demanding.  It is obligatory to have a 
touch phone, either apple green or sky blue.  Consumer objects are just 
as much a matter of fashion today as clothing was a century ago.  It is all 
useless, yet that is how it is.  But a minister of state might reply 
indignantly on television that all this is very useful, for by buying these 
innumerable gadgets we keep the factories busy, give work to artisans 
and engineers, create capital, increase the gross national product, help 
exports, and act as good citizens.  As we are regularly told, in an 
advanced society the problem of needs is a false problem.  We have now 
moved up into the domain of freedom, culture, and well-being.  It is 
useless to dwell on it.  I will simply refer to the excellent chapter by J.  
Neirynck on "The third industrial revolution or the invention of what is 
useless," in which he shows clearly that the more we advance (especially 
in computers), the more we invent and create what is useless.  But this is 
already leading us into the next section. 
 
 
In the past pages readers might have smiled and shrugged, 

 
 
WHAT USE?  THE WORLD OF GADGETS 
 
269 
 
thinking I was making much ado about very little.  But what we are now 
going to discuss should make us angry.  I refer to social or collective 
gadgets, that is, objects of great collective importance which are still no 
more than gadgets.  The two main ones in our society are those 
connected with space and the computer.  Now, I am not saying that these 
are no use at all.  My point is that their value is small compared to the 
investment of intelligence, skill, money, and labor that goes into their 
creation.  Remember that it is this disproportion that makes a gadget.  
Naturally, I recognize the great space achievements: walking on the 
moon, etc.12  But what do they really amount to?  What real value is the 
enormous, gigantic, ruinous growth of booster rockets and satellites put 
into orbit? 
 
 
If we reflect on the reality instead of being carried away with 
enthusiasm, we might mention meteorological satellites.  But these do not 
allow us to make very accurate forecasts.  Experience shows over 30 
percent mistakes, though some of these may be due to faulty 
interpretation 
of 
the 
images 
transmitted. 
 
There 
are 
also 
telecommunication satellites, but these only allow quicker telephone links 
and the worldwide broadcasting of television shows, which we have 
already seen to be absurd.  Then there are observation satellites, whether 
for civil or military use.  As regards the former, we have referred already 
to crop forecasts, and the rest are similar.  They also help to update 
maps, which is worth many millions of dollars.  Above all, it is hoped that 
they will help us to discover new metals and hydrocarbons.  A system 
launched in France in 1985 was not to be just a spectacle but was to be 
of scientific and industrial benefit, generating stock dividends.  It was 
hoped to sell its pictures at $250 each.  But the Americans, who have 
launched such satellites since 1972, are far less keen today and have 
gained from them much less than expected.  In spite of promises, they do 
not give notice in time of earthquakes, avalanches, or floods. 
 
 
The true usefulness of satellites is military.  Observation satellites 
pass over enemy territory and make it possible to detect troop 
movements or the launching of nuclear missiles.  Communications 
satellites keep the various military posts in a nation in constant touch.  
Combat satellites play a defensive role, as in the American SDI (popularly 
known as star wars).  The idea here is that a laser beam from a satellite 
might destroy incoming missiles.  At first the possibility was 
 
 
270  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
regarded as almost certain, but numerous studies have shown that it is 
not.  Furthermore, satellites armed with lasers could easily be used 
offensively.  But the waste that it all involves is past imagining.  Hundreds 
of satellites would be needed for an effective defense, and one satellite a 
week would be needed for replacements.  At the moment France has only 
observation satellites (Helios) and communications satellites (Syracuse). 
 
 
However that may be, we should not forget that three out of every 
four satellites launched thus far are military.  I do not think that this use 
offers an adequate response to my question of their usefulness.  Let us 
not forget that even if they are of no use, the cost is dreadfully high.  One 
French observation satellite costs 800 million francs.  Research on laser 
satellites had cost 600 million francs by 1986.  If we look at another 
possible use, that of the economic exploring of mining resources on other 
planets, we recall that there were many dreams about this after the moon 
landings.  There was talk of enormous reserves and new metals.  But two 
or three years later this talk seems to have faded.  The moon has been 
abandoned.  We should not forget that the main aim of the Apollo 
program (there were four voyages) was not simply to go to the moon but 
to settle there and build factories.  This aim has been abandoned by the 
Soviets as well as the Americans.  In another century or so it might be 
possible to exploit other planets, but the expense is enormous and the 
usefulness of the fabulous exploits is nil.13 
 
 
But does not space have scientific value?  Space probes 
undoubtedly have great interest from the standpoint of scientific 
understanding of the galaxy and of some of the components of the 
universe.  There are also space laboratories.  But there is a great 
difference between purely scientific work and the laboratory experiments 
that are interesting from a technical point of view.  As regards the latter, 
some chemical (pharmaceutical) products can be made which are 
possible only in a weightless environment.  But there are only a few of 
them and their use is limited.  Similarly, other products have been made 
that are useful in high-precision instruments, infrared detectors, and 
detectors of X-rays and gamma rays.  The behavior of fluids in a 
weightless state has also been studied, as have also some polar 
phenomena, the components of the atmosphere, the behavior of rats and 
monkeys in a weightless state, and space materials.  A wide-range 
astronomical camera has also been used, the conception of French 
scientists.  In addition, there has been 

 
 
WHAT USE?  THE WORLD OF GADGETS 
 
271 
 
research into the problems of blood circulation in a weightless state, along 
with other biological and psychological studies. 
 
 
But scientific observations of the latter kind are of interest only if we 
decide to settle and live in space.  We have seen, however, that this has been 
abandoned.  The scientific observations are for the sake of science alone.  
We thus arrive at the vital conclusion that some vast technical enterprises 
serve only to advance scientific knowledge and nothing else.  Note that!  
Some readers might think that science translates itself into useful techniques 
that pay off.  Not at all!  That is an outdated notion.  Scientific discoveries do 
not necessarily give rise to practical techniques.  These mostly come from 
technique itself.  Science today often stays on the plane of knowledge.  As I 
see it, that is not a bad thing.  But we should not try to justify the billions spent 
on the conquest of space by inventing uses that do not exist. 
 
 
Nevertheless, we cannot stop progress, and the French government 
decided in October 1985 to build a spacecraft (it is hoped by 1990).  The 
National Center for Space Studies is in charge.  But in view of the great cost it 
is hoped that Europeans will unite on the project and thus give Europe space 
autonomy.  It has to be recognized that this project must be started from 
scratch.  Ordinary satellites will not do.  Computer programs are needed for 
such gadgets, and the programs for Hermes will be much bigger than that for 
Ariane or the observation system.  In addition, materials that can withstand up 
to 20,0000 C (36,000'F) are needed for the return to earth.  For testing, such 
temperatures have to be created, and we can imagine how great will be the 
cost of providing them. 
 
 
As a last example along these lines we might refer to the project of the 
biggest orbital station ever constructed (American, of course).  All the plans 
and even the materials are ready and assembled.  This is a station which is to 
be inhabited.  It will be composed of four metal pylons (300 meters long), 
joined together and supporting all the rest, then of four big cabins (20 meters 
by 4), with many laboratories and solar panels for energy.  President Reagan 
predicted that it would be launched in 1994.  The interesting point is not the 
exploit but what is to be done with it.  The director of the enterprise made the 
remarkable statement that they would find this out when they were in orbit.  
He could not have stated better that we launch out into vast technical 
undertakings without having the least idea what use they are.  We need to 
ask why people are doing things like this.  There is a mania for exploits, for 
technical success, which has remained the same ever since I formulated the 
principle that whatever technique can do, it has to do.  There is also the need 
for prestige.  If we are to remain among the bigger 
 
 
272  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
nations, we must do what the others are doing, and do it better, in the 
area into which the whole of the civilized world has now thrust itself There 
is also the question of economic rivalry.  We hope to sell our prototypes, 
our rockets, our satellites, our space labs, our orbital stations, our probes.  
But the true usefulness is almost nil.  This is our first great collective 
gadget.  We have to make people enthusiastic about something. 
 
The second great collective gadget in our advanced world is the 
computer, which has the peculiarity of being able to link individual 
gadgets to the great universal gadget.  Naturally, I know as I write this 
that it will be found scandalous.  For all our hopes rest on this gigantic 
worldwide instrument.  We must begin by taking note of all the 
propaganda and publicity which incessantly promotes the merits of the 
computer and especially the microcomputer (Lussato's "Little Kettle"), as 
though the macrocomputer no longer existed.  Yet in reality it is the latter 
on which laboratories, banks, insurance companies, multinational 
corporations, and governments depend.  We forget it because it is 
embarrassing, a centralizing organism which we cannot dress up, which 
we cannot come to grips with.  That said, what is the usual line on the 
computer?  First, the possibility of "decolonizing" it,14 of bringing in a new 
world order of information, so that nondeveloped peoples will not be 
totally dependent for information on Western centers.  Communication 
has been changed into a system of signals and commands which can 
increase the power of the large machines.  Freedom of information was 
always accepted in theory, but was never possible for lack of means.  
Today the computer makes it possible.  The modern technology of signs 
allows of pure and simple transfer.  Nonaligned countries do not want a 
new order of closed information.  What is needed is a pluralism of 
sources.  This demands a truly universal expansion of means.  Thanks to 
the free flow of data,15 underdeveloped countries can finally get moving, 
there can be new activity and employment on a planetary scale, and the 
prices of raw materials can be prorated. 
 
The computer smashes any monopoly in information or techniques.  The 
computer can transform information and knowledge into useful 
operations.  It is the tool of a twofold revolution, in both communication 
and economics.  We are witnessing an astonishing growth 

 
 
WHAT USE?  THE WORLD OF GADGETS 
 
273 
 
in its applications: letters, accounts, forecasts, microprocessing.  The 
computer figures in office automation, telematics, robotics, and factory 
automation.  The computer can be used in scores of ways: for household 
accounts, for orders, for information, as office equipment for the execution 
and even the conception of work.  Informational tasks can be automated 
so as to increase productivity, to speed up the rate of economic growth, to 
raise the level of education, to improve medical services, and to reduce 
the rate of pollution.  Thanks to fantastic progress in perfecting the 
computer, everything seems to be possible.  The creation of smart cards, 
computerized banking, electronic mail, data banks: all are available to 
help in the search for information. 
 
 
It is estimated that by 1995 the equipment available for each 
inhabitant in France will have the power of dealing with 100 million 
instructions per second (100 mips) and of storing 20 million characters.  In 
1984 the total power was only 9 mips.  But 200 mips are now expected, 
with a central memory capacity of 50 million characters.  The sending of 
one page of 2,000 characters takes 20 seconds.  The communication (by 
satellite) between two computers will be I billion characters in 20 minutes.  
A coaxial cable can carry 50 images or I million characters per second, 
and an optical fiber ten times as many.  At the same time the price of 
these marvels is rapidly decreasing.  Computers in charge of specific 
functions can cooperate with one another.  Texts can be changed into 
vocal messages and vice versa.  Simplified languages make it possible to 
get in touch directly with data banks.  Telematics systems are also 
increasingly rapidly.  In France in 1984 there were 800,000 videotex 
terminals in operation and more than 1,000 operational services with 
some 8 million calls a month. 
 
 
Progress is incessant and seems to be unlimited.  One might say 
that it involves an economic transformation, an intellectual transformation, 
and a communications transformation.  All the services and institutions 
that are the framework of a nation are undergoing transformation.  
Everything has to be adapted.  The computer will supposedly end all 
mindless and boring work.  "Teletel [an electronic telephone directory] will 
open up our minds and spirits.  It is said to be bringing a power to earth 
that will illumine everything with its light.  We see a new omnipotence on 
earth.  The ideal of socialized omnipotence is incarnate in modern 
technique and will bring great benefits to life."16  Things are moving too 
fast to leave time for decisions.  A debate on Teletel was suggested but 
technical progress moved so much faster than 
 
 
274   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
discussion that videotex was being integrated before there was time to 
consider the related details or problems.  The experiment was thus 
initiated without debate.17  Confronted by this evidence of progress and 
utility, how do I have the audacity to talk of gadgets?  I am not arguing 
that computers are not efficient or that they have not become 
indispensable for accounting or budgeting or juggling with fantastic figures 
or keeping track of sales or stocks.  They play a useful part in economic 
and financial management.18 
 
 
Computers are also indispensable for calculations in modem 
astronomy and mathematics.  We simply note once again that technique 
makes possible a certain development in science without our really 
knowing whether the new knowledge makes sense.  I will undoubtedly be 
told that the uses I have cited are minor and relate only to calculations 
when in fact the handling of information has far greater economic impact.  
The future of the computer is supposedly more oriented to the 
manipulating of information, of which only a small part has to do with 
figures.  But it is precisely in this regard that I ask whether the computer 
has any real use and not merely a fictional, phantasmagoric, 
supererogatory use. 
 
 
No one denies that data banks contain a vast amount of information.  
But who consults them?  Do we really believe that 50 million French 
people are using these services?  Only intellectuals, engineers, and 
journalists do so.  In this way the gap between the upper level and the 
rest widens.  We have only to consider the difficulty for houses equipped 
with videotex.  A whole propaganda campaign was needed to get people 
to buy this equipment.  Vitalis pinpointed the problem.  We were invited to 
live as free, autonomous, rational subjects who could 

 
 
WHAT USE?  THE WORLD OF GADGETS 
 
275 
 
find the answer to our problems by asking the system, but also to live as 
submissive subjects conforming to the bureaucracy.  In response to the 
latter demand we practiced diversion; in response to the former we 
resisted merely as objects with hyperconformism, dependence, and 
passivity.19 
 
 
In fact, there has been much deception regarding Teletel, which was 
supposed to replace the telephone, television, etc.  It was reported in 
1985 that Minitel was making headway in business in spite of some 
problems with videotex.  But few households were interested; only 1.5 
percent had microcomputers.  Teletel was supposed to make possible a 
socializing of technique and become the basis of administrative services 
and strategies.  But no one seemed to put the question of its true 
usefulness.  Can we really say that a microcomputer is needed for a 
household budget?  Or that reserving seats for the theater, planes, or 
trains (which can be done by telephone) is a primary use?  Or that it is 
indispensable to know telephone numbers or railroad or plane schedules, 
which one can easily obtain when needed? 
 
 
I could continue with my list of the ridiculous services which will 
merely replace services that are already adequate.  The only real service 
is in the area of messages, in which we supposedly have a new medium 
that will revolutionize psychosocial relations.  But the new medium, 
replacing letters and the telephone, can so easily be abused that some 
restriction has been necessary.  This reminds us yet again that except in 
management most of the use is for play, which we shall study later.  The 
same is true of innumerable gadgets for automobiles and the home. 
 
 
Gadgets to detect pollen so as to guard against allergies are useful, 
as are also those for surveys, or for assembling data in the case of oil 
slicks, but they simply do much faster what can be done already.  
Gadgets for constructing computer graphics, which are very costly, are 
mostly ridiculous.  Some graphics, for example, those for engineers or 
architects which can represent in three dimensions what they have in 
mind, are also useful, but the same can hardly be said of advertising 
graphics, or especially of artistic graphics, like the dreadful portrait of 
Montaigne by M.  Combes (of the Center for Contemporary Plastic Arts) 
at the opening of the Bordeaux Museum of Contemporary Art.  This 
computer portrait of Montaigne is not in the least bit like him, makes him 
out to be ignoble and stupid, and forms a kind of antithesis to his Essais.  
It is an interesting illustration of the aesthetic capacity of the 
 
 
276   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
computer, and all its creations seem to be of the same order.  Of its 
musical creations I have 8poken elsewhere.20  Here again we need to 
distinguish between an acceptable use by engineers and a totally 
superfluous, absurd, snobbish use in which the computer is merely a 
gadget. 
 
 
In another area I will simply recall briefly a much debated issue that 
cannot be decided.  In its political impact, is the computer an instrument 
of unequalled centralization or a means of remarkable decentralization?  
There are as many arguments for the one side as the other.  But the 
reference is to mainframes in the one case, to microcomputers in the 
other.  Furthermore, the only two orientations that seem to be serious are 
as follows.  Thus far the only applications have been for the reinforcing of 
central power, and I do not know of a single example of decentralization 
by computer.  But second, different conditions are needed for the two 
different results.  As regards centralization, whether in Africa, Asia, or the 
USA, centralization already exists, and the computer has simply to go 
with the tide.  As regards decentralization, it would have to swim against 
the tide, opposing usages, institutions, habits, and the demands of the 
social body, and doing a creative work of freedom.  But to make this 
possible we would need thousands of people and associations that are 
autonomous, that are nonconformist (whether left or right), that think for 
themselves, that stand for something specific, and that do not share the 
current commonplaces.  This would demand an enormous effort.  We 
have mentioned already the lamentable failure of independent local radio 
stations in this regard.  A hundred times more quality and will would be 
needed for decentralization by computer.  Thus far we have been shown 
what individuals might create thanks to it, but when reference is made to 
the transmitting of information, we are not told what information.  All that 
we really have is the invention of games. 
 
 
The case is self-evident.  The idea that the computer is a creator of 
freedom is a myth pure and simple.21  The information that it handles is 
that which this society uses and can use.  The computer can only confirm 
it.  To be amortized, the heavy investment in computers demands that the 
system already installed be preserved.  The methods of analysis and 
programming do not permit an evolution of services already in place.  
There is no computer revolution.  There is simply a 

 
 
WHAT USE?  THE WORLD OF GADGETS 
 
277 
 
computer shock that impels the socio-technical system to move faster in 
its own direction. 
 
 
In general, we may say that we have had some experience of the 
choices that are available when a technique is at work.  Always and in all 
circumstances technique has historically gone along with centralization 
and the concentration of power.  "Without automobiles, planes, and 
loudspeakers," said Hitler in October 1935, "we could not have taken over 
Germany.”  "By the magic of the telephone and telex, centralization is 
even easier today.  Orders come down smoothly from superiors to the 
lower echelons.  Information circulates rapidly and discreetly, making 
possible both increased surveillance of citizens and total concentration of 
decision.  Totalitarianism goes hand in hand with modern gadgetry."22  
"Totalitarian societies seem to be simple, logical exaggerations of the 
technological state of modern society."23  “What would the new order be 
without the transmitting capacity of modern instruments ...  which is 
constantly growing.  The Nazi government launched a big advertising 
campaign to get all Germans to buy radio sets.  In May 1935 they could 
legitimately triumph, for in two years more than 800,000 sets had been 
sold."24  These experiences seem to me to be conclusive, confirming a 
reasonable evaluation.  Yet I cannot think that all the talk of the possibility 
of decentralization by such technical means as the microcomputer is a lie.  
There is no intention to deceive.  It is a major example of technological 
bluff.  It is a bluff that ensnares democrats and liberals, and that is all it is. 
 
 
"The computer is not a means that can be used in the service of new 
social ends."25  Once again, I am not doubting the marvels performed by 
computers and especially microcomputers.  I am simply trying to show 
that these marvels do not really change existing society (except to speed 
it up and, as we shall see, to make it more fragile).  Nor do they truly 
better the individual lot.  The use of a touch screen instead of the 
traditional keyboard did not really change anything.  The visual 
information terminal is a masterpiece, but it does not really change 
anything.  In the politico-social realm it is simply an aid to decision and 
office automation. 
 
 
As regards the aid to decision, we must differentiate between this 
and ideas which receive help from computers.  The latter kind of 
 
 
278   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
help is incontestable.  An engineer has the idea of circuits and the computer 
designs them on the screen.  If the engineer agrees he gives the green light 
and the computer, linked up with precision instruments, makes sure that the 
circuit is made properly.  We have here the particular case of a graphic 
representation of an idea.  The same process can be helpful in the routing of 
planes or cars.  Technique aids technique.  But the aiding of decisions is very 
different.  We enter here the domain of economics and politics.  According to 
an old idea, computers can register all the information concerning an issue.  
They can encompass all the parameters.  The dream twenty years ago, then, 
was that computers would make useful, right, and wise decisions.  Knowing 
all the data and all the rules, why should they not be able to decide 
definitively?  They could also foresee various scenarios and combine factors 
in different ways.  They could be told what the goal was.  They would then 
point out the most appropriate scenario.  Since they could not make a 
mistake, we ought to follow them. 
 
 
That is a dream.  First, our human models are always incomplete.  
Second, qualitative imponderables that the computer cannot know enter into 
all political and economic issues: How much bombardment can a population 
stand?  What will be the level of courage of the last German troops?  How apt 
are Japanese workers to mobilize?  The next theory, then, is that of the aided 
decision.  Politicians will make the decision but only after having received all 
the data that the computer can provide.  In my view, we have here a great 
mistake, for people who are deluged by information become incapable of 
making decisions.  An excess of information and parameters results in total 
paralysis of the process of decision. 
 
 
We must return at this point to a distinction made by Jouvenel that I 
have often quoted.  Some situations can be totally expressed in numbers and 
can thus be reduced to the formulation of a problem.  There is then only one 
solution and no decision is needed.  But political and social situations are not 
of this kind.  They cannot be presented as a problem.  There is a time, then, 
when we have not to solve but to simplify.  In this decision to simplify all kinds 
of imponderables, inexpressibles, impressions, and intuitions will intervene.  It 
is precisely the art of politicians (and perhaps also economists) to be able to 
sense what no computer can tell them, and then to simplify.  The gathering of 
data is no doubt useful at a pre-pre-preparatory stage.  Secretaries will work 
and rework them until they are reduced to broad schemas and hypotheses in 
brief reports that will be useful to those who decide.  But no more! 
 
 
As regards office automation, tertiary activities need to be automated 
and computerized so as to improve the conditions of functioning 

 
 
WHAT USE?  THE WORLD OF GADGETS 
 
279 
 
and the quality of the services rendered by the offices and 
administrations.  It is "the ensemble of techniques and means aiming to 
computerize office work, especially in the handling and communications 
of speech, of writing, and of images" (cf.  a circular issued in the Journal 
officiel of January 1982).  The brakes on its expansion are the result of 
poor preparation and of beginning to use foreign materials, which consists 
of software roughly Frenchified and not adapted to the workers.  To 
computerize administration there has to be vigorous training of all the 
personnel in a permanent process.  A comprehensive governing schema 
has to be worked out in relation to the traditional functioning of the 
services.  Counsellors have to be set up who will keep a permanent watch 
on the functioning.  The public demand for the products and services has 
to be organized.  But we are far from having fulfilled these four conditions.  
We are also far from making a proper use of the computer in the services 
provided, and we still have an abundance of overlapping, of wrong 
billings, and of useless paper. 
 
 
From these various angles, and without insisting on the techniques, 
one might say that we are moving into a media society with no mastery 
over the constituents and no real knowledge of the effects or all the 
possibilities.  We are advancing like the blind in the direction demanded 
by technique but also decided by politicians.  It is the Iatter who have 
formed an image of the society to come (inevitably) and who are imposing 
the computer everywhere so as not to be left behind in the race.  We shall 
return to this matter.  For the moment let us simply state that telematics 
rest almost entirely on official decisions.  Neither industrialists nor the 
providers of services have created a true market.  If there are some 
successes, there are also failures.  In some places people rejected cable 
television, but it was imposed by the government.  The costs have been 
about 20 percent above estimates.  Many instruments have not been 
used or used only for games.  Many users say that they used them a little 
at first out of curiosity, then less and less. 
 
 
The least that one can say is that for the general public none of 
these techniques is essential.  I realize that it will be said that at first it is 
the same with all innovations, but finally people take to them.  But this is 
simply to say that no gadget responds to any real expectation or need but 
that they all impose themselves by the power of the economic, political, or 
technical system.  Technique always entails more technique.26 
 
 
280  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
 
We shall stay in the realm of computers but may now engage in 
some reflections.  An essential point that we have noted already relative 
to information is that an encyclopedic knowledge of all possible choices 
provides no criterion for choice.  We may get information on every 
possible objective choice, but the logic of choice has nothing whatever to 
do with the examination of possibilities.  Abundance creates 
disorientation.  No place is left for the practical logic of exchange of 
information.  No one can use this model.  It rests on the substitution of 
technical rationality for social and moral rationality.  The information 
offered is virtually credible but never true.27 
 
 
The problem is the same as in the case of political decision.  After a 
lengthy study of telematics at Nantes, Vitalis concludes that it did not 
change in any way the relations between the administrators and the 
administered.  The public is simply a consumer.28  The coming of new 
techniques of management represents an extraordinary windfall for the 
conservation and self-reproduction of an administrative system like ours.  
The perspectives offered reinforce the bureaucratic ideals of France.  The 
vital point is the wave of belief in the omnipotence of things, in the 
mechanical enmeshing of startling findings, in the idea that we can only 
submit to what is happening.  We can do nothing, for the power is outside 
us and we count for nothing.29  The systems also allow anonymous 
conversations about trivialities, in which people can adopt false identities 
and engage in fictitious dialogues, in which anything is possible with no 
sanctions or social reprobation, in which they can express themselves 
freely (but express what?), and in which they can form groups, asking 
every member to pass on a daily message.  These are mere games, but 
they are a substitute for human relations and in fact denote a basic 
loneliness and the boredom of having exhausted every experience. 
 
 
All this might be regarded as a distortion of the real function of 
instruments such as Minitel.  In a different way we find exactly the same 
abuse of freedom with Minitel as in the case of the independent local 
radio station.  Most of the exchanges end up with pornography, 
prostitution, erotic dialogue, dirty graphics (anonymity guaranteed), 
lessons on new positions, the creation of a network of pedophiles.  Mr.  
de Valence, director of the A-Jour group, who edits Minitel magazine, 

 
 
WHAT USE?  THE WORLD OF GADGETS 
 
281 
 
notes regarding the pornographic messages that what was first said to be 
acne is now seen to be smallpox.30  There are 20,000 calls of this type 
per day. 
 
 
One of the great problems of data banks and other memory systems 
is that they guarantee the information contained in them.  But simple 
manipulations can result in swindles.  This is very common.  Small 
swindles repeated millions of times can have serious effects.  So can the 
tapping of information.  As one of these swindlers noted, the more 
complex the systems, the more they help swindlers.  Those who handle 
computers have to take serious steps to protect themselves: codes and 
passwords.  But codes can be broken.  There is also the great problem of 
protecting information, which must not be tampered with.  Codes and 
passwords help, but they have to be changed frequently.  Records must 
also be kept of all attempts to obtain information, but systems to keep 
track are costly and slow.  Without pressing the point, I would emphasize 
that there is no sure protection of data.  We have here a vast and 
uncharted territory of possibilities of fraud and data exploitation.31 
 
 
Some pirating is an involuntary result of playing with the computer.  
The story is told of one operator who asked his screen to display lines of 
zero characters.  No one had ever thought of this absurd possibility.  The 
computer complied, and that generated a prohibited operation (division by 
zero), and the operator saw appear on his screen materials which 
enabled him to enter areas of the operating system to which he never 
should have had access. 
 
 
J.-P Chamoux has made a fine study of pirating and trickery.32  He 
offers hundreds of minutely described cases in which experts use their 
knowledge for personal ends, pirating industrial secrets, plagiarizing 
works, and especially engaging in financial crime by means of computers.  
Electronic currency is now made possible by a vast system.  Thus the 
automated exchanges of the bank of Lyons runs to millions of francs and 
can change and sell a billion dollars in fifteen seconds.  This type of 
money opens up new horizons for fraud by means of small additions 
(usually of the order of 10 million francs) or by making it possible for funds 
to cross borders freely.  The electronic bank is more vulnerable than the 
classical banks because there are fewer opportunities for control. 
 
 
282   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
 
The vulnerability of payment systems is one of the great weaknesses 
of society as a whole.  Frauds are often simple (e.g., erasing data, 
changing numbers, using lapsed identification numbers).  There is also a 
great deal of insurance fraud, and in the case of programmers the 
possibility of programming frauds.  But all this presupposes access to 
mainframes, which is now possible with systems like Minitel.  All that is 
needed is a little patience.  In this way confidential information can be 
pirated, as was done by a journalist of the Canard enchaîné (Nov.  1984). 
 
 
Another important point is that fraud can result from children playing 
games on microcomputers and by chance finding a code which gives 
them access to a whole group of circuits.33  In fact, it has been found that 
some children are "geniuses" in the field.  Rawson Stovall at twelve years 
of age created hundreds of video games and published dozens of articles 
on the theme in a daily column in seventeen journals.  Cori Grimm at 
thirteen became a graphics consultant in a computer firm.  Jeff Gold at 
seventeen was taken on full time to protect against piracy.  Musa 
Mustapha at fifteen works full time on special effects.  Cyrille de 
Vignemont at twelve negotiated a first programming contract with Apple 
and at fourteen spends two hours on education, two on programming, and 
two on marketing (contracts, etc.).  He has sold two software packages 
with hundreds of copies.  Cyrille's programs are in increasing demand.  I 
could cite other cases. 
 
 
Are these children geniuses?  Have they special gifts?  No, there are 
too many of them.  The proliferation of children who can reach the heights 
of computer creation brings to light a basic feature of the computer itself-it 
is infantile.  When some simple facts have been mastered even children 
can understand it more easily than they can grammar or arithmetic, and 
once they are on this path, the complexities are no problem.  They do not 
have to be geniuses.  They do not need to be encumbered by hundreds 
of other branches of knowledge or questions.  They do not have to know 
their own language, or history, or science.  They have to know only the 
possibilities of their computers and the networks.  They do not even have 
to waste time on human relations.  Neither Stovall nor Vignemont has any 
friends.  They are small examples of fascinated humanity.  They obtain 
fantastic results without standing for any human or intellectual values.  
Vignemont 

 
 
WHAT USE?  THE WORLD OF GADGETS 
 
283 
 
prefers correspondence courses and admitted on television (Nov.  1985) 
to not being a good student except in algebra.  This shows that the 
microcomputer is above all a game and is infantile.  But it is also very 
dangerous.  We need to know whether it does not also "infantilize." 
 
 
What we have written concerns microcomputers, but there is also a 
problem in the case of mainframes.  This is their fragility.  In contrast to 
what is often said, they are very fragile.34  They have to be kept in a room 
at a constant temperature (20° C, 68° F) and humidity.  Many factors can 
make them unusable, for example, a sharp rise in temperature, fires close 
by, lightning, a break in current, a power surge, a magnetic field in the 
vicinity (e.g., the installation of radar), the presence of an electric cable, 
excess humidity (through flooding!), or the penetration of dust or smoke 
into the chamber.  Chamoux also points out that the computer is a type of 
machine, and that like all machines it can fail for no external reason.  (The 
manager of an automated bank acknowledged that his machines broke 
down on average twice a month.) 
 
 
Specialist critics wrote in Terminal (Oct.  1983) that computer 
science is a field in which error is the rule and programming mistakes take 
up most of the time of programmers.  We thus need to resist firmly those 
who pontificate seriously about the infallibility of computers.  When we 
consider how many important things on which our life depends (banks, 
police, etc.) are at the mercy of this fragility and vulnerability, we may well 
be very anxious about what might happen.35 
 
 
We will conclude with some more general reflections.  The first is 
that this whole field of computers is making society more vulnerable.  The 
risks extend to the public and daily life.  We are vulnerable 
 
 
284   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
financially.  We are vulnerable to strikes by a very small number of 
people.  We run the risk of greater social control and a levelling of 
behavior.36  To be acceptable to electronic machines and to calculators, 
models of human behavior have to be reductionist.  In relation to both 
things and people analyses and data have to be in simple classes for 
easy expression and comparison.  A specialist tells us that; Chamoux is a 
specialist on network security' and has founded a private research center.  
We have here the counterpart of the supposed "conviviality" of the 
computer, but no one, of course, talks about this. 
 
 
In reality, we have to pay for the gain in efficiency with the risk of 
enslavement on the one side and actual vulnerability on the other.  But let 
us pass on to what seem to be more sophisticated reflections of a 
different kind.  Neirynck has noted that the world of computers fulfils all 
the conditions of a cult of initiates.  It has every quality as well.  It is clean.  
It uses little energy.  It deals with immaterial things.  We increasingly need 
its information in our society.  To the public it is very mysterious.  It 
corresponds to an ancient dream of humanity, that of constructing an 
automaton that will perfectly imitate humanity.  Having shown why there is 
this passion for the computer, Neirynck then asks what use it really is.  
Does it better the lives of individuals?  Does the spread of personal or 
domestic computers meet a real need?  Or is the manufacturing of 
well-marketed microcomputers a solution in search of a problem?  Do 
robots really make life easier for workers?  In principle they do, but in 
practice they do not.  (We shall took at the problem of productivity later.) 
Having noted the ineluctable march toward centralization, Neirynck 
concludes that the greatest danger of the computer is ideological.  The 
less comprehensible it is, the more extravagant the statements to which it 
gives rise.  In particular, it supposedly liberates us from the constraints of 
energy, reversing entropy!  This idea rests on a confusion which Neirynck 
analyzes in detail.  By giving pure computer information to a closed 
system, we do not diminish entropy.  The real truth is simply that we can 
get spectacularly better energy performance by the computer.  A 
computer linked to a network of electrical distribution can avoid the loss of 
power by better transit planning.  This is valuable, and the computer is a 
remarkable tool in constructing a technical system at a low rate of entropy 
growth.37 
 
 
To return to the human level, the computer can hardly fail to pose 
anew the question of time.  It is a machine which greatly compresses 

 
 
WHAT USE?  THE WORLD OF GADGETS  
 
285 
 
the time needed for planning, production, and management.  As programming 
advances, a society is set up that is fully synchronous with a generalized 
synchronization of which the computer is the founding myth and omnipresent 
organizer.  Real time is now looped in advance and works in an instant.  The 
search for ever more synchronization weighs heavily on workers, as we shall 
see at length in relation to productivity.  Chesneaux has given a detailed 
description of the impact upon human life at all levels of this instantaneity to 
which the computer accustoms us and which it progressively forces upon us.  
"The computer is the instrument of the absolute primacy of the present over 
the future and the past.  It is the central benchmark of social duty, which must 
adjust its rhythm to generations of computers.”38 
 
 
I will close these general reflections with three references which are very 
interesting because they do not come from opponents of computerization.  
Quite the reverse! 
 
 
First, I will take up the vital phrase of Neirynck: "the invention of the 
useless.”  The gigantic economic organization with billions involved; the whole 
political and ideological mobilization; the proliferation of gadgets; the inflamed 
rhetoric about the society of tomorrow–what is their point?  Simply to convey 
information of which 9,999 parts out of 10,000 are totally useless.  Neirynck 
describes this new technical revolution in the invention of the useless.  It is 
not driven by any immediate necessity or express need but by the automatic 
process of technical growth and by the ideology which Neirynck calls the 
technical illusion, the climax of expectations which have not been met by 
promises of a society of abundance.  Lacking abundance of food, we will 
have a superabundance of the empty nourishment of information. 
 
 
The second reference is to B.  Lussato, the apostle of the 
microcomputer, in which he finds every hope of salvation.  Yet he is still 
uneasy about the vertiginous development of the computer.  He does not 
know whether this is good or bad.  He sees the risk of uncontrolled growth, for 
the more communications develop and computer terminals proliferate, the 
more people want to communicate, but the more they want to communicate, 
the more communication systems are put in place, and the less they can do 
without communicating.  It is an addiction, as in the case of drugs.  The 
marriage of communication and the computer (telematics) has a multiplier 
effect that we cannot evade. 
 
 
The third reference is from a telematics magazine, Terminal (1984).  
Tomorrow everybody, equipped with a smart card, will be able to tap 
information, phone an aunt in New York, and use the television 
 
 
286  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
for forecasts and reservations.  At home he can consult the telematics 
journal, and help the children to program their electronic games.  If he has 
any remaining time, he will profit by linking up with his terminal, with the 
card as identification, in order to work some more hours at home.  But the 
question is then raised what will be the world and the psychology of 
people who work, communicate, consume, play, and educate themselves 
from birth to death by means of a screen. 
 
A good question!  The computer is indeed a gadget whose 
usefulness is infinitely less than the bluff of technological discourse would 
have us think.  Yet even though it is only a gadget, it can turn the world 
and humanity around and set us in the direction of nonsense. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 Several authors are aware of this fact even though they are not critical of 
technique.  Thus M.  Mirabail, Les Cinquante mots Clés de la télématique (Privat, 
1981), writes: "The offer of services anticipates a demand for them.  Technology 
thus induces new needs.”  I would find this hard to contest! 
2 There is even a supposed "need for communication between computers.”  We 
must weigh the terms here.  The fact that computers can communicate with one 
another directly has become a "need"! 
3 A German survey in 1979 showed that 30 percent of the potential clients were 
interested, the rest not.  Cf.  Problémes audiovisuels (Paris: La Documentation 
française, June 1981). 
4 See Le Monde de l’économie, Feb.  1985. 
5 Cf. the learned work of J.-C.  Beaune, L’Automate et ses Mobiles (Flammarion, 
1980), though he tends to make over-profound philosophical inferences. 
6 I know that some say a flat screen is necessary to receive satellite 
transmissions.  We will return to that.. 
7 M.  Marchand and C.  Ancelin, eds., Télématique, Promenade dons usages 
(Paris: La Documentation frangaise, 1984). 
8 See C.  Akrich, "Les satellites de t6l6visiondirecte," La Recherche 14 t.  (Jan. 

                                                                                                               
                                                                                                              
1983). 
9 Cf.  “Automobile et vitesse," special number of Le Monde, June 23, 1985.   
10 See Le Monde, March 1986. 
11 Cf. Jézéquel,et al., Le Gâchis audiovisuel (Éditions Ouvriéres, 1987), pp.  
135ff., on the trickery of the false mike, false guitar, etc. 
12 Behind them, of course, is national prestige and competition.  Cf. R Langereux, 
"L’Europe spatiale à la crois de des chemins," La Recherche 138 (Nov.  1982). 
13 Not to speak of the littering of space; cf.  A.  Repairoux, “L’encombrement de 
Fespace," La Recherche 159 (Sept.  1984). 
14 Cf.  the three articles of J.  Deornoey, "Empire des signes et signes de 
l'empire," Le Monde, Aug.  1983. 
15 See Les Flux trans-frontières de données (Paris: La Documentation française, 
1983). 
16 Quotations in Marchand and Ancelin, eds., Télématique (Paris: La 
Documentation frangaise, 1984). 
17 For an example of the way in which all have to participate when a technical 
operation is launched, cf.  a short article in Le Monde, March 1984.  It deals with 
the Minitel project at Evry in which the mayor, inhabitants, and experts (who at 
first had no particular interest) all became progressively involved.  Once such a 
project becomes the center of attention, no one thinks of anything other than to 
improve it, to find new goals for it, etc.  General participation is supposedly a proof 
of democracy.  Technicians orchestrate progress, and no one has the courage to 
say it is not wanted.  There is a technological seduction that brings everyone into 
the bluff. 
18 J.-P.Chamoux, Menaces sur l'ordinateur (Paris: Seuil, 1986), stresses that 90 
percent of the applications of computers are in banking or commercial 
management and accounting.  To arrest the computer in these areas would 
severely disrupt operations.  Each day dependence on automated procedures 
grow.  Of the remaining 10 percent, games take up three-fourths.  This is the 
reality in spite of all the rhetoric.  Data banks play only a weak role as compared 
with other forms of passing on information. 
19 A.  Vitalis, Les Enjeux socippolitiques et culturels du systéme Télématique 
(Telem, 1983); idem, Informatique, Plouvoir et Libertés (Economica, 1981). 
20 See J.  Ellul, L’Empire du non-sens. 
21 See J.  L.  Leonhardt, "Informatique et société," in Une société 
informatisée-Pourquoi?  Pour qui?  Comment?  (Presses universitaires de Namur, 
1982) (forty-five essential studies). 
22 See D.  Pelassy, Le Règne nazi (Paris: Fayard, 1982). 
23 See C.  Riedrich and Z.  Brzezinski, Totalitarian Dictatorship and Autocracy 
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1956). 
24 D.  Felassy, Le Règne nazi. 
25 Ohrenbuch in Travaux de l’Institut d’Informatique. 
26 Vast sums have been expended by industry, government, and universities on 
computers.  Government alone spent 17 billion francs in 1973, 70 billion in 1983, 
and almost 100 billion in 1986. 
27 See D.  Boullier, "Télem A Nantes," in Marchand and Ancelin, eds., 
Télématique (Paris: La Documentation frangaise, 1984). 
28 Vitalis, "Les enjeux socioculturels de Télem," in ibid. 
29 See P.  Legendre, Fbroles poétiques échappées du texte.  Leçons sur la 
 
communication industrielle (Paris: Seuil, 1982). 
30 See Le Monde, Sept.  1986. 
31 Cf.  A.  Grissonnache, "Des risques grandissants, mal connus, peu combattus," 
Le Monde, Sept.  1983. 
32 J.-P Chamoux, Menaces sur Pordinateur (Paris: Seuil, 1986).  Cf.  also J.-C.  
Hazera, "La Sécurité informatique," La Recherche 113 (April 1980); and F 
Bergantine, "La Sécurité informatique," La Recherche 143 (April 1983). 
33 Marchand, Télématique, quotes the case of a ten year old who, playing with his 
father's Apple, connected by chance with Minitel and finally tapped out a whole 
series of passwords, which resulted in the abandoning of all the internal numbers 
of Minitel. 
34 Cf.  chapter IV above on the general fragility of the system.  Another study of 
this matter may be found in J.-P Chamoux, Menaces de Pordinateur (Paris: Seuil, 
1986), which is along the lines of P.  Lagadec, La Civilisation duisque (Paris: 
Seuil, 1981). 
35 In an article in La Recherche I also read of a possibility about which no one 
speaks, i.e., that of a nuclear explosion of moderate yield at a high altitude (300 
miles) which would have no fallout or victims and would hardly be noticed but 
which would develop electromagnetic impulses that might cause a continental 
electrical blackout destroying all the broadcasting networks (telephone, radio, all 
that is electronic), and blowing all the components of computers, the circuits and 
cables.  Every country would thus be reduced to impotence (military as well).  
There is no longer any need of war to conquer!  This is especially important when 
we realize that every army is now computerized.  Cf.  J.  Isnard, "L'armée et 
Fordinateur," Le Monde, special number Sept.  1984.  For a humorous novel on 
the theme, which shows great foresight, see J.-M.  Barrault, Et les bisons broutent 
à Manhattan (Julliard, 1973).  Cf.  also G.  Vezian, "Le retour de la grande 
informatique," Le Monde, special number, Sept.  1984. 
36 See J.-P Chamoux, Menaces sur Pordinateur, p.  211. 
37 J.  Neirynck, Le Huitiéme lour de la Création.  Introduction à Pentropologiee 
(Presses polytechniques romanes, 1986), pp.  208-12. 
38 Chesneaux, De la rnodernité (Maspero, 1983), pp.  35-49. 

 
 
CHAPTER XV 
 
Waste 
 
It has often been said that our Western society is a society of waste.  To 
me this seems obvious.  But it is often attributed to the excess products at 
our disposal, to poor economic management, and at times to 
administrative or political decisions.  All these things, of course, play a 
part in waste.  The root of the matter, however, is that waste is the 
ineluctable consequence of the technical system that is in constant 
development.  Technique has to produce all that it can.  All possible 
techniques have also to be applied (unless there are economic 
obstacles).  These are two principles which inevitably lead to waste.  We 
should begin by recognizing, however, that there has been waste among 
many peoples from the very first.  The story of the famous potlatch is a 
good example, as is also what has been called the economy of 
ostentation.  We may refer also to the great sacrifices to the gods or the 
dead.  If we add up the number of animals regularly sacrificed according 
to the rules of the Torah we are amazed that poor peoples could "waste" 
so much.  Yet this type of waste is not like our own.  It is part of a 
sociological or religious structure that is necessary for social equilibrium 
or cohesion.  It is precisely measured.  A decision is made about 
conspicuous consumption and there is no variation.  But very great 
uncertainty obtains in our society.  We do not choose or decide; we are 
carried by the current, floating at the will of the forces that manifest 
themselves, wasting because we have too much, because the 
environment leads us to do so.  In particular, we must distinguish between 
private waste and public waste, which in my eyes is much more serious.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
287 
 
 
288  
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
1.  Private Waste 
 
Of course, we think first of the waste of food.  When I go to restaurants I am 
always alarmed to see the number of plates on which the helpings have been 
only half eaten (enormous steaks, etc.), the remnants being thrown out and 
totally lost.  In imitation of the American custom, the helpings served are 
much too large.  Technique here is for nothing.  All the world knows that we 
eat too much in the West.  We are gluttons.  Normal consumption would be 
2,400 calories, but the average in France is 3,500 and in the USA 4,500.  
What we have here is double waste: too much eating of fat, sugar, and meat 
on the one hand, and the waste of caring for illnesses due to excess on the 
other hand (liver, arteriosclerosis, etc.).  Raising the proportion of lipids by 10 
percent translates into 15 percent more sickness and a 2.5 percent increase 
in mortality. 
 
 
But this overeating is not due solely to greediness on the part of 
Westerners (and others!).  It is due to the fact that more and more is 
produced and has to be consumed.  For this reason we have advertising and 
constant campaigns by which alone the domestic market can be induced to 
mop up excess production.  The latter, however, is the result of technical 
methods.  As regards food, waste has another aspect.  Modern methods, 
modern feeding, and modern implements speed things up.  Thanks to 
hormones calves are fattened in three months.  Each cow yields much more 
milk through scientific feeding.  Trawling scrapes the seabeds.  Plant varieties 
are created, including trees which produce two or three times as much as 
traditional ones.  Pigs, calves, and chickens are battery raised, with execrable 
results.  Why?  To apply the most developed technical methods and in this 
way to make our products "competitive.”  We all know the result.  Each year a 
great part of the harvest has to be sacrificed because it is too large for even 
swollen consumption on the domestic market.  Similar results are obtained 
abroad due to the same methods, so that the products there are not more 
expensive.  For the last twenty years, then, millions of tons of apricots, 
apples, and artichokes have been buried and millions of tons of fish have 
been thrown back in the sea.  This is the direct result of techniques of high 
productivity. 
 
 
The use of oil is a second area.  It has now become the custom to use 
an automobile no matter how short a distance one is going.  If one argues 
that this is the driver's fault, I reply that the driver is the victim of habit in a 
technical setting.  There is waste, too, in traffic jams.  Thousands of cars carry 
only a single person, but each car covers several square yards.  How can we 
avoid traffic congestion, however, when we are incessantly exhorted to buy 
(advertising) so as to keep the 

 
 
WASTE 
289 
290   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
factories busy, and every so often we are told in scandalized tones that no 
more that 75 percent of the people in France have automobiles?  This is bad 
when having an automobile is the normal thing.  It is unjust and unacceptable; 
100 percent of the people must become owners.  More congestion, then, and 
more waste of gasoline!  The fact that wastage is inevitable may be seen from 
the failure of the campaign against it which was solemnly announced when 
the price of oil rose so drastically in 1975. 
 
 
Is there waste that might be stopped immediately?  We could begin with 
pleasure craft, which are nothing but harmful, providing neither sport nor true 
contact with the ocean.  We could then turn to car races-another stupid 
amusement!  It is no good arguing that we need them to improve performance 
and to test auto parts.  What use are they when we ought to keep the speed 
limit at no higher than 65 miles per hour?  Does it make sense to test engines 
and tires at three times that speed?  Then we could reduce the number of 
costly, dangerous, polluting highways.  Fourth, we could have fewer air force 
maneuvers-a frightful waste when even specialists agree that they serve no 
useful purpose.  But nothing has been done in any of these four areas.  We 
cannot close the pleasure craft industry (a sacrosanct argument used on 
behalf of the Concorde!).  And what about national defense?  (linked to the 
evolution of the outdated Mystère).  As for highways, who can withstand the 
incredible power of this lobby and displease our modern mammoths? 
 
 
Heating is another area of private waste.  It has been rightly argued that 
older buildings are poorly insulated.  With full insulation there could be a 50 
percent energy gain.  In this regard technique brings economy.  But no 
attention is paid to the opposite fact that there is now a mania to have higher 
indoor temperature in winter (20-25° C, 68-77° F).  As we have proved from 
fifty years of experience, without any discomfort we can live with 
temperatures of 15-18° C (59-66° F).  The excess heating is pure waste.  But 
we have to use the electricity which is produced.  The oil companies have to 
keep going and sell their fuel.  The enormous expenses incurred in opening 
new wells have to be recouped.  How can a technical society stay alive if it 
does not find the most effective means to drill exploratory wells offshore and 
build ocean platforms?  Progress of this kind must not be for nothing.  Hence 
we have to use more fuel.  And city dwellers have to live in an asphyxiating 
cocoon of heat. 
 
 
Another form of waste relates to the rapid obsolescence of our 
machines.  How can we use an older car, or an outdated heater (with no 
replacement parts available), or black and white television, or a record player 
that is not hi-fi?  Where do we think we are?  In Neanderthal 
 
 
 
caves, no less!  We are told that the new products are more developed 
and perform better, so we must rush out and get them.  It is not just a 
matter of fashion.  The new engine does what the old could not do.  But 
are the new gadgets necessary, or even useful?  No one asks this 
question.  Once they are produced and perform better, they are self-
evidently useful and advantageous.  Very quickly, then, we have to 
switch.  The products we buy are made to last only for a limited time, and 
they cannot be repaired because the parts are not available.  Hence we 
have to throw away things which could work for a long time were it not for 
a single part.  It is essential that we replace them.  This is how what has 
been called the throwaway society works.  We have to change very 
quickly because the socio-technical machine works very quickly.  Once 
we buy a thing we have to realize that it is ready to be thrown away.  The 
unconscious process is at root what Iribarne has called the "cycle of the 
better": the more expensive it is, the better it is!  The more recent it is, the 
better it is!  In food, clothes, hygiene, or care, the infinite cycle which 
pushes up normal usage is almost solely responsible for the waste that 
we see.  This cycle is the cycle of the better- a conviction created by 
advertising but which once created, like a conditioned reflex, finally 
functions on its own and without stimulus.  The cycle of the better has of 
itself the power to make waste the first item in our budget.  The only brake 
on its course is the limit of time and of individual ability.  It will advance 
without end when progress makes us more efficient.  To increase 
efficiency is thus to increase the potential for waste.  Our daily experience 
confirms this.  But it confirms even more collective waste. 
 
2.  Social and Collective Waste 
 
It is hard to discern collective waste except when an audit brings it to light.  
Since it is caused by the various branches of government, no one can 
denounce it, and because of self-interest, opposition to it (e.g., that of 
politicians) is very superficial.  In political debate attention might be drawn 
to a few individual instances but nothing is said about the fantastic 
techno-scientific waste.  What do I mean by the branches of government?  
First politicians, then higher civil servants, then high level technicians, 
then research scientists, then experts.  We might also include the most 
powerful business executives, some unions, and the media (newspapers, 
television, radio).  These all advocate technical development and 
therefore none of them will denounce the failures, malfunctions, and 
general waste. 

 
 
WASTE    
291 
 
 
I will confine myself to waste deriving from technical operations and not 
deal with the waste relating to personnel, etc.  Before turning to some 
monumental examples, I must first distinguish between expenditures on a 
human scale and those that are gigantic.  The former, although they finally 
amount to important sums, are close to waste at the private level.  For 
example, offices waste a great deal of paper.  We must not forget that 
computers consume paper at a terrible rate.  The least operation demands 
sheets and sheets of paper, 90 percent of them useless.  An inquiry is 
needed into the paper consumption attributable to computers, attention being 
directed to the triple and quadruple sending of the same letter or brochure 
(and the postage incurred).  It is said that when this happens the computer is 
badly programmed, but I would say that they must all be badly programmed, 
for every day from different sources I receive double and triple invoices and 
brochures and advertisements. 
 
 
Everywhere, too, we find countless and useless photocopies.  This is no 
doubt the fault of secretaries who photocopy everything.  I could give many 
examples.  But my present point is that they have at their disposal such 
simple and efficient copying machines that they run off ten copies when one 
would do.  There is also an extraordinary multiplication of administrative forms 
that citizens have to fill out.  Nor should we forget the need that business has 
felt to modernize offices.  One advertisement admirably states that in order to 
humanize administration and combat bureaucracy, business should equip 
itself  with X.  I also think of the scandal of new government offices throughout 
France.  There is here a waste of time, money, and materials which ought to 
be treated as private waste.  My main concern, however is with monumental 
waste: the waste of public projects, of badly planned projects, and of failed 
projects. 
 
 
Among useless public projects I do not hesitate to classify those that 
have been seriously called artistic.  Some of these have been successful, and 
the billions spent on them supposedly have an educative, commercial, and 
aesthetic impact that will give them a place in history!  In other instances it 
was realized too late that they hi only a kitschy charm, and some people 
wondered whether they ought not to be rebuilt.  Others are simply 
scandalous, and in some cases it is not even known what to do with them.  
The trouble with such enterprises is that people have grandiose schemes in 
their heads, technique makes them possible, and the millions can always be 
found.  We have vast schemes of urban renovation because our presidents 
want to leave behind them monuments comparable to those of Louis XIV and 
Napoleon.  Thus building commences, and it will be seen later whether 
 
 
292   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
there will be any use for it.  This is technical logic.  And what about the 
headquarters for defense with its enormous deficit?  The state has had to spend 
almost a billion francs to bail it out.  I might refer finally to the magnificently 
useless and enormously costly Grand Louvre of Mitterrand with its glass pyramid, 
which has caused much discussion. 
 
 
Let us press on!  A marvelous example of waste is provided by the famous 
Parc de la Villette affair.  Under Giscard in 1979, 800 million francs was set aside 
for a park and museum, and 200 million was spent on a museum of science and 
technology in the meat-market hall.  The museum was so badly planned that it 
was decided in 1982 to restore this hall, but to do this 21,000 tons of iron and 
steel (three times the weight of the Eiffel Tower) had to be removed.  The 
government decided instead to build a real museum of science and technology.  
In 1984, 4.5 billion had to be set aside for the park and museum, 1.  7 for the 
museum of technology alone.  It was argued that this was not expensive since the 
Pompidou Center had cost 3.2 billion.  Furthermore, thanks to concessions, 
taxpayers would not have to pay more than 3.8 billion. 
 
 
In all these cases, of course, the forecasts and estimates were much too 
low.  Thus it was estimated that the Sports Palace (Palais Omnisports de 
Paris-Bercy) would cost 300 million (1979).  But the costs had already run over 
one billion by 1986.  Nor was that the end, for innumerable faults were found.  The 
framework had to be reinforced, 3,000 mobile seats changed, aluminum supports 
substituted for steel supports, and the functioning of the mobile gangways 
improved.  In addition, special arrangements have to be made for each event.  It 
cost 1.2 million to prepare for the Six Day cyclists.  Nothing but waste! 
 
 
Let us take some other examples.  We have stated already that France 
produces too much electricity.  Yet work continues without a qualm on 
supergenerators.  Super-Phoenix will cost 20 billion francs, an ordinary nuclear 
plant 6 or 7 billion.  But in every area those who promote nuclear power have 
always displayed a desperate optimism.  It seems that by 1990, according to the 
present plan, there will be ten or so more nuclear power stations than our 
maximum need requires. 
 
 
Among other large-scale useless projects there is now the Channel tunnel.  
This will provide trains from Paris to London in three hours.  But there will also be 
needed a motorway from Paris to Calais and a new port at Calais to compensate 
for the ferries, which the tunnel will replace, and to make it possible for larger 
ships to call there.  There is also to be a high-speed train Paris-Calais-Brussels.  
The total estimated cost runs to 15 billion francs, though from previous experience 
we can double that amount.  But the development of the area which is projected 
will never take place because the infrastructure does not exist for 

 
 
WASTE 
293 
294   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
economic or industrial development.  The only thing that is certain is that 
the many projects will demolish the human and social equilibrium of the 
district, as has always happened with motorways and high-speed trains 
(to which we shall return).  As for the tunnel, it will no doubt be much 
easier to take one's seat at Paris and alight at London.  Why should we 
not spare passengers the trouble of changing for ferries?  But it will bring 
no development.  Tourism?  It will not bring any. 
 
 
We might also refer to the obsession with bridges.  In France there is 
the Havre bridge, which traffic has never justified, the Oléron bridge, the 
Île de Rébridge.2  We have a surfeit of bridges.  The problem is always 
the same.  We allow areas that owe their charm to silence, solitude, and 
secrecy to be overwhelmed by cars and tourists.  But we have to have 
these great projects.  Soon there is to be a Gironde bridge costing billions 
(including much speculation).  I will be told that such things are really the 
result of speculation and ambition, not technique.  This is true, and yet it 
is technique that makes everything possible.  Without it these projects 
could never have been undertaken, for there is no more of a work force 
than under Napoleon or Louis XIV 
 
 
Another example of useless waste is the expansion at all costs of the 
telephone service.  The French have to have 25 million phones.  It is not 
acceptable that there should be a home without one.  With fiber optics 
and satellites available, nothing less than 100 percent will do.  Technique 
demands it, as with Minitel.  The French are coming round.  We have only 
to create the equipment and the need will slowly arise.  But this leads me 
to my second class of waste, that of poorly planned projects. 
 
 
The model here is obviously the Concorde.  France and Britain 
decided to build this plane in November 1962.  They would build a 
prestigious plane of great speed and with maximum comfort thanks to the 
application of advanced technique.  It would also be a long project which 
would assure work for hundreds of people over many years.  Though 
costly, it would also be profitable.  But cost was not a major concern.  The 
figures jumped around in an amazing way, but so what?  Billions of francs 
could always be found.  The result was the fastest and most modern 
plane in the world (though it is now outdated), but the costs and the time 
spent in construction went through the roof.  The 
 
 
 
prototype, begun in 1962, was not ready until 1967!  The expenses were so 
great that it would have been better to abandon the project, but the usual 
argument in such situations prevailed, namely, that since so much had been 
spent to arrive at this point, we must not lose the money already disbursed.  
The 1.8 billion of 1962 had become 8.4 billion by 1969!  The project was 
continued in the hope that the extra expenses would be covered by good 
international sales. 
 
 
In fact, the USA and China seemed to be interested.  But the USSR with 
its Tapolev 144 was also in the field.  We recall the Concorde's arrival in New 
York.  The noise was so loud that the plane had to fly at subsonic speeds, 
using supersonic only over the Atlantic.  The time of the flight from Paris to 
New York was reduced by half (i.e., to four hours).  But from 1985 a seat cost 
more than twice a seat on other planes (26,000 francs instead of 12,000).  
Passengers had to ask whether their time was worth 3,500 francs an hour.  
There were in fact few passengers, and each flight was a loss for Air France.  
The expected clients did not materialize.  Four more planes were built and Air 
France was forced to buy them, with an equivalent number for Great Britain.  
In other words, Concorde was a financial disaster from every standpoint, 
whether construction, profitability, or marketing.  Technique had made 
possible the building of an extraordinary machine that was beyond our social 
and economic capacity.  Taxpayers had to make up the loss incurred by each 
flight. 
 
 
The disaster was not quite so total with high-speed trains.  Yet these are 
another example of waste.  Once again prestige and high technology were 
the motivating factors.  Since 1979 there has been little but praise and 
exultation regarding these trains.  Two hours from Paris to Lyons!  The 
technical performance once again gave France a leading place in the railway 
world.  More than 40 percent of the population had been given a new form of 
travel.  Nothing but that!  It not only led people to prefer the train to the plane 
but also induced them to travel when they would not otherwise have done so.  
It seems that these trains made a profit, but that depends on the months and 
years.  Other experts are more reserved, as we shall see.  But what glory!  
Lyons has been liberated; "Lyons has lost its provinciality" (Le Monde).  It 
seems we must be within easy reach of Paris not to be poor, isolated 
provincials.  By 1983 the high-speed train was carrying 6,600 first-class 
passengers a day compared to 3,000 in 1981.  Hopes were high.  After this 
success some thought that we might sell the train anywhere in the world. 
 
 
Unfortunately, the British and Germans were building their own systems.  
France's first clients (Korea and Brazil) cancelled their contracts.  The 
Japanese went one better by selling their trains in the USA, 

 
 
WASTE 
295 
 
for they had long since built trains just as fast and comfortable as those in 
France and already had over 1,100 miles of track compared to only 350 
miles in France.  The question thus arose how long it would take to 
amortize the 15 billion francs spent in building this first high-speed train.  
It is not enough to say that the line has brought benefits.  But after this 
first success, the system had now to be doubled.  A line had to be built to 
the Atlantic with branches to Brittany and Bordeaux.  The signal to go 
ahead was given in May 1984. 
 
 
This leads us to some more general reflections on the project.  It 
would certainly be good to improve communications with Brittany, though 
without all the work involved in high-speed trains.  But the line to the 
Southwest is an absurdity.  The journey from Bordeaux to Paris normally 
takes four hours and it would merely be reduced to three.  Is the hour 
gained worth the 12 billion francs that we estimated for the project in 
1984, and the additional billions that would actually be spent (there was 
already talk of 15 billion in 1985)?  The decision rests on three mistakes.  
The first is commercial.  It was announced that the train would be 
profitable, but that is not true.  The fact that it is profitable in the Southeast 
(an economically strong region) does not mean that it will be so in the 
Southwest.  The cart is being put before the horse.  Rapid transport will 
not get the economy of the West and Southwest moving.  On the 
contrary, it is economic expansion that justifies rapid transport.  The 
opposite idea is absurd.  Furthermore, it has been pointed out that a 
high-speed train is profitable only after ten years, seven for construction 
and three in use.  During these ten years there has to be borrowing in 
dollars on the international market to ensure financial stability.  But 
French railways were in no position to incur further debt in 1984.3 
 
 
The second mistake is a very different one.  It has to do with 
democracy.  To build a new line it was proposed to proceed according to 
the nasty custom of government in all projects (motorways, hightension 
lines, etc.): The large project would be divided and subdivided into smaller 
projects, and inquiries into public utility would be for each little project 
rather than the whole, that is, one segment of the railway line at a time.  
Of course, when the consent of the first communities is gained, 
construction will begin, and then it will be explained to opponents that the 
project is under way and there can be no more question of opposition.  
The interesting point in this case is that the first communities to be 
consulted on the new line turned it down.  But that 
 
 
296  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
made no difference.4  The government stuck out its jaw and decided to go 
ahead anyway.  We are reminded of the time when the motorway to the 
West and Southwest was built.  Communities objected but the decision 
was still made to go ahead, and once the first section was built the 
remaining communities had no voice.  But what does democracy mean in 
these circumstances? 
 
 
The third problem with the project is Jacobinism.  There is talk of 
decentralization!  Mere talk!  Behind high-speed trains is the disastrous 
notion that only Paris counts and that every "province" must be linked to 
Paris.  We must be able to travel faster from Brest, Bordeaux, Marseilles, 
or Lyons to Paris.  Paris is at the center of the network of new roads and 
railways.  But the real national and local need is not for links to Paris but 
for cross-country routes (e.g., Bordeaux to Lyons, or Nice to Rouen, or 
Toulouse to Strasbourg).  This would be real decentralization and would 
be of real use.  For on these routes the connections are terrible.  We 
should make lines that are of value to passengers and are not just for 
prestige.  This would be real escape from the tyranny of state-of-the-art 
technology.  But people and their needs count for little.  First we make the 
marvels and then come the projects.  There is also the Concorde 
argument.  During construction it provided many jobs and kept the wheels 
of industry turning.  A budget for projects is thus voted.  What projects?  
No matter whether they are of any use or make any sense so long as they 
are projects. 
 
 
I also recall the great enthusiasm for the agreement regarding the 
Siberian gas which was to heat France.  This would put an end to all our 
anxiety about oil.  The pipeline of almost 3,000 miles represented another 
striking technical achievement.  The first deliveries came without problem 
in 1983.  In 1985, however, France tried to renegotiate what had been 
extolled as the contract of the century (another one!), as an unheard-of 
opportunity for France, etc.  (January 1982).  For this contract had 
increasingly proved to be valueless.  Only a billion cubic meters of gas 
were received in 1984 (instead of the 4 billion forecast) and 2 billion in 
1985 (instead of the 6 billion forecast).  What about the 8 billion for 1986?  
And all this from the great pipeline (a masterpiece of which we were so 
proud) that was supposed to deliver 25 billion cubic meters a year.  Then 
suddenly everything came to a halt.  As might have been foreseen, the 
ground had shifted.  There were problems even 

 
 
WASTE 
297 
298   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
in the USSR.  Many Soviet economists advised against any more contracts 
for the exporting of gas.  Silence gradually descended.  Siberian gas, 
however, had not ceased to pose serious problems after all the enormous 
sums expended on installation. 
 
 
Examples abound of projects that swallow up hundreds of millions of 
francs with no other result than to provide contracts for certain industries and 
to meet the objectives of the technicians associated with them.  This is the 
way of the "advanced" world.  We recall the account given by J.-J.  Salomon 
of the Mohole Project, which was launched by the National Science 
Foundation (1965) with just as much fanfare as the Apollo project.  The aim 
was to bore through the earth's crust at the bottom of the Pacific so as to 
penetrate to the "mantle of the earth" at a depth of 20,000 leagues.  
Preliminary studies commenced with great publicity and to the tune of $125 
million.  But Congress refused to vote the budget (for once the argument of 
money already spent did not prevail), putting the simple question: What use is 
the project?  Obviously none.  Thus the project was stopped, as many other 
things ought to be stopped. 
 
 
Another story relates to the commission for the development of the 
Aquitaine coast.  A proposal was made to build a fine canal linking the great 
lakes of the Landes: Hourtin, Lacanau, Arcachon, Cazaux, Biscarosse, Leon, 
Soustons, etc.  There would be nearly 200 miles of a fantastic tourist canal, 
and digging began.  The first link from Hourtin to Lacanau was finished and 
opened with great ceremony.  But some days later it was discovered that the 
lakes were not on the same level and Hourtin was beginning to empty into 
Lacanau.  The canal was hastily blocked and the project abandoned.  Tens of 
millions had been wasted by the commission, but so what?  They had just 
forgotten to check the altitudes of the lakes. 
 
 
A more serious problem arose with nuclear power stations.  In May 1983 
the minister in charge of energy presented a crucial report which concluded 
the labors of a group for long-term energy planning.  He announced that the 
nuclear plants were overproducing, that the surplus would reach a climax by 
1990, and that the program should be slowed down so as not to waste 
investment.  Any jobs that might be lost could be replaced by work on finding 
new sources of energy.  To prevent investment loss the nuclear program 
should be slowed down and other sources explored.  But naturally there was 
no slowing down.  Instead, the pace was accelerated, and the waste of 
investment continued (Le Monde, May 1983). 
 
 
A final example of miscalculation in projects relates once again to the 
automobile.  The automobile is today the great master of human 
 
 
 
life.  It is the idol, the future, the economic solution, etc.  Everything 
possible must be done to favor it.  Among other things, we must provide 
roads for it, all kinds of roads from motorways to city roads.  Nothing must 
stand in their way.  A third fast road must be built on the narrow 
Cap-Ferret peninsula which will destroy the forest.  Access roads must be 
built through the green belts around Paris, further reducing open spaces 
that ought to be left intact.  An enormous plan of circular routes was 
drawn up to relieve the congestion of the traffic in Paris.  The automobile 
is law.  At all costs we must end bottlenecks, improve circulation, and 
satisfy motorists.  Everything must yield to this economic, social, and 
psychological imperative.  But a strange thing happens.  The motorways 
are rapidly clogged and the circular routes are a hell of traffic jams and 
bottlenecks.  We all know that. 
 
 
The works of Ziv on traffic in the USA and those of J.  Dupuy on 
urban life and traffic show that there is no mystery about this result.5  The 
explanation is simple.  A new road does not reduce congestion on older 
ones but simply increases automobile traffic.  The mistake is as follows.  
Those who plan highways and bypasses begin with the idea that the 
number of cars passing a given point per minute will be the same in ten 
years, so that a new road will reduce it by half.  But this is wrong.  The 
new road will bring in new cars.  Both statistics and experience prove this.  
Growth is induced.  A new road does not respond to a demand but 
creates it.  The logic is that of the development of the automobile market, 
which gives the appearance of being there to satisfy transport demands.  
The infrastructure of roads will ensure an important increase in traffic. 
 
 
We might quote Ziv and Dupuy in full.  But the government 
imperturbably proceeds to build its highways, following what was (we 
should not forget) a Nazi model.  In the process it destroys the 
countryside, divides properties, tears up small towns (what matter!),6 and 
shatters the life and human equilibrium of whole areas.  These things 
must go and motorists must be satisfied.  But according to the logic noted 
above they never will be.  We have here a contest like that between the 
fortress and the cannon.  The more roads, the more cars, and the more 
cars, the more roads.  Waste pure and simple!  Generalizing the rule, we 
come across the basic formula of Dumouchel and Dupuy: "The 

 
 
WASTE 
299 
 
attempt to overcome scarcity (by increasing the quantity of goods and 
disposable resources) increases it.  This is the problem of scarcity: it is totally 
independent of the quantity of goods and disposable resources."7  We should 
regard this as a veritable law.  It is the law of the relation between the 
technical system and the technical society. 
 
 
We look finally at failed projects.  There are countless numbers of these 
as well.  I can hardly make a list.  This is more a matter for research, for we 
find such projects locally.  They are projects on which preliminary studies 
have cost millions, the project has been started, but then it has been 
abandoned.  Whenever I go to Paris, on leaving Orleans, I have bitter 
thoughts as I see the route of the aerotrain.  Thirty miles of viaduct support a 
rail on which this train was to have speeded from Orleans to Paris at 250 
miles per hour.  The train itself had been built.  But the trials were a disaster 
and the whole project was abandoned.  When we think of the expense of 
buying land and the initial work, it might be worth calculating the cost.  We 
might also think of the giant windmill of Ouessant which was supposed to 
provide electricity for the whole island but which simply broke in pieces in July 
19P 1).  The wind was too strong for it.  In general such absurd failures are 
hushed up.  I will mention two or three from my own area. 
 
 
Among the big projects of the Aquitaine coastal commission was (1) a 
plan to develop the beaches of Capbreton-Hossegor.  A sea wall was 
constructed to "enrich" the beach.  It had a little lighthouse end.  But the first 
big equinoctial storm smashed it, leaving only some concrete blocks.  All the 
local sailors had foreseen this result.  (2) Around Arcachon, because of the 
terrible pollution caused by the tourists attracted there by the commission, a 
sewage system was built.  This was a sizable work, but unfortunately the 
population increased so much that the system was overloaded and a few 
years later it burst.  While it was being repaired, millions of gallons of polluted 
water escaped.  But what matter?  (3) The next idea was to connect the 
sewer to an outlet far out in the ocean on the edge of the Atlantic trench.  This 
was a grandiose scheme, but the first equinoctial storm smashed the outlet.  
The German firm which built it stated simply that they had never realized that 
Atlantic storms were so violent.  The sewage was thrown back upon the 
coast, so that at high tide one could see floating in the Arcachon basin the 
effluents that had been taken from the area.  I repeat, we need a list region by 
region of these abandoned projects that we planned poorly. 
 
 
300  
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
3.  Responsibility 
 
I now want to raise an unanswerable question.  We are in an idyllic situation.  
On the one hand billions and billions are wasted for nothing; we have to apply 
better techniques.  On the other hand we have resounding failures.  But in the 
middle there is no one-no one is responsible for anything.  The contractors 
were not responsible for' those homes of children that were swept away by an 
avalanche or for the dams that break, etc.  Whom would we hold responsible?  
The scientists who are there at the beginning?  But they do only theoretical 
studies.  The upper-level technicians who do the practical studies and 
planning?  But they simply make proposals.  The experts who examine the 
plans?  But they only give advice.  The politicians who decide to carry them 
out?  But they know nothing about technical questions and simply rely very 
reasonably on the labors of the technicians.  The civil servants who see to the 
execution of the plans?  But they only obey the politicians.  The other 
technicians and supervisors who do the work?  But they simply carry out the 
plans of others.  No one at all is responsible for anything.  We are in the same 
situation of not being able to fix blame as at the Nuremberg trials.  No one 
was responsible for the massacres at the concentration camps. 
 
 
My own view, however, is that we ought to establish a very strict rule of 
responsibility, even if only by adopting the reports of auditors.  This is the only 
way in which to save billions for taxpayers and to restrain the technical 
madness.  First, politicians are responsible.  Politicians and administrators 
must be made personally responsible for what they decide and do.  In the 
19th century there was a good reason for personal freedom from 
responsibility (except in cases of crime or malfeasance).  It would ensure the 
independence of political decision and the anonymity of public functioning.  
The only sanction lay in the hands of the electors, who could refuse to reelect 
an unsatisfactory representative.  But we now have totally new conditions.  
We can no longer accept a freedom from responsibility which is a cover for 
waste, disorder, and contempt of the public.  We must make politicians, 
administrators, and technicians personally responsible for useless, unjust, 
and unsuccessful projects that are shown to be such. 
 
 
Sometimes, accidentally, technicians are called to account in this way.  
But it is always at the level of execution: the engineer whose dam gives way, 
or the captain of the Amoco-Cadiz who was unreasonably held to be totally 
responsible for the disastrous oil spill.  The responsibility must be placed at 
the top, where the decisions are made.  I know that the objection will be 
raised that decisions are very complex, 

 
 
WASTE 
301 
 
that no single individual can make them, that decision is a process which 
involves many people.  In such important matters, then, we must be very 
strict.  In various ways all those who help to make the decision must be 
held responsible for it. 
 
 
As regards politicians, those who decide in favor of useless and 
wasteful projects must lose their mandate and be refused the possibility of 
reelection.  As regards the higher civil servants who prepare the papers 
and who often make the decisions themselves, and the upper-level 
technicians who draw up the plans (often full of mistakes, as in the case 
of nuclear power stations), we should apply strict financial sanctions as 
was customary under the Roman Republic and at some periods under the 
monarchy.  Those who make such mistakes must pay for them.  If this 
were done, it would perhaps cool the ardor of civil engineers who take a 
percentage on such works. 
 
I believe that the rule of responsibility is a basic one today.  A 
good means of bringing it into play is the ancient Roman institution of 
popular action.  If we take seriously the fact that we are all citizens and 
that we can control the decisions made by our representatives, unjust and 
absurd decisions can be rightly attacked by any of us.  Being citizens is 
enough to give us an interest.  Everyone laments the widespread 
irresponsibility of society today.  To fight against it we must begin at the 
top, where the rot starts. 
 
 
                                                 
1 Cf.  C.  Gruson's report on waste (1970); P.  d'Iribarne, Le Gaspillage et le Désir 
(Paris: Fayard, 1975); H.  Guitton, Entropie et Gaspillage (Cujas, 1975). 
2 This last bridge is remarkable because work on it began without an official 
inquiry or authorization.  Condemned by a tribunal, the builders carried on as 
though nothing had happened.  An appeal obviously does not stop such works; 
according to the doctrine of Biasini, when a public project has begun, no matter 
what legal obstacles may stand in its way, it must be completed. 
3 The Paris-Brussels line (with branches) will cost 25 billion francs and will 
become profitable only in the year 2000. 
4 The groups formed to oppose high-speed trains in 1980-81 claimed that 
decisions were forced upon them.  They objected to properties being divided, 
villages cut off from their fields, electrical stations being set in open fields, and 
above all the noise.  But these human factors were of no importance compared to 
progress! 
5 J. C. Ziv, Planning Model for Private Goals: A History of Urban Transportation 
Planning in the U.S.  (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1977); J.  Dupuy, 
Urbanisme et Technique (Centre de recherche d'urbanisme, 1978). 
6 See J.  Hussonnois, Les technocrates, les élus et les autres (Paris: Éditions 
Entente, 1978). 
7 P.  Dumouchel and J.-P.  Dupuy, L'Enfer des choses (Paris: Seuil, 1979).   

 
 
CHAPTER XVI 
 
The Bluff of Productivity 
 
1.  The State and Science 
 
Before going to the heart of this subject (i.e., the use of productivity as a 
kind of magic, the promotion of an ideology of productivity, and finally 
productivity as a bluff), I must say something about the relation between 
the state and science, since everything else depends on this.  The matter 
is simple enough.  The state, directly if it is socialist, indirectly if not, 
controls the economy.  It wants good production, a balanced budget, 
good exports, adequate domestic consumption, and continued growth.  
To achieve these goals the state needs a technical efficiency above that 
of other countries.  Technique is closely dependent on science.  The 
state, then, has to promote science and orient it to a high level of 
technical production and to progress.  But science can develop only with 
the help of the intricate technical devices that are beyond the means of 
even the strongest corporations.  It can do its work, therefore, only if the 
state focuses all available national resources on the primary goal of 
scientific and technical research.  This gives us the expression which first 
appeared in the USA in the 1950s: research and development.  The result 
of research and development is productivity. 
 
 
As may be seen with angelic simplicity, the problem arises at this 
point.  (It is no longer the problem that I sketched in 1950, when I showed 
that state intervention is always disastrous for science and technique.)  
Productivity is the final goal.  Productivity justifies the costs, the 
apparently unreasonable investment.  Productivity is the hope of technical 
culture, of its rationality, of the scientific and technical pursuit.  But this is 
the bluff, as we shall try to show.  We have here a typical example of the 
"scientization of politics" and the "politicizing of science," both of which 
are linked to the same phenomenon of the  
 
 
 
 
 
302 
 
 
THE BLUFF OF PRODUCTIVITY 
303 
 
domination of technique that is the reason for now social conflicts and 
individual initiatives.1 
 
 
The tremendous initiative that the state has at its disposal in 
regulating technique brings increasingly to light the tension between the 
complexity of its operations and the rationality of its decisions.  Industry 
and the scientific community have such influence in directing technical 
research that the impartiality of the government has little credibility.2  We 
have seen many examples.  Technical decisions are also made within 
administrative structures and by procedures over which individuals, as 
citizens, have no control.  The issue in the debate between Habermas 
and Luhman (as recalled by Salomon) is whether democracy is possible 
in the most decisive questions and their economic, technical, and social 
implications (e.g., the elimination of peasants).3 
 
 
For Luhman it is a peripheral and provincial idea to think that 
individuals can influence the state in areas which are beyond their 
competence and in which the process is autonomous and contingent.  
Luhman rightly refers to the growing autonomy of the apparatus of 
government.  Habermas talks about the dependence of the government 
on the interests of the better-organized groups, the weightiest of these 
being the technicians and scientists.  Thus the combination of political 
administration and the technostructure results in the total elimination of 
individuals.  But the character of the combination and of the power of the 
state is strange, for the state less and less directs the economy.  Its 
planning is for itself alone.  Unemployment brings to light its total 
powerlessness (in spite of the omnipotence of its decisions!) and the 
multiplying of the victims of modernization (peasants, workers, etc.). 
 
 
The modern dynamic has basically gambled: on the one side, the 
priorities of profitability, productivity, efficiency, and competetiveness, and 
on the other, as effects, the turning of the countryside into a desert, 
unemployment, the manufacturing of useless goods, and the reducing of 
consumption to banality, all with an appearance of ease, comfort, and 
health!  But we must not ignore the fact that the system seems to rest on 
a consensus.  In spite of the repeated failures of the politico-technical 
conception–as Chesneaux put it, "the calculated 

 
 
304   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
plan opened up an abyss before being a failure"-the same policy has been 
triumphantly pursued by both left and right.  The state and big business have 
an uncontested monopoly in the field of great technological advances, the 
only qualification being that a large part of French production (about 20 
percent) is now controlled by foreign capital.  The left can do nothing about it.  
In spite of protestations, it has kept up the nuclear power program and the 
expansion of high-speed trains.  The state is the prisoner of the technique 
that it thinks it directs. 
 
 
This is strikingly shown by the great Eureka plan which takes up the old 
theme of research and development and which is so grandiose that even 
though worked out by France it requires European cooperation.  Financed by 
the state, it implies that large industrial corporations must follow it, engaging 
in programs of research along the lines of the plan, which is to be the 
powerful engine of technical development.  The experts chose six sectors as 
a basis on which a technological Europe might be quickly established.  (1) 
Optronics (the systems which enable the light of photons to be transformed 
into electricity, pressure captors, discharge it, amplifiers of light, linked by 
fiber optics).  (2) New materials (composite materials with a base of glass 
fibers, of carbon, ceramic, alloys of titanium, etc., for engines, the automobile, 
the space industry).  (3) Large computers (the fifth generation, where we are 
overtaken by the Japanese).  (4) More powerful lasers and particle beams.  
(5) Artificial intelligence (to improve the "dialogue" [?] among humans, 
machines, and systems experts, to recognize forms, etc.).  (6) Very fast 
microelectronics (the USA has devoted $676 million of its military budget to 
this). 
 
 
These six sectors do not exclude others that are less urgent (e.g., 
biotechnology).  When the state commits itself on this scale, we have to 
consider that it is a reasonable venture in view of the stakes.  The main stake 
is productivity, which will make us militarily, technically, and economically 
independent, which will ensure foreign trade, and which will develop industry, 
thus reducing unemployment.  We shall see concretely whether this is true.  
For the moment we may simply state that what is at issue is staying in the 
race and upholding national prestige by multiplying communications and 
increasing the efficiency of the technical apparatus (for no particular 
purpose!).  More and more, technique is at stake.  All other stakes are false.  
There is no real political, economic, or scientific stake.  The pseudo-stakes 
that are supposed to decide the fate of France are all shams. 
 
 
When we look more deeply at performance in technique, we see that it is 
not really possible to think of any other stakes.  E.  Morin has shown this very 
well.  As he puts it, scientific knowledge is less and 
 
 
THE BLUFF OF PRODUCTIVITY 
305 
 
less produced as an object of thought or reflection for the human mind 
and more and more accumulated for recording by computers, that is, for 
use by supra-individual entities, and supremely by that which is 
supercompetent and omnipresent-the state.  At the same time, and 
correlatively, this science blinds us.  The face of our world and society 
and destiny is divided up into pieces by a scientific knowledge which is 
incapable today of conceiving of individuals, subjects, or the nature of 
society, or of elaborating any thought that cannot be put in simple, formal, 
mathematical terms, but which is very capable of giving to the authorities 
new technical powers of control, manipulation, oppression, terror, and 
destruction.4 
 
 
The relation between the state and science is reciprocal, and it has 
become essential.  Neither can live without the other.  Talk of productivity 
and the economy is a pretext.  The real reason is power on both sides.  
Less than ever (in spite of scientific innocents who believe the contrary) is 
there any such thing as pure science! 
 
 
We could stop there.  But I thought it might be interesting to add the 
main points from J.-J.  Salomon's report La politique française de la 
technologie, which was requested in May 1984 by Laurent Fabius, which 
is document No.  61 of the Centre d'évaluation et de prospective, which 
was sent to the prime minister in June 1985, but which was at once 
pigeonholed, never presented or discussed, and published clandestinely.  
This report is terribly honest.  It denounces the policy of the arsenal.  It 
discusses commercial fiascoes, the real plan, the real plans for the 
computer and telematics, and the Concorde.  It challenges the three 
priorities of defense, the atom, and space when the most competitive 
countries are those with the smallest programs of military research.  It 
shows how ridiculous is an economic system in which the state is both 
client and investor, both banker and entrepreneur, both administrator and 
executive, in enterprises that have no guarantee of technical or scientific 
success.  All the great technological projects upon which France has 
embarked since 1966 have failed except for one, which had an 
unexpected result-the development of the software industry.  These 
strategies supposedly put public services in the service of an industrial 
policy but in fact put industry in the service of public services! 
 
 
Will things be any different in an industry that has not yet been 

 
 
306  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
developed, biotechnology?  Here, too, state intervention is indispensable, 
and heavy, departmentalized structures are being set up without the 
necessary specialists being available.  It would be better for the state to 
stay in its own domain: education, regulation, patents, no bureaucracy 
(though Salomon has confidence in experts!), consultation without the 
power to decide, and association with industrialists.  Yet Salomon still 
believes in research and development and in the need to make technical 
and professional training a priority.  Aid must be given to research and 
development and the economic results of science improved.  But being 
very critical of the omnipresent state, Salomon was ignored.  This shows 
how sensitive is the relation among the state, science, and technique and 
how important is self-justifying discourse.5 
 
 
In this complex of science, the state, technique, and the economy, 
we should finally recall the extraordinary difficulty of technological 
transfers.6  These correspond to the universalizing of technique but are 
dictated by other than purely technical imperatives.  On the one side are 
economic imperatives (e.g., improving the balance of trade) and political 
imperatives (favoring allies and discriminating against potential enemies, 
though these imperatives will often coincide 
 
 
THE BLUFF OF PRODUCTIVITY 
307 
 
with the economic).  These transfers of technique may be between East 
(the USSR) and West, between the USA and Europe, or between the 
USA and Japan.  But a problem here is that the USA does not want 
technique transferred to the USSR, and yet it cannot be sure that France 
or Japan will not sign contracts with the USSR.  On the other side are 
transfers between North and South to help developing countries.  But 
here transnationals interfere, on the one hand following their own 
interests, on the other imposing the concept of a new international order.7 
 
 
One gets the impression that official arrangements in these areas 
are idealistic and illusory.  For it is not very likely that transnationals will 
obey them.  It is estimated that the transnationals are responsible for 90 
percent of the transfers!  Again, as regards the Third World, the problem 
is not to increase the flow of techniques but to let the Third World develop 
its own techniques, its autonomous supply.  Finally, we have to take 
subcontracting into account and the fact that the Third World countries 
have very little negotiating power.  In all these cases technique is viewed 
solely as merchandise.  Today, however, I think that we must see it as the 
merchandise par excellence, that is, as that which grants it an 
independent place in political calculation. 
 
2.  Productivity 
 
Our theme is productivity, which is a very simple idea.  Thanks to the 
development of technical means of production, it is a matter of obtaining a 
higher production of goods for the same quantity of work.  In more 
learned terms, let us call productivity a ratio or measure of efficiency in 
relation to production and the factors of production (labor, fixed capital, 
circulating capital, etc.).  Productivity rises when output increases faster 
than input.  But the interpretation of these changes depends on the 
specific concepts of production and factors of production, and on the 
quality and content of the standards used.  The usual standard today is 
that of production per hour per worker.  Nevertheless, it is hard to have a 
single production index for the multitude of different products and 
especially for services.  In general, it is granted that there can be an 
increase of production per hour of work for four reasons: (1) using other 
factors (equipment, new raw materials-the problem of the global 
productivity of factors); (2) the structure of the workforce, which can be 
modified, for example, by bringing in better qualified 

 
 
308   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
workers; (3) economizing so as to increase efficiency without altering 
work procedures; (4) bringing in new methods and infinitely more efficient 
machinery as a result of technical change (much the most common 
reason today).  In fact, the great search in our world is for new methods 
and equipment which will enable us to transform our resources into the 
desired products.  This technical change sees for itself a twofold mission.  
It must restore long-term economic dynamism by new techniques that can 
increase market demand and build up investment capital.  It must also 
loosen economic constraints that are an obstacle to policies of regulation. 
 
 
Thanks to gains in productivity, a rapid technical change can reduce 
inflationist tendencies and the external constraints of the international 
market.  It can also work against restrictive economic policies and 
improve the employment situation through new ventures.  The slowing of 
economic growth, the rise in unemployment, and the toughening of the 
world economic war have made more evident the need for the 
development of applied science and of techniques relating to production, 
for it is on these that productivity and competitiveness depend.  
Productivity is all the more necessary due to the world economic 
recession.  So long as competition was only domestic, productivity was 
relative.  But the speed of transport and the development of information 
have now exacerbated the problem of competition, of profitability, of 
economies of scale, and of mass effects.  No business can justify itself 
except by increasing its productivity. 
 
 
Between 1963 and 1983 international trade increased twelvefold.  
That is what we are told by both left and right.  During the same period 
both Thatcher and Mitterrand stated that research and development are 
the primary means to solve our economic problems and to stimulate 
growth.  On April 10, 1986, Chirac stated that all economic growth 
depends on developing our export capacity, which implies advance in 
productivity, technological research, and the promoting of traditional 
sectors.  This is also the central idea of political economists (e.g., Barre) 
and of most economists and technicians.8  It is so ingrained that there is 
research into productivity for productivity's sake and no other basic 
reason.  Productivity justifies itself in any area in which it appears.  It is a 
good thing in itself It is a standard of judgment.  Reasonable researches 
from an economic standpoint are now neglected if they are not affected 
by a coefficient of productivity.9 
 
 
THE BLUFF OF PRODUCTIVITY 
309 
 
 
Naturally, this doctrine and its accelerated application have already 
aroused fears.  I will mention four.  The first is, of course, the fear of 
unemployment.  Rapid development of communications and automation 
inevitably put more people out of work than are demanded in the new jobs 
created by computer research, production, and servicing.  The 
computerization of the Bank of France led to the removal of 40 percent of 
the work force, and the same was true in insurance.  A detailed study 
shows that.  the result of robotics is more unemployment than new 
employment, a free hand being given merely to the fourth sector 
(communications).10  In effect, if every worker produces more in the same 
time, there are only two solutions; either reduce personnel or reduce the 
hours of work.  This is why there is a strong movement for the reduction 
of working hours with no reduction of pay.  We cannot indefinitely 
increase the amount of goods produced.  The domestic market is quickly 
saturated and competition makes the foreign market very risky, since it is 
dependent on many other factors apart from productivity (e.g., financial 
fluctuations, dollar quotations, etc.). 
 
 
The second fear is that the constant appearance of new and different 
technical instruments will eliminate qualified workers who cannot readapt 
and acquire new professional skills.  The levels of qualification, according 
to the unions, tend to become lower.  It is true that proportionately there is 
more unskilled than skilled labor where there is automation. 
 
 
A third fear is that fundamentally productivity by means of technical 
improvement is simply an extreme development of Taylorism in the form 
of computers, automation, robotics, and industrial automation.  Tasks are 
parceled out, the rate increased, and work not interrupted.  This finds 
confirmation in the total elimination of "dead time" by the application of 
computers.11  That is to say, results are immediate.  It is stressed that this 
elimination can take place not merely in industry but in society as a whole 
thanks to the speeding up of social, economic, and, of course, work 
rhythms.  This total elimination of dead time is  

 
 
310  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
plainly a great source of Productivity in the world of work.  By constant 
observation of workers and procedures it is possible to rethink the whole 
system of production around internal communication networks.  Ultra-fast 
video makes possible fine tuning.  The traditional rhythms corresponding to 
the speed of perception by the hand and the eye are no longer the obligatory 
terms of reference but an obstacle. 
 
 
The fourth and final fear found among workers and unions is that if 
workers adapt to all this they will finally internalize an ethic of productivity.12  
That is, they will themselves try to improve production on their own initiative 
and rationalize both their work and their daily lives.  They will come more and 
more under the pressure of attitudes both at work and outside work.  The 
pressure of work will shape their whole personality. 
 
 
When they come up against these fears (especially the last two), 
specialists on the subject dismiss them.  There will not really be any 
acceleration or compression of time.  In automatized and computerized work, 
time is split.  There is a human time in the physiological rhythm and a 
machine time measured in nanoseconds (billionths of a second).  This is the 
time in which machines command machines.  We are no longer in the era of 
work in atoms (G.  Friedmann) but in that of work in "elementary particles" 
(Bressand and Distler) which the machine gathers together and joins.  
Everything is in networks, and human beings are simply directors of networks. 
 
 
None of this has anything in common with the older industrial society.  
We need a total renewal of thinking, organization, and conceptions in terms of 
network structures.  There are no longer any divided and repetitive activities.  
The human role is that of the intelligent coordinator who controls good 
functioning.  But how many directors of networks, or coordinators, are 
needed?  And what about the rest?  Furthermore, in spite of the solid 
scientific basis, is not all this a purely theoretical idealization, since none of it 
exists as yet?  However that may be, the fears that are felt correspond exactly 
to the hopes that are set in productivity. 
 
 
We must now look a little more closely at the actual situation.  A stricter, 
nonideological examination shows many gaps and illusions in all the talk and 
projects.  I would argue briefly that it is false to say that productivity 
necessarily brings growth and that growth will eliminate unemployment.  It is 
false that productivity is an unfailing result of scientific and technical research.  
The formula "research and development” 
 
 
THE BLUFF OF PRODUCTIVITY 
311 
 
is inaccurate.  Research cannot engender productivity.  Productivity may 
result from other things besides technique.  It is false, finally, that 
productivity responds to human needs and carries within itself the solution 
to the crisis.  Let us look first at the complex combination of technique, 
research and development, and productivity.  It is important to note that 
contrary to the general idea and uncontested dogma, it is not countries 
that have devoted most money to scientific and technical research that 
have the highest rate of productivity.  For some years this has been the 
great problem that has occupied American researchers, economists, and 
Sociologists.13 
 
 
It is surprising to be able to state that among developed countries 
France is second in the world in the absolute level of productivity, with a 
growth rate five times higher than that of the USA.  Contrary to the usual 
belief, productivity in France is higher than it is in Japan.  And in general 
Japan is behind France in techniques.  We shall see later that the 
Japanese challenge is through better organization rather than technical 
superiority.  Between 1977 and 1983 the average growth rates per year 
were USA 0.6, Japan 3.4, Germany 2.1, and France 3.14  The surprising 
point is that the countries with the most research and development are 
low in productivity.  The rate of growth in the USA fell from 2.4 per year in 
1968-73 to 1.9 per year in 1974-79.  There was a deceleration of growth 
of 1.5 percent between 1960 and 1982.  Japan is even worse, with a 
deceleration of 4.5 percent between 1970 and 1982.  In France the rate 
was 1.4 percent.  In the USA there was a recovery in 1982 with an 
extraordinary boom in investment, so that there was talk of the crisis 
being at an end.  The growth rate went up 2.9, but it was a flash in the 
pan, as some had foreseen, given the enormous deficits in the budget 
and trade.  The year 1987 set a record for business failures in the USA 
(some 200 important companies failed) and the various recoveries that 
were announced were fragile.  The budget deficit has continued to grow 
since 1950 and reached 6 percent of the gross national product in 1985.  
The sector that was affected worst was agrobusiness.  There the decline 
in revenue has been 30 percent since 1983, and it is now the lowest since 
1932.  Farm exports have become increasingly difficult, so much so that 
in 1986 Reagan had to subsidize the growers 

 
 
312   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
of corn so that they could sell at a competitive price abroad, especially in 
the USSR.  A new deal for farmers was launched in 1984 but it does not 
seem to have been very successful.  There has been a continuing exodus 
from rural areas, and only 2 percent of the population of the USA now 
lives by agriculture.  In 1985 it was recognized that the global growth of 
the American economy was still modest (Le Monde, Nov.  1985).  
Expansion in 1985 was much weaker than in 1984 (around 3 percent).  In 
1986 there was economic stagnation and increasing debt (Le Monde, 
Aug.  1986).  The annual deficit rose to $212 billion in 1985 and the total 
debt to $2.1 trillion.  The foreign trade deficit was $148 billion in 1985 and 
over $170 billion in 1986.  Many big corporations ran into difficulties (oil 
and automobiles).  Federal debt doubled in five years.15  Vergara stresses 
that the creation of jobs in the USA is a "myth." 
 
 
Nevertheless, in raw figures the USA was investing ten times as 
much as other advanced countries in research and development.  If the 
relation of research and development to the gross national product varied 
slightly (2.9 percent in 1960, 2 percent in 1980, 2.2 percent in 1985), it 
was still an enormous sum, as much as $56 billion in 1984. 
 
 
Thus productivity and development are not linked directly to 
research.  Sometimes the very opposite is the case.  Being ahead in 
innovation is not necessarily an advantage.  The American computer 
industry had this experience.  It developed much faster than its 
counterpart in Europe.  Too fast: There was a serious crisis in the sale of 
computers in 1985, which shows that the talk about computer production 
being the salvation of France is false.  Was the market saturated?  
Perhaps not, but obviously a threshold was reached, and on this 
threshold it became difficult to continue adapting firms, unions, and 
people to new forms of employment. 
 
 
As is well known, we may also adduce the example of Japan as that 
of a country whose economic advance was not on the basis of research 
and development.  The growth of Japan after 1955 had nothing whatever 
to do with investment in research.  Japan simply exploited discoveries 
made elsewhere, especially in the USA.  It secured the licenses for what it 
regarded as important patents.  After 1980 Japan then began to invest 
heavily in research and development, with many 
 
 
THE BLUFF OF PRODUCTIVITY 
313 
 
patents and technical innovations.  But at the same time we also note a 
decline in productivity.  This decline has gone hand in hand with research 
and development, though naturally I am not contending for any causal 
relation.  Japan is falling slowly into an economic crisis with lower 
productivity.  An interesting point is that to stave off this crisis it is now 
engaging in the manufacture of armaments.  In 1985 the countries with 
the most important innovations were the USA with 64 percent and Great 
Britain with 17 percent, but these were precisely the countries in which 
the rate of productivity did not increase and economic development was 
very weak. 
 
 
It is thus pure ideology to associate technical progress and economic 
development by way of production.  But if the relation between research 
and development and productivity is weak, American economists and 
sociologists have been trying to understand why there has been this 
decline in the USA.  If it is not technical progress that brings increased 
productivity, what is it that brings decline?  They have come up with some 
interesting findings.16  There has been especially a change in the labor 
force and the view of work.  Many poorly qualified young people joined 
the labor force between 1960 and 1980.  There was a general decline in 
the competence, qualifications, and experience of workers.  There was a 
serious decline in discipline.  There was a great rise in turnover.  Much 
less effort was put into work; there was much less interest in it.  On the 
whole one might say that ethical and disciplinary problems, greatly 
aggravated during the 1970s, essentially explain the decline in 
productivity in spite of new materials.17  With the same machinery and 
methods Ford obtains 20 percent higher productivity in its German 
factories than in its American factories.  In other words, what we have 
here is a human problem.  The vital element in productivity is the 
qualification and motivation of the labor force. 
 
 
In all the evaluations of innovations and discoveries, however, what 
is completely ignored is a factor to which we have referred already, that of 
feasibility.  An invention means nothing unless all the factors are present 
to give it a place in actual industrial expansion.  Research and 
development have to be mediated.  Japan proves this point.  The 
prodigious success (or miracle) of Japan is due primarily to the Japanese 
conception and organization of work.  People work with a company for life 
and are not afraid, therefore, of losing their jobs.   

 
 
314  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
Salaries are poor but there are good bonuses.  Self-management is the rule.  
Workers maintain quality control over their own products and participate in 
investment decisions.  In other words, Japan has succeeded in interesting 
workers in increasing productivity.  The greatest amount of flexibility is sought 
(to the benefit of workers, unlike that in France), as are also the best means 
to evaluate the technological know-how and expertise for a given enterprise.  
The great problem is setting up labor-supervisor-management relations, and 
the participation of the workers in the total life of the company.  If there can be 
"hard productivity" by research, technical innovation, and capital, there can 
also be "soft productivity" by motivation, cooperation, and equipment.  To this, 
perhaps, corresponds the concern (quite new to the Minister of Research) to 
bring the social and human sciences into research, along with their 
psychologists, sociologists, jurists, etc., who play a part in programs of 
technical research by studying the social and economic impact and the 
changes that will be demanded in corporations, etc.  (Le Monde, May 1985). 
 
 
Finally, as regards the decline in American productivity, there has been 
an emphasis on the excessive growth of the third sector (including all the jobs 
relating to the computer), since productivity in the service sector is very low.  
Thus it has been admitted that in the USA a transfer from the second to the 
third sector (health, law, police, commerce, administration, etc.) means a loss 
of 37 percent in productivity.  Between 1977 and 1983 the productivity of 
laborers increased 6 percent but that of white-collar workers only 0.8 percent.  
Industry, however, has become increasingly bureaucratic.  There are 57 
million white-collar workers for only 30 million blue-collar workers.  We thus 
slip once again into the problem mentioned above.  The growth of information 
services is well and good, but we cannot eat computer paper or wear what 
the service sector has to offer. 
 
 
We are not to think, then, that productivity always denotes the 
production of usable goods.  Jean Voge has estimated that each time 
productivity increases 10 percent, the part corresponding to "information" (i.e., 
essentially the cost of organizing work) rises 20 percent (the cost of 
information has a growth quadruple that of producing usable goods).  
Naturally, there are efforts to improve the productivity of services (electronics, 
computers, rationalization), but these efforts do not solve the problem.  In the 
consumption of knowledge, it is hard to give knowledge use value when it 
functions as exchange value.  This explains the growing complaints of 
consumers about the artificial obsolescence of goods.  Many techniques are 
abandoned as soon as they are refined.  They are relegated to marginal 
zones because they are no 
 
 
THE BLUFF OF PRODUCTIVITY 
 
315 
 
longer profitable.  The logic of production is that information exists on its 
own, while that of demand is partly to impose its use.18 
 
 
We must now ask whether productivity creates employment or 
unemployment.  We come across some surprising facts.  Martin Bailey 
argues that developments unfavorable to the growth of productivity in the 
USA have not had serious effects on the labor force.  Even during the 
period of stagnation civil employment increased by 15 percent.19  C.  
Freeman makes the generalization that the level of employment goes up 
in tandem with a growth of productivity so long as this is weak.20  In other 
words, a dip in productivity does not prevent the hiring of workers and a 
rise does not necessarily mean either a drop or a rise of employment.  
Even if it were true that growth would lead secondarily to a growth of 
employment, this would be limited and would not end unemployment.  
Rising productivity does not accelerate the rotation of capital-quite the 
reverse.  Nor does it necessarily mean economic growth, which in any 
case would not overcome unemployment.21 
 
 
Expansion creates jobs but also eliminates them in sectors under 
reconstruction.  Economic growth has never created many jobs: 125,000 
a year in 1959-71, 60,000 a year in 1971-84.  Thiot has an interesting 
table showing a growth of the gross national product of 162 percent from 
1959 to 1983 and only 11 percent growth of employment.  In France and 
Japan the figures are 475 percent and 32 percent.  But we have to take 
into account many other factors.  Thus growth, by offering more consumer 
goods, demands higher wages.  Standard wages in 19 50 would now be 
at the poverty level.  We have also to take into account demographic 
progress and the difference between the demographic curve and the 
employment curve.  Here there is only a weak relation between growth 
and employment.  In sum, it is wrong to believe that unemployment will be 
solved by higher productivity and the resultant economic growth.  But we 
must now look at the opposite. 
 
 
We may take the typical case of the robot.  One ordinary robot 
replaces two workers but has different capacities according to the 
purpose for which it is intended.  A robot is very expensive (e.g., a robot 
for soldering cost $25,000 in 1981).  Moreover, the savings in labor is 
compensated by the operating costs: maintenance and the extra energy 
the robot consumes (the robot is an enormous consumer of energy). 

 
 
316   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
 
Again, a robot begins to be profitable only after producing so much.  
The amount varies according to the industry.  Finally, models of robots 
soon become obsolete; often a model has to be replaced before it is paid 
off.  Paul David cites a German study of five branches of industry and 
twelve manufacturing operations that concludes that between 1990 and 
1995 robots will save 10 percent of the labor force (though some 
journalistic studies give a figure of 25 percent for the USA between 1985 
and 1990).  David thinks that the most likely figure is 5 percent when we 
take every factor into account.22  It seems that in the choice between 
building a new factory equipped with robots and gradually automating an 
older one, robots are at a disadvantage.  In fact, the installation of robots 
in an existing factory is hampered by the interdependence of techniques.  
A robot requires a whole series of related equipment, that is, another 
conception of the business.  Its place is really in a new factory with 
automation and computerization.  This new factory relates machines to 
machines without interference.  The networks are the links, and they fully 
integrate production.  Computerization becomes a process that affects 
every sector of automation.  Information automation replaces mechanical 
automation.  Thus a new financial and business strategy is needed.  We 
have here a wholly new conception of business and economic life (cf.  the 
"networks" of Bressand and Distler).  This will perhaps result in a new 
dynamism of growth.23 
 
 
We must now deal with the assumptions.  Research and 
development rests on the premise that technique is in the service of 
people to enhance their well-being.  But O.  Giarini along with many 
others has 
 
 
THE BLUFF OF PRODUCTIVITY 
317 
 
shown that in reality there is no relation between economic growth and 
enhanced well-being.24  He takes as an example the common notion that 
all paid work produces an added value that generates well-being.  But this 
is not accurate.  Technical work often means reduced value.  Thus 
industries for eliminating pollution simply recover an existing value; they 
do not enhance well-being.  Yet they increase the gross national product 
and thus contribute to productivity!  This investment represents a 
supplementary cost due to production that reduces well-being. 
 
 
At times the reduction of value is greater than the addition.  Thus 
technique, by its own development, can increase productivity and yet at 
the same time diminish the positive economic benefit.  Either way, 
however, there is growth!  Our technical society, says Gellibert, is like a 
top which can stand on its point only in virtue of its speed.  The least 
slowing down and social disorder appears at once (farmers threatened 
with ruin, and fertilizer, pesticide, and insecticide factories over which the 
specter of unemployment looms).  We run into the problem of useless 
work, but no matter what the consequences, we must keep the top 
spinning and increase productivity, even for destruction.25 
 
 
Concluding this sketch of productivity, I will recall an older thesis that 
is often forgotten and needs to be brought to mind constantly.  It is the 
thesis that our industrial or postindustrial organization and technical or 
computerized society are not for the purpose of creating consumer goods 
or enhancing human life and well-being but solely for the producing of 
profit.  Solely!  All else is pretext, means, and justification.  Marx 
demonstrated this in the case of capitalism but it is equally true of socialist 
society as we actually know it.26  Real productivity is solely for the 
purpose of profit.  All the rest is accessory.  The calculations are 
controlled, then, not by science or technique, but by the strategy of profit. 
 
 
The supporting market is first selected.  Thus in the case of rockets it 
is said that within two or three years there will be a demand to put 
satellites in orbit.  Then there is investment only where control is assured.  
Then the greatest possible development is attempted.  Finally, with no 
shame, what is least profitable can be discarded (cf.  the textile and 
metallurgical industries, though with subsequent regrets), and investment 
made in a new supporting market (which will probably 

 
 
318   
 
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
soon be saturated, since others are doing the same).27  This clearly 
explains the reversal to which we referred in the relation between 
technique and economics, but it has become necessary only to the 
degree that the sectors of technique have multiplied inconceivably (so 
that there are many choices and we cannot exploit all of them) and 
economic resources are limited. 
 
 
A strange phenomenon thus confronts us.  Efficient modern 
techniques may exist which have useful qualities (e.g., not polluting), but 
they never see the light of day because the big economic and financial 
groups choose other techniques which, they think, will bring more profits.  
Thus the oil companies do all they can to dismiss the biomass, solar 
energy, wind energy, and geothermal developments.  In other areas, too, 
we see gentle, appropriate techniques that have no chance of success 
because they will not yield maximum profits.  In the last resort there is no 
relation between profitability and knowledge.  That is our last word on the 
famous expression: research and development. 
 
3.  Entropy 
 
According to Ingmar Granstedt, since 1964 the growth of capital per head 
in industry has not been accompanied by an equally strong growth of 
technical efficiency.  The total productivity of factors has not kept pace.  
Production will henceforth grow less quickly than the amount of capital put 
to work.28  This judgment leads us to a brief reminder of the theory of 
entropy, which is the exact counterpart of research and development, and 
which, if verified, will give further evidence that politico-technological 
discourse is all bluff.  Entropy has successively been discerned in 
physics, astronomy, biology, and philosophy (Lalande, 1899).  In the 
1960s it was realized that the second law of thermodynamics might apply 
to other fields, and especially to economics and technical progress.29 
 
 
Entropy is a state of absolute disorder, corresponding to 
disintegration 
 
 
THE BLUFF OF PRODUCTIVITY 
319 
 
and a complete absence of "information.”  The law of entropy simply restates 
mathematically a law which has been known for at least a century, especially 
in farming-that of diminishing returns.  Georgescu-Roegen put it in theoretical 
form when he criticized the general idea that technique is of unlimited 
capacity.30  It is supposed to develop exponentially.  The superficial 
justification for this idea is that one technical advance brings another.  This is 
true, but the advance is not cumulative, as in the case of demographic 
growth.  Even if technique continues to progress, this does not mean that it 
has no limits.  Growth has an upper limit, which in the case of technique is 
fixed by the coefficient of efficiency. 
 
 
Entropy applies also to economic systems.  These can continue to grow 
so as to keep going, but with no greater usefulness or betterment of human 
well-being.  As Georgescu-Roegen proves with detailed examples, technique, 
too, is subject to the law of diminishing returns.  Furthermore, by its own 
development it contributes to the diminishing of economic returns.  This is 
simply to show in another way what we have demonstrated in the preceding 
sections.  The costs of research mount, the time it takes grows longer, and 
the costs predicted are exceeded, as in the case of nuclear power stations.  
The appearance of new techniques means inevitably a faster obsolescence 
both of the technical tools themselves and also of the products, so that they 
have to be replaced before they have paid for themselves (cf.  computers).  
This idea of entropy (and of information as "neg-entropy") has become 
widespread,31  but since 1984 the scientific world has reacted vigorously.  It 
has shown that sociologists and economists have misinterpreted the second 
law of thermodynamics, that entropy is not a notion that can be applied to 
everything, and that it does not apply ineluctably.  We thus need to reason 
judiciously. 
 
 
I accept many of these reservations.  It seems that the enthusiasm for 
the idea of entropy was extreme, and I distrust universal generalizations.  I 
prefer to stay with the simple but very powerful idea of diminishing returns in 
both economics and technique.  This seems to be so firmly demonstrated that 
it is hard to contest.  Yet I think it is correct that a new technique might arrest 
the decline and renew the movement of productivity.  This is simply an 
application of the idea that new information checks the possibility of entropy. 
 
 
Nevertheless, the growth of waste, of technical aberrations, of 

 
 
320  
THE TRIUMPH OF THE ABSURD 
 
adverse effects, of slowness in the transition from innovation to 
application, and of subtracted values reflects the global reach of 
technique and leads inevitably to a lowering of productivity.  Economic 
phenomena tend to be more and more unstable (flow, networks), and 
when there are no stable phenomena (technique in its globalness may be 
a stable unity, but only individual sectors are economically significant, and 
these technical subsystems are most unstable), no theory can be 
formulated.  This is why economic science seems to be restricted to the 
short term, to the period when the variable factors can serve as data and 
a mechanical and quantitative analysis can have some meaning. 
 
 
A further point is that the more technique develops, the more, as we 
have seen, it specializes.  Every new solution is better, in general, in a 
narrower field of application than the technique that it replaces.  It may be 
more efficient but it applies in a narrower economic sector, so that the 
innovations bring diminishing economic returns from a larger standpoint.  
According to Giarini, producing a narrower selection of goods more 
quickly simply increases quantitatively and qualitatively the demand for 
supplies at the various stages of production, places heavier demands of 
input and output storage, and increases the number of intermediaries.  
The obvious result is a considerable reduction in technical productivity. 
 
 
This trend is accentuated by the slide to the third sector which 
technical progress not only facilitates but induces.  Scandalous though it 
may be to say this, the computer, which results in fabulous third-sector 
growth, is a decisive factor in economic entropy and therefore in technical 
entropy, even though innovations and technical marvels do not cease to 
multiply.  However that may be, in spite of modem critics J.  Neirynck has 
taken up and generalized the concept of entropy in a systematic study of 
all the places where it may be found.32  Obviously, we do not have here a 
mathematical or statistical demonstration but a rigorous investigation 
which seems to lead us to the incontestable conclusion that the greater 
the increase of technical power, the greater the entropy of the complex 
system that we might for a moment regard as a closed system.  It is 
certainly a total illusion to think that the computer, as information, can play 
the role of neg-entropy and reverse the process. 
 
 
It is at this point that we need to look at a crucial article by a scientist, 
Claude Riveline.33  Riveline runs through the many uses of 
 
 
THE BLUFF  OF PRODUCTIVITY 
321 
 
computers but he then asks whether it is not all a gigantic mistake.  
Computers have never increased the returns of administrative work, given 
the number of operators.  As regards the drawbacks, he gives many 
examples of the damage they do.  But are they not essential to science?  
Few scientists work with them.  Their main use is for calculation.  
Confronted with "a mystery of nature," scientists used to reflect.  Today 
the questions are translated into logical systems which I computers can 
handle.  But they are very selective.  What masks the poverty is the 
quantity of elementary facts that they can absorb and their speed of 
operation.  But intelligence is efficient preoccupation with essentials.  Why 
search for essentials, however, when we can deal with everything at 
once?!  The appearance of a new tool or a new application is hailed as a 
triumph even though its virtues do not support this.  What produces 
enthusiasm for computers is not that they are useful and efficient but that 
they give the illusion of being intelligent. 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 See J.  Habermas, Technik und Wissenschaft als 'Ideologie’ (Frankfurt am Main: 
Suhrkamp, 1968), partially translated in Toward a Rational Society, tr.  Jeremy J.  
Shapiro (Boston: Beacon, 1971), pp.  50-127; idem, Legitimation Crisis, tr.  
Thomas McCarthy (Boston: Beacon, 1975). 
2 See J.-J.  Salomon, Prométhée empêtré (Paris: Pergamon, 1981), pp.  92ff. 
3 Cf.  the works of J.  Habermas cited in n.  1 above, and Luhman, Theofie der 
Gesellschaft oder ‘Sozial-technologle' (Frankfurt, 1971). 
4 E.  Morin, La Méthode (Paris: Seuil, 1980), 2:299ff.  Cf.  P.  Feyerabend, Against 
Method: Outline of an Anarchistic Theory of Knowledge (New York: Schocken, 
1978); Bryan Wynne, "Sociology of Science," Science, Technology and Society 
(three special numbers devoted to the sociology of science, 1984). 
5 A fashionable slogan in 1984 was: "Less of bureaucracy, more of the state.”  (I 
am thinking especially of an article by Strauss-Kahn in Le Monde, Nov.  1984.) 
The state, we read, guarantees national unity, supports firms in trouble, and 
inspires public projects (with boasting about nuclear development, space, the 
airbus, and Ariane).  The state has pumped a good deal of money into industry.  
The only countries that are achieving the modernization that technological 
changes demand are those in which there is most state intervention.  The state 
offers pragmatic motivation and thus increases efficiency.  It can neutralize the 
risks of modernization, lay down the rules, and fight against social and economic 
rigidity.  Remarkable!  It might seem that we are reading Mussolini.  And all this, 
as in fascism, in a battle against bureaucracy, the root of all evil.  Nowhere do we 
find the simple question: With what tools is the state to perform all these miracles?  

                                                                                                               
                                                                                                              
The state needs arms and hands.  It needs the tools to analyze situations, 
evaluate problems, propose solutions, make concrete contacts, and distribute 
funds.  This is all administrative work.  There is no state without administration.  
But administration, it is argued, is not bureaucracy.  Of course it is.  Administration 
today has many tasks to perform and it has to apply increasingly detailed and 
complex rules.  It proliferates as the functions of the state proliferate.  It has also 
to engage in public relations.  It is equipped with an increasingly efficient, modern, 
and fast apparatus.  This is why bureaucracy is omnipresent.  If there is no state 
without administration, there is no modern administration without bureaucracy.  To 
say that administration is not bureaucracy is infantile. 
6 See Angela Stent Yergin, East-West Technology Transfers: European 
Perspectives, Washington Papers no.  75 (Sage, 1980); Stephen Sternheimer, 
East-West Technology Transfers: Japan and the Communist Bloc, Washington 
Papers no.  76 (Sage, 1980). 
7 See J.  Touscoz, et al., Transferts de technologie (Paris: PUF, 1978). 
8 Cf.  G.  Schmeder in Salomon and Schmeder, Les Enjeux du changement 
technologique (Economica, 1986). 
See J.-M.  Ferry, "La robotisation," Esprit, Jan.  1985.  Ferry also raises another 
vital problem.  The age of information and robotics is causing us to lose all sense 
of the traditional principle of social justice: "To each according to his or her work.”  
This principle no longer has any meaning! 
10 Cf examples in the 1986 Bordeaux thesis of Gellibert, "Le Choix de la biomasse 
comme énergie.  Révélateur des mythes et des conflits de la société 
technicienne": the possibility of using the nitrogen from the air and the nitrogen 
from legumes (with the practice of letting the land lie fallow) in order to avoid the 
misuse of nitrous fertilizers.  This would economize both land and energy but it is 
neglected because it does not have enough technique. 
11 See Bressand and Distler, Le Rrochain Monde (Paris: Seuil, 1986). 
12 See Mercier, Vie quotidienne et Nouvelles Technologies: La Société digitale 
(1984). 
13 See J.-J.  Salomon and G.  Schmeder, Les Enjeux du changement 
technologique (Economica, 1986). 
14 See Lester C.  Thurow, Organisation sociale et productivité (Economica, 1986).  
Bourguinat, Les Vartiges de la finance internationale (Economica, 1987), poses 
the difficult question how a country that normally exports capital can suddenly 
become a debtor nation, as the USA has done, with a debt exceeding that of 
Brazil. 
15 Bourguinat (op.  cit.) emphasizes that in this situation the "new finance" has 
brought the whole American economy into a speculative bull market.  After five 
years of an overvalued dollar, the economy seemed to be shattered, with imports 
rising 19 percent and exports only 5 percent, and a particularly drastic reduction in 
high-tech exports (from $27 billion in 1980 to only $6 billion in 1984).   
16 See Martin Bailey, Capital, innovation et croissance de productivité, p.  53. 
17 See Lester C.  Thurow, Organisation sociale et productivité, p.  75. 
18 See J.  Beillerot, La Société pédagogique (Paris: PUF, 1982), p.  12 5. 
19 Martin Bailey, Capital, innovation et croissance de productivité p.  53. 
20 C.  Freeman, Technologies nouvelles et Avenir de l'emploi, p.  91. 
21 See F.  Thiot, Le Monde, May 1986; Couria, Informatique et Emploi (Conseil 
économique et social, 1984). 
 
22 Paul A.  David, La Moissonneuse et le Robot, op.  cit., p.  109.  The Bureau 
international du Travail observes that the use of robots is also not making as 
much headway as expected: 44 percent of the English firms that use robots have 
run into serious difficulties and 22 percent have abandoned them.  Germany is 
investing only 5 percent of its capital in robotics.  Yet forecasts are optimistic.  By 
1990, there are to be 70,000 robots in Japan, 60,000 in the USA, and 20,000 in 
France.  I do not know the basis for these estimates.  Though robots will not solve 
all problems, they are described as a viable option that will not create 
unemployment.  Europe has the most unemployment and uses fewest robots, 
while Japan has little unemployment.  But there can be no question of enforcing 
the use of robots; workers must agree (Revue internationale due travail I [1986, 
Bureau international du Travail, Geneva]). 
23 Cf.  the interesting article in Le Monde on robots in the clothing industry (R.  
Clavaud, Oct.  1983).  Although computerization and robotics will supposedly be 
the salvation of the industry, new factories will have to be built, robots will do only 
simple tasks, and the range of products will be reduced (one model for T-shirts, 
three for underpants).  A rise of 5 percent in productivity may be expected.  Fewer 
textile specialists will be needed but more laborers and engineers.  Costs should 
be reduced, but there is no mention of the price of the robots or the new factories! 
24 0.  Giarini, L'Europe devant l'âge post-industriel (Paris: Futuribles, 1977). 
25 J.  Gellibert, "Le Choix de la biomasse comme énergie" (dissertation, University 
of Bordeaux, 1986). 
26 Cf.  the essential book by Michael Voslensky, Nomenklatura: The Soviet Ruling 
Class, tr.  Eric Mosbacher (New York: Doubleday, 1984). 
27 For an excellent account see Gellibert's thesis, "Le Choix de la biomasse 
comme énergie." 
28 Ingmar Granstedt, L'Impasse industrielle (Paris: Seuil, 1980). 
29 Especially following Shannon's theory of communication (1948).  It might be of 
interest to recall two implications of Shannon's formula, namely, that the entropy 
of a source relates directly to the number of elements that it contains, and 
correlatively that it diminishes in direct relation to the dissymmetry of the 
probabilities of each of these elements, This has important consequences for the 
interpretation of the evolution of the technical system 
30 Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen, The Entropy Law and the Economic Process 
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1971). 
31 Cf Henri Guitton's excellent book, Entropie et Gaspillage (Cujas, 1975). 
32 J.  Neirynck, Le Huitième Jour de la Création.  Introduction à l'entropologie 
(Presses polytechniques romanes, 1986). 
33 Claude Riveline, "Manifeste pour la désinformatisation.  de la société," Pandore 
(Feb.  1982). 

 
 
PART IV 
 
Fascinated People 
 
 
We must begin by recalling a question that I dealt with a long time ago.  
When someone says that people can and should master and handle 
technique as they wish, my simple question is: What people?  People in 
themselves?  They do not exist.  You and I and average citizens?  I can 
refuse to have a telephone or a videorecorder, but what does that 
change?  Politicians?  They know nothing and can do nothing.  The upper 
class?  This has power in its own domain but not over technique.  
Technicians?  They, too, are limited to their own sphere, and their interest 
is to apply and perfect their technique as best they can.  The 
technostructure comes into play here.  The application of technique 
enhances the social (and financial) status of technicians, and this leads 
them to further applications of their technique.  Finally, scientists?  But 
often scientists do not know what will be the technical consequences of 
their discoveries (remember Einstein), and their passionate interest in 
scientific 
research 
prevents 
them 
from 
exercising 
self-restraint.  
Therefore, no one! 
 
The idea that people master and use technique as they wish is 
meaningless and absurd, as we have shown already (see chapter VII 
above).  In recent years it has been modified.  We are now told that 
people in the West are fascinated by modern technique.  Fascination 
means exclusive fixation on an object, passionate interest, the 
impossibility of turning away, a hypnotic obedience, a total lack of 
awareness, and finally exteriorization of self (either possession or 
dispossession, according to where one is situated).  But again we must 
distinguish.  I am not saying that everybody in the West is fascinated.  
Contrary to what a simplistic judgment might suppose, it is the most 
educated people with the most developed personalities who are the most 
fascinated. 
 
 
 
 
323 
 
 
324  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
 
At this point we come across a phenomenon that we also found in our 
study of propaganda and which might seem to be surprising.  Those who are 
most susceptible to propaganda (and advertising) are the intellectuals, while 
the hardest to reach and to budge are those who are rooted in traditions, 
whose ideas are fixed, who live in a relatively stable environment (like farmers 
up to the 1950s), or who are in structured relations (like members of unions).  
The last group is not exactly fascinated by technical modernity.  A very 
interesting recent work has shown that ordinary people or those who belong 
to the middle class may watch television, but if they are asked about it they 
are very guarded and have not been much influenced by it.  This creates 
serious problems of interpretation for the investigator.1 
 
 
In fact, those who are fascinated by technique are the intellectuals, the 
technicians, the scientists, the upper classes, the journalists, the various 
shapers of public opinion, the artists, the priests and pastors (when they want 
the church to change and to adjust to modern tastes), the responsible 
economists (bankers, etc.), the professors (who have suffered enough from 
being told that their teaching is worthless!), and the high-level administrators.  
These are the ones who are fascinated and who show no critical spirit, or 
who, when they believe (like many artists) that they are engaging in violent 
criticism of our society, fail to see that they are simply reproducing in a kind of 
parody the technical world itself with all its perversity, thus strengthening the 
perverse effects and in so doing reinforcing the myth.  I demonstrated this for 
most of the arts in Empire du non-sens.  It is to this essential group of 
responsible people that we refer when we talk about the fascinated. 
 
 
A first dominant feature of these people is the presence among them of 
a number of images that we might call myths if it were not that the word is 
given a different use-modern but fundamental images which at one and the 
same time engender, validate, and render incontestable certain judgments, 
attitudes, and choices.  We have already dealt with some of these, for 
example, productivity, science, and rationality.  Some are constant, others 
spring up, are grafted on to the former, and are both new and incontestable.  
There is, for example, the myth of Japan.  The West has been invaded by 
motorbikes, cars, watches, computers, and videorecorders that are Japanese, 
and all of them (in spite of duties) at prices lower than Western prices.  The 
commercial and economic stakes are high. 
 
 
At the same time we learn that this is not dumping.  Nor is the 
                                                 
1 See D.  Brethenoux, "Étude de la réception télévisuelle: Sémiologie TX, 
réception TV" (dissertation, University of Bordeaux, 1985). 

 
 
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
325 
 
Japanese labor force exploited.  There is practically no unemployment in 
Japan and the standard of living is high.  Even the boldest experiments are 
the rule in Japan.  The Japanese have an incredible number of robots and the 
fastest trains in the world.  Their territory is limited but in spite of the high 
density of population Japan is not overpopulated.  It is thus the absolute 
model.  It may be noted that the groups of people listed above are always on 
the watch for the absolute model.  For many among them (though not all) it 
used to be the USSR, then China, but in truth there was too much 
disagreement between these (intellectually seductive) countries, and then the 
technical reality!  Now the ideal is Japan because Japan also seems to have 
solved social problems thanks to fabulous technical progress. 
 
 
Japan is thus being studied with a view to imitation.  For the only way to 
compete is to imitate the leader (as in 1930 when everyone imitated the USA 
and gambled everything on the automobile).  We see at this point the 
difference between average people and fascinated people.  The former are 
content to buy Japanese products without another thought.  The latter form an 
idealistic image of progress incarnate.  They feverishly study Japan.  They 
learn of the striking role of cooperation between the state and private industry, 
of the complex elaboration of the economic plan (though the work is done 
smoothly, the ministry does not impose policy), of the creation of links 
between the ministry and industry, of the success of a kind of general 
mobilization for productivity, of a deliberate readiness to make collective 
decisions in concert, and of the progressive emergence of a consensus which 
is also a process of taking cognizance, analysis, agreement, and negotiation, 
in which the unions are on good terms with the owners and the workers are 
strictly supervised. 
 
 
But above all Japan is the ideal because it was the first to find the 
vacuum in which to provide new goods.  Hence it is less the (difficult) 
Japanese structure that we try to imitate.  Instead, we are trying to play in the 
same field (robotics, etc.), which is an obvious blunder, since we will never 
catch up with the Japanese.  Or else we are trying to find our own vacuum 
which no one has yet filled and in which we will have no competitors: more 
refined, sophisticated, extreme high tech, which can still be marketed.  
However that may be, the Japanese model fills our minds, fascinating us and 
pushing us in this direction.2 
                                                 
                                                                                                              
2 In general, a dubious feature about Japan is ignored: the very low value of the 
yen.  When the yen rose in value, Japan's international commercial advantage 
was reduced.  The truth is that 50 percent of the workers are employed by the 
innumerable subcontractors, are severely exploited without defense, and accept 
their lot.  The works of Satoshi Kamata may be biased, but we cannot ignore them 
 
 
326  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
It is these obsessional images which seize the intelligence and 
characterize what I have described as fascinated people. 
 
 
 
 
(Japan in the Passing Lane: An Insider's Shocking  Account of Life in a Japanese 
Auto Factory [New York: Pantheon, 1983]).  The idea that Japan has no 
unemployment (or a rate of only 2.6 percent) is also an illusion.  In fact, the 
organization of the job market is so different that comparison is not possible.  
There are different forms of unemployment and a crude instrument like the "rate" 
cannot measure them; cf.  P.  Saucier, "Le chômage au Japan," Travail et Emploi 
(Ministry of Social Affairs, May 1986). 

 
 
CHAPTER XVII 
 
From Information to Telematics 
 
1.  Information 
 
The world of information can be a terrible one.  Information has enjoyed a 
triumphal onward march.  It is viewed as the condition of all intellectual, 
social, and economic development.  A surplus of information is a surplus 
of culture and personality.  In the theory of entropy, we recall, it is 
information which will renew the system and stop the ineluctable slide into 
entropy.  But information is seen in many different ways.  Costa de 
Beauregard has taught us to distinguish between knowledge-information 
and organization-information.1  I receive information which remains with 
me as knowledge but which I quickly forget.  Etymologically, however, 
information (in-formare) has the sense of giving form.  It shapes conduct.  
If the same information is given to many people, by being led to adopt this 
conduct, they form a coherent group.  Thus the information given by bees 
tells other bees where there is nourishment, in what direction, and how far 
away, so that they all know where to fly. 
 
 
This is precisely the role of information in a "primitive" society.  It is 
useful.  It tells about hunting possibilities, dangers, and relations to the 
spirits.  All the information that members of tribes receive is classified by 
them as useful or not.  Lévi-Strauss has shown that Indians receive a 
phenomenal amount of information about nature that would be completely 
strange to us.  When useful, the information is passed on to others, and 
the group acts accordingly.  This is the model of information in all 
traditional societies.  The information of pure knowledge was much less 
extensive, was reserved for special groups (the Greek philosophers), 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
327 
 
 
328  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
and was little appreciated (cf.  what travelers reported about strangers in the 
Middle Ages, which was received with skepticism on the ground that those 
who came from afar found it easy to lie). 
 
 
There is also the information which seems to be knowledge but which in 
reality is not.  On the one hand, we have information in the spheres of art and 
music (singing, dancing, theater, clowning, storytelling, minstrels, and 
troubadours).  This type of information is indispensable for the coherence and 
fellowship of the group.  It is not just a matter of aesthetics or entertainment.  
As has been said again and again for the last fifty years, festivals have a 
basic role and the information relative to them has the same role.  On the 
other hand, there is also religious information.  This plays a part in 
organization: popular processions, the actions of religious orders, the 
preaching of crusades or missions, etc.  Information of this kind seeks to 
galvanize and shape the group. 
 
 
After this brief survey of information in the past, we must now assess the 
complete change in our own day.  Confronted with what now passes for 
information, we note at once the intellectual and conceptual gulf that 
separates us from the computer.  What is information for the computer?  
Information is defined as data.  Facts and ideas are formalized in such a way 
that they can be communicated or manipulated by different procedures.  But 
the data have first to be represented.  This representation is used throughout.  
The process consists of handling the data, which may or may not be 
memorized.  It is interesting to note that in analyses of the information 
handled by the computer, we find again the ideas of knowledge-information 
and service-information, but the words have now changed their meaning.  
The knowledge at issue here is comparable merely to the predigested 
knowledge of an encyclopedia, which gives a certain picture of the world but 
bears no reference to reality.  The new status of knowledge-information 
makes of the world and culture a superficial reality and a language of 
artifacts.2  Service information replaces organization-information.  Services 
are useful bits of information to guide us in the jungle of the modern world 
(classified announcements, administrative notices, timetables, etc.), which in 
reality integrate us into this world rather than stirring us to action on the basis 
of our own judgment and assessment of the situation.  But let us stop for the 
time being at information as it is generally circulated. 
 
 
We are deluged today by a flood of data, by an uninterrupted flow of 
mixed material about everything and nothing.  Now we have to 

 
 
FROM INFORMATION TO TELEMATICS 
 
329 
 
distinguish between the information which comes to us from outside by way of 
the senses (millions of data a minute, though we spontaneously filter out most 
of it, or else we would go mad), and the data that are directed at us by the 
procreators of information who want it to reach us and want to make us 
receive it.  On the one side the data come from the natural world; on the other 
they are fabricated by other people with a view to making us do something. 
 
 
Now  999 of every 1,000 data do not concern me at all, but they still 
smite my eyes and ears, they still assault me, for they are designed to make 
me feel concerned, to control by feelings and ideas and likes and dislikes, 
and finally to commit me to action, modifying my opinion, attitude, and 
behavior.  These data invade my imagination and subconscious.  They 
constitute a mental panorama in which I have to put myself.  It is 
extraordinary that as regards data, no less than energy and merchandise, no 
one asks about the value of their distribution.  When we want to evaluate the 
culture of a people, we look at the number of newspapers and broadcasts it 
has.  More data necessarily mean progress, as may be seen from the urge to 
create satellites which can distribute more information, without asking 
whether the human brain is not already satiated. 
 
 
These data are neither useful knowledge nor organization.  They are 
incoherent and useless.  They produce disorganization.  It is in this regard 
that the theoreticians of communication-information, the philosophers, and the 
scientists show the weakness of their basic paradigms.  The important thing 
for them is that communication be perfect, without loss or addition, that the 
information transmitted be perfectly received by the recipients. 
 
 
No effort is made to find out whether the information serves any useful 
purpose, whether it makes any sense, whether it is worth broadcasting.  The 
important thing is that the information is there and that it is transmitted well.  
The millions of artificial data received each day are completely incoherent.  
They transport me into different worlds.  They do not hang together.  They 
help to shape a split personality.  Happily, this does not happen all the time, 
but this invasion by empty and useless data, this circle of information, has still 
singularly modified our personalities.  Four traits, as I see it, proceed from this 
invasion by information. 
 
 
We note first the result of a process that I have already studied: 
disinformation through excess of information.3  J.-C.  Simon writes: 
 
 
330  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
 
"The multiplying of information is not without negative effects.  A 
study in Japan (1975) shows that 90 percent of the information produced 
is not used at all even though very efficient means of distributing it are 
available.  Our society has reached saturation point.  There is a tendency 
to reject information in general.  Similarly, most of the advertising mail is 
tossed in the wastepaper basket without being opened."4  Those who 
receive, receive nothing at all.  Their brains are stuffed with incoherent, 
uncoordinated, purposeless data that they cannot register, master, 
classify, or memorize.  The spontaneous reaction of their organism, then, 
is total rejection, pure and simple.  They throw it all out, including the data 
that might be of interest, which they miss because they are inundated by 
the rest.  Disinformation results because the information received is 
neither knowledge nor organization.  It goes in one ear and out the other.  
Or else it constitutes a kind of confused mush that I have often seen in 
students.  Nothing is correctly linked either to a coherent whole or to a 
network.  Those who have a precise ideology (e.g., communism), escape 
this confusion.  They receive information that conforms to the ideology 
and reject the rest.  But this is disinformation of another kind and it leads 
to the creation of jargon. 
 
 
The second trait follows on from the first.  It is a broken vision of the 
world.  Everything is accidental (a direct and inevitable result of 
event-by-event information).  There is Chernobyl, a famine in Ethiopia, 
war in Nicaragua, war in Lebanon.  Nothing is correlated or thought of in a 
coherent way.  Biased judgments are constantly passed.5  Each event is 
considered in isolation.  Chernobyl does not cause us to question our 
nuclear program.  The only problem is knowing where the "cloud" is 
going.  There is a similar refusal to consider the probable consequences 
of such a group of events.  When the same events happened ten or 
fifteen years ago and had specific consequences, one might at least draw 
out possible consequences.6  But no.  Excess of information goes hand in 
hand with a culture of forgetting.  The mass of information produces a 
blind life with no possible roots or continuity. 
 
 
The third trait that results from this obsessional information is that we 
become exclusive consumers.  The consumer society has been 
condemned enough, and we have heard enough criticisms of the 
consumer attitude and enough exhortations to be active and  

 
 
FROM INFORMATION TO TELEMATICS  
 
331 
 
responsible.  This is all good.  But we need to look at the causes, and the 
cause is excess of information.  I do not say advertising.  What I have in mind 
is the information spread by radio, television, and newspapers.  We cannot 
absorb this information.  We do not inform ourselves.  We are fed information.  
The result is a general attitude that we do not think we are capable of caring 
for our own needs.  The commercializing of life is not an end.  It is 
experienced as a means of gaining information and acting upon the world (an 
illusion).  We become consumers because what ought to produce our 
initiative is inhibited by excess of information.  "Consumers are not the 
decision makers.  The decision makers are not those who pay.  Those who 
pay are not consumers.”  Information leads to obligatory consumption in the 
same way as suburban living leads to the obligatory use of the automobile.  
The lack of consumer power has often been stressed.  Consumers take what 
the producers give them.  But this lack begins with a failure to find out what is 
useful.  The mass of unimportant information which is circulated produces the 
passive consumer attitude.  Educated as they are, consumers constantly 
want more.  It is only thus that they feel they are alive.  They swallow the 
information even though they later disgorge it and seek something new, as 
they also seek every technical innovation that is presented as indispensable 
and redemptive. 
 
 
All the previous traits converge on a fourth, namely, a confused sense of 
impotence.  What do you want me to do in face of the disasters of which I am 
incessantly informed?  There are two sides to this.  The first is the one that I 
have just indicated.  What do you want me to do about the war in Lebanon or 
the famine in Ethiopia?  I will no doubt be asked to sign petitions and support 
relief agencies and Amnesty International.  But I have so often been misled; I 
have signed petitions with deceptive aims and been cheated by associations 
that were supposedly giving aid to the Third World.  A feature of this 
information is that I cannot verify personally that what is being done 
corresponds to what I am told.  Because of the confusion of causes and 
arguments, I abstain. 
 
 
The second aspect takes us deeper.  The infinite multiplicity of facts that 
I am given about each situation makes it impossible for me to choose or 
decide.  I thus adopt the general attitude of letting things take their course.  
This is one of the most essential orientations of Western society.  But the 
course that things take is essentially that of the process of technical 
development, as may be seen in numerous political and technical texts.7  We 
thus arrive at a formula which seems 
 
 
332  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
to be a veritable law of our society: The more the number and power of 
means of intervention increase, the more the aptitude and ability and will 
to intervene diminishes.  We think that we live in a society that is open to 
"conception," but in reality I think that an apter way of viewing our society 
would be as a society of "contraception."8  Information is the main carrier 
of contraception. 
 
2.  Television 
 
We can hardly engage in detailed study of television.9  We shall look at it 
only from the specific angle of this chapter.  Television is one of the chief 
forces that exercises fascination in our society.  We have only to watch 
little children in front of a television set.  Its power to fascinate is much 
greater than that of the cinema.10  We may also quote the hours spent in 
watching it (4 hours a day on average in France, 7 hours in the USA).11  
These figures give us some idea of its influence on ideas, opinions, and 
political orientation.  On this level television has much more power than 
any other medium.  It affects the psyche and the personality.  It is the 
great agent of transition from a society of writing to a society of pictures.12  
But this can be taken in two ways, or rather one can see two kinds of 
consequences. 
 
 
There is the orientation of Marshall McLuhan and that of Guy 
Debord.  We are thus told that the Gutenberg era is now over and 
outdated, so why not accept it?  We are entering the society of the 
spectacle.13  As regards the first orientation, intellectuals who accept 
progress argue almost unanimously that printing led us out of the oral 
society to the society of writing, and that this produced tremendous 

 
 
FROM INFORMATION TO TELEMATICS 
 
333 
 
intellectual and cultural progress (a point that might well be contested!).  But 
now we are taking a new step.  The new tool is calling us to move on from the 
society of writing to that of the image.  We have to adapt, and we may expect 
equally important new progress.  The door is opened for a new and no less 
vital and expansive culture.  It is all waiting to be invented. 
 
 
I would like to temper this enthusiasm by taking seriously McLuhan's 
own formula: "The medium is the message," or "Massage-Message.”  What 
this really means is that television has no message apart from itself.  It does 
not transmit anything, whether information, thought, or artistic creation.  It is 
itself the message.  What it implants in us as message is itself.  The pictures 
that it presents have no meaning.  This is why they must be short and striking.  
Dancing is more televisual than yoga, a papal visit than meditation, war than 
peace, violence than nonviolence, the shouting of a charismatic leader than 
reflection that expresses ideas, conflict and competition than cooperation.  
Ecology does not go over well on television.  Non-messages go over best.  All 
that remains is a general haze out of which only the screen itself emerges.  
We are given no information about reality. 
 
 
There is in fact no information on television, only television itself.  An 
event is not news unless television carries it.  One moment, some weeks, it is 
excited about Biafra, the next about Cambodia and Pol Pot, the next about 
the Boat People, the next about Israel, the next about South Africa.  We are 
shown the same pictures again and again (a process that is becoming more 
common all the time).  Suddenly millions of viewers are worked up about 
injustice in Israel or South Africa.  But then it is gone in a flash.  The situation, 
of course, is still the same.  But television cannot follow it any longer.  On 
television everything has to be very simple (pictures!).  There are the good 
guys and the bad guys.  Again, viewers want something new.  Only what is 
new is interesting.  Things must not go on too long, even tragic things, or they 
become boring.  There is a total confounding of the important and the new.  
The taking of hostages is very important.  The progressive seizure of 
Cambodia by Vietnam is not important because it is not new.  In effect, 
viewers are watching a show.  There has to be action and it must not go on 
too long. 
 
 
When television stops dealing with a question, the question no longer 
exists.  This is what shows us that television is itself the message.  Television 
does not communicate information.  Information communicates television.  
We are merely consumers of information, that is, of that which television has 
dramatized.  This is why the televised message is really a massage of the 
brain, of knowledge, of 
 
 
334  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
memory.  This massage causes all that we have seen yesterday to 
disappear. 
 
 
An expression that caused great excitement was that television is 
changing our world into a small village.  I do not accept that.  But I agree 
with Debord's concept of the society of the spectacle.14  This has given 
rise to many misconceptions.  It has been taken in a very simplistic and 
not very interesting way, as though it meant that we are living in a society 
in which there are many shows (television, video, film, advertising).  That 
is not the issue.  Debord has something else in view.  His point is that the 
media are transforming real life (politics, wars, economic problems) into 
mere shows; for us as viewers the real is a picture and a show.  Our own 
lives become shows.  J.  Piveteau saw where it all begins.15  Television is 
a screen between us and reality.  Viewers think of television as the screen 
on which reality projects itself The sense of immediacy, of being present, 
means that we are there at a bombardment or an accident.  Television 
plays with reality.  Between us and life it sets up a screen on which 
shadows act.  But we take the shadows for the reality.  This leads us to 
equate all reality with these shadows on a screen. 
 
 
We thus have a detachment from reality which we have to take note 
of if we are to understand the actions and opinions of people in the West 
(at least in the class denoted-not all people).  This phenomenon is the key 
to what we said earlier about disinformation.  "Disinformation results from 
confusion between reality and image" (Piveteau).  We are detached from 
reality because time is eliminated.  Television is instantaneous.  This is 
extolled because it means that we are present everywhere, though it also 
means that the pictures grow old after a week or two. 
 
 
There is a change in our relation to time.  Delays are eliminated.  So, 
too, is duration.  As we said above, an event that goes on too long is not 
interesting.  It is explained that if something has to be said on television, it 
must not last more than a minute and a half, or the viewers will no longer 
follow it.  Thanks to television, the instant has become tyrannical.16  When 
election results are given, the event is not the outcome itself but the 
triumphant fact that it can be known at once.  Speed of communication is 
the valuable thing.  It shows how capable 

 
 
FROM INFORMATION TO TELEMATICS 
 
335 
 
one network or another really is.  Television suspends time.  It does not make 
me attentive to any lasting reality. 
 
 
Television also abolishes the relation to space.  I see what is happening 
everywhere.  My interest is in what is on the screen.  A little experiment is 
very significant in this regard.  Enable the inhabitants of a large complex to 
televise programs that their neighbors can see, not special programs, but 
scenes from everyday life, and immediately people who are completely 
indifferent to their neighbors will become passionately interested in what 
appears on the screen.  Interest is aroused only when something is on 
television.  If something has been filmed and is put on the screen, then it is 
important and interesting.  What counts is not what is seen spontaneously, 
but what we are given to see. 
 
 
In these conditions there is naturally no reason for human relations to be 
formed.  Thus the idea of the global village is a snare and delusion.  It is not 
really true that no matter who may talk, only that which is put on the screen 
exists.  But where there are no human relations, there is no longer any 
participation (in spite of the supposed participation of viewers in televised 
games).  Television sells illusions.  It has to try to give an illusion of 
participation, though this is strictly impossible (J.  Cazeneuve). 
 
 
I watch, but necessarily, because of the screen, I remain at a distance.  
This becomes my general attitude.  What I see on the street has the same 
reality as what I see on the screen.  When I meet a beggar or one of the 
unemployed, I look at this person in the same superficial and disembodied 
way as I do at the living skeletons in the Third World that television shows me 
from time to time.  We have here an extreme detachment from reality.  The 
living world is confused with the televised world.  In other words, television 
exploits a profound human tendency, especially in intellectuals, which 
Kierkegaard analyzed under the "category of the interesting.”  But the attitude 
of life which was acquired by an intellectual exercise has now become an 
automatic product of the external world.  It expresses disengagement from 
reality and is obviously balanced by an engagement in unreality that television 
induces. 
 
 
It is not by chance that the idea of engagement in politics came to light 
at the same time as television.  It is a direct product of television.  Politics is 
given the status of reality, whereas daily life and interhuman relations are 
scorned and ridiculed.  Along with the ridiculing of "charity," sexual liberation 
and the abandoning of all morality are signs of detachment from reality.  I 
realize that cultural and scientific broadcasts will be adduced in response.  
But in fact these programs obey the 
 
 
336  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
essential law of television: They must go quickly, not give long explanations, 
contain dramatic turns of events, dramatize; the setting and encounters are 
the important thing.  A kind of continuum is established between reality and 
fiction.  A simple public can gather less from them (at least when it is allowed 
to voice its opinion) than a public which is already living on images and the 
production of rhetorical and metaphysical images.  However that may be, the 
complex detachment from reality is a decisive factor in the fascination of 
people today. 
 
 
I need only add two or three remarks on this central point.  I stated that 
there is no real message.  I ought to have been more precise and said that for 
me it is a question of clear and constructive messages, messages which can 
be expressed and discussed.  Undoubtedly, there are messages.  This is 
what is so dangerous.  For these are not messages that can be 
conceptualized.  They are subliminal (according to the thesis of Bretonnoux).  
Television acts less by the creation of clear notions and precise opinions and 
more by enveloping us in a haze.  We must certainly not overrate the 
importance of the subliminal.  We must not think that a film or clip can have a 
kind of magical effect, that it can introduce into the subconscious an image 
which will have determinative effects.  That is clearly not the point.  As 
Jézéquel says, there is less and less talk and more and more manipulation.  
Electronics can greatly alter the picture and take away any message.  
Television puts us in a world of falsehood, trickery, and deception (e.g., 
singers with their wooden microphones!).  (We should read the pages of 
Jézéquel's remarkable work Le Gâchis audiovisuel.)  But given the power of 
pictures to shock and to create impressions (and this is the only truth in the 
saying that one picture is worth a thousand words!), when thousands of 
pictures are forced upon us, upon our subconscious, and all with the same 
basic message, this power finally becomes a determinative component of our 
attitudes and opinions. 
 
 
It is thus that television and television advertising are, as I see it, 
determining factors in the eroticizing of society and the growth of violence.  
No film or magazine ever had the same influence.  For years now we have 
had erotic scenes and acts on television every day.  The same is true of 
scenes of violence.  Every television show must have one or the other.  It 
seems that no show can be put on without a couple making love or a fight or 
a murder or a science fiction monster. 
 
 
Again I am not referring to merely one effect or one show or one bit of 
information.  It is the constant repetition evening after evening which forms 
the existential mental setting day by day for viewers.  I am not making any 
moral accusation.  What we need is awareness of the reality.  I know the 
reply, namely, that we must cast off taboos and keep 

 
 
FROM INFORMATION TO TELEMATICS 
 
337 
 
up with the times.  Unfortunately, this means that television controls our 
times, shatters the taboos, and creates the public need for shows of this kind.  
When people argue that the television industry is simply responding to the 
public taste and demand, they forget to add that this demand is the creation 
of television.  Television is responsible for the kind of general mental climate 
of which violence and eroticism are a part. 
 
 
We should not be surprised, then, at the mounting violence and 
exaggerated eroticism throughout society.  But no one worries about it; it is 
not interesting.  What counts is the technical improvement of the equipment.  
This is the only question.  As one specialist among hundreds put it, when we 
are dreaming about multiplying channels and intensifying the consumption of 
pictures, it is time to think about improving the channels and pictures.  We 
thus have the progress toward high-definition television, flat screens, the 
spread of compact discs' direct television satellite, etc.  Jézéquel is very 
explicit.  The more we spend on increasing the number of channels, the less 
we spend on basic research and artistic creation.  The statement to which I 
just referred is quite plain.  We have to make the public consume more 
images.  There is no real public demand.  This is the work of technicians on 
the one side and the organizers of society on the other.  We constantly find 
them talking about "having to.”  This kind of talk is by no means innocent. 
 
 
The reference to a need of images is a falsehood.  People are being 
plunged into an artificial world which will cause them to lose their sense of 
reality and to abandon their search for truth. 
 
 
There is no need for the heavy apparatus of Orwell's 1984 or the subtle 
biological manipulations of Huxley's Brave New World.  It is enough to put 
people in a fictitious world.  What we find in television is only the beginning of 
what we shall find throughout the rest of this study.  It is quite wrong to say in 
reply that television will be personalized with cable and the possibility of 
creating private systems.  The debate about ownership is grotesque, for so 
far as society and individuals are concerned, it is all one whether television is 
in the hands of the state, the networks, or large financial groups.17 
 
 
Nor does the argument carry much weight that videorecorders confer 
much more freedom by liberating from bondage to scheduled programs.  An 
inquiry by Piveteau seems to show that this is true only for films and scientific 
broadcasts but not for sporting events or political events.  But video in any 
case does not free us from television. 
 
 
338  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
It simply adds to the hours of viewing.  We have our normal hours and 
then an extra hour or two for shows that we could not see when we 
wanted to do so.  This gives us so much less time to live our own lives 
and so much more time to live vicariously.  That is the result of video. 
 
 
A final question is whether average people really want this or like it.  I 
have already quoted Brethenoux, who shows that the television viewers 
whom he studied almost all found in television an amenity, habit, and 
dream, but did not think it important.  They were not criticizing the 
programs or content, but the thing itself.  Yet they recognized that they 
could hardly do without it!  An experiment conducted by Télérama seems 
to confirm this detailed study.  In 1986 Télérama asked twenty families to 
do without television for a month.  The inquiry was strict; Télérama even 
took away the sets.  Naturally, the effect was a shock.  Suddenly, there 
was so much empty time.  When there is time to spare, it is so easy to 
turn on the set and take what is available.  The experience of empty time 
which we have to fill on our own by conversation, by relations with other 
people, by reflection, or by reading, has become a traumatic one for our 
generation.  These people were suddenly confronted by an inner void.  
They had nothing to say to other people.  The details of daily life were not 
interesting.  They themselves were empty.  It is this existential void that 
has been, throughout human history, the driving force behind all cultural 
and social creating. 
 
 
The results of the experiment were conclusive.  The families became 
"marginal" in their neighborhood, but within the month they had a "feeling 
of freedom and holiday."18  They came to see that television insidiously 
enmeshes us.  A few could not stand being deprived and visibly pined.  
But most found, for example, things in their children that they had not 
known before, having almost completely ignored them.  One couple that 
had no television and was given one quickly found that the result was less 
reading and less listening to records.  But those who did without television 
found that there was much more talking between spouses and between 
parents and children, and that they now had the time to see friends and to 
read that they had not had previously.19  At the end of the month some 
families took back their sets with no pleasure and put them in a corner.  
The most 

 
 
FROM INFORMATION TO TELEMATICS 
 
339 
 
remarkable thing to me, however, is that when the couples were asked 
whether they would let their sets be taken away for six months 19 out of 
the 20 agreed.  In a broader poll 37 percent in France said that they could 
live without television, and 51 percent thought there should be no 
broadcasts one evening a week.  But the majority was ready to accept 
television for the sake of the children.  To me this is the decisive point.  
Children are in fact fascinated by television.  They live in it and are 
shaped by it.  They demand this drug.  One of the subjects of the 
experiment stated honestly: "Without television, I do not exist.”  An 
English sociologist quoted in the inquiry showed that five years are 
needed to suppress the reflexes caused by television and to restore 
earlier cultural habits. 
 
 
In conclusion I will quote F.  Fellini's remarkable analysis.  
"Television has mutilated our capacity for solitude.  It has violated our 
most intimate, private, and secret dimension.  Enslaved by an invading 
ritual, we fix our gaze on a bright screen which casts up billions of things 
that annul one another in a dizzying spiral.  Peace comes only when we 
turn it off.  At eleven o'clock or midnight great fatigue descends upon us.  
We go to bed with an uneasy conscience, and in the night, with closed 
eyes, we try to renew, like a broken thread, the inner silence that was 
ours."20 
 
3.  Telematics 
 
 
A third carrier of fascinating information is the most modem, 
telematics.21  We have to remember that this is only one of the new media 
(television satellites, independent local radio stations, cable television, 
video, etc.) which are in competition with the old media of state radio and 
television and the press.  We have to ask the following questions: Are 
these new media wanted by the public?  Or by those who want to express 
themselves?  (and are these representatives?) Or are they imposed by 
technicians, financiers, or the state?  If they are imposed, for what 
purpose?  For information?  For pluralism?  For money?  To serve the 
 
 
340  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
public or to serve political or financial groups?  In no study have I found even 
an outline of answers to these questions.  Telematics has been developed 
because the means were there to do it, and this arouses a passion to do it.  
That is all. 
 
 
But first we must make clear what we mean by "telematics," which is not 
at all obvious.  The reference is to the totality of services (apart from the 
telephone and telegraph) which can be secured by those who use a network 
of communications that enables them to get information or to do certain things 
(e.g., consult data files, commercial and banking transactions, teletex, video, 
or telecopying).  The commission on the vocabulary of computers refers to 
services which, having their nature or origin in computers, can be furnished 
by means of telecommunication networks.  If the computer is the sum of 
means of handling information (acquisition, checking, arranging, storing, 
calculating, and transmitting), the tele-computer consists of the techniques 
and related applications for the linking of telecommunications to the 
computer.  The reference, then, is to all the new services linked to 
telecommunications that are in turn linked to computers.  It is a subsidiary of 
the tele-computer, at the junction of telecommunications and the computer, 
but the information sent along the networks is of interest not only to computer 
specialists but to average people.  Its influence is daily, and it touches many 
different subjects that can inform different social strata. 
 
 
This equipment has made possible a veritable explosion of services.  
France by 1985 had 800,000 videotex terminals.  There are more than a 
thousand services in operation.  Some 8 million calls are registered a month.  
The services are accessible to the public twenty-four hours a day.  The 
number of daily requests for information amounts to 1,700.  Most of them 
come from banks, insurance companies, municipalities, chambers of 
commerce, the press, information services industry, and transport.  What is 
transmitted is not an inert current but information, that is, power.22 
 
 
The stake, then, is not just the adoption of new technical tools.  The very 
notion of information is called into question.  The result is that economic, 
cultural, and political choices have to be made.  This leads us to the real 
question: What is at stake when information is handled by the computer and 
made generally available?  Our interest here is not in the different systems 
themselves, nor in the sectors in which they are applied.  The question is 
much more basic.  To startle readers, I will refer to a headline in Le Monde 
which spoke of telematics 

 
 
FROM INFORMATION TO TELEMATICS 
 
341 
 
being an explosive force in education; that is splendid and we ought to rejoice 
(Le Monde, April 17,1986).  We must seriously ask what is really at stake.  
Mirabail thinks it is right to talk about stakes in this context, but what is at 
stake, he says, lies neither in the field of hopes and fears nor in that of profit 
or loss.  At stake here is no less than the world, humanity, society, the 
different experiences that we can have.  At stake is the profit of a civilization 
preceding its transformation, which is viewed as inevitable, as we shall see 
later. 
 
 
Telematics follows the computer in its radicalizing of everything that 
went before.  It systematizes the reorganization of learning and revolutionizes 
conceptions and methods of work.  It makes a break between two worlds and 
prefigures the second of these.  But we can say nothing about the latter point 
apart from what the infrastructures of new technologies foreshadow: data 
banks, communication networks, telecommunication services.  The risk is that 
of an indefiniteness of thought which is unable to define the meaning or 
nature of new social and cultural objects (Mirabail). 
 
 
Handling information raises immense problems.  Political problems: Who 
releases information and to gain what power?  Economic problems: What are 
to be the new materials, industries, jobs (at the expense of what others, and 
for how long is profit to be discounted)? 
 
 
Sociological: Who is to profit from the new potentialities?  Psychological: 
What will be the changes in behavior?  Cultural: What cultural changes will 
there be?23 
 
 
But first we must analyze the new way of handling information.  At this 
point we rely on Françoise Holtz-Bonneau.24  The processes move on from 
the very small (the reduction to minimal units) to the very big (the exhaustive).  
The main added value is strictly material.  Access is possible at a distance.  
There is first a necessary process of reduction to minimal units of information.  
Prior to handling there has to be separation and classification with the 
strictness, exactness, and logic without which computers cannot function.  
Everything relates to computers.  (Although they do not constitute new 
information, they demand certain processes if they are to be operational.)  
The result is reduction and taxonomy, but this raises the question what is to 
be left out.  Condensation is required.  Each page in data processing must 
contain the maximum number of data.  This entails the risks of linguistic 
impoverishment, of a loss of the riches of vocabulary and the suppleness of 
thought (but is it a matter of thought in information of 
 
 
342  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
this kind?), of schematism and rigidity.  But does not the very fact of 
condensation enable new types of information to emerge?  In fact, 
condensation works best for factual information.  But the constraints of 
condensation can result in the distortion of information (effects of evaluation 
that can hardly be changed). 
 
If, however, there is condensation in the shaping of information, one of the 
features of the telematics system is that it is so exhaustive, that its ability to 
inform is so capable of extension.  Being exhaustive, it offers two new types 
of possibility: data banks and means of access to data that exist elsewhere on 
other support systems.  But the risk is increased of being drowned in a flood 
of information that we cannot assimilate (as noted already).  Furthermore, the 
possibility of automatically having the proper answer to my question means 
that I do not look for the answer in the mass of documents.  Things go too 
fast.  In true research, we all know that three things happen: We come across 
"lateral" information which modifies our view of the question; we find a 
document which by association suggests another problem; we have a new 
idea by intuition.  None of these can happen, however, if, having formulated 
the problem, I receive a solution.  In other words, the whole contingency of 
research disappears.  Data banks produce blindness, making sense only in 
the short term.  Power rests on the quantitative force of these data banks, 
namely, whether this or that country possesses 80 percent of the global 
economic data, etc. 
 
But what about the qualitative side?  Does not a country risk arriving at a time 
when the quantitative empire breaks up because it has no sure qualitative 
foundations?  Holtz-Bonneau asks such questions, but I am not sure that we 
can follow her suggested answers.  In fact, "telematics involves a 
reorganization of all that can be expressed and therefore of all discourse that 
can deal with meaning.  The telematics revolution carries with it a linguistic 
revolution.  Thought is trapped in the net of new language that gives form to 
the system of an inner emptiness with no existential significance or claim or 
history."25 
 
It is an effect of the boasted "transparence" of the computer that it achieves 
convenience of usage but only by weakening research into ends and 
processes, that is, thinking which is not yet reduced to logic.  The telematics 
system is significant in itself but has no significance beyond what it contains 
(services and sociocultural integration).  The interference of symbolic 
language, of systems of signs, actually establishes a time and place for us, a 
world of meaning (even though we cannot attribute any meaning to it!), the 
opening of a history (not just 

 
 
FROM INFORMATION TO TELEMATICS 
 
343 
 
the descriptive passing of time), and the possibility of true symbolizing 
(though we cannot admit that technique covers all anthropological 
questions or that videotex terminals cover all human imagination). 
 
With its exclusive power telematics constitutes for us a world that is 
characterized by the construction of its data and by a language whose 
transparence closes our eyes to contingency and to the occasional 
significance of relation to reality.  It robs history and morality of their 
weight and merges time and distance into the instantaneity of 
documentation.  It results in great inequality between those who make full 
use of its services and the rest (90 percent) who remain outside except to 
gain a little information, for it has to be adapted to the state of knowledge 
of different groups and thus reinforces social distinctions.26  I am 
astonished that all those who use this global instrument of telematics act 
as if they have understood it so long as they can manipulate it skillfully 
and no more. 
 
I will leave aside the familiar issues of freedom,27 identification, identity 
cards, the danger of a unique signifier, the risks of centralization, social 
immobilization ("a place for each but each in place"), and the attempts 
(unsuccessful in my view) to safeguard privacy and to control and limit the 
use of telematics.  I will simply quote Mirabail to the effect that the 
widespread use of the computer raises the problem of our very identity.  
In this new mode of culture and communication our only real identity is 
administrative.  Linking society by telematics results in a levelling out of 
differences.  We are far from the convivial society, the informational 
agora28 in which difference is the basis and point of exchange.  P.  
Lemoine finds in the identity crisis one of the main cultural effects of 
computerization.29  A transformation of identity results from the 
modification of administrative identity brought about by computerized 
technologies.  The facility of communication has this result.  Satellites 
bring better access to networks and these (ideally!) make possible 
interaction and exchange.  This is why there is all the rhetoric about the 
"relational society" or the "friendly computer.”  But we always come back 
to our simple questions: What relations?  Between whom? 
 
 
344  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
 
Human exchanges and relations are not isolated, independent, 
transportable commodities.  Two corporations can exchange financial or 
commercial information, but this has nothing whatever to do with human 
relations.  In fact, there is a temptation to "gloss over the difference in nature 
between 
human 
communication 
and 
communication 
through 
these 
artifacts."30 
 
 
There are indeed few points of contact between ideas of identity, 
relation, and communication in the sense of human communication and the 
same phenomena at the level of machines. 
 
 
As for Thélème, the first "convivial telematics" which is supposed to 
overcome the limitations of time and distance by messaging and 
teleconferences, it pretends to be telematics for the people, but this is a bluff.  
For one thing the people at large do not need conferences.  The millions of 
workers (apart perhaps from union leaders), farmers, small-business people, 
employees, etc., do not have any use for this tool.  As for messaging, it is 
useful for those who do a great deal of business by messenger or phone, but 
not for others.  The system is also very costly.  Even though neither the 
monthly rent of a Minitel (100 francs, or about $20) nor the subscription to 
Thélème (100 francs for individuals, 1,000 francs for groups) is expensive, the 
charge for connections (and this is what counts) is very high (230 francs, 
almost $50, an hour, which in practice might well be each day). 
 
 
A further point is that words are typically misused when there is said to 
be "community" between people who do not meet and who communicate only 
by teleconference with the help of computers.  It is sheer bluff to talk about 
fellowship or community in such circumstances.  It is audacious to say that 
teleconferences are the same as clubs or societies or bistros or salons.  We 
have here an inhuman outlook which can abstract from clubs, etc., all that is 
specific and simply retain the fact that one can communicate.  There may well 
be conviviality in them, but there is also selection and the exclusion of those 
who do not keep the rules, as R.  Klatzmann points out.31  Klatzmann is right 
to talk about "electronic nomads.”  These living contacts between people far 
removed can become more real and significant for many of them than the real 
communities in which they live, and they thus change into electronic nomads 
with no roots in a place or a human setting. 
 
With analysis of the stakes of telematics, there has been much enthusiastic 
technological talk to the effect that telematics will 

 
 
FROM INFORMATION TO TELEMATICS 
 
345 
 
guarantee our recovery from the economic crisis by producing networks 
of communication and information that are typical of modern humanity 
and that will necessitate a new and universal culture.  When France 
adopts a new planned strategy to keep pace with the USA and Japan, this 
will lead to a concentration of national resources on certain objectives and 
will thus socialize risks and protect weak industries against market 
uncertainties. 
 
 
It is indeed very hard to judge and to decide, to weigh up the pros 
and cons.  Technique moves much too fast for reflection, which is 
complex.  In part, reflection must be sociological in the broader sense, 
studying the effects on social structures, on relations, on groups, but also 
on language, and consequently studying intellectual, cultural, and 
psychological effects.  But reflection has also to be political, for nothing 
can be done without financial support from the state, and the political 
effects of telematics also need study.  Finally, reflection must be 
economic, as is clear.  But while specialists, politicians, and intellectuals 
grope their way with only inadequate data at their disposal (for these 
techniques have not yet been applied on a large scale), technique itself 
forges ahead with prodigious speed.  It thus seems that in this situation 
the reversal of attitude took place in 1982 when Gérard Thery said about 
Teletel that the time was past for hashing and rehashing the question and 
the time had come for systematic distribution of videotex.32  In other 
words, enough discussion-it is time for action!  Let us go ahead and see 
what happens.  We could apply to telematics (and computers in general) 
what Piveteau said about television: we have here a technical device 
which has been nationally developed and deployed without the least prior 
study or reflection.33 
 
 
A particularly fundamental point seems to be that these techniques 
come equipped with some irreversible effects.  People, society, language, 
and thought processes inevitably model themselves on it.  If we ever 
perceive that we are on the wrong road, it is impossible to turn back.  
What is done cannot be wiped out, for we are now accustomed to living in 
a world of pictures and trivia, and we cannot be taken out 
 
 
346  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
of this world.  As Roqueplo says, our heads are full of codes already.  
According to C.  Durieux (Le Monde, Feb.  1981), "the only real problem 
is to codify democratically the use of these means of expression.”  This is 
a revealing statement; the media are not said to be the problem but their 
"democratic codifying.”  The problem is the more serious because this 
expression has no meaning.  For how can we codify (i.e., regulate in 
stable fashion) something that is always changing, that takes unexpected 
forms and has unexpected applications and that is, therefore, always 
alterable? 
 
 
We have seen with Distler and Bressand that law cannot regulate 
technique.  This applies more than ever at this point.  No court will ever 
sanction any departures!  And when Durieux talks of codifying 
"democratically," what does that mean?  Asking the people for advice?  
That is unthinkable when the situation is so complex and the equipment 
so difficult.  Asking the elected representatives, the politicians?  But they, 
too, are incompetent.  The important thing, however, is calling this the 
"only" problem.  It is stupefying that other things can be dismissed so 
cavalierly. 
 
 
In fact, we have to realize that we are in a process of universal 
transformation without really knowing what is happening.  This confirms 
our older judgment regarding the autonomy and collective supremacy of 
technique.  By way of compensation we might consider, as Piveteau did 
in the case of television, that in order not to seem dispossessed, people 
deify the technical device.  It is universal and spectacular; it defies my 
attempts to master it; it performs what would usually be called miracles; to 
a large extent it is incomprehensible.  It is thus God.34  We are justified if 
we give up any attempts to control it and simply ask for its services.  The 
true gods today are not economic but technical, and they take their most 
direct form in television and telematics.35  This is in keeping with absolute 
fascination. 

 
                                                 
                                                                                                              
1 Oliver Costa de Beauregard, Science et Conscience (Stock, 1980). 
2 See M.  Mirabail, et al., Les Cinquante mots clés de la télématique (Privat, 
1981). 
3 See J.  Ellul, L'Information aliénante," Économie et Humanisme 192 (March 
1970): 4352. 
4 J.-C.  Simon, L'Éducation et l'informatisation de la société (Paris: Fayard, 1981).  
An interesting point is that Simon is himself an ardent advocate of the information 
society. 
5 For an example see J.  Ellul, Un chrétien pour Israel (Monaco: Rocher, 1986). 
6 As I tried to do, with no success, in relation to the crisis in South Africa. 
7 An exceptionally clear example is the report Prospective 2005.  Sept 
Explorations de l'avenir (C.N.R.S., 1986).  We shall discuss this matter in the 
chapter below on technological terrorism. 
8 Cf.  the pill, a technical tool that is the product of a conception but that results in 
contraception. 
9 9 See the fine passage in M.  Henry, La Barbarie (Paris: Grasset, 1987), in which 
he criticizes television and shows that it is destructive of culture. 
Cf D.  Brethenoux, "Étude de la.  réception télévisuelle" (dissertation, University of 
Bordeaux, 1985). 
11 For children under fifteen the weekly average is 18 hours, so that some children 
are watching as much as 25 hours. 
12 Cf.  J.  Ellul, The Humiliation of the Word, tr.  Joyce Hanks (Grand Rapids: 
Eerdmans, 
1985); 
Abraham 
Moles, 
L'Image 
communication 
fonctionelle 
(Casterman, 1981); La Recherche 144 (May 1983) (a special number on "La 
Révolution des Images"). 
13 See G.  de Broglie, Une image vaut dix mille mots (Plon, 1982). 
14 Guy Debord, Society of the Spectacle (Detroit; Black & Red, 1977); cf.  J.-C.  
Missika and D.  Wolton, La Folle du logis, /a télévision dons les sociétés 
démocratiques (Paris: Gallimard, 1983). 
15 J.  Piveteau, L'Extase de la télévision (INSEP 1984). 
16 Piveteau uses the happy comparison of quartz watches, which give us only the 
instant and remind us that the instant that follows is different. 
17 Experience with cable simply gives evidence of unimaginable deterioration.  Cf.  
J.-P.  Jézéquel, et al., Le Gâchis audiovisuel (Éditions Ouvrières,1987). 
18 Cf.  the accounts by J.-C.  Raspiengeas, Télérama, April 1986; and C.  
Humbolt, Le Monde, April 5,1986. 
19 One extraordinary statement from a wife was that after ten days she realized 
she had been living for ten years with a man whose qualities she had forgotten. 
20 F.  Fellini, Le Monde, Jan.  1986. 
21 Among the many books cf.  especially the report of Simon Nora and Alain Mine, 
L'Informatisation de la société (Paris: La Documentation française, 1978); M.  
Ader, Le Choc informatique (Denoel, 1984); M.  Marchand and C.  Ancelin, eds., 
Télématique, promenade dons les usages (Paris: La Documentation française, 
1984); f.  Poswick, in Une société informatisée-Pourquoi?  (Presses universitaires 
de Namur, 1982); M.  Mirabail, et al., Les Cinquante mots clés de la télématique 
(Privat, 1981); F.  Holz-Bonneau, L'Image et l'Ordinateur (Aubier, 1986); also, of 
course, the government report on the plan for technology, especially the 
computer. 
 
22 See Nora and Minc, Unformatisation de la société.   
23 See Poswick, in Une société informatisée-Pourquoi?  pp.  291-95.   
24 F.  I Holtz-Bonneau, L'Image et l'Ordinateur (Aubier, 1986). 
25 M.  Mirabail, et al., Les Cinquante mots clés de la télématique. 
26 This confirms what we have said about interested persons, i.e., only special 
groups. 
27 Cf.  the basic work of A.  Vitalis, Informatique, Pouvoir et Libeités (Economica, 
1981). 
28 This recalls our analysis of McLuhan's "communicational village" and television. 
29 P.  Lemoine, "L'Identité informatisée," in Les Enjeux culturels de 
l'informatisation (Paris: La Documentation française, 1981). 
30 A.  Giraud, J.-C.  Missika, and D.  Wolton, Les Réseaux pensants (Masson, 
1980). 
31 R.  Klatzmann, "Thélème," Autrement 1982 (special number on computers). 
32 Cf.  Charon in Marchand and Ancelin, eds., Télématique, promenade dons les 
usages. 
33 I had myself a small experience of how this can happen.  The government 
offered the Reformed Church a half-hour broadcast on Sunday mornings.  
Everyone was full of enthusiasm.  I alone suggested that it might be as well to do 
a preliminary study of the congruity of this medium and propagation of the gospel.  
I was violently criticized as one who rejects progress, modern methods, openness 
to the world, etc.  Not half an hour of reflection was given to whether we should 
offer a gospel show on television 
34  As Piveteau puts it, television has itself become a religion, a kind of God.  Like 
God it is everywhere, it is watched everywhere, it speaks everywhere.  It is a 
practical god in a human dimension, much less mysterious than our older God.  
By way of advertising it has a revelation for humanity.  Christianity should see that 
it has lost the two messianic messages that are at its heart, the one regarding the 
Savior, the other regarding the world to come.  As a religion, television also has 
rites, grand liturgical ceremonies (L'Extase de la télévision). 
35 For a fine analysis of telematics and divinity see Mirabail, et at., Les Cinquante 
mots clés de la télématique.  Telematics reminds us of Babel, Golem, and 
Hermes.  Its divinity lies in the rapidity of its progress and the multiplicity of its 
spheres.  Thus computers can print three pages a second (R.  Myers, "Les 
Imprimantes d'ordinateurs," La Recherche 123 [June 19811). 

 
 
CHAPTER XVIII 
 
Advertising 
 
We cannot pretend to offer here an exhaustive study of the phenomenon 
of advertising.  Since the studies of Dichter and Packard there have been 
hundreds of books on the question.1  But fundamentally there has been 
much more concern about the scientific character of advertising and its 
falsity than about its socioeconomic character.  Inasmuch as the 
important thing for me is the relation between individuals and the 
technical system, my emphasis will be on the last aspect.  Problems of 
motivation, studies of veracity, and inquiries into the source of needs are 
not vital in this context.  Everyone seems to be agreed that we must 
dismiss any idea that advertising is not needed.  But the need, like the 
style of arguments in its favor, is acquired. 
 
 
Advertising is a psychological act which claims to be based -on a 
science.  At present it is there and I need not concern myself with its 
reality (except to thwart it, like Holtz-Bonneau).  It is itself a technique.  All 
economists agree that it is indispensable to promote sales.  Mass 
production means mass sales, and these are not possible without 
advertising.  An interesting point, however, is that studies from only ton 
years ago are all out of date in comparison with advertising today.  
Something has happened that has changed everything.  For one thing, 
there is the intervention of the computer, and for another thing, there is 
the fact that what has to be sold today is always technique.  What was 
said earlier is all true, of course, but there has been a complete change of 
scale. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
347 
 
 
348  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
 
Advertising budgets illustrate this point.  In 1975 the advertising 
budget in France was estimated at 7 billion francs, but in 1986 it had 
passed 70 billion.  This is understandable when we recall that making 
advertising images by computer costs one million francs per minute.  
"Advertising keeps television alive.  Government television derives money 
from the temptations that it sets before me so as to have the means to 
warn me not to succumb to the same temptations.  It is a rather 
sophisticated system!" (Piveteau). 
 
 
Advertising plays an indispensable role in financing the audiovisual 
system.  It provides 25 percent of the resources of the public networks in 
France in spite of restrictions.  In 1984 it contributed 3 billion francs (about 
$600 million).2  In countries with no restraints it contributes 40 percent.  
We recall the great debate about private channels, but there had to be 
development at all costs, the conflict between culture and technique being 
nowhere revealed more clearly.  Those responsible for public channels 
reckon that restrictions impede the growth of television (a crime against 
technique) and that the pressure will become so strong that there will 
inevitably be deregulation and a full development of the economic 
market.3  But since we must not lose sight of humanistic and cultural 
interests, it is usually explained that "audiovisual advertising has become 
a means of cultural expression with its own code, language, and rites.  It 
is the emergence of the consumer society."4 
 
 
Finally, the press and television must be freed at all costs, rigidity 
must be ended, and the greatest flexibility must be granted.  This is a 
general requirement of all technique.  We will not touch on the problem of 
the rivalry of the press and television but simply give some numbers.  
Advertising in the daily press has fallen by 12 percent, whereas that on 
television has risen by 68 percent and cable television is making inroads 
of 20 to 30 percent.  There will be a corresponding rise in receipts.  All 
this shows that advertising is increasing inexorably and that any 
impediment seems scandalous, not merely financially, but because it will 
retard the whole economic-technical system. 
 
 
Inquiries into motivation have also changed their character 

 
 
ADVERTISING 
349 
 
since people have to be made to buy more and more useless gadgets, as we 
have seen.  What might have been regarded as rational or Freudian 
motivations will no longer do (in spite of the importance of eros and freedom).  
The public inclines increasingly toward the extraordinary.  We shall return to 
this matter.  Everyone can see that the style of advertising has changed.  It is 
not only the use of new technical means, of computer images, of new 
cinematographic processes, nor the changing of subjects and the ways of 
treating subjects.  There is an altogether different matter. 
 
 
Advertisers are clearly aware that they must present new and 
unexpected products in different ways and that astonishingly new methods 
are at their disposal.  They need to introduce into their goods libidinal qualities 
that are not intrinsic to them (E.  Morin).  In this way they will give rise to 
unconscious urges appealing to the Freudian id.  They also need to follow the 
route of individuality, of the cultural construction that is called personality, 
appealing to the Freudian ego.  But there is more than that to the change in 
advertising and its current role. 
 
 
The style of advertising has changed because its function has changed 
and at the same time its status has changed.  Advertisers are carried along 
by a change in the object of their work which has outdated all former inquiries 
into motivation.  They are thus forging a new type of advertising which is 
adapted to its new status but which is in some sense outside their control. 
 
 
Thus far advertising has been an indispensable aid to distribution and 
business, inducing people to buy products.  Today, one of its aims is still to 
induce people to buy products but with the difference that these are not 
ordinary goods but technical products, sophisticated goods of high technical 
quality (even though the product be only Coca-Cola!).  As technique has 
changed its status, so has the aid to selling it.  Advertising is now the driving 
force of the whole system.  It exercises an invisible dictatorship over our 
society. 
 
 
We have passed through the intermediary stage when viewers were 
progressively transformed into consumers.  The transition was not easy.  
Reflexes had to be conditioned if it was to be made.  But today the situation is 
different.  On the one side we have mass production.  New high-tech objects 
are made available to the public.  People do not easily see the use of such an 
object, but they are ready to react as obedient consumers.  There has to be 
mass consumption of high-tech products.  Indeed, these are the key to all 
economic development.  The economic success of the businesses which 
produce this engine of development is necessary for technique itself.  As we 
have seen, technique can 
 
 
350  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
continue its triumphant march only if the public follows, buying the 
maximum number of computers, tape recorders, videos, photocopiers, 
high-definition televisions, microwaves, and compact discs.  For every 
new technical advance there has to be a public that is ready to buy the 
latest product.  Before winning foreign markets one has to have a secure 
base in the domestic market.  The massive buying that ensures technical 
development also makes possible the continuation of scientific research. 
 
 
Alongside state investment there is also investment by big 
corporations which do not want to risk their money in research unless 
there is a chance of this opening into a technical production, and this will 
continue only if there is an assured market.  Advertising guarantees this 
market.  This is why I can say that advertising is now (not alone, for the 
state, too, is indispensable) the driving force of the system: 
science-technique-merchandise.  Previously advertising had the task of 
making people buy in order to provide profits for capitalists.  That is still 
partly true.  In a capitalist system profits are essential.  But advertising 
now has a new status. 
 
 
 
This change has entailed a modification of methods.5  It is not so 
much a matter of motivating people to buy products, or creating new 
needs, or making people into consumers.  These are still objectives, but it 
is not by such means that advertising now functions.  If one considers 
technique a system or milieu or "nature," then to make people buy what is 
offered they must be integrated into the system and made parts of the 
whole.  There must not be the technical world on the one side and on the 
other the individuals who are to buy its products.  As individuals are 
already part of the system as creators and producers, they must also be 
integrated into it as consumers. 
 
 
It is advertising which even in the farming community makes people 
buy computers, electric milking machines, huge tractors, and other 
complicated farming equipment (with the result, as we have seen, of 
disastrous overproduction).  Farmers resist propaganda and advertising, 
so they had first to be integrated into the technical system and then they 
could be convinced that they no longer wanted to be backward but must 
buy for their farms the most modern equipment. 
 
 
In the technical system, then, advertising is a central and  

 
 
ADVERTISING 
351 
 
dynamic factor.  Its role is threefold.  First, it has the older, classical role of 
selling products.  We have seen the importance of this.  Second, it must make 
new products known.  This implies a new orientation.  For the new products 
are not just new brand names of cookies or appetizers.  The public has to be 
initiated into the secrets of new automobile gadgets or irons with fifteen 
settings, and a simple presentation cannot adequately do this.  The public has 
to understand.  They have not only to be shown how to work washing 
machines, etc., but must also be, acclimated to the necessity of technical 
progress and of the exchanging of an older model for a new one.  But the 
demonstration or explanation must not be boring.  It must not clutter the 
brains of buyers or lose their attention.  Advertising that explains too much 
misses the mark.  Air example was a union advertisement on behalf of a 
factory which explained in great detail how efficient it was, how qualified were 
the workers, how it was a factory of the future, and why it was ridiculous to 
want to close it.  This kind of arguing might be useful around a table but it 
does not influence the public.  It has been found long ago that advertising 
must not be argumentative. 
 
 
The same might be said of Marcel Dassault's pieces in Le Monde.  They 
might be very amusing but they could not change anything.  A scholarly 
approach is no good.  Interested people have to be introduced into a world 
that is to be theirs and in which the object presented (often furtively) becomes 
indispensable.  A simple example, though not pertinent to my project, might 
be that of youth, the joy of water sports, the beauty of a young couple.  Here 
is a desirable world, and what completes it is the tonic drink which symbolizes 
youth.  The more serious and profound result, however, is that by 
innumerable sequences there is integration into the technical world either by 
direct pictures of technical situations or by an appeal to the advantages of 
some technical product.  The technical world itself is often related to nature; 
the great aspiration of people today is to be on a beach and to watch 
television by the ocean. 
 
 
Advertising on every television channel plunges us into this world (which 
we know concretely) of an idealized and stylized technique, of technique 
transformed into a work of art, in which the object for sale takes its place 
spontaneously.  In this regard advertising continues an orientation that it has 
had for a long time: one of the instruments of social control.  Its messages are 
meant to model lifestyles and attitudes, to adapt them to their setting, which is 
made up of objects like that which is being sold.  The difference today is that 
this world is now wholly technical and that what were once large-scale 
techniques have now become marketable micro-techniques.  At the 
 
 
352  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
same time, as advertising seeks to integrate us into the total system, it 
also wants to fascinate us.  Modem advertising plunges us into a strange, 
weird, surprising world.  It makes use of unexpected statements which 
seem to be irrelevant and simply stir up curiosity. 
 
 
The weird element is important for two reasons.  First, it 
compensates for the more stern and austere aspect of technique, and 
second, it separates the viewers and readers from their ordinary, daily, 
familiar world, which although already informed by technique is not yet 
fully technical.  Faced with an excess of technique, viewers and readers 
might retreat defensively into the everyday, the familiar.  Advertising, with 
an explosion of astonishing, seductive, amusing, and interrogative 
images, fascinates future consumers, who by means of it can enter a 
world of dreams that might be a little crazy but is still desirable and 
appealing.  Advertising has been greatly helped by computer graphics.6  
Thus in addition to the traditional role of presenting a model of people and 
of the life they ought to live (which is still a role today), and in addition to 
the more recent but already traditional role of inserting viewers into the 
society that is presented, and in which the object to be bought will 
guarantee a place, advertising now has the decisive role of introducing 
them into the technical world.  An interesting point in this regard is that the 
French, unlike the Italians, Americans, and British, are not hostile to 
television commercials.  In other countries people do other things during 
commercials, but the French watch commercials: 75 percent of viewers 
watch 85 percent of commercials, and 50 percent watch as many as 90 
percent.  Thus the commercials have their full effect.  This is a remarkable 
indication of the lack of a critical spirit in France regarding television (Le 
Monde, June 1986). 
 
 
We have now to bring into the domain of advertising a different 
factor.  I refer to the media's general support of techniques and of 
technique.  There has previously been discussion of indirect advertising 
when in the course of a movie an actor would hold up a bottle of whisky 
with the label showing or when leading competitors in various sports 
would wear clothing or equipment advertising various products, but I have 
in mind something different.  Since 90 percent of the products we are 
asked to buy are the products of elaborate techniques (even our 

 
 
ADVERTISING 
353 
 
foods), there is indirect publicity for these products when there is publicity 
for the technique itself even though there is no label or allusion to the 
products.  I have in mind the nearly permanent advertising for technique, 
high technology, etc.7 
 
 
For a whole year I have never seen a news broadcast on any 
channel without something being said to the glory of technique.  I 
maintain that this is advertising for technique, whether it be the person 
who does such marvelous things that is glorified, or the nation.  What we 
have here is direct advertising of technique itself, usually by showing the 
most spectacular innovations, without labels or invitations to consumers, 
but as a way of enabling viewers or readers to enter the world of daily 
technical miracles.  Open-heart surgery might be portrayed, or the 
implanting of an artificial heart, or the many uses of lasers in surgery or in 
star wars, or the various aspects of space exploration, for example, 
spectacular launchings, the placing of satellites in orbit, linking up with 
existing satellites, and operations within spaceships or shuttles. 
 
 
In general robotics is less important.  We have daily demonstrations 
of computers but the robot is not a favorite topic.  Perhaps it arouses 
some fear.  Perhaps there is nothing very extraordinary to add, for we are 
used to automated factories with functioning robots.  Perhaps science 
fiction movies have used robots so much that viewers are blasé.  But 
automobiles always cause a stir.  We have to see Formula I races and 
rallies and all-terrain events, culminating with the infamous race from 
Paris to Dakar. 
 
 
In general genetic engineering has less success.  It is perhaps too 
repellent, and there is nothing much to "show" apart from the test-tube 
baby, which arouses no great enthusiasm.  I will not go into the pictures 
transmitted by satellite or new manufacturing procedures.  My point is that 
every day we are plunged into high tech.  Along with the news of great 
political events (both national and international) and important economic 
and cultural developments, there must be equal time, and perhaps more 
time, for what is often a long sequence on technique.  This shows us 
better than anything what integration is. 
 
 
Newspaper advertising for technique does not lag behind.  It has 
here a commercial character, but I would say that it is even more 
interesting.  Thus we find a full page with the decisive heading:  
 
 
354  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
“Technology Is a Global Resource," and we then see ears of grain or giant 
peas (there must always be a reference to nature).  A subheading tells us: 
"Human development is by way of technology.”  It could not be stated better.  
Here is a veritable credo. 
 
 
Commercials are a favorite field in television, not only for financial 
reasons but also because advertising is the one type of broadcasting that 
really allows action and stirs the viewers to action, thus reconciling the 
watching viewer and the active viewer.  For we are no longer divided here into 
spectators and actors.  As advertising sees us, our integrity is restored.  We 
can act tomorrow and buy the product that is extolled this evening.  The 
complete person promoted by television is thus solely the consumer.  
Consumers are presented with marvelous devices (photoelectric devices, the 
communicator that helps those who have difficulty with speech to express 
themselves, photocopiers with cartridges, etc.).  The basic idea is that 
technique is the key to everything.  Thus we might read that the steel of 
tomorrow will come from the computer, for it alone can solve the problems 
posed in forging new steel that can be put to totally different and difficult uses.  
We have here a demonstration of the integration of different techniques into 
one another. 
 
 
Before taking a look at computer advertising, we should consider a 
thoughtful weekly which contains an advertisement: "Live in Europe 1.”  What 
is the point?  We see a small boy eating breakfast, very joyful, and the 
projection of images: a sinister Arab emir, air raids, and a raging military 
dictator who recalls Hitler.  What a capital broadcast!  What charming ideas to 
put in the head of a small boy!  But everyone has breakfast, and it is a matter 
of proving that this brand name gives energy.  It is not enough, however, to 
depict a dynamic person.  We have to have a great deal more, and our 
symbol is a space rocket and a satellite in orbit.  Only technical images are 
evocative enough to tempt buyers whose minds are filled with space concepts 
and images.  Then there is a radiant couple with electricity sparking from their 
bodies and the exhortation to go electronic, with an invitation to visit high-fi 
centers.  Finally, there is a double page.  On the one side is a handsome 
young man in traditional dress, stiff, lifeless, with a stupid expression.  On the 
other side is the same young man in casual dress, intelligent, concentrated, 
and enthusiastic.  What has brought about the change?  He is now "on" 
instead of "off" because he listens to a Slim-Line (a stereo radiocassette).  
That is enough to bring about the change.  The terrible thing is that I believe 
this is accurate-but it is not a change for the better! 
 
I will conclude with a look at computer advertising in magazines.  This is 
worth a look because the presentations are so significant.   

 
 
ADVERTISING 
355 
 
There is the "computer friend"; with such a computer you have four friends in 
one: one for play, one for study, one for an introduction to computers, and 
one for family management.  How remarkable!  It reminds me of the story ten 
years ago of a Japanese airport with a robot that solitary passengers who 
were sorry to leave could go up to and have someone take them by the hand 
and wish them a pleasant journey.  We are reducing friendship and affection 
to a machine that functions. 
 
 
Here we have one of the very significant aspect of advertising for the 
computer: it makes the computer familiar and friendly, thus dispelling the 
mystery and the magic.  The computer is your good servant, it will do your 
pleasure, it is a loyal comrade.  The advertising plays on all the emotions of 
future consumers.  Computers are also instruments of pleasure.  Forms are 
drawn and come to life accompanied by a strange music.  Thanks to 
computer X you can be a poet and inventor and will have pleasure.  But three 
advertisements of this kind seem the most remarkable.  First, there is the 
appeal to the emotions, to pure sentimentality.  Thus at the time of the 
success of Spielberg's E.  T.  there was the moving appeal: "E.T.  needs you, 
he is lost without you.”  We could save the day by using computer I' But we 
had to hurry, for the powers of E.T.  were failing.  On the occasion of a 
sentimental success a false sentimentalism was thus put to work.  Here we 
are totally in a world of falsehood, dreaming, and illusion.  But it works.  The 
second method is to call the computer a treasure.  It can solve all our 
problems, family problems, problems in human relations, health problems.  
Computer Z will solve them all.  I can being them all to it.  The computer, 
then, is an antidote to doubt.  We need have no more doubts.  We may have 
doubts about the existence of God or the truthfulness of our spouse or the 
morality of our children, but if we submit to the computer, thanks to it we will 
be cleared of doubts.  (I have taken this from public statements.) The one 
who made this assertion did not consider all the implications of what he or 
she was saying.  Among other things, if there is no longer any doubt  there is 
no longer any intellectual life. 
 
 
Between this mythical and sentimental appeal and what follows there is 
some interesting advertising for Apple computers.  "Take a bite and you will 
be convinced.”  The computer is not just a machine that helps us to calculate.  
It also gives us new personal powers so that we can convince others.  There 
is an interesting allusion here to Eve and the forbidden fruit which opened her 
eyes and mind to all that knowledge makes possible. 
 
 
We now pass to the second great strand of advertising, the more banal 
claim that the computer gives us great power and has endless 
 
 
356  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
applications.  Power: a fine cat's head with fascinating eyes.  The engineers 
of telecommunications see what others do not see.  They are endowed with a 
sixth sense, that of larger and more forward-looking vision.  The most 
powerful center of vector analysis is being put in the service of French 
industry, we are told: unlimited power which will enable us to deal with billions 
of data.  This power is available not only for industry and big business but 
also for all who want to enhance their abilities.  The computer will make us 
100 percent surgeons, insurers, or bankers.  Without it we were only 
half-surgeons, etc.  Now we are 100 percent. 
 
 
But again what is being said has not been fully weighed.  We are 100 
percent bankers.  That is to say, we are nothing else.  Our whole being is 
included in our profession, thanks to this technique.  We are wholly integrated 
into the system, thanks to the combination of the computer and advertising.  
The stress is always on power.  Thus we are shown encyclopedias and piles 
of books.  We cannot read and know them all but our computer can do it for 
us.  We can make it our memory, our power of comprehension, our 
knowledge.  One of the great problems in education as I see it is that we are 
producing people with empty minds who can no longer work out data for 
themselves but can only manipulate computers. 
 
 
As for the endless number of uses, the point here is the flexibility of the 
computer.  It has the suppleness of a gymnast.  This image relates to the 
concern to show that computers are human and are not mere machines.  
They have the flexibility of the human brain, and this means that we can apply 
them to any use.  The most elementary advertising simply lists some of these 
uses, for example, in ships, cars, or planes.  Computers can also test various 
possibilities by simulation and do away with the need for models in 
architecture, etc.  But there is again an appeal to the average person.  The 
computer will simplify daily life!  A double page of cartoons might depict 
average people in France such as tradespeople, accountants, typographers, 
and secretaries, all of whom need computers.  Another double page then 
contains cartoons showing the user in a hundred different situations, always 
resorting, whatever the difficulty, to the computer. 
 
 
I have listed some of the forms of advertising because the computer is 
indeed the great agent not merely for the selling of a product but for 
integrating us into the world of this product.  Whether it be by television or the 
press, the process is the same.  This one gadget will irresistibly bring us into 
the movement of technique.  By incorporating us into the technical system it 
will then lead us to buy the object in question.  This advertising is possible 
only in virtue of  

 
 
ADVERTISING 
357 
 
technical equipment.  We are thus set in an interesting circle.  The 
technical object influences television (for example) which in turn 
influences viewers in favor of the technical object.  This is true even when 
we do not have commercials, for example, when there are programs on 
space or on Formula I races.  These are all hymns of praise to technique.  
Technique gives the televised program a dynamics, a power that 
fascinates us.  I recall a striking formula on the occasion of a space 
launching.  "Space is business but it is also a spectacle." 
 
 
                                                 
1 See, e.g., Vance Packard, The People Shapers (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 
1977); E.  Morin, Sociologie (Paris: Fayard, 1984) (a chapter on advertising); 
Françoise Holtz-Bonneau, Déjouer la publicité (Éditions Ouvrières, 1976); G.  
Durand, Les Mensonges en propagande et en publicité (Paris: PUF, 1982); idem, 
La Publicité (Paris: PUF, 1984) (with bibliography); O.  Reboul, Le Slogan (Paris: 
PUF, 1975); idem, L'Endochinement (Paris: PUF, 1977). 
2 The advertising budget on French television in 1987 was 8 billion francs (about 
$1.6 billion), and the cost of producing one hour of advertising was 42 million 
francs (about $8 million). 
3 After these pages were written, deregulation came and advertising has achieved 
total domination over private television.  Private television serves those who pay 
for it.  Frequent reiteration of messages eliminates critical reaction.  Advertising 
can also decide whether a show is put on or not. 
4 M.  Le Menestrel, Le Monde, March 1984.   
5 Today, e.g., there is advertising for advertising.  A need is felt to convince and 
convert (cf.  the full page in Le Monde, Dec.  1982).  This is hardly the best way to 
go, since average readers will hardly read it and it is better to approach those who 
handle advertising for big firms directly.  But the aim is to accustom people to 
advertising and to convince them of its excellence and necessity. 
6 Cf.  Jézéquel, Le Gâchis audiovisuel Éditions Ouvrières, 1987), who points out 
that advertising has become an art for a whole current of thought, that the 
production of music videos is very sophisticated and expensive, that the 
investment is recouped by the sale of videocassettes, and that Shakespeare now 
counts for less than a box of noodles or dog-food. 
7 .  Cf.  the remarkable article by A.  and M.  Mattelart, "La technique est 
l'évènement," Le Monde diplomatique, Oct.  1979, which argues that the technical 
event is at the center of advertising talk.  In the USA  there are 20 to 30 technical 
events per minute in commercials. 

 
 
CHAPTER XIX 
 
Diversions 
 
With diversions we take a giant stride along the path of abstraction and 
addiction by means of the technical society and fascination.  We are 
referring to diversions not just in the sense of amusement but in the sense 
of Pascal: being diverted from thinking about ourselves and our human 
condition, and also from our high aspirations, from the meaning of life, 
and from loftier goals.  People "have a secret instinct driving them to seek 
external diversion [which includes war and algebra for Pascal, so that it is 
very different from amusement] and occupation, and this is the result of 
their constant sense of wretchedness."1 
 
 
"Man is so . . . vain that, though he has a thousand and one basic 
reasons for being bored, the slightest thing, like pushing a ball with a 
billiard cue, will be enough to divert him. . . . However sad a man may be, 
if you can persuade him to take up some diversion he will be happy while 
it lasts, and however happy a man may be, if he lacks diversion ...  he will 
soon be depressed and unhappy" (136).  "Leave a king entirely alone, 
with . . .  no diversion, with complete leisure to think about himself, and 
you will see that a king without diversion is a very wretched man" (13 7).  
'All the major forms of diversion are dangerous for the Christian life" 
(764).  "Man is obviously made for thinking.  Therein lies all his dignity 
and his merit; and his whole duty is to think as he ought" (620).  “Anyone 
who does not see the vanity of the world is very vain himself.  So who 
does not see it, apart from young people whose lives are all noise, 
diversions, and thoughts for the future?  But take away their diversion and 
you will see them bored to extinction.  Then they feel their nullity without 
recognizing it” (36).  "Being unable 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
358 
 
 
DIVERSIONS 
359 
 
to cure death, wretchedness and ignorance, men have decided, in order 
to be happy, not to think about such things" (133).  "It is easier to begin 
death when one is not thinking about it than the idea of death when there 
is no danger" (138).  "We run heedlessly into the abyss after putting 
something in front of us to stop us seeing it" (166).  Such distractions, 
then, divert us from existential and essential truths and realities. 
 
 
But also involved is an element of dissipation.  Pascal noted plainly 
that one diversion quickly has to replace another.  We jump endlessly 
from diversion to diversion without stopping, without stepping aside, 
without realizing what we are doing.  We have to fly off all directions.  And 
thanks to technique our society has now made this possible for the first 
time in history.  In Pascal's day the diversions which he referred were 
those of the rich and powerful.  The middle class and the peasantry had 
no part in them except at special festival  
 
 
For the most part, too, they were individual diversions.  War as 
diversion was not the war of foot soldiers but that of kings, nobles, and 
great generals.  These diversions were for the few.  But modern divisions 
are universal and collective (even when we are alone, each before his or 
her own screen). 
 
 
We have already seen how the computer, telematics, and television 
are means of diversion.  We will not go into that again here.  We may 
remark, however, that self-evidently we would not accept the permanence 
of our diversions if we knew them for what they really are.  This is why, as 
in the case of all our base, vile, and dangerous pursuits, we have to cast 
a large veil of idealism, grandeur, and seriousness over them.  Things 
that are only diversions are declared by the authorities and the media to 
be an enhancement of freedom.  We now have freedom to walk on the 
moon, to choose among many channels on television to save time by 
plane and train, to drive at 150 miles per hour on road.  (a motorcyclist 
was arrested for driving at this speed on a busy road in August 1986); we 
have the freedom not to conceive, or to make test-tube babies.  Do we 
not see that we are overwhelmed by freedom?  Conversely, we have a 
poor, foolish, mediocre idea of freedom if we call all these exploits 
freedom!  For diversions are always against freedom inasmuch as they 
are against conscience and reflection.  We shall now take a look at four 
types of general diversion: games, sports, the automobile, and some 
forms of art.2 

 
 
360  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
1.  Games 
 
Since Huizinga's Homo Ludens we all know that play is one of our 
essential human characteristics.3  But I think that there is a great 
difference between the games that people have always been able to 
invent and those that have invaded our own society.  In traditional 
societies we find collective festivals which gave society an opportunity for 
release and renewal (cf.  the studies of Mircea Eliade and Dumézil), but 
these were exceptional events.  There were also the great Olympic and 
Isthmian games of Greece, which were truly constitutive of Greek society.  
At the other extreme are children's games, which seem to have existed 
since Neolithic times.  Then we find the games of aristocrats and nobles 
(races, hunting, tournaments, also cards, chess, etc.).  Finally, there are 
village games on special days with jousting, dancing, etc. 
 
 
Games are indispensable, but they are rare and they are played with 
others in a relation that has a metaphysical and social dimension.  Rome 
seems to have been the only society which after the 1st century B.C.  had 
permanent collective games.  Juvenal's expression "bread and circuses," 
which has become famous, related to circus games and plays in the 
stadium or amphitheater.  These performances were free, paid for by the 
magistrates out of their own fortunes.  It was a common means to secure 
their election.  But they were reserved for free Roman citizens, who in 
principle did not work and passed their time with these entertainments.  
This is all very significant, for games then began to change their 
character.  They became pure spectacles, whereas previously they had 
involved participation as joint play. 
 
 
Games as they have developed in our own society during the last 
thirty years bear no relation to traditional games.  They are a new 
phenomenon.  Between traditional games and the new games we find 
 
 
DIVERSIONS 
361 
 
money games, set up by the middle class (e.g., in casinos or on 
racetracks).  In principle these were meant for the wealthy, but they have 
gradually become popular.  In France the setting up of the national lottery 
in 1934 made money games popular.  Many young people found this 
morally scandalous.  They thought it immoral to win so much money 
without working for it.  This reaction was rooted in the work ethic.  But the 
really new thing was that the state was now organizing games, and this 
was in keeping with the state's universal growth.  The national lottery was 
a lure to make people pay painlessly, for it brought in big revenues. 
 
 
Among modem games we must distinguish two main types.  First 
there are national money games, all deriving from the national lottery.  
Then there are television and computer games, which have been all the 
rage for the last ten years.  As regards the various forms of lotteries, 
including those that seem to involve some form of sporting participation, 
the true issue is their exceptional popular development, the passion of all 
the people, one might say, for these mirages.  We do not intend to treat 
this as a matter of morality.  We will simply recall that the state sets up 
these deceptions primarily to make money. 
 
 
Nevertheless, I think that there is a more profound if unconscious 
reason for them.  People's attention must be fixed I on winning $10,000 or 
$100,000 or more either by pure chance or by guessing the qualities of a 
horse or vehicle.  When they are excited about this they will not think 
about anything else.  Thanks to the multiplying of the number of games, 
they are excited about it every day.  Every day there are bets to make and 
results to await on television.  Why should they be interested in anything 
else if they might become millionaires this very evening?  These games 
(thanks to television) have become an obsession.4  When we see people 
lining up to buy tickets, it is obvious that nothing else really interests them, 
that they are blind to what really constitutes life in depth or decisive 
politics or culture.  A whole people is fascinated by this mirage, by what is 
an illusion in 999 cases out of 1,000.  This is the first aspect of this by no 
means innocent diversion, which the state sets up to divert by the lure of 
easy and decisive winnings. 
 
 
Yet it is not the most vital aspect of the invasion of games.  For we 
are now immersed in a world of games by television and the computer.  
Among the many uses of telematics and video it is admitted quite openly 
that one of the four major uses is play.  In the Hall of 

 
 
362  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
Videocommunications in 1983 it was stated that electronic games were 
one of the most important items in the market for microcomputers and 
computers, though naturally these games were advertised as a positive 
activity inasmuch as they belong to videocommunications, help in 
education, create numerical images, etc.  According to a questionnaire of 
June 1983, microcomputers are used 75 percent for games and only 25 
percent for other activities.  The games are in fact extraordinary and their 
fascination has been an essential factor in development.  In 1980 there 
were only 20,000 consoles for games in France, but by 1983 there were 
500,000 and by 1984, 8,600,000.  In addition to these games, which we 
shall take up again later, we must also include the time spent in watching 
television and television games, which attract the general public. 
 
 
Now none of these games has anything in common with ancestral 
games.  There is in them no element of play or dreaming or amusement.  
They are primarily commercial.  They are the products of massive 
technical equipment.  They present factitious and coded situations and 
not an expression of the instinct of play.  They amount to no more than 
graphic abstractions or simple operations on a screen.  There is no place 
for improvisation.  The computer does not "reflect" on a situation with x 
possibilities but unfolds an infinite series of situations with two 
possibilities.  They are role games or simulation games or society games 
derived from Monopoly or Wargames.  There are hundreds and 
thousands of them.  The market for them changes rapidly.  People pass 
their time to no purpose.5 
 
 
Constantly gripped by the possibility of having something new, for 
these games are soon worn out, the players quickly lose interest.  Yet the 
importance of the games is so great that a noble newspaper like Le 
Monde thought it good to devote twelve articles to a series on "video 
games in twelve lessons.”  This was an elegant intellectual way of 
participating in the general mindlessness.  But can this really be 
presented as an aspect of intellectual development?  In effect, if one is 
competent, one can create one's own programmed games, set up the 
rules, invent new situations, and program the computer for it. 
 
 
The essential thing, then, is the possibility that the computer offers 
for creating games that are extraordinarily rich in possibilities (P.  
Berloquin).  There is free play with images, texts, and melodies.  Anyone 
can create, as anyone can paint!  Games have been invented with 
computer materials that would not be possible with traditional 
 
 
DIVERSIONS 
363 
 
materials.  This is obvious, since we have here only fleeting images!  
Furthermore, the rules are included in the program.  They may not be known, 
but they cannot be broken.  Players may discover them with various attempts 
and groupings, and that is part of the game!  The rules are not given.  Players 
are in a closed situation.  If the creator is not careful, they become not so 
much players as spectators, and the game is less a living game and more a 
playing script.6 
 
 
Furthermore, it is possible to create a real football game or tennis or 
boxing match in which you participate from your armchair.  Play is made with 
the elements of indeterminacy as the ingenious computer projects the 
necessary images on the screen.  There is also the passion for videos.  What 
a scandal it was when the French government tried to block Japanese 
imports of videos, thus depriving us of more games!  We have here a true 
collective whim on the part of French adults.  They are like four-year-olds 
stamping impatiently in front of toy stores.  The cultural aspect is that we can 
now choose our own films.  Unfortunately, the overwhelming favorites seem 
to be pornographic and science fiction films.  We have here yet another 
manifestation of the infantile mentality of the public. 
 
 
We 
must 
mention the jewel in the crown of computerized 
intelligence-chess.  Does not this aspect justify all the others?  To have 
constantly at one's disposal an indefatigable partner that can make different 
moves at our pace, is not that ideal?  Is it not a sign of advanced culture?  Not 
at all!  True chess players know the importance of the psychological factor, of 
the implicit relation with the opponent even when no words are spoken, of 
sensing the reactions and moves of the opponent.  Chess is played against 
and with someone.  One of the main points of playing games is that they 
create a social bond.  But if you play with a computer you are alone again.  
The essential vice of all electronic games (including Wargames) is that you 
are alone with the machine.  These games are games for solitude.  It is not 
the same thing to play chess with a friend or another enthusiast and to play 
chess with a computer.  The computer can never be your neighbor.  There is 
no social bond with it.  This has its effect on individuals and has global 
consequences for society.  The multiplying of these sterile games means that 
the little time left over from television and mass spectacles is snapped up by 
them. 
 
 
Games, then, cease to be social cement and become a factor of 
dispersion, of enclosure within the solitude of fascination with machines. 

 
 
364  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
They become spectacles instead of being exercise for everybody and 
participation in a common creation.  They become pastimes that take hold 
of us like drugs.  We are fascinated by the screen, by images, by 
possibilities, by the unknown that comes out of the box, by lights and 
flashes.  How many people have I seen in a trance, unaware of what is 
happening around them, unable to tolerate a human presence that breaks 
the concentration of their relation to things!  The computer is not a 
companion; it is a vampire.  It is false that the games are cultural or 
educational.  They teach us only how to use a device.  They are no more 
than an agreeable means of adapting us to the computerized society- 
Above all, they are fascinating. 
 
 
It is well known that the average person (in France) spends at least 
two hours a day before the screen, watching television.  We can probably 
double this time once there are computer games.  In a curious way it is 
said that the obsessed and impassioned mentality of the players, 
hypnotized by the games, is that of only the tiny minority of those who 
frequent places with video games.  But the enthusiasm has obviously 
spread everywhere as the games have become available in great 
numbers.  We have to ask what free time is left for those who are thus 
obsessed.  What time do they have to acquire the knowledge that is 
needed to live in our world, to act as good citizens?  What time do they 
have for friendships or for social relations that are true relations and not 
just those of fascinated people in front of a little screen watching the same 
game or show, which are no relations at all?  It has been realized for a 
long time that the family is being destroyed by the placing of the dinner 
table in such a way that during the meal it will be possible to watch 
television.  In reality the relation between members of a family is 
significant and decisive at meal times.  But technical games produce false 
relations as well as false intelligence even in seeming to make possible a 
certain initiative.  Similarly, video, which seems to enable us to collect 
programs that please us or to see again movies that we praise, is in truth 
the sign of a false independence, for it helps to shut us up a little more in 
a world of images of escape. 
 
 
I am firmly convinced that the whole system of technical games and 
amusements and distractions is one of the most dangerous factors for 
tomorrow's people and society.  It leads us into an unreal world, and since 
we have here a passion or fascination,7 this unreal world is not the one 
that is necessary for a day, as in the case of fetes and balls, from 
 
 
DIVERSIONS 
365 
 
which one returned at once to real life.  The unreal world here is one of 
fantasy from which there is no longer any reason to return.  It is like an 
addiction to drugs or gambling.  In other words, technical games 
correspond very well to Pascal's diversions.  They divert us radically from 
any preoccupation with meaning, truth, or values and thus plunge us into 
the absurd.  They also take us out of reality and make us live in a totally 
falsified world.  This is for me the greatest danger that threatens us as a 
result of technical development.  In these conditions we become absurd 
(etymologically) in relation to reality no less than to truth. 
 
 
The second basic aspect to which I have referred is that of diversion 
from public affairs, from society, from politics, from the question of 
meaning.  I am not certain that it is intentional on the part of the 
authorities, but what is happening is as if there were some policy like that 
of imperial Rome or Byzantium, namely, to distract people and thus 
prevent them from thinking, and to do it now with means that are a 
thousand times more effective and universal.  Everything takes place as if 
the political order of the day were that the people should play and the 
government would take care of everything.  This is a skillful and basic 
negation of democracy, decentralization, and participation.  Do we want 
democracy?  Then we should begin by stopping all television and 
computer games!  This is not to take into account the effects recognized 
by specialists.  Video games, they tell us, accentuate the taste for power, 
for machismo, for aggression, for manipulation.  The machine becomes 
the child's only friend, invading its personality and shutting it up in a world 
that has no contact with reality.  In the end the young will have only a 
negative vision of society, a vision of losers.  The object of these games is 
to destroy, and the action in them is accompanied by violent explosions 
which induce violent behavior.  Even nonviolent games like Pac-man 
keep those who play them in paranoic tension and cause real neurotic 
stress.8 
 
 
I might not accept this judgment in the case of all games.  The 
essential point as I see it is that of general diversion.  People are diverted 
for nothing (except the pleasure of winning) by a gigantic socio-technical 
mechanism.  People today are perverted, not morally but in intelligence, 
attention, and scale of values they are perverted by diversion.  There is 
nothing except a constant repetition of games.  I would say quite plainly 
that the greatest threat to Western society today is not communism or 
Americanism or the economic crisis or drugs or alcoholism or resurgent 
racism, but our absorption in games and the 

 
 
366   
 
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
softening, degradation, disengagement, escapism, and loss of meaning that 
come in and through games. 
 
2.  Sports 
 
Sports are the second great diversion, distraction, entertainment, blinker, 
deception, illusion, and social conjuring trick for people in the West.  Readers 
will think at once that technique has nothing to do with sports.  They will be 
wrong.  Technique plays a double role.  First, in the sports themselves, 
technique transforms their practice by its rigor.  Second, technique makes 
sports the ideal television spectacle and thus changes them.  We will simply 
mention the first aspect in passing, since I studied it in Technological Society 
and it is not so relevant here.  Those who engage in sports are constantly 
breaking records through improved techniques.  As they continually seek 
better results, the techniques become more demanding and extend to the 
whole of life (regimes, etc.).  The result is professionalism.  But the greater 
application of techniques in sports depends on technological discourse.  If a 
match or competition were simply a game (as sports used to be), and if it was 
simply an individual matter (like golf), there would not be the frantic 
application of extreme techniques.  Technological discourse has transformed 
sport into an enormous spectacle and fabricated champions, stars, gods of 
the stadium. 
 
 
It is the massive diffusion by the media and the power of propaganda 
over the masses that has transformed sport.  It is technological discourse that 
has overturned it by making it a national and global affair in which little regard 
is paid to what was once its golden rule: honesty, strictness, fair play. 
 
 
To see how the public has been captivated by sport we have only to 
consider its place in the media.  On television, on any channel, not a day 
goes by without several minutes devoted to sports.  The newspapers allow it 
even more space.  The remarkable thing is that throughout the year 
something is taking place in sports every day: football, soccer, tennis, 
Formula I racing, boxing, swimming, cycling, etc.  Every day the public has to 
have its dose of emotion and passion.  Matches and games are televised 
internationally.  Ratings show that 50 percent of all viewers watch matches 
that are televised directly.  This is the equivalent of three networks showing 
films together.  In France the price for the right of transmission in 1985 was 
500,000 francs (about $100,000) per match, and the annual revenue might be 
as much as 3,500, 000.  francs ($700,000). 
 
 
DIVERSIONS 
367 
 
 
Naturally, transmission on this scale supports overwhelming 
advertising.  Signs are placed all round sporting arenas.  Advertising has 
given the French a passion for sponsored yacht races in which the sailors 
carry the names of the sponsoring firms.9  These sponsorships cost 
millions, and naturally, advertising carried by the sport brings in as much 
and more.  It would not be possible if television and radio did not 
constantly infuse sport into the heads of all the French Broadcasting is 
indispensable. 
 
 
Some provincial dailies even devote their first pages to sporting 
events, with color photographs.  The latest match is more important than 
an international agreement or an assassination attempt.  Matches are the 
most important news.  As always, there is reciprocal action, for as the 
media focus on sporting events, after a while more people are interested 
and the demand grows.  The media can then increase the amount, the 
intensity, the exaltation of sports even more, for they are now meeting a 
public demand. 
 
 
Well and good, but what becomes of sport when it is technicized and 
made a spectacle in this way?  First, we have a transition to total 
professionalism.  Professionalism may not be new, but given the 
enormous financial stakes it is becoming exclusive.  Sport used to be 
play.  People engaged in it when not at work.  Little by little 
professionalism has gained ground.  Today the only "true" sport is 
professional.  We thus have a remarkable double phenomenon.  On the 
one side players are bought.  The richest club will have the best players.  
The sums paid to buy them are in the millions.  Many clubs go into debt.  
They thus have to raise money- Some cities will heavily subsidize them, 
devoting much more money to their clubs than to social prevention or the 
rehabilitation of prisoners.  There is frantic advertising to bring in more 
spectators.  But new stadiums are then needed and the city again helps.  
The money of taxpayers who are not interested supports this mad 
expenditure.10 
 
 
It is true that those who are not enthused by the skillful and powerful 
performances are not wholly normal.  Professionalism makes possible 
technical perfectionism.  But it also has some serious consequences.  
Boys of fourteen with no other abilities are trained excessively, 

 
 
368  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
for eight hours a day, so that at eighteen they can begin to play in public, 
but their career will be over when they are about thirty.  They will then 
know nothing else, have no other skills, and not be capable of anything 
else.  During ten or so years of sporting activity they have thus to make a 
fortune that they can live on for the rest of their lives.  For both clubs and 
players sport has thus become a matter of cash.  In the name of 
technicized sport, in the name of those who thanks to technological 
discourse have become the gods of the stadium and the fans, money is 
finally king.  Socialism is no better, for it is under the same pressures.  
There may be less financial competition between clubs but there is more 
bureaucratic competition! 
 
 
Another effect of professionalism for sale11 may be seen in the 
composition of teams.  In Formula I races a Renault, Fiat, or Porsche 
team may be made up of people from any country: Brazilians, Africans, 
Italians, Portuguese, etc.  Originally a city team used to be made up of 
people from that city, so that one city was really playing another.  But 
what does a match prove today?  Simply that the winning club has been 
able to find the best players on the market by paying the most for them! 
 
 
If sport is to be pushed at all costs, there need be no hesitation either 
about extreme brutality.  In televised matches that I watch I am always 
amazed at the brutality of the encounters.  We see it even in swimming!  It 
is most striking, however, in boxing, which is no longer an art but merely 
unleashed violence.  We see it in tennis, too.  We are amazed by racket 
strokes that are like sledgehammer strokes.  It would seem that 
blacksmiths are at work.  It is not for nothing that tennis champions are 
given such names as "The Rocket" and "Boom-Boom.”  But where is the 
tennis of yesteryear with its grace and suppleness and finesse?  Borotra, 
Lenglen, and Tilden did not play like those who slaughter cattle, holding 
their rackets like cleavers.  This brutality is linked both to the violence of 
competition and also to transmission for millions of spectators, for brutality 
is visually much more profitable.  How can we be surprised that the 
brutality of the players affects the public, the thousands of obsessed 
fanatics, who are no more sporting than I am, but who say that they are 
because they watch the matches, and who finally, as we see again and 
again on television, become overexcited, fly into a rage, and smash 
everything.  They are simply contaminated by the gods of the stadium and 
by the worldwide televising of the spectacle, in which they themselves 
suddenly become actors. 
 
 
DIVERSIONS 
369 
 
 
I think that the more techno-sporting propaganda increases, the more 
outbreaks we will see in the stadiums, just as there were violent conflicts 
between the great sporting rivals, the Blues and the Greens, at Byzantium.  
The fans show us the result of complete fascination in diversion. 
 
 
In contrast to what I have just written, I would recall the way in which a 
traditional society has been able to integrate and control the most violent of all 
sports, the bullfight.  A fight between a "brute" and a man is the one that could 
have degenerated most easily into general bestiality.  But this has not 
happened.  The barbarous game has been ritualized, the violence given 
precise forms, the brutality replaced by a controlled elegance, and the 
collective behavior set within a kind of communal ethic.  What was butchery 
has become a noble art.  But today we see the very opposite.  My point, 
however, is that this is principally the fault of technique and technological 
discourse, which entails the primacy of success and by way of compensation 
a popular unleashing by fanaticizing. 
 
 
The fact that sport is now a spectacle comes to expression at every 
level.  I have in mind one astonishing instance of this, namely, the ridiculous 
gesticulating by the players.  When a player scores, for example, he falls on 
his knees, invokes heaven with frantic gestures, then falls on the necks of 
team members, and they embrace and congratulate one another while the 
crowd is roaring.  This is more important than any political event.  But the 
gesticulating is only because there are cameras showing it to millions of 
viewers.  In other words, the players all know that it is a show and this is in 
keeping with the need for absolute diversion.  It is the result of the principle: 
"Play, play, we will take care of the rest." 
 
 
I want to draw attention to three other results of technological discourse.  
First, the sports deception.  We have as an example the celebration of what 
are called the "Olympic Games.”  But the real Olympic Games were 
something quite different.  They were not just a sporting event; they included 
singing, theater, poetry readings, etc.  They were also an occasion for the 
Greek cities to come together, even in wartime.  During the games there was 
a truce, fighting stopped, Greek unity was restored, and I suppose that 
diplomatic conversations would use the occasion to solve problems.  Our own 
"Olympic Games" are the very opposite.  They are an occasion for sanctions 
against countries, for divisions, for expressions of conflict.  Some countries 
refuse to go to the USSR, others refuse to go to the USA.  This or that 
accursed country (e.g., South Africa) is excluded.  In other words, the games 
are a mode of combat.  They are thus a good demonstration of the 
tremendous 

 
 
370  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
transformation which sport has undergone due to the technicizing of society 
(not its politicizing, for no world was more political than the Greek).  
Competitors must be crushed at all cost.  This is the pitiless, lawless law of 
technique and also of sport now that sport has become part of the public's 
tragic mystique and is exalted by all the media, which heap on sporting 
figures honors that were previously reserved for generals and which give 
them the glory of bigger headlines than ever, so that games are plainly no 
longer viewed as games but as mortal competitions, merciless encounters, a 
true Manichean battle.  Our Olympic Games today, then, are not real Olympic 
Games of peace and dialogue but games of ferocious rivalry.  This is the law 
of technique and also of modern sport.  And technological discourse has to 
exalt the greatness of sport, which is the greatness of a country as a whole.  
Sport is so important that the President of France had to postpone a speech 
that he had to make in order to allow the citizens to watch European Cup 
matches on television! 
 
 
A second effect is that the importance of sport is so dominant that a 
sporting event has to be staged as a show when there is a blank in the daily 
program.  Not a single day must go by without the public having its fill of 
shows.  Monstrosities are thus created like the rally from Paris to Dakar, 
which was an absurd and insulting waste in countries where famine is rife, 
showing off Western power in the powerless Third World, an example of 
sheer vanity.  Do not misunderstand me; I am not contesting the courage, 
endurance, ability, or energy of the participants.  What I am saying is that in a 
world, in which courage, intelligence, and endurance may be shown in 
thousands of necessary ways, it is totally absurd and even odious to waste 
these qualities on something so imbecile.  Why did not the energetic pioneers 
work for Third World relief, transporting needed provisions to the heart of 
Africa on routes just as difficult as those to Dakar?  Why did they not sail on 
Greenpeace ships?  Last year a television reporter who followed the rally with 
the important mission of sending back breathtaking pictures that would make 
millions of viewers gasp was killed in a helicopter and thus earned the right to 
a deluge of heroic talks.  The only sane thing was said by Cavanna under the 
heading: "Dying as a Fool for Paris-Dakar." 
 
 
Finally, a good article in Réforme on the yacht race to Rhum was 
interesting because it emphasized how the public was mobilized for this event 
(500,060 watched the start at St.  Malo) and recalled that this sport is really a 
publicity stunt with sponsors backing the boats, enormous technical research 
to improve their performance (as in the case of Formula I cars, typical waste 
on the part of a society in 
 
 
DIVERSIONS 
371 
 
disturbing economic imbalance), and technique enjoying an eminent 
place during the race as satellites and computers were used to make sure 
that all viewers would not miss the slightest incident.  This is a good 
example of sublime means used to attain ridiculous results, the sport 
being a game with no particular importance of its own.  But why was this 
excellent article given the title: "Technology in the Service of Fantasy"?  
This title is worth considering.  "Technology" was not in service at all.  It 
dominated and aroused and imposed its own fantasy.  In this regard we 
may follow Castoriadis (L'Institution imaginaire de la société).  To the 
degree that fantasy is instituted, if it is hypnotized, fascinated, diverted, 
and vitiated by shows, denuded of any meaning of its own, robbed of 
finality, stripped of value, creating nothing, purely passive, fed on 
merchandise, the whole society which results can be nothing but dust and 
smoke dispersed as quickly as the exciting but insignificant image of 
sport.  It is ultimately of little importance that sport has become an 
instrument of big money.  "We need to expose and denounce the 
mystifying mythology of sport, which for the benefit of big investors has 
become a travesty of circus games."12 
 
 
It is also of no great importance that sport is centralized by the state, 
cemented by middle-class ideology, and governed by relations to 
production, so that it is a capitalist substructure.13  This criticism of leftish 
dogmatism, which has the merit of destroying idealistic and humanistic 
talk about the virtues of sport, makes the mistake of relying on analyses 
of society in 1900.  Today big investors, who certainly have a decisive 
influence, no longer play so radical a part as technique, even in socialist 
countries.  The dominant factor in sport is now technological discourse, 
the indispensable drug of the average Westerner, sport being merely an 
occasion.  Sport has to bow to the necessity of this discourse no less than 
to the imperatives of big investors, who profit by it, as do socialist states 
as well! 
 
3.  The Automobile 
 
The automobile is the great symbol of diversion and the associated 
emptying out of reality and truth.14  It signifies both being somewhere 

 
 
372  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
else and being outside oneself (making infamous brutes of fine people who 
are good parents or spouses).  Its very presence makes it possible for me to 
be elsewhere and outside myself.  This is why it has established a truly 
universal consensus among people in the West.  As Scardigli states, it is the 
product of the happy marriage of science and desire.  Its performance as a 
consumer object coincides with the demands of a system of personalist 
values (i.e., officially, those of our society).  The destruction of traditional 
society invokes the creation of a space and a time that are structured by and 
for the vehicle. 
 
 
The automobile is thus the most perfect symbol of the technical society, 
and in buying it we are really buying a nexus of social symbols.  It combines 
utility and futility, evasion and fatality, being elsewhere and finally meeting 
death.  The development of sales bears witness to the consensus.  The big 
firms first imposed its use in every country, and now there is agreement that it 
is the supreme diversion.  Nothing can stop it.  It was said that the oil crisis 
would arrest its use.  It did not.  Sales declined for two years but then 
rebounded and became bigger than ever.  The OECD predicted in 1983 that 
the number of cars in Europe would double from 1975 to 2000.  In France 
about two million new ones are registered each year, and 2 percent of the 
homes without cars buy them each year.  In surveys the automobile alone is 
beyond criticism; some people are opposed to television and the computer 
but none to the car.  Thus 93 percent of the upper classes have cars and 84 
percent the laborers.  More and more families have two cars. 
 
 
The motorizing of society is a model that is followed everywhere.  Third 
World countries are buying cars.  Sales in these countries grow 7 percent 
each year and many of them have their own automobile factories.  The car 
seems to be a good way of responding to the economic crisis, as it was in 
1930.  There has never been a strike against the car (in general) or in favor of 
public transport.  Traffic snarls and accidents and parking problems have led 
to talk of a demotorizing trend, but in fact there is no such trend.  People all 
continue to use their cars more and more to go to work and to go on vacation.  
Fewer cars can hardly be imagined, since for the last thirty years we have 
planned and modeled urban and social space in such a way that it is no 
longer livable without cars.  The consensus being there, what can the 
authorities do but comply with it.  Any decisions to the contrary lead to 
demonstrations and blockages aimed at taxes, fines, impoundings.  The 
principle is always that to reduce the use of automobiles is to mount an attack 
on freedom.  Car owners and motorcyclists are the most important lobby or 
pressure group in Western countries.  The state is totally powerless against 
them.  In the construction of roads and highways they have 
 
 
DIVERSIONS 
373 
 
forced the state to come out decisively and, I believe, irreversibly in favor of 
the car over public transport.  Every obstacle to the automobile has been 
lifted.  The state contributes three-quarters of the funds for research at 
Renault and Peugeot.  Even at times of gasoline shortage the state permits 
the grotesque aberrations of Formula I races.  Doubling this state aid, public 
and private financial institutions basically play the same automobile card. 
 
 
The great word to justify all this is freedom.  Again we see diversion.  
The meaning, experience, and depth of freedom have been diverted (and 
perverted).  Out of freedom we have made the enormous foolishness of being 
able to take to the road freely in a car at any speed we like.  Freedom is thus 
reduced to escape (from one's neighborhood,, from routine, from daily 
concerns) and to mobility (confounding freedom with going anywhere!).  
Freedom in solitude: this was imposed on urban dwellers by the destruction of 
traditional society, but it is now in great demand by car owners, at a speed 
which isolates them and which creates a "closed sphere of intimacy.”15  As 
Charbonneau says, the automobile is a product of middle-class freedom.  It is 
no longer a chariot of the gods but is available for every citizen.  
Unfortunately, when freedom incarnates itself it exacts a price.  We can go 
faster and faster wherever we please.  But the roads on which we go are 
covering the land.  And we are all there together on the same roads, though 
each in his or her own private property (for this is not Russia where people 
are crammed into trains), and each listening to the same program on his or 
her own transistor. 
 
 
Technological discourse tells us that the car is only an instrument of 
freedom.  It helps us to look for work, to enlarge the horizons of our 
knowledge by a personalized tour, to expand many of our faculties, or to buy 
the best products at the best price, etc.  It is freedom.  We can choose our 
own car.  We freely choose to go to the office in it, and on vacation we freely 
choose our route, though at the same moment that millions of others are 
making a similar free choice.  Since the car means freedom, we are yielding 
to a basic law, namely, that technological discourse is above all deceptive 
discourse.  As we have seen, the lie is not merely in advertising.  Indeed, it is 
in technological discourse as a whole, which strongly and loudly affirms 
values (in this case freedom) by the very means which negates these values. 
 
 
At the same time there are annexed values.  The car ensures social 
integration.  Its absence arouses suspicion, rejection by the dominant 

 
 
374  
  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
society.  The right to drive is an initiation rite.  The car symbolizes access 
to adult sexuality and the marvels of modern life.  It guarantees our being 
in touch with progress.  It enables drivers to surpass themselves.  When 
they drive, they are no longer conscious of limitations.  I would almost say 
with Scardigli that it gives us access, or enables us to return, to paradise 
lost.  It can compensate for all the frustrations of a society like ours and 
make us think that we have a part in personal, autonomous development.  
The day when we finally break loose we put a tiger in the tank, we roar, 
and we rush upon our prey.  But the highway is cluttered, our speed drops 
to 5 even though it is 120 in our head.  Thus the vehicle that was going to 
take us out of the crowds puts us back in them (B.  Charbonneau). 
 
 
Be that as it may, we live in a kind of splintered space by reason of 
the new solitude.  The traffic flow rules out encounter.  Alluring physical 
communication displaces social communication.  Solidarity becomes 
abstract and impersonal.  We no longer help neighbors in distress, but we 
work several hours a week to pay for the immense mechanism of road 
safety intended to bring help to unknown people.  We no longer 
communicate with those we pass alongside each day, but an immense 
web of roads (or telephones) makes "communication" possible.  The car 
both answers and demands this extraordinary dispersal that is called an 
opening up to the world.  It effects (and is required by) the work of 
industrialization and urbanization.  We are in a social void that speed 
alone can fill.  The lofty discourse of technology tells us that speed is our 
access to paradise.  But the reverse side of the picture is already familiar 
to us.  The vaunted autonomy quickly turns into increasing dependence 
relative to the car's demands.  Thus we have the vicious circle that cars 
make possible the putting of big roads around our cities, and these roads 
are so practical and economical that they demand the use of cars, etc.  
This common revolving door is a symbol of the effect of technique on 
humanity. 
 
 
But how are we to evaluate the real positive and negative aspects 
(not those of technological discourse)?  Who will add up the increase in 
noise level, in pollution,16 in accidents, in the destruction of beautiful 
country (the French highway network covers 4 percent of the land), in 
nervous illnesses, etc.?  Who will add up the positive benefits, the adding 
to the country's wealth by exports, the making of isolated regions more 
accessible, much more democratic access to resorts, etc.?  The cost of 
individual labor offered as a sacrifice to the automobile has 
 
 
DIVERSIONS 
375 
 
been calculated.  In developed countries 15 to 20 percent of the gross 
national product is devoted to transport.  In France we work one hour out of 
seven to pay for transport, or one hour out of five if we have a car.  According 
to EEC statistics, in France one must work 1,317 hours a year for one's car.  
Some have scoffed at these figures and at those of J.-P Dupuy and P.  
d'Iribarne, who in an inquiry into the true speed of cars prove that it is just as 
fast to go by a bicycle as by a Porsche.  It is wrong to mock such statistics, for 
this is in fact the reality. 
 
 
But the weight and coherence of technological discourse prevent us 
from believing it.  The ultimate reason for this is that the automobile is a 
diversion.  It is a diversion because it gives us speed, takes us to far places, 
offers us escape, and grants us apparent freedom.  I am told though we 
would need employment statistics and opinion polls to prove it-that like the 
microcomputer the car is used much more for pleasure than for transport.  It 
is a distraction.  It displaces us.  It is useless and superfluous.  It makes us do 
things we would not do without it.  In it we go anywhere to calm our nerves, 
etc.  This is more essential than using it to go to work.  It is a diversion 
because it prevents us from looking at ourselves or meeting our neighbors or 
being content with one-to-one relations or contributing our personality to 
everyday life or being responsible at the heart of our community or on Sunday 
having an ultimate encounter with God.  The refusal to do all these things acts 
as a funnel to send us off in our cars.  We have such a passion for this 
diversion that we may well pay for it with our lives. 
 
 
It cannot be repeated too often that 1,000 people die each month on the 
roads in France.  But what does death matter to those who are in ecstasy?  
They are indeed fascinated people.  The automobile is an engine of death.  
As has been said, the car is life, but it will not allow any but a mechanical life.  
Everywhere it passes, it kills.  The human cost of such a hecatomb cannot be 
estimated: the number of hours lost per year, the premature deaths; every 
year a million years are lost in the USA.  The medical costs in France in 1978 
ran to 40 billion francs (Scardigli).  Are we sure that the economic gains 
compensate for this?  But for the public, as we know, this is of no importance.  
The bloody sacrifice, equal to that of the Aztecs, is accepted with complete 
passivity and even content: the content of drugged and fascinated people, of 
diverted people.  It should also be stressed that we do not take the costs into 
account because the divine vehicle has two contradictory sides.  It is 
prestigious and yet it is ordinary and therefore reassuring.  It is not a coffin but 
a commonplace means of transport.  We do not imagine entrails and blood on 
its comfortable upholstery.  The car does not kill; an accident is to blame.  
The car does not kill because it kills every day. 

 
 
376  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
 
If we had just a little awareness and freedom, we would challenge 
the automobile.  But to take note of the harm done by progress is to begin 
to question the very foundations of our society and to hasten the transition 
to a different model of social life.  Contesting the automobile is going 
terribly far.  It is going against the opinion of fascinated humanity.  
Protecting the speed of cars is more important than saving people.  The 
first minimal exercise of freedom would be to make cars a secondary 
accessory which is used only in exceptional circumstances.  But modern 
people, fascinated and diverted, put things the other way round.  They 
want to go out and they are back in their cars.  They smash themselves 
up, thinking to grasp the reflection of happiness. 
 
4.  Mechanistic Art 
 
I am not going to take up again a full study of modern art, which I have 
dealt with at length elsewhere.17  I will not talk about painting, sculpture, 
architecture, modern music, poetry, or literature.  I will simply look at 
some aspects of what with amazing lack of awareness has been called 
art for the last decade.  This art completes the panoply of dehumanization 
and fascination whereby what was for centuries the supreme human 
activity has now become the most vicious and externally the most 
grotesque of snares.  I call it mechanistic art because as a whole it either 
depends on technique or is provoked or induced by it.  Yet my first point is 
the rather different one that we see here how far we moderns can be 
fascinated and made infantile by our environment.  I have in mind comic 
strips.  I used to like these when I was a child; indeed, they are childish.  I 
have read some of them with amusement as an adult.  It is good to sink 
back into childhood at times.  Naturally, I have never thought of them as 
art.  But lo and behold, they have now become a major art form with their 
ridiculous characters and their puerile or fantastic stories.  There has 
been a national exhibition of them and a surfeit of articles explaining that 
this is a major art form, that this is the art of our age, and that a specific 
originality comes to expression here. 
 
 
I am simply emphasizing that we have at this point a reinforcing of 
my thesis that we are becoming infantile.  What is pitiable is that this 
process is taken so seriously.  Technique begins to play a part, however, 
only when we come to what Jack Lang calls the new images-animated 
 
 
DIVERSIONS 
377 
 
cartoons, videos, etc., which a strong article In Le Monde (Dec.  1983) 
seriously describes as images resulting from the dialectic between 
technological challenges, economic stakes, and the defense of an artistic 
patrimony, the very mark of cultural industries.  Nothing more!  Perhaps 
culture has always been an industrial product, but the machine, even though 
it be the computer, is never more than a machine.  Animated drawing is only 
for programs for young people, for ads, and for instructional films.  Nothing in 
it can pretend to be art.  But we have here an economic area.  That is what 
really matters. 
 
 
Nevertheless, the justification of money does not justify everything.  
There has to be a spiritual element, art.  Hence an enormous machine is set 
to work to make us view as art the new type of advertising films (weird, 
startling, exuberant, incoherent).  The article in Le Monde speaks of brilliant 
moments.  Honestly, I have seen many such clips and films and I regard them 
as absurd and sometimes even silly.  The presence of a Halliday or Isabelle 
Adjani cannot make them art, nor can the play of light, the phosphorescent 
colors, the smoke, or the formlessness.  I have seen automated dancers in 
jerky rhythms, dances of cubes, and forms and mixtures of colors.  Clips and 
films and commercials and programs and promotions of this kind have no 
clear status.  But none of them has arrested me and caused me to say that it 
was beautiful or rich in meaning. 
 
 
They are all of them absurd and futile.  This is what happens when the 
cleverest techniques give free rein to infantile imaginations which have 
"power" going for them.  I might admire the amazing work of integrated 
circuits.  With the help of computers we can design the smallest circuits in the 
world.  The microchip, we are told, will be the key to industrial production in 
the 21st century.  That may be.  But clever though it may be, I do not see in 
industrial neo-neo-designs the slightest shadow of artistic quality, even 
though I might imagine that art today is very different from what it has been 
for three thousand years.  What I reject is that art should be a lowering to the 
basest level of all human specificities. 
 
 
I must now state as firmly as I can that technological marvels do not 
suffice for artistic creation and that the techno-sciences are not precursors of 
the arts.  To talk this way is just as ridiculous as to argue about the existence 
of God.  Technical devices may upset people's convictions, give them a 
sense of relativity, and muddy the frontiers between the certain and the 
improbable.  Seeing that we in the West no longer have any values or 
certainties, that we are schizophrenic, paranoid, and stupid, one would not 
have to exert great effort to bring about imbalance and to erase all bench 
marks, drowning us in information. 

 
 
378  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
This is our new ultraconformity.  As we have already read and understood for 
the last thirty years, there is nothing to understand here.  This was already 
true of the new novel.  The ultramodern is in fact regressive. 
 
 
But let us leave aside these tricks which cost fortunes and mobilize an 
armada of intellectuals and artists at exhibitions.  Like music videos, they are 
a form of entertainment, but they are far less important than music.  I am not 
talking about great music but about the permanent daily music which 
accompanies young people in all that they do thanks to the Walkman.  On 
buses and trains we have only to look at the faces of those who carry a 
Walkman to see how serious a matter this is.  With their concentrated and 
inhibited air and attention always directed inward, those who constantly listen 
to music are abstracted from reality and are strangers to those around them, 
living on a solitary island and refusing all communication.  This device is a 
new destroyer of human relations and a creator of solitude that can lead only 
to suicidal attitudes.  For a long time now young people have been living with 
permanent noise, constantly replacing their cassettes.  The serious warning 
here is that a refusal to listen to silence is a refusal to meet oneself or others.  
Things have grown much worse with the twofold fact of the Walkman, which 
makes this world of noise incessant, and the change to rock, which is a 
disaster, especially hard rock. 
 
 
E.  Morin is both nuanced and comprehensive regarding rock.  "It is not 
just musical frenzy but existential frenzy.  The premier rock groups feel a rage 
to live where most get lost.  The only ones to save themselves and triumph 
are those who abandon existential disorder (and drugs) to enter the 
commercial system, which demands a minimum of regularity of life even if 
only to honor engagements and respect schedules."18  (Indeed, these 
revolutionary geniuses easily enter the star system and the capitalist regime 
and rapidly make their fortunes!)  'At the source of rock is a movement which 
does not believe in the industrial society.  It arises on the fringe....  There is in 
this intense and frenetic music a dionysiac ferment, a panic....  Strong 
stimulation is given to the ferment of rebellion in all adolescents.”  The thrust 
of the movement is either to violence or to dandyism.  What a system of mass 
culture has to do in the cultural industry of the song business, however, is to 
"restrict the dionysiac tendency without destroying it (since it is that which 
sells), snuffing out the latent element of rebellion, eliminating the explosive 
tendencies and social explosiveness but keeping the  
 
 
DIVERSIONS 
379 
 
appearance and sound of them.”  Rock shows are exercises in 
"sociological domestication," in the integration of all groups into a star 
system, in "the acclimating of rock's original savage force." 
 
 
But since Morin wrote these words, rock has in fact become 
diversified and has worsened.  It is based on the beat which always 
characterizes it (the constant repetition of regular sounds combined with 
syncopated rhythms).  Hard rock, according to psychoanalysts, excites 
sexual instincts with its metallic beat and electric guitars; acid rock orients 
toward acid (LSD).  A medical team in Cleveland has studies the effects 
of rock: severe traumatisms of the auditory, nervous, and endocrinal 
systems.  It causes breathing changes, glandular secretions, contraction 
of the larynx, and irregular heart rhythms.  Some halls are equipped with 
laser beams, which cause burning of the retina and during dancing result 
in dizziness, nausea, and hallucinatory phenomena.19 Above all, there is 
the intense noise.  Hard rock is19 decibels above what the human ear can 
tolerate.  It assaults every listener by pounding the auditory perception.  
People do not listen to it; they are submerged in it (with Peter 
Townshend).  Acid rock (Beatles, Rolling Stones) has as its refrain that 
rock is the source of revolution.  Means have been sought to pass on 
subliminal messages which the hearers do not consciously hear in the 
incredible noise but which they pick up in the subconscious.  Rock groups 
have been accused of passing on such messages on behalf of drugs.  
Punk rock does the same on behalf of violence to the self and others.  
The subliminal message becomes more subtle.  Some claim that phrases 
are added in reverse which we can hear when tapes are played 
backward.  For such messages very low frequencies are used (14 cycles 
per second) or very high frequencies (17,000 cycles per second).  The 
power of rock lies in the syncopation coupled with the amplified noise.  All 
self-control is lost.  All power of reflection and all personal will are 
inhibited.  Rock in its different forms is a true destroyer of personality.  
When devotees of rock meet in a hall, isolated from one another by the 
crushing music, exposed to the play of blinding lights, they do what they 
do without ever looking at one another or speaking a word to one another.  
The unanimous cry that is most often heard is "Me, me, me.”  An 
American study in 1981 showed that 87 percent of American young 
people spend three to five hours each day listening to rock.  The number 
of hours has risen to seven to nine with the coming of the Walkman.  In 
1984,130 million rock records were sold.  In general, then, there is a loss 
of control over the powers of reflection, a permanent diminishing of 
intelligence, neurosensory over 

 
 
380  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
excitement, a hypnotic and (secondarily) depressive state, and finally 
serious memory difficulty and loss of neuromuscular coordination. 
 
 
I want to insist, however, upon the effects of noise.  We find this 
everywhere and it is simply aggravated by rock.  It is not really recognized 
as a serious danger.  When it lasts, the different effects are due to the 
cumulative dose.  Recovery from damage demands a longer period than 
that of exposure.  Once 80 decibels are passed,20 there is a serious 
alteration of physiology, and around 120 decibels a change in the 
composition of the blood and an increase of arterial tension, of the 
cholesterol rate, and of the production of stress hormones.  The vibration 
(i.e., the rhythm of rock) greatly aggravates the effects of noise.21  
Furthermore, it has been verified that excess noise generally weakens the 
cerebral faculties.22  But at the same time the organism grows 
accustomed to noise and ends up by needing it.  Noise has now become 
a veritable drug.  We are drowned in urban noise (cars, sirens, engines, 
cement 
mixers, 
bulldozers, 
planes, 
helicopters, 
motorcycles, 
jackhammers, etc.).  And now, under the pretext of music, this pounding 
by rock has been added.  Why do we stress this here?  Because this "art" 
would not exist were it not for technical means.  As there would not be the 
idiotic "sculptures" of compressed vehicles were it not for the presses, 
there would not be the disintegration of the personality by rock were it not 
for the technical means that make it possible to produce such an infernal 
racket (sound systems), the media which tell us with such beatific 
intensity about the exploits of the rock stars who are their heroes, and 
finally the technological discourse which extols the marvels that result 
from the use of all these techniques. 
 
 
Two things above all show how impotent we are against noise.  First, 
noise is not suppressed but we are given devices to make it tolerable 
(e.g., soundproof windows, and anti-noise barriers alongside freeways).  
Second, the measures taken against noise in 1983 are ludicrous: 
regulation of the noise level of ultra-light planes; a revision of airport noise 
standards after three years (in 1986 this was forgotten); "aid" (?) to 
people living near airports; compulsory construction of 
 
 
DIVERSIONS 
381 
 
mufflers that could not be dismantled (but we have not seen them); levels 
were set for washing machines and contracts were made with pilot towns 
for soundproof schools and day-care centers.  But nothing was done 
about cement mixers, bulldozers, or motorcycles, and there were no 
severe penalties for drivers who do not have mufflers.  Noise is part of the 
sacred and inviolable world.  As motorcyclists repeat again and again, it is 
a matter of freedom. 
 
5.  Ultimate Idiocies 
 
Disneyland 
 
Undoubtedly, the diversion which is most calculated to make the French 
infantile and distract them from all serious things is the Eurodisneyland 
project at Marne-La-Vallée.  Investment in this gigantic park of infantile 
attractions has risen to 10 billion francs (about $2 billion).  It is projected 
that there will be 10 million visitors the first year, which ought to leave a 
profit of 5 billion francs, but similar calculations were made regarding 
high-speed trains, and they proved .wrong.  It is generously estimated 
that the average visitor will spend 225 francs (about $45) in the park.  
Thus a husband and wife and two small children will spend about 1,000 
francs (about $200) on a visit to Disneyland.  As for the positive effects, 
these are wonderful.  Disneyland is an opportunity for the whole region, 
say M.  Cantal-Dupart (the urbanist responsible for Greater Paris) and M.  
Bayle (editor of the review Urbanisme).  Construction over five years will 
offer 13,300 jobs.  Hotels, restaurants, shops, and transport will mean 
30,700 permanent jobs.  Receipts should amount to 8 billion francs (much 
of this from foreigners), or 10 percent of all foreign tourism. 
 
 
Every source of financing has been considered.  As always in such 
projects, there will be a perfect financial balance (the problems will appear 
much later).  Remarkably, too, Eurodisneyland will even things out west of 
Paris.  A wonderful arrangement!  Ecologists, of course, do not agree.  
But the authors cited above, like all serious people, scoff at them.  Yet it is 
necessary to expropriate twenty-five farmers from good agricultural wheat 
fields.  Obviously, the interests of these country folk count for nothing 
compared with the greatness of a project that is so highly cultural and 
also so profitable.  Furthermore, ecologists are told that Disneyworld in 
Florida contains many wooded areas and stretches of water, and this 
ought to reassure them.  It remains to be seen how all this will develop. 

 
 
382  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
 
Others are disturbed about American influence, but they are told that 
French culture and European history will have a place among the 
attractions.  The techniques used will also be French, as will 90 percent of 
the workers.  The existence of Main Street, the West (cowboys and 
Indians), New Orleans Square, etc., is of little importance.  For my part, I 
am not so worried about this aspect, for our pseudo-culture is wholly 
modeled on techno-Americanism.  This will be only one more step.  I also 
commend Mr.  Giraud, president of the Regional Council of the 
Ile-de-france, for his honesty in saying that the project is primarily a 
matter of economics. 
 
 
Culture is secondary.  But I am interested in this statement: "My 
culture is Mickey."23  Here at last we hear the truth.  The cultural level of 
educated France is that of cartoons designed for children of eight.  
Disneyland is not a scandal.  It is simply social cretinism pushed to its 
extreme limit.  It is simply the most explosive manifestation of the 
deculturizing of France and its diversion from serious and basic daily 
realities.  It is the degradation, justified by employment and economics, of 
what might still remain of the spirit of criticism and reserve. 
 
The Idol 
 
It is good sometimes to close with mockery.  This world of the distraction 
or diversion or perversion of humanity by technology culminates in 
adoration, veneration, and beatification, in the expression of a properly 
religious sentiment.  This is normal.  As Marx showed, alienation leads to 
religion.  Humanity, when diverted, also becomes religious.  The star 
system has been functioning for a long time.  In the entertainment world 
the star becomes the idol in the primary sense, the absolute, 
transcendent image, a veritable Allah.  I have rarely found a more 
grotesquely exalted paean, however, than in Le Monde (Oct.  1984) under 
the pen of Marc Raturat and with reference-this is interesting to the first 
star of music video, Michael Jackson.  Those who have not seen 
Jackson's videos, he wrote, should spend some time in a Tibetan 
lamasery or amuse themselves planting a flag on the South Pole.  
Channel 2 (on French TV) talks of the Jackson myth.  No gesture of his is 
unimportant.  His squeals transform into nuggets the poor stuff that he 
sings solo.  When he finds a good song, the whole planet pants with him. 
 
 
The Jackson myth!  Plainly there were never any musicians or 
 
 
DIVERSIONS 
383 
 
singers before him!  What makes him unique and divine, however, is that 
he is the first music video star.  This technique is what has made him 
without equal, on a rank of his own, truly transcendent.  The religion of the 
star becomes loftier and loftier as the dulled senses of diverted humanity 
float down with the stream toward they know not what. 

 
 
                                                 
                                                                                                              
1 Pascal, Fensées, tr.  A.  J.  Krailsheimer (New York: Penguin, 1966), § 136 (p.  
69).  Hereafter references in the text will be to the sections of this edition. 
2 I will not go into the associated question of medicine, which might be regarded 
as a diversion insofar as it prevents us from asking what sickness really is.  
Instead of seeing sickness as an integral part of human life, we now regard it as 
an accident, an unjust inconvenience, an unbearable affliction.  Normal life is 
incompatible with it.  Time spent in the hospital is bracketed time.  We should 
come out as we went in.  Sickness is not a time for reflection or change; it is 
something to throw off as fast as possible.  We cannot bear to suffer and to prove 
ourselves by resisting suffering.  No need to suffer-all the anesthetics one could 
want are available to relieve us.  No need to worry-all the tranquillizers one could 
want are available to help us.  A serious study of the role of sickness is needed.  
What would Pascal, Mozart, Beethoven, Lautiréamont, or Baudelaire have been 
without their maladies?  But medicine is part of our enormous technical arsenal of 
collective modern diversion away from the self. 
3 Cf.  Johan Huizinga, Homo Ludens:A Study of the Play Element in Culture 
(Boston: Beacon, 1955); R.  Caillois, Jeux et Sports (La Pléiade, 1967); M.  
Griaule, Jeux (1938); Anatole Rappoport, Fights, Games, and Debates (Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1974); Eric Berne, Games People Play (New 
York: Grove, 1964). 
4 Piveteau was not wrong to speak about the "ecstasy of television"; see his 
L'Extase de la télévision (INSEP, 1984). 
5 See Chesneaux, De la modernité (Maspero, 1983), p.  116.  A single line of 
computers offers 1,500 video games that "let loose the passions.” 
6 See P.  Berloquin, "Jeu et informatique: l'effet Golem," Le Monde, Aug.  1985.   
7 .  I concede that in the past there was fascination with, e.g., roulette or cards.  
Cf.  Dostoyevski's The Gambler or Darry Cowl's moving confession in Le 
Flambeur (1986).  But these were isolated cases.  The whole population was not 
affected.   
8 See "Enquêtes médico-sociales américaines sur les vidéogames," Libération, 
March 23Nov.  10, 1982. 
9 The new yachts are also monstrous gadgets using navigational satellites, 
sophisticated meteorological equipment, a computer displaying the speed of I lie 
boat, its course, the true wind speed and apparent wind speed, and a computer to 
give the most efficient spread of sails in the prevailing wind and sea conditions. 
10 I suggested some time ago that taxpayers who are not interested in these 
sporting spectacles should be allowed to deduct from local taxes the proportion 
spent on financing the clubs 
11 The sale of football players, etc., today reminds us of the auctioning of 
gladiators, pugilists, and chariot drivers at Rome.  There, too, sport had become 
professional and technical, arousing mad public enthusiasm. 
12 C.  Leroy, "Les métaphores du libero," Le Monde aujourd'hui, June 1985.   
13 See M.  Caillat in the magazine Quel Corps (a good critique of the actual 
practice of sports). 
14 Cf.  B.  Charbonneau, L’Hommauto (Denoël, 1967); J.  Baudrillard, Le Système 
des objets (Denoël, 1968); V.  Scardigli, La Consommation, culture du quotidien 
(Paris: PUF, 1983); Sauvy, Les quatre roues. 
 
15 M.  Bonnet, "L'automobile quotidienne: mythes et réalités," L'Automobile et la 
Mobilité des Français (Paris: La Documentation française, 1980). 
16 For an exhaustive study see "La Pollution automobile," La Recherche 149 (Nov.  
1983). 
17 See Jacques Ellul, L'Empire du non-sens.  Cf.  also M.  Nahas, "Quand I'artiste 
peintre devient informaticien," La Recherche 165 (April 1985).   
18 E.  Morin, Sociologie (Paris: Fayard, 1984), though the text to which I refer 
dates from 1965. 
19 For details cf.  Regimbal, Le Rock n Roll (Geneva: Croisade, 1984). 
20 This was the limit set by France's National Council of Hygiene in 1975.  We 
must not forget that the increase from 80 to 90 is exponential. 
21 See H.  Laverriére, Repenser ce bruit dans 1equel nous baignons (La Pensée 
universelle, 1982). 
22 France's National Council on Noise put it this way: “A brain which resounds 
[résonne] does not reason [raisonne]” (1982).  But the Council has met with a 
setback (Le Monde, Feb.  1986).  The amusing thing is that at the very same time 
the Prefect of Paris was much disturbed about the barking of dogs!  Government 
always provides comic relief. 
23 Article in Le Monde, July 10, 1986. 

 
 
CHAPTER XX 
 
Terrorism in the Velvet Glove of Technology 
 
I know that in linking terrorism to technology I will scandalize the 
technicians who use it peacefully or who invent means to make life better 
and who have no thoughts of terrorism.  I know that others will think that I 
am exaggerating.  But again, we need to understand one another.  I am 
not talking about technical terrorism, although I might have shown that the 
growth and popularization of technical means has made terrorist acts 
much easier.1  My subject, however, is the discourse of technique, or 
technology in the strict sense, and my point is that this discourse is 
terrorist.  But I must also explain my use of the word terrorism.  I am not 
using it here in the literal sense which would relate "terrorist" to those who 
set off bombs.  I am recalling instead the usage around 1968 when a 
professor might be called a terrorist because his status enabled him to 
influence his students with lectures which no one could contest, or when 
teaching the mother tongue was terrorist because, along with the 
language, images and symbols and judgments were impressed upon the 
minds of children that they could never cast off, so that they were not 
allowed to develop freely. 
 
 
At that time I showed that the analysis was both correct and absurd!  
It is in this abstract sense of molding the unconscious with no possibility 
of resistance that I am adopting the word terrorism in this context.  My 
point is that the discourse on technique which we encounter everywhere 
and which is never subjected to criticism2 is a terrorism which completes 
the fascination of people in the West and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
384 
 
 
TERRORISM IN THE VELVET GLOVE OF TECHNOLOGY  
385 
 
which places them in a situation of twofold irreversible dependence and 
therefore subjugation. 
 
 
This terrorist discourse rests on a picture of tomorrow's society.  It is 
clear, incontestable, and beyond a shadow of a doubt that the society of 2000 
will be an entirely computerized society, a communication society, a high-tech 
society, a society of space colonization, of unlimited energy, of radically 
transformed production thanks to industrial automation and robotics, a society 
in which artificial intelligence almost completely replaces human intelligence, 
and in which material shortages will be largely made up by the creation of 
new materials (see the enthusiasm of A.  Ducrocq, who speaks of the 
"morning of the elements"), which are just as good as the old and even better.  
This society will also be one in which the methods of production are so 
different that it will be impossible to think of work as we know it today, in 
which communities and transport will be completely changed, in which the 
main problems of birth, living, and aging will have been solved, and in which 
nutritional problems will also have been solved thanks to new and 
inexhaustible foods.  It will be a society in which eventually questions of 
consumption will be pointless because new products and services will make 
possible new and balanced budgets both public and private. 
 
 
Am I dreaming?  Am I simply sketching another Brave New World?  Not 
at all!  I am simply reproducing the headings of a most official document 
which I have quoted before, namely, Prospective de 2005.  Sept Explorations 
de l'avenir, the report which a forecasting group drew up for the planning 
commission and the prime minister. 
 
 
In the private sector we find exactly the same global view of the year 
2000 in such works as those of Ducrocq or Bressand and Distler.  We also 
find it in Le Monde.  The interesting thing is that these are not "scenarios" 
(with different parameters, multiple variations, or varying solutions).  No, the 
world will be like this in 2000.  We have here a complete and certain forecast.  
Given what exists today, one cannot contest that what is forecast will come to 
pass.  Money will have given way totally to credit cards.  All objects in use will 
be computerized.  All relations will be by the computer route.  New materials 
will make possible structures that are inconceivable today in housing, 
transport, and also prosthetics.  The great difference from Brave New World 
or science fiction, whether films or stories, is that those are works of 
imagination, so that what they foresee is possible but not certain, and need 
not be taken seriously.  But the reports and works to which I have referred 
claim irrefutable scientific certainty. 
 
 
I will not return to what I said earlier about technical 

 
 
386   
 
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
unpredictability.  What I have noted in reading official or semiofficial texts is a 
complete failure to mention four phenomena which seem to be very 
important: the possibility of a nuclear war, the possibility of a general Third 
World revolt, the possibility of an exponential increase of unemployment, and 
the possibility of a general financial collapse of the West due to accumulated 
debt.  These four possible disasters are ignored.  Furthermore, the report 
which I quoted deals solely and expressly with France. 
 
 
I do not want to give the impression of thinking that the experts had no 
idea at all of the four possibilities I list.  I am simply saying that they present a 
future in which these possibilities have no part, without taking the precaution 
that all could be disrupted.  No, the society of 2005 will be like this.  They are 
thus giving a practical demonstration of my 1950 thesis, violently attacked at 
the time, that technique is the new fate of our era.  Technique is incontestable 
and inexorable; it is our destiny.  When the forecasters portray society as it is 
then going to be, they make it plain, though without using metaphysical -or 
literary terms, that it cannot be different.  An irresistible fate is taking us to that 
point.  This is going much further than the popular slogan that we cannot stop 
progress.  It is closer to the important statement of Professor Bernard on 
television when, answering the reservations of Professor Testart regarding 
genetic engineering, he said that we must never impede scientific research. 
 
 
Our future is clear and irrevocably fixed.  This might, of course, be a 
matter for intellectual debate.  One might bring against Ducrocq or Bressand 
the damage that progress does, or quote critical reports.  But this is no longer 
the situation.  The report that I have summarized is an official text which is 
meant to show the government what it should do and forecast.  Above all, we 
have to see that this is not a mere hypothesis or probability.  No, tomorrow's 
society is like this.  The main task of the government, then, is on the one hand 
to prepare young people to enter this society and on the other hand to bring 
this society into being.  It is here that terrorism arises. 
 
 
This totally technicized, computerized society is inevitable.  Thus we 
have to go with the flow, to make it arrive, to preside at its birth, and to 
integrate the new generation into this world.  We no longer have any choice.  
There are no options, which would be useless, for we know what the outcome 
will be.  In a different ideological context we, too, must go with the flow of 
history.  But we are well aware that when we do this we are scientifically 
determined.  (Do not forget that Marxism was regarded as the science of 
sciences; today technologism is.)  The ineluctable outcome is dictatorship and 
terrorism.  I am not saying that 
 
 
TERRORISM IN THE VELVET GLOVE OF TECHNOLOGY  
387 
 
the governments that choose this as the flow of history will reproduce Soviet 
terrorism.  Not at all!  But they will certainly engage in an ideological terrorism. 
 
 
Three threats are the key to this previsionism.  There is the threat of 
unemployment.  If you do not take the path which leads to this society, if you 
do not prepare to be a technician of one of these leading techniques, you will 
inevitably be unemployed.  Everything in the future will be done by the 
computer, by telecommunications, by networks and files.  Those who are 
unacquainted 
with 
these 
will 
necessarily 
be 
marginal 
and 
totally 
unemployable.  Children are incessantly told that here is their only future.  
Parents are told that this is the only choice.  If their children do not become 
technicians they will be nothing.  Technique is so broad that if the children 
have training in computers they can move in many different directions.  They 
can even become theologians if they are trained in the biblical and theological 
use of the computer, as at the Louvain Institute. 
 
 
There is also the threat to the intelligence.  Only those who know how to 
handle the computer are intelligent in our society.  We have only to recall the 
young computer geniuses to whom we referred earlier.  Knowledge of 
literature, ancient languages, or history counts for nothing.  At a pinch there is 
a place for the humanities (though.  their stock is constantly reduced).  But 
they have to show that they can help to adapt individuals to the technical 
world.  If they cannot do this, they have no place.  Entertainment and 
diversions can also be admitted, for they prevent people from becoming 
aware of what our future society demands. 
 
 
Our world has obviously made great progress as compared with that of 
the 19th century.  Then ideal industrial workers were uneducated people who 
would do what they were told.  Today an appeal is made to every level of 
intelligence, and that will be even more true in the year 2000.  Intelligence, 
linked to mathematics, is absolutely essential in our society.  But it is no 
longer the intelligence of the humanities, of human beings as such.  It is the 
intelligence that cooperates with the robot and that is modeled on artificial 
intelligence.  The problem is no longer whether the computer is intelligent and 
a competitor.  No, given the intelligence of the computer, the problem is how 
to educate us so as to correspond to it.  We have to learn to pose problems 
differently in computer language and to solve them by other than classical 
procedures.  We have to think in algorithms (unambiguous rules of thought, 
transformation that makes possible the passage from one representation to 
another, execution by a finite number of steps).  We have to be shaped by the 
theory of algorithms,, formal grammars, and, the 

 
 
388   
 
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
complexity of memory (which will make it possible among other things to 
determine the calculability of an algorithm), by the theory of graphs, and by 
the semantics of computer language.  This is the kind of intelligence that is 
indispensable in the society which is ineluctably predicted.  The interesting 
thing, however, is that those who are educated this way are completely 
obtuse when it comes to other forms of intelligence.  Happily these no longer 
count. 
 
 
During the transitional period, of course, what I am indicating might 
seem strange and very difficult.  Not at all!  This terrorism does not terrify; it 
acclimates.  Thus the computer might seem hard to understand and to use.  
Its achievements are so astonishing that there is a real computer myth.  But 
some have given themselves the task of "demythifying" it.  This is being done, 
however, in a strange way.  The formulation is that "the technology in this 
area of the computer is still in prehistory...  The gap between computers 
which have evolved very fast and business needs which have evolved less 
fast justifies the need for service companies.  We shall continue for another 
decade or so to demythify the computer.  This is for the sake of users, who 
must not be isolated from suppliers" (Le Monde, July 1986).  The point is that 
there has to be a business which helps other businesses to choose the best 
computer.  In other words, demythifying the computer does not mean showing 
its fragility, mistakes, or dangers, as do Vitalis and Chamoux.  On the 
contrary, it means creating a need for it where the need is not yet felt, 
encouraging more users, teaching them to buy the model that best suits their 
needs, proving to them that the computer is not miraculous or mythical but 
that the only intelligent thing to do is to use it.  The computer is really so 
simple.  It can help you a lot.  You do not want to die an idiot. 
 
 
This is the kind of thing that is really being said by an important service 
company in the demythifying of the computer.  There is a true threat to the 
intelligence, which is global.  To be "in," "to be linked" formulas essentially 
based on the computer-is a proof of intelligence.  These are terrorist formulas.  
Those who are not "in!' or "linked" are treated with sovereign disdain and pity.  
Advertising also tends to show that for every problem the good technical fairy 
will have the solution.  But we have to be willing.  We have to be ready to 
accept its help and to be comfortable with what it can provide.  We must not 
be defiant or reticent.  Terrorism is composed of three steps: psychological 
preparation, education, and compulsory imposition.  We have said a few 
things about psychological preparation.  We now take a look at the other two 
aspects. 
 
 
Education or instruction: the idea is simple.  Since tomorrow's  
 
 
TERRORISM IN THE VELVET GLOVE OF TECHNOLOGY 389 
 
society has to be thus and cannot be different, we have to prepare young 
people (and the not so young) to enter it, not to be alienated by what they 
find in it, to be accustomed to its workings.  Around 1930 teaching on 
automobiles was introduced into the schools.  But the automobile was not 
primarily a working tool.  Today we have to prepare children to use the 
new instruments (e.g., teleconferencing, printers, computer graphics, etc.) 
as a help in making decisions.  Computer science is thus an 
indispensable subject along with French or mathematics.  It can also be 
integrated with other subjects, helping children to learn history or physics. 
 
 
This is why I talk of terrorism.  All children must now learn to use 
computers.  They are shaped by them and adapted to them.  This 
adaptation will one day go so far that orthography itself will have to be 
changed to fit computers.  The computer will mediate all things intellectual 
and the whole intellectual formation of the child.  What we hear repeated 
a hundred times is always the same.  Children must be able to use 
computers because tomorrow they will be the universal work 
environment. 
 
 
What is demanded of children, however, is a transformation of 
intelligence, for the computer claims to be not only a technique but also a 
science.3  It changes our way of imaging things (whether they be physical, 
economic, linguistic, or biological).  It gives us a new way of coding 
images, words, ideas, language.  Everything must go into a code for the 
machine.  It imposes its own language and its own way of putting 
problems.  It produces principles and new concepts.  In high schools it is 
both a science to learn and a tool for the teaching of other sciences.  This 
is computer-assisted instruction.  Experiments are being made with it in 
many high schools. 
 
 
As the report notes, however, we must begin at the beginning.  The 
computer should not be something supplementary.  It is giving rise to a 
new culture (the famous technical culture) which reconciles theory and 
technique.  It does this so well that when applied everywhere it becomes 
the central discipline (earlier French and mathematics had been the 
central disciplines in France, around which all the others revolved).  Every 
field makes use of the computer, and as it will be inevitably in society, so 
it will be inevitably in education.  All methods are good.  Children will be 
taught telematics by telephone, by television, and not just at school.  They 
will have to learn that the computer is the 

 
 
390  
  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
irreplaceable tool for the modeling of complex phenomena and that its 
concepts are of use in every discipline. 
 
 
The technical culture becomes increasingly important whether we 
like it or not, and schools must give future citizens the culture of the 
future.  Schools must raise students to the same technical level as they 
will find outside.  Using a computer can be associated with a game.  It is a 
pleasure to play around with gadgets instead of being bored by books.  
Children must be prepared for added cerebralization (?) after school by 
more intelligent (?) cultural activities. 
 
 
This very complete report then lists the academic sphere in which 
the computer can be applied and how it will be done (e.g., the acquisition 
of languages, of knowledge, and of modes of reasoning).  But the modern 
methods 
of 
instruction 
(audiovisual, 
telecommunications, 
computer-assisted instruction) all imply the domination of images over 
writing or speech.  In evaluating students' work seven criteria are to be 
retained: memory, syntax, semantics, induction, deduction, strategy, and 
creativity.  Each corresponds to a "skilled operator," and students must be 
trained to understand the process of intellectual development.  Training in 
computer science is essential if those who use computers are not finally 
to see in them mere push-button tools but an aid to creativity.  The report 
examines in detail the application to each subject, the levels of instruction, 
and computer-assisted instruction in all advanced countries.  It finally 
shows the advantages and disadvantages of directed study, in which 
students are guided by the system following their answers to multiple 
choice questions, and nondirected study, which involves simulation, 
assisted conception, and programming. 
 
 
I cannot give all the details.  What I want to make plain is that we 
have here as terrorist a system of education as there can possibly be.4  
For young people have no escape, even less so because it is all 
presented as a game.  What is more ideal than to learn by playing?  This 
plan of educating all children by computer was envisioned by Giscard and 
reinforced by the socialist government.  In November 1984 the Secretary 
of State, Mr.  Carraz, announced that technical instruction was one of the 
basic items in the modernization of the schools.  Technical instruction 
would be obligatory.  Computers would be generally available, and 
schools would be equipped with microcomputers and software.  Mr.  
Fabius announced in January 1985 a plan, "computers 
 
 
TERRORISM IN THE VELVET GLOVE OF TECHNOLOGY  
391 
 
for everyone," which would put 100,000 microcomputers in primary schools, 
high schools, and colleges, with 11,000 workshops for computer training.  
High schools would have semiprofessional materials.  The plan would cost 2 
billion francs (about $400 million), and 100,000 computer instructors would 
have to be trained.  By January 1986 Mr. Chevènement had put 120,000 
computers in educational establishments.  A program of "computer culture" 
had been set up, and it was hoped that computers would lead to more 
strictness and effort in French writing (cf.  the Simon report).  Over 110,000 
teachers, enthusiastic volunteers, were trained, and it was hoped to open 
computer classes to the public and especially to parents. 
 
 
This is in my view one of the main forms of this terrorism and it is based, 
as we have seen, on the certainty that ours will be a total computer society.  
Children have to be assimilated to the computer, which becomes the judge of 
all things with no possibility of critical evaluation by other criteria (e.g., a 
possible conflict between word and picture) or by a culture founded on other 
values and made up of other modes of education.  If there had been serious 
reflection (i.e., not based on the assumption that the computer is the key to.  
our society), it might have led to the view that the computer might be one 
subject of instruction among others, and therefore optional, instead of being 
made a general teaching aid or something which forces us to adopt new 
concepts, a new logic, etc., and which in some sense falsifies everything that 
traditional culture has slowly developed. 
 
 
The plans and projects of the various governments-for Chirac has 
naturally endorsed the suggestions of Giscard and the work of Fabius-display 
a total lack of reflection.  For eventually the young people who will be taught a 
different mode of reasoning and of seeing and interpreting reality might well 
find themselves twenty years later in a radically different society from that 
which these futurists predict.  What will become of them then?  What will they 
do if there is a crisis or a war?  How will they survive, having been trained for 
an automated, computerized world?  For I do not believe at all that those who 
have been molded in this way will be able to adapt quickly. 
 
 
That which has enabled human beings to survive, their versatility, is 
being lost due to the coupling of people and machines.  This coupling 
imposes a true terrorism.  Quite apart from disasters, do we not see with what 
prodigious speed changes have taken place in the three great technical 
spheres?  For example, the speed of change in artificial languages: who 
would dare state that the knowledge accepted for using computers in 1990 
will still be valid for computers in 2010?  It might be replied that the principles 
remain the same.  My simple 

 
 
392   
 
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
retort would be that there is nothing to prove this.  Computers were not 
the same prior to microprocessors.  The vaunted knowledge that is 
spread abroad today might well be useless for the computer of tomorrow. 
 
 
But the computer is not the only factor in the modeling of children.  
Television is another.  An important difference is that whereas the 
subjugation is intentional and calculated in the case of the computer, it is 
spontaneous and desired in the case of television, and its effect is thus 
harder to measure.  The abuse of the screen by children results in the 
creation of a more difficult relation to space, for things change on the 
screen more quickly than the eye can follow, the eye being trained in 
space to follow real movements.  There is thus a false estimation of space 
which has been confirmed medically again and again.  Children who live 
too much before the set cannot do certain things.  Educators have also 
stated that children who watch too much television are both overexcitable 
and somnolent at the same time, passing through phases of excitement 
and debility. 
 
 
Some say that television opens up children's minds and gives them a 
smattering of everything.  As we have seen, however, we need to know 
what this culture consists of, for talking about this and that is not a 
coherent training of the intelligence.  Does television really teach children 
anything?  Plainly, it does not (cf.  Piveteau, Cazeneuve, Holtz-Bonneau).  
There are, of course, educational programs.  But do children really want 
to watch these rather than infantile cartoons or films of terror and 
violence?  By what mysterious means will children choose and assimilate 
good programs and avoid the follies of Mandrake and other 
science-fiction programs that are full of violence, star wars, etc.?  We 
would have to believe that they have a superhuman wisdom and 
perspicacity much superior to that of which adults are capable.  
Furthermore, English psycho-sociologists (cf.  the various warnings to "be 
careful what your children watch," and Brethenoux's thesis) have shown 
that when certain programs are assiduously watched, behavior can 
change, but not basic attitudes.5  This proves that television acts more by 
structure than by content.  Nothing conscious or intelligent can be gained 
by means of it.  Many psychologists -and parents have perhaps found this 
to be true-argue that television prevents children from engaging in natural 
activities.  They no longer know how to play spontaneously and even less 
how to invent games on the basis of things which are nothing in 
themselves but become what they are through the 
 
 
TERRORISM IN THE VELVET GLOVE OF TECHNOLOGY  
393 
 
imagination.  When no longer fascinated by the screen, children do not know 
what to do.  They are unable to create; they are bored.  This is one of the 
interesting results of terrorism in a velvet glove.  But this is no longer the 
terrorism of discourse about technique.  It is the terrorism of technique's own 
discourse, which is symbolized in televisual images. 
 
 
This acclimatization, sometimes obligatory and sometimes voluntary, to 
the most modem technique-and television plays its part by so blinding 
children with what is done by technical machines that they can no longer 
distinguish between reality and fiction, everything being a show-must certainly 
continue after the years in school and college.  Adults have to plunge into this 
bath, too.  This is the aim of the grandiose Museum of Science, Technology, 
and Industry opened at Villette.  I will not refer again to the frightful cost.  In 
this context the important thing is the purpose, which is to set visitors in a 
world full of all that average people today can understand, perceive, and 
visualize.  They must see the most sophisticated tools and machines and also 
their connections.  They must not only see but also experiment with them.  
There must be interactive presentations in which they can manipulate, move, 
and converse.  (Exceptionally tough equipment is thus needed!)  The public 
must not be merely window-shopper consumers. 
 
 
To justify the enormous expenditure the same argument is always used: 
France must be up-to-date.  All French people must be given the chance to 
possess the culture with which to confront the century.  They are thus 
plunged into a universal technical bath which gains its fascination from the 
extraordinary potential of the machines.  (Naturally, there is no place for 
reflection, for reserve, for a critical spirit!)  The obvious aim is to stir many 
people to become research scientists, technicians, and industrialists. 
 
 
"Central to Villette is the symbiosis of science and technique, and these 
are put to work in industry.  To bring about the great transformation which the 
actual crisis both conceals and expresses there is need of more science, 
more techniques, and more industry. . . . We must help the coming 
generations to understand the world in which they will live."6  We must thus 
seduce and integrate them.  We must set them on the right track by 
preadaptation to what is thought to be the future.  This exposition obviously 
presupposes unending progress, final evolution, and the ultimate possibility.  
Incessantly, then, it puts visitors in the future world, for the world in which they 
actually live is not that of highest progress.  This is why this museum is part of 
the terrorism in a velvet glove which is never seen to be anything but a 
diligent 

 
 
394  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
servant.  It is a true instrument of the thirst for progress and the incitement 
never to question anything. 
 
 
At times, however, this terrorism can cease to be benevolent and gentle.  
It can become constraining and incontestable.  We see this when people are 
practically prohibited from producing by their own means their own electricity.  
Électricité de France is not a state monopoly but it acts as though it is.  There 
is no formal law against setting up a windmill or tapping a stream on one's 
own property.  But there are many administrative obstacles and the charges 
are prohibitive.  A more clearcut example is the decision to put all homes on 
cable and to make whole groups take Minitel.  The telephone company 
graciously makes a gift of this, but we can be sure that it will recover the cost 
later.  The government, leaning on capital, industry, and more or less captive 
markets, is following a strategy very much determined by the spread of the 
computer.  But in telematics it is plainly using its monopoly in 
telecommunications.  Great Britain took the lead with Prestel, but France has 
adopted a more extreme policy with the free distribution of Minitel, first 
creating an electronic directory (cf.  the Vélizy experiment in 1980-81). 
 
 
There has been no real debate about these moves in spite of the 
promise of a big parliamentary debate in 1982.  The same is true of the 
large-scale authoritarian distribution of videotex.  After 1982 no debate was 
possible because the social actors were too much engaged in integrating 
videotex to take time to discuss choices and problems. 
 
 
I talk about terrorism, then, for two reasons.  First, great transformations 
are imposed on human and social relations without consulting the interested 
parties.  (We grew used to this, of course, with nuclear power stations.)  In 
our so-called democracy decisions are made to change society without 
considering the opinions of the "captive sovereign.”  The second reason, 
however, is more startling.  A decision has been made to eliminate the old 
means.  Thus the telephone directories are to be replaced by those of Minitel 
and videotex.  This device will tell us all we want to know.  We are not free, 
then, to reject it.  We have no other means of finding information.  This is a 
wholly terrorist measure.  And we have to admit that it will grow worse as 
equipment is perfected.  We will then be forced into futuristic technicization. 
 
 
Our final task is to ask who are the agents of this technical or 
technocratic terrorism.  First, of course, there are the political powers acting 
either by constraint or by massive propaganda.  The government that acts in 
this way thinks that it is adopting important policies.  Governing is foreseeing.  
Since society will necessarily be this computerized, automated society, the 
virtue of government is to preadapt 
 
 
TERRORISM IN THE VELVET GLOVE OF TECHNOLOGY 
 395 
 
institutions and people to what will happen just as surely as the sun will rise 
tomorrow.  What we said earlier about advertising and publicity is important 
here, but we need not repeat it.  Second, there are the technocrats and the 
technostructure.  Their position is clear: the more society becomes 
technicized (the atom, the computer, satellites, genetic engineering), the more 
indispensable they become, the more power they have, the more important 
they are, the more money they make, the more difficult they are to uproot.  
Their propagation of all techniques and their crushing of nontechnicians and 
nonspecialists by their science and authority is an expression of both their 
self-interest and the strengthening of their situation.  They cannot act in any 
other way.  They are forced to reject increasingly what remains of democracy.  
We talked about this, too, in depicting the transition from the present system 
to an aristocracy. 
 
 
But the first two groups who are responsible for this terrorism find a 
guarantor or opening quite ready in the public.  I will state again an older law 
that I laid down in my book on propaganda, namely, that propaganda cannot 
succeed without the complicity of those at whom it is aimed.  This is how 
things are today.  There is complicity on the part of the public.  Being badly 
informed-that goes without saying the public is full of admiration for all that 
modern means can do and blinded by their obvious achievements.  There can 
be no discussion with the man who walked on the moon or with the robot; we 
are struck dumb by such marvels.  Because they are spectacular, all the 
techniques have become obvious.  Evidence of this kind cannot be 
questioned.  This is why the terrorism can be in a velvet glove.  Its rests on 
advance evidence. 
 
 
There remain two other groups that bear responsibility for this terrorism, 
namely, intellectuals and the churches.  Their situations are similar in many 
ways.  First, if they do not basically engage in this technicization, they are 
afraid of appearing reactionary and thus calling down upon them the scorn 
and derision of the parties of progress.  Then they have the duty of forming 
the culture of their day, but how can they do this unless they integrate 
technique into it?  Then teachers, aided and equipped thanks to the daily 
papers which give them ample crops of technical innovations, adopt what 
they think will be the best way of adapting children to tomorrow's society (e.g., 
history as the history of techniques and economics, geography as the 
geography of natural resources and economic changes, and similar inimitably 
silly fads).  If teaching Racine or Roman history was a horrible terrorism in 
1968, what are we to say of this type of teaching?  The first had at least the 
merit of putting children in the concrete reality of their society and 

 
 
396  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
thus giving them the chance to adopt a critical standpoint.  The second 
plunges them underwater so that they learn nothing and want nothing but 
science and techniques.  This type of education is double terrorism. 
 
 
To me, however, the churches seem worst of all.  Whether we take 
the World Council of Churches or the papacy, they have become the 
privileged agent of technological enthusiasm.  They are in a panic lest 
they should be thought to be behind the times, obscurantist, out of things.  
To show their good faith and broadmindedness, they defer.  Should they 
have the audacity to confess to reservations and to raise the question of 
truth, they are put in their place and told that they have nothing to teach 
anyone.  Reference is naturally made to Galileo (wrongly, for Galileo was 
not prosecuted, as is said, on the purely astronomical issue).  At a pinch it 
may be conceded that the church can express an opinion on the moral 
plane, for example, in matters of in vitro fertilization or the freezing of 
embryos or surrogate motherhood.  But never must it meddle in basic 
matters.  Happily, the clergy are only too willing to sound the trumpet to 
the glory of technique, signaling, as has been said, "the end of the era of 
suspicion." 
 
 
Two recent works point the way.  First, Michel Boullet shows that the 
hierarchy is increasingly open to artificial "communication."7  His path is 
simple.  As the influence of the churches diminishes, they need to 
become aware of the importance of the media, to invest in this sphere, 
and to train professionals.  (Billy Graham made this discovery half a 
century ago, but the European exodus from the churches has continued!)  
Boullet makes the remarkable judgment that fear of the media is not 
Christian.  I am not sure what is Christian, but in any event the effect of 
the media on their audience, and children in particular, is certainly unlikely 
to involve the transmission of even a grain of truth.  Pierre Babin, a former 
collaborator of McLuhan, goes much further.8  The actual status of the 
church, he thinks, has changed in the communication society.  The 
audiovisual irruption has produced a spiritual renewal (a greater miracle 
than any at Lourdes!) and is transforming catechesis (as is obvious, 
though without making children more open to the truth).  This is a 
theological debate into which I do not wish to enter here.  I am simply 
saying that the church's spokespersons now favor broadcasting.  A 
technological wager: The official church has not yet taken up the 
challenge but it can hardly fail to do so given its traditional sociological 
conformism and the example of the World Council. 
 
 
TERRORISM IN THE VELVET GLOVE OF TECHNOLOGY  
397 
 
 
But before going into that, let us examine the vigorous thesis of 
Babin.  Television, he says, has replaced the crucifix in the home and the 
imagination.  The faith of the new generation is also marked more by the 
emotional and symbolic force of the audiovisual media than by intellectual 
adherence to a doctrine or dogma.  These statements certainly merit 
reflection.  Since when has faith in the Lord Jesus Christ been intellectual 
adherence to a dogma?  Babin's "Christian reflection" also seems to me 
to be strangely subject to the primacy of fact (i.e., to that which is the 
basis of all technological procedure).  This is the actual situation, and the 
church and revelation must be adapted to it.  Babin calmly states that 
pleasure, beauty, and symbol will tomorrow be the privileged paths of 
faith and the knowledge of God rather than learning.  What pleasure?  
What beauty?  Works of modem art inspiring faith in God by their 
"beauty"?  As for symbol, we have already studied the fact that the 
modern world is opposed to symbols. 
 
 
The work of Olivier Rabut is another example of conformity to the 
technical society.9  The procedure may seem to differ but it is really the 
same.  Christianity must be modernized, that is, adapted to our technical 
society.  The modem world demands a change of mentality on the part of 
Christians.  Christian modes of thinking and even essential beliefs must 
change.  Christian doctrine must be liquidated because it does not stand 
up to the pressures of science and technique.  But vital Christian 
spirituality will survive.  What does this spirituality consist of?  Are not 
shamanism and voodoo just as spiritual?  We never break free from the 
vague happiness of those who appeal to "living" rather than thinking 
(which is by no means new).  The odd thing is the primacy of belief in 
modernity and progress, which have reason to call all things into question, 
including Christianity.  This is again a belief in fact as the ultimate value to 
which everything must bow.  No attempt is made to reverse things and to 
let Christian faith, clearly explained in an intellectual manner, judge these 
facts, these life-styles, these instances of pseudo-progress, this way of 
being modern.  Authors of this type never dream of such a thing. 
 
 
I will conclude my discussion of Roman Catholic writers with a series 
of articles by Michel Albert entitled "La Bonne Nouvelle cachée dans le 
développement économique."10  Here-another surprise there is perfect 
agreement between the gospel and economic growth.  Thus far, Albert 
says, the gospel has been located in countries of famine, poverty, and 
"predation.”  It has recommended a sharing of wealth, 

 
 
398   
 
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
condemned the accumulation of riches, and opposed powerlessness (i.e., 
being on the side of the lambs in societies divided between lambs and 
wolves).  But that was all tied to the existing economic situation.  It has 
changed today.  Thanks to research and development we are entering an 
age of economic plenty.  The wealthier we become, the more we can help 
others to become wealthy.  The search for wealth is a good thing.  
Economic development is giving us a new gospel.  All economic creation 
becomes a matter of human relations, that is, of religion.  We are entering 
a world of creation in which individuals and groups are not enemies any 
longer but must have relations of trust.  This is a fiduciary world based on 
a recognition of others and confidence in them.  The rate of trust will grow 
with that of the gross national product.  What are being created are no 
longer relations of competition but of partnership.11  The new gospel is 
that of wealth, trust, and a decline of power. 
 
 
We will now take a brief look at the Christian naïveté of the World 
Council of Churches (WCC) in its attitude toward technique.  I have in 
mind the Boston conference of four hundred scientists and theologians on 
the theme "Faith and Science in an Unjust World" (July 1979).12  We note 
that already in the title there is emphasis on an "unjust world.”  In 
accordance with the dominant WCC trend, the world (i.e., the Western 
world!) is judged to be unjust.  This is in line with the great predominance 
of African and Latin American churches in the WCC.  Thus the problem of 
science and revelation is not really studied, but the whole problem is first 
set in the context of the injustice of the Western world.  That said, after 
reading the two big volumes we are completely disappointed, provided we 
have any knowledge at all of the issue.  The approach is mostly 
descriptive.  We are simply told what is.  No effort is made to evaluate, 
from the perspective of revelation, the scientific and technical 
developments.  At best there is only juxtaposition: Science says this and 
theology that, with no interaction, and usually a justification of science as 
such, with perhaps some ethical limitations.  The only thing that is 
condemned is the break between technique and humanity.  Prometheus 
is good, but his deviation into Faust is reprehensible. 
 
 
TERRORISM IN THE VELVET GLOVE OF TECHNOLOGY  
399 
 
The promotion of science is a moral duty.  It has an essential role in the 
building of a better world (Hombury Brown).  In no sense is it an enemy of 
faith.  Its modernity brings emancipation and postulates autonomy.  There 
are also "audacious" formulations like the following: "Love and a just, 
participatory, ecologically responsible society are public criteria for the 
verification or falsification of science." 
 
 
In the whole work what is said about science is astoundingly trite and 
for the most part presents techno-scientific realities that are totally 
outdated.  There is no sense of the real situation and the reasoning is 
simplistic (e.g., that redistributing income will increase productivity and 
consequently the returns).  We also find that the churches are beginning 
to take note of the lessons taught by Christians who live in socialist 
countries.  There we find the ideal for a proper application of science.  
The dominating impression in both the scientific and the theological 
discussion is one of banality.  What is true, I would say, is banal, and 
what is novel is erroneous.  Thus it is said that everyone in the West now 
sees the need for a limitation of growth.  Increasing the production of 
material goods is the necessary condition for transition from the realm of 
necessity to that of freedom (C.  T.  Kurien).  The ethical sphere is just as 
badly treated as the scientific. 
 
 
The whole work is a plea for science and technique so long as they 
are set in a socialist world.  The work has been partly published in French 
with some added articles by Swiss theologians which are much better.13  
In these additions we find a much more refined sense of the problem but 
also great timidity.  The conformist talk of the WCC is more relevant in the 
present context than these articles.  The question that I have to ask is 
why the churches have so little judgment and so little critical spirit in a 
matter which concerns not only dogma but the conception of humanity as 
a whole and even the possibility of a revelation that is beyond the reach of 
science.  I think that all the churches' reactions stem from the fear of not 
being modern, of not being up to date or "with it.”  It is much more 
important for them to preserve contact with their contemporaries than with 
God, to talk as society does than to listen to God's Word.  They are thus 
victimized by the terrorism of opinion and communication as regards 
technique.  To escape their own panic the churches become in their turn 
the cassette recording terrorism in the velvet glove of technology.  This 
ensures that they will not be judged. 

 
 
400  
FASCINATED PEOPLE 
 
"This society is inevitable and we are thus preparing young people to 
enter it, to find a place and a job in it.”  This is the terrorist argument, as 
we have said.  What seems not to be considered is that this society is not 
inevitable.  By preparing people to enter it, by giving them no other aim 
than to be competent in it, by creating among them a frantic need to work 
on technique, by soaking them in the knowledge and coherent practices 
of this society, we are making it increasingly probable.  What will finally 
make it inevitable is neither the development of science and technique 
nor economic needs but the shaping of people who can do nothing else 
and will not be comfortable in any other society.  What makes 
techno-science inevitable is the belief that it is, the pseudo-predictive 
boasting, and the assuring of people that it is in process of realization. 
 
 
                                                 
1 See Jacques Ellul, "La démocratisation du Mal," Sud-Ouest Dimache, Sept.  
1981, p.  5. 
2 Occasional denunciations cannot hold their own against the flood of talk in the 
media. 
3 What follows is taken from the report submitted to the President of France by the 
president of the commission, J.-C.  Simon, L'Éducation et l'Informatisation de la 
société (Paris: Fayard, 1981). 
4 It needs the courage of an anarchist to challenge the terrorism; cf.  the 
passionate work of Paul Feyerabend, Against Method (New York: Schocken, 
1978), which demands among other things the separation of science from the 
schools-an excellent point in my view. 
5 See William Belson, Television Violence and the Adolescent Boy (England: 
Saxon House, 1978). 
6 See P.  Delouvrier, "Pour l'apprentissage du futur," Le Monde, April 1984. 
7 Michel Boullet, Le Choc des médias (Paris: Desclée, 1986). 
8 Pierre Babin, L'Ére de la communication: réflexion chrétienne (Paris: Centurion, 
1986). 
9 Olivier Rabut, Peut-on moderniser le christianisme?  (Paris: Cerf, 1986). 
10 Four articles in France catholique, Nov.-Dec.  1985. 
11 This is all incredibly naive.  Older societies were not always societies of penury.  
Relations of trust have existed before and were a hundred times stronger than 
they are today.  Power is not any the less in our societies.  Partnership is no more 
important now than it was eight centuries ago.  The most glaring mistake, 
however, is the equation of the gospel with economic growth! 
12 Faith and Science in an Unjust World, 2 vols.  (Philadelphia: Fortress, 1980).  In 
this attempt at Christian reflection we are also surprised to discover science in 
Islam and Buddhism, and Arab, Indonesian, African perspectives, etc. 
13 Science sons conscience, foi, science et avenir de l'homme (Geneva: La et 
Fides, 1980).  This edition contains sixteen conference reports and articles by P.  
Gisel, J.-L.  Blondel, M.  Faessner, et al. 

 
 
 
 
Last Words 
 
1.  Inventing Humanity 
 
This is the fine title of an excellent book,1 and it has been taken up for 
some time by the press.  Inventing humanity!  A.  Jacquard borrowed the 
phrase from Sartre and his use of it to describe the ideal objective of 
history.  He follows the Marxist line: As we have thus far known only 
humanity's prehistory, modem humanity is only a preliminary sketch of what 
humanity is to become.  For Marx, however, this will be the result of a 
transformation of the economic and social milieu.  But today things have 
changed.  Obviously, the tremendous power that humanity has now been 
given implies for it a transformation.  We are condemned to invent 
humanity, says Jacquard, because of the technical change which has 
followed the first "invention of humanity" at the time of the determinative 
breakthrough made by Homo sapiens.  This is also the view of those who 
talk about "science with a conscience."2 
 
 
If we regard Bergson's idea of the supplement of the soul as totally 
ridiculous and idealistic, then modern orientations seem to be 
extraordinarily disturbing or blind.  It is not at all clear what is meant by 
these reassuring formulas.  What are the options and possibilities?  We 
may set aside at once cybernetic or computer-man, who has electrodes 
implanted in the brain and who does exactly as commanded.  A second 
suggestion is more tempting since we are already on the way to it by 
genetic engineering.  This is the way of artificial insemination, of 
preservation of embryos in vitro, of the production of clones, of the endless 
reproduction of the same models, of the accurate detection of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
401 
 
 
402   
 
LAST WORDS 
 
defects in the embryo, of the insemination of women with the sperm of 
unknown men, of the preservation of the sperm of great men, etc. 
 
 
It is now fully possible to make the kind of people we want.3  But this is 
where jacquard shows wisdom, and we must read his book as a warning as 
well as a magnificent introduction.  His judicious thesis is that although we 
are technically capable of doing anything by genetic engineering, there is 
no scientific indication of where we ought to go.  It is very feeble to think 
merely that we should make hundreds of Einsteins.4  Jacquard is in search 
of a path, a certainty, and he comes up against the limitations of human 
judgment, which has not kept pace with human knowledge.  No matter what 
answers one may give, there is always, he thinks, a question which makes 
all the other questions and answers ludicrous. 
 
 
Our knowledge is not on the same plane as our uncertainties, which 
are not of the same order or in the same sphere of comprehension as 
phenomena.  The great venture of genetic engineering comes up against a 
giant obstacle.  No one can answer the very simple question: What kind of 
person do we want to create?  One that is above all intelligent, or.  
religious, or muscular, or perfectly balanced physiologically, or altruistic, or 
egotistic, or fully integrated into the collective, or sensitive to beauty and 
artistic, or endowed with the critical judgment that makes for autonomous 
individuality, or conformist, or individual?  We have to choose, for we 
cannot have them all.  We cannot have a person that is both rigorously 
rational and highly spiritual. 
 
 
When human types are presented to us in novels, we see clearly the 
uncertainty regarding the ideal model, and in futurist films or science fiction 
there is even horror at the model that is coming, since in spite of 
omnipotence it is either an evil genius or a stupid hero.  There is no other 
option unless we are prepared for the silliness of E.T.  Here, then, is the 
proof that no scientists, psychologists, sociologists, moralists, or 
philosophers are able to tell us what is the ideal model of 

 
 
 
 
LAST WORDS 
403 
 
humanity that we must reproduce with our technical methods.  We know 
how.  But what?5  And even if we knew what, another small detail is being 
overlooked.  This ideal person that we invent and produce by genetic 
engineering will have no freedom but will simply be the model that it is 
programmed to be.  But freedom is a big thing.  Can a person be ideal 
without it? 
 
 
Face to face with these basic problems, I will never cease repeating 
the old joke of J.  Rostand who, when working on the embryos of toads, 
said in 1960 that he could now create a toad with two heads or five paws, 
but he had not yet managed to make a supertoad.  This is vital: a toad 
better adapted to live the life of a toad than one that is reproduced 
normally.  I do not believe that the person created by genetic engineering 
will be a superman.  A human being born naturally is a human being.  Let 
genetic engineering rectify some of nature's mistakes and make possible 
the avoidance of certain psychological or physiological tragedies, but let it 
stop there.  It is not its task to invent a new humanity in spite of the paeans 
of victory that regularly sound forth. 
 
 
What other ways are there?  Transition to an ideal socialist society is 
supposed to produce the new humanity.  Aragon's novel on Communist 
humanity makes this claim.  There is no need to insist that we do not know 
what this humanity is.  Yet it is often thought that changing society or the 
social environment will produce the new humanity- The new humanity will 
no longer be planned and directed but will be the long-term or short-term 
result of the influence of the environment.  In an interesting way we find 
here the antithesis of nature and culture, or of the natural and the artificial, 
or of the spontaneous and the planned.  We might proceed to make the 
new humanity directly by technical means.  Or we might wait for a change 
in the natural environment by social neo-Darwinism-the appearance of a 
mutant. 
 
 
Very curiously, Scardigli combines the two.  On the one hand he sees 
a humanist trend in the consumer society which "is rehabilitating the 
person.”6  Each has to believe that the future will be better than the present 
and act accordingly.  The consumer society is thus reintroducing humanity 
as the principle and goal of economic activity- It is in humanity's name that 
there is innovation.  Finite material needs are giving place to desire, and an 
infinity of objects is responding to an 
 
 
404  
LAST WORDS 
 
infinity of desires.  That may well be.  But what "humanity"?  We know the 
universal consumer: hypertension, cholesterol, obesity.  "Desire" tells us 
nothing.  Is this really the ideal humanity that we want?  On the other hand, the 
same Scardigli tells us that the new humanity can be "produced," and he recalls 
the progress in medicine, quoting such banalities as the fact that the invention 
of the pill gives women a freedom that corresponds to personalist (?) values, 
that there are now convenient ways to eliminate pain, that cosmetic surgery can 
give us all beauty, etc.  He also makes astonishing statements, for example, 
that the isolation of the sick proves that we regard them as autonomous 
persons, or that medicine today denies any participation of those around the 
patient in either the outbreak or the cure of sickness; patients are the persons 
responsible for their own treatment.7 
 
T 
his is in contradiction with two points made by analysts of the medical 
establishment, namely, that those around the patient play a vital part in healing 
and that patients participate less and less in the treatment that physicians 
prescribe.  In other words, some people believe that the global evolution of 
society is leading to a positive transformation of humanity in which we will be on 
the same level as technical devices. 
 
 
In reality all these are misleading illusions.  The computer will not enable 
us to invent humanity nor will the coupling of people and computers (e.g., 
artificial intelligence, for it is not a matter of intelligence).  Again, the more 
wide-ranging coupling of humanity and machine does not enable us to predict a 
human transformation.  This transformation might be in any direction.  As for 
genetic manipulations or operations on the brain, we have already stated what 
we think of these.  We always run up against the same obstacle.  We can 
invent humanity, but we have not the slightest idea of what humanity to invent. 
 
 
Socrates did not have the same idea of humanity as Buddha, and neither 
of them thought in terms of homo economicus.  As for obtaining by slow 
spiritual education a wise and moderate person who will use technical power 
for the common good, will this really come about when machines of increasing 
power are put in the hands of this and all persons?  Is not the tempting model 
closer to home than Prometheus?  The superman of Nietzsche seems the most 
probable.  As regards artificial intervention, we have to remember that all the 
attempts had serious negative and harmful effects, not because technical and 
scientific progress is inadequate but because such effects are inherent in 

 
 
 
 
LAST WORDS 
405 
 
every enterprise of this kind.  As we have already seen, there can be no pure 
progress.  Perverse effects are inherent in the existence and development of 
science and technique.  Thus inventing humanity as though it were a technical 
and scientific activity will have destructive effects for humanity, or may well 
create monsters.  We must have no illusions about this.  As for inventing 
humanity spiritually, ethically, and educationally, I wish it could be done, but it 
should have been done during the last 2,500 years of effort.  The sorry 
conclusion to which we are led is that in fact humanity has already been 
invented.  It is part of the great design of which we spoke at the outset.  This 
great design is the complete integration of humanity into the technical system. 
 
2.  The Great Design 
 
The great design has three panels; it is a magnificent triptych.  On the central 
panel is humanity perfectly adapted to the requirements of the smooth 
functioning of sciences and techniques.  People are trained for this from their 
youth.  Their main mission is to promote it.  On the left panel is fascinated 
humanity: fascinated by the marvels of science and technique and by the 
ever-growing opportunities of our life.  On the right panel is diverted humanity: 
games and distractions of all kinds, gadgets, etc.  People here are diverted 
from seeing reality.  They constantly flutter around the many brilliant lamps and 
possibilities of escape.  If we close the side panels, on the central panel we 
have the representation of a perfectly balanced, happy, and fulfilled humanity, 
never protesting, knowing no trouble, calmed by hypnotics, mens sana in 
corpore sano, kept healthy by jogging and other kinds of exercise. 
 
 
The great design is, above all, that there should be no conflicts: not within 
an individual, not with neighboring groups, not with corporations where one 
works, not with political authorities.  We have not yet arrived at this point, but 
when we consider how ardently people in the West enter into false conflicts 
(e.g., electoral), we have to think that we are close.  At root our society is not at 
all demanding, contrary to the impression one might have! 
 
 
What, then, is required of people today?  Essentially four things. 
 
 
Their first and chief duty is to work well, painstakingly, and punctually.  
The second is not to be bothered about collective matters, not to become 
involved, not to meddle, to leave things to those who are qualified to see to 
them: politicians to govern, the churches to dispense tranquillity, doctors and 
hospitals to see to the sick and elderly.  Each one has a sphere – play, play, 
and we will take care of the rest.  The third thing is, 
 
 
406  
LAST WORDS 
 
to be a good consumer, to have good wages and to spend them, consumption 
being an absolute duty, the only imperative duty, for if people do not consume 
the pace will slow down, money will not circulate, and there will not be enough 
work.  The final thing is to follow the opinions propagated by the media, to 
adopt the information and themes for reflection that are proposed, and not to 
seek further afield, since the information provided is sufficient, and occasionally 
a scapegoat will be found, a terrible enemy, though not too close or powerful, 
on which the crowd can vent its anger and show its independence of spirit.  
These, then, are the four duties of people today. 
 
 
There are, of course, some serious obstacles: the unemployed, Third 
World famine, terrorism.  But we are assured that on the one hand the black 
marks will soon be erased, and on the other hand that those who cannot be 
reached are lost in a confusing mist, tragic and distant figures.  In sum, the four 
requirements of the great design, which are well on the way to being met, will 
make it impossible for people to have an individual view of their own lives or of 
the reality of the world in which they live.  Amid all the extolling of the world of 
communication and information, the great choice which is being made is that of 
ignorance.  Such is the great design. 
 
 
Seldom is this admitted in principle but it often is in fact.  J.-J.  Salomon 
quotes an amusing passage from World Health Organization report which 
argues that from the standpoint of mental health, the most satisfactory solution 
to the problem of the future peaceful use of nuclear power is to raise up a 
generation that will have learned to accommodate itself for the most part to 
ignorance and uncertainty.  If we do not know the risks, we will not worry, and 
this is best for everybody.  This is mental health.  Here is the balanced 
humanity of our closed triptych.  We have to live with the conviction, says 
Scardigli, that as medicine can solve all problems, so what is damaged here 
can be repaired elsewhere.  This combination explains our blindness.  If we 
were to take note of the harm done by progress, we would begin to challenge 
the very foundations of our society.  But this is unthinkable.  Everything is in 
place for us to live in blissful ignorance.  We are diverted and distracted.  As I 
have said, but need to repeat, the concern to focus our energies of 
dissatisfaction, of protest, of questioning on false targets is one of the major 
tasks of the numerous communication systems. 
 
 
The choice of ignorance agreed upon between those who work the 
machine and have an interest in this ignorance and those who are part of the 
machine and have an interest in their own peace of mind or mental health has 
the remarkable effect of completely erasing responsibility from our society.  
Everyone has become irresponsible.  I am not  

 
 
 
 
LAST WORDS 
407 
 
referring now to the irresponsibility resulting from our insurance system.  This is 
a simple matter and is of no particular interest.  I have in mind two great blocks 
of irresponsibility in our society.  There is that of the decision makers and that 
of the "untouchables.”  The decision makers-the politicians, administrators, and 
technicians-are fundamentally irresponsible.  There are two main reasons for 
this.  First, the events for which they ought to be responsible are mostly far too 
complex, and second, the process of decision itself is similarly far too complex. 
 
 
The first point is plain.  Who can be responsible for the enormous waste 
that we have seen?  Politicians have made decisions, administrators have 
drawn up memoranda, and technicians and experts have made their own 
specific contributions.  But among them, who is really responsible?  The 
President who sets the general plan in motion?  The cabinet members who in 
their own areas refine it?  Who is responsible for a nuclear accident?  The 
magnificent response in the case of Chernobyl is that human error on the part 
of a worker was responsible.  A wretched fellow turned the wrong handle.  
Fortunately, he is dead.  Take any matter and this is how it goes.  But our 
present-day operations are a hundred times too complicated for a single 
person, or even ten, to be responsible.  In the great decisions that have now to 
be made there is only one in which the responsibility is clear: that of a head of 
state pressing the button for nuclear war.  But this brings us back to simple 
cases. 
 
 
Where do we still see responsibility?  When one policeman kills a criminal; 
when one surgeon botches an operation.  These are precise and limited 
incidents.  They are not complex; they concern only one person.  Elsewhere 
there is mitigation.  Who can foresee the landslide that causes a dam to shift 
and finally to crack?  Who can calculate exactly the trajectory of the second, 
discarded engine of a rocket?  Who can envision the consequences of 
depositing barrels of dioxin in a quarry etc.? 
 
 
Every day I would say that hundreds of complex matters (not all of them 
equally grave) can have serious negative effects.  But responsibility is mitigated 
in the two ways that we have indicated.  The actual event is complex, for it is 
only one possible result of the enormous complexity of the decisions that lead 
to the unfortunate incident.  The global phenomenon is intrinsically complex.  It 
has not been made such.  All that we attempt with our leading techniques (e.g., 
space, computers, lasers, and atoms) is the result of a series of detailed 
operations and interwoven micro-decisions.  In no operation does there seem 
to be one clear responsibility. 
 
 
To this situation there corresponds the inevitable complexity of 
 
 
408  
LAST WORDS 
 
administrative machinery and industrial organization.  Where are we to 
seek those who are to blame, those who are responsible, in the tangle of 
decisions and micro-executions?  In his Nomenklatura Voslensky has given 
us an incredible example of administrative complication in the decisions of 
the supposedly all-powerful Soviet Central Committee.  No one can be held 
responsible for anything.  Those in power are not responsible because their 
fault or responsibility can never be pinpointed. 
 
 
Then there are the "untouchables.”  In our society we have two great 
classes of untouchables.  There are the scientists, whose absolute 
autonomy is guaranteed by the omnipotence of sacrosanct science.  Who 
would ever dare accuse a scientist?  Then there is the political class.8  
Though its members are divided into warring parties, they are all essentially 
at one in defense of their class status.  So long as there is a political class 
in so-called democratic countries, there can never be true politics or true 
democracy. 
 
 
There can, of course, be political scandals.  These are usually 
financial, but for the most part they are on a small scale and involve only 
individuals who have not kept the rules.  Beyond that there is no 
responsibility for political decisions made by a group in which each is 
defended by all.9  When by chance action is taken, one need not fear that 
the guilty party's career will be ruined, for there are always enough political 
friends to provide an honorable position. 
 
 
 
As for scientists, they are universally untouchable, for they carry with 
them our future.  This is true even though it may be realized that in many 
ways science participates in the bluff of technology.  I will take up only one 
aspect.  (The deifying of science is not my present theme beyond what I 
have already said on this score.)  I refer to scientific fraud.  We are familiar 
with financial fraud but there is also scientific fraud.10 

 
 
 
 
LAST WORDS 
409 
 
 
One of the most eminent of British psychologists, Cyril Burt, made up facts 
and experiments that he reported regarding intelligence and heredity- 
Chemistry has also had its frauds, for example, when a laboratory made up the 
results of its work on plutonium.  Then there was the famous Piltdown skull, or 
the less familiar scandal of experiments relating to evolutionary continuity and 
their interpretation.  More serious was the complete fraud of F.  Moewvs in 
molecular biology.  In biology, too, P.  Kammerer achieved considerable 
renown by proving the heredity of acquired characteristics.  Unfortunately, it 
was discovered that one of the proofs in his laboratory had been forged in India 
ink.  Fraud of this kind is common even in serious laboratories.  We might 
mention finally Schubert's tremendous fraud when he announced that he had a 
complete cure for plutonium poisoning on the basis of falsified experiments 
(1978). 
 
 
The other type of fraud is not in scientific work itself but in the technical 
conditions of its execution.  Some experiments ought not to be carried out 
because they are so dangerous.  Early research on encephalitis involved many 
experiments whose author himself admitted in 1977 that he never performed 
them.  He was so sure of his ideas that he regarded the experiments as 
useless, though he later wrote them up!  Often the scientists concerned may be 
world famous, like Schubert with plutonium.  Thus even in sacred science, the 
pure search for truth, there are schemes, fraud, and falsehood.  Science is not 
just "impure" in terms of its political or social consequences.  It is also impure in 
terms of the irresponsibility of scientists who are above suspicion.  We should 
note, however, that the immunity from responsibility which politicians and 
scientists enjoy is possible only in a general climate of irresponsibility. 
 
 
I ought to have recalled that the word irresponsible has a double sense.  
The mentally deficient are not responsible for their acts.  But that is not the 
meaning here.  Those who commit a crime, or attack public morals or their 
neighbors, or violate the truth but cannot be questioned on the matter, are 
irresponsible because their social status puts them outside the norms and 
relieves them of any investigation.  There is also, however, a third sense, that 
of evasion.  People may be held responsible but deep down inside they mock 
at responsibility and try in every way to escape their obligations.  They seek 
protection.  This is the point of insurance.  But it is not just the financial world 
that engenders and reinforces the inner feeling of not being responsible for 
anything.  The general climate of irresponsibility makes possible the 
irresponsibility of politicians, scientists, and technicians. 
 
 
In opposition I would refer to the old example of the ship's 
 
 
410   
 
LAST WORDS 
 
captain.  If there was an accident,' whether the captain was personally 
responsible or not, he would assume responsibility and go down with his ship 
even though most of the passengers and crew might be saved.  Similarly, in the 
19th century when a businessman or banker failed, whether he himself made 
the unfortunate speculations or not, he would commit suicide.  Absurd?  Yes, 
like everything that relates to human dignity.  But it solved nothing?  It did not 
put his affairs back in order?  And does general irresponsibility settle our 
economic and political affairs?  This was a matter of honor, the exact opposite 
of irresponsibility.  But no one today knows what honor is. 
 
 
I want to quote at some length from Olivier Merlin's remarkable article in 
Le Monde called "Béjart et les robots."11  Its theme is the "Mass for the Future." 
 
Whether the younger generations like it or not, the delightful times 
that await our grandchildren will in all probability have restored to 
honor the bestiality of former ages, the domination of strong males, 
and heroic songs on the computer.  Such French privileges as 
charm, compliments, and trifles will be forever excluded from these 
implacable relations in which any reference to culture is regarded as 
a crime.  The essential merit of Béjart's mass is that it gives us a 
wild vision of the new world whose programmed gesticulations will 
one day regale humanity...  The pure rhythmics swarm with ideas 
that test whether the nerves are in a messianic (?) state.  Drive this 
point home: the prehistoric plantigrade descending from the trees 
will one day call the tune and homo sapiens or the supreme thinker 
of Teilhard de Chardin will be viewed as a little joke.  The second 
part of the mass, which would have been enough alone and which 
Béjart calls "the conventional world," takes on direct intensity from 
the fact that four robots move out in their glass cages.  They are 
terrifying, these robots, unbearably ugly...  In the night of disheveled 
relations a spark of altruism will seem to be born from the depths of 
their mechanized being....  Yet I do not mitigate in the least my 
profound disapproval of the musical nexus.  Béjart has always 
shown a liking for horrifying Hindu or Far Eastern rhythms, and in 
trying to astound the middle class he astounds himself. 
 
It seems to me that Merlins text is important when we consider that this is 
supposed to be a mass (ite, missa est), that its author is regarded as France's 
greatest modern artist in music and ballet, and that art has the role of being an 
accurate and absolute reflection of a society at its 

 
 
 
 
LAST WORDS 
411 
 
height.  I think that the work expresses very well the meaning of the ideal shape 
of the finished product, the bluff of technology. 
 
 
Is this a closed situation?  Is there no way out?  Is collective spiritual and 
material suicide the only result that is incontestably held out to us by the actual 
bluff of technology?  Having stated that we can foresee nothing with certainty, I 
can hardly fall into falsely prophetic prediction in looking at the logical 
consequences of the bluff.  But I can give a warning.  If we have any chance of 
emerging from this ideologico-material vice, of finding an exit from this terrible 
swamp that is ours, above all things we must avoid the mistake of thinking that 
we are free.  If we launch out into the skies convinced that we have infinite 
resources and that in the last resort we are free to choose our destiny, to 
choose between good and evil, to choose among the many possibilities that our 
thousands of technical gadgets make available, to invent an antidote to all that 
we have seen, to colonize space in order to make a fresh beginning, etc.; if we 
imagine all the many possibilities that are open to us in our sovereign freedom; 
if we believe all that, then we are truly lost, for the only way to find a narrow 
passage in this enormous world of deceptions (expressing real forces) as I 
have attempted to describe it is to have enough awareness and self-criticism to 
see that for a century we have been descending step by step the ladder of 
absolute necessity, of destiny, of fate. 
 
 
Following Hegel, Marx, and Kierkegaard, I have often said that we show 
our freedom by recognizing our nonfreedom.  But this is no longer a 
philosophical or theoretical matter of the mind.  It is no longer a matter of 
debate between the servile and the free will.  Our back is to the wall.  We must 
not cheat or think that we can extricate ourselves by talk.  Seeing the Hydra 
head of trickery and the Gorgon face of hi-tech, the only thing we can do is set 
them at a critical distance, for it is by being able to criticize that we show our 
freedom.  This is the only freedom that we still have if we have at least the 
courage to grasp it.  Nothing is more certain. 
 
 
Are we then shut up, blocked, and chained by the inevitability of the 
technical system which is making us march like obedient automatons thanks to 
its bluff?  Yes, we are radically determined.  We are caught up continuously in 
the system if we think even the least little bit that we can master the machinery, 
prepare for the year 2000, and plan everything.  Yet not really, for the system 
does not stop growing, and thus far we have no examples of growth that does 
not reach the point of imbalance and rupture.  For the last twenty years balance 
and cohesion have been increasingly difficult to maintain.  Not really, for as we 
have seen, the gigantic bluff is self-contradictory and, 
 
 
412  
LAST WORDS 
 
it leaves a margin of chaos, it covers gaps without filling them, it gives 
evidence of mistakes, and it has to multiply deceptions to veil the absence 
of feedback in the system.  Even without nuclear war or an exceptional 
crisis, we may thus expect enormous global disorder which will be the 
expression of all the contradictions and disarray.  This must be made to 
cost as little as possible.  To achieve that, we must meet two conditions.  
We must be prepared to reveal the fracture lines and to discover that 
everything depends on the qualities of individuals.  Finally, not really, if we 
know how little room there is to maneuver and therefore, not by one's high 
position or by power, but always after the model of development from a 
source and by the sole aptitude for astonishment, we, profit from the 
existence of little cracks of freedom, and install in them a trembling freedom 
which is not attributed to or mediated by machines or politics, but which is 
truly effective, so that we may truly invent the new thing for which humanity 
is waiting. 

 
 
                                                          
 
 
 
1 A.  Jacquard, Inventer l'homme (Editions Complexe, 1984). 
2 Cf.  E.  Morin, Science avec conscience. 
3 See A.  Maillet, Nous sommes tous des cobayes (sur l'expérimentation biologique 
et clinique sur l'homme) (Editions Jeune Afrique, 1980); J.-P Changeux, L'Homme 
neuronal (Paris: Fayard, 1983); Vance Packard, The People Shapers (Boston: 
Little, Brown and Co., 1977).  I might have devoted this whole book to genetic 
engineering, for it is the most flagrant example of our unreason.  But I am less 
familiar with this field than the others.  Cf.  the excellent article by T.  Deutsch, "Les 
manipulations génétiques," La Recherche 110 (April 1980), in which he 
demonstrates the madness of biologists.  Cf.  also J.  Testart, L'Oeuf transparent 
(Flammarion, 1986). 
4 The case of Einstein is interesting because (1) he was a mathematical genius and 
a good man, (2) he could not foresee the results of what he was doing, and above 
all (3) his general political and religious ideas in his books are rather puerile.   
5 See S.  J.  Gould, The Mismeasure of Man (New York: Norton, 1981); A.  
Jacquard, Endangered by Science?  tr.  Mary Moriarty (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1985); cf.  also "Les manipulations génétiques: des risques 
encore mal évalués," La Recherche 107 (Jan.  1980). 
6 V.  Scardigli, La Consommation, culture du quotidien (Paris: PUF, 1983), pp.  56-
57. 
77 Ibid., pp.  180ff. 
8 I have often denounced the total irresponsibility of this class resulting from the fact 
that politics is both a living and a career.  Some simple decisions would put an end 
to it: no plurality, no mandate; the impossibility of having more than one reelection; 
the exclusion of elections when one has fulfilled four times a representative 
mandate.  Thus simply and assuredly one could achieve true representation and 
true democracy. 
9 Whenever sanctions are taken against a political group for their decisions, it is 
always in the course of a "revolution.”  In 1917 and 1933 politicians as a whole were 
condemned by the victors.  But unless they are killed they will reappear with glory a 
few years later, as happened in the case of those who were condemned in France 
in 1940. 
10 See M.  Blanc, G.  Chapoutier, and A.  Dawchin, "Les fraudes scientifiques," La 
Recherche 113 (July 1980); P.  Tuillier, "Le scandale du British Museum," La 
Recherche 125 (Sept.  1981); cf.  also 106 (Dec.  1979). 
11 Olivier Merlin, "Béjart et les robots," Le Monde, Feb.  1984. 

