
EMPOWER
HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
D A V I D  P A S S I A K

Also by David Passiak
Disruption Revolution:
Innovation, Entrepreneurship, and 
the New Rules of Leadership
Red Bull to Buddha:
Innovation and the Search for Wisdom

Social Meditate Press
EMPOWER
HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
D A V I D  P A S S I A K

Copyright © 2016 by David Passiak
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, or  
transmitted in any form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other 
electronic or mechanical methods, without the prior written permission of the publisher, 
except in the case of brief quotations in a book review, presentation, or social media.
Cover Design: Tom Lau
Printed in the United States of America
First Printing 2016
ISBN 978-0-9898233-2-6
Social Meditate Press
745 Telya Ridge
Milford, MI 48381
www.SocialMeditate.com

This book is dedicated to future generations
May you aspire to do better than your ancestors, 
surpass the hopes and dreams captured in this book, 
and empower humanity to reach our true potential


Contents
Co-Creation by Donation .............................................................. ix
Foreword  ................................................................................... xi
by Jeremiah Owyang – Founder, Crowd Companies
Acknowledgments ...................................................................... xv
How to Co-Create the Future ......................................................xvii
Introduction by David Passiak
PART I – COLLABORATIVE LEADERSHIP
Giving and Originality  ..............................................................3
Adam Grant – Wharton, Author Originals, Give and Take
Peers Inc. ..............................................................................17
Robin Chase – Co-Founder, ZipCar, Author Peers Inc.
#GiveFirst ..............................................................................31
Brad Feld – Co-Founder, Foundry Group and Techstars
Communities and Movements .................................................43
Douglas Atkin – Global Head of Community, Airbnb
PART II – THE POWER OF SHARING
Sharing Communities .............................................................59
Neal Gorenﬂo – Co-Founder, Shareable 
Love is the Answer .................................................................71
Prince EA – YouTube Megastar and Inspirational Content Creator
Collaborative Society .............................................................83
Antonin Léonard – Co-Founder, OuiShare

viii EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
It’s a Shareable Life ...............................................................95
Chelsea Rustrum – Author It’s a Shareable Life
PART III – COMPANIES AND THE CROWD
Smartcuts ............................................................................109
Shane Snow – Co-Founder, Contently, Author Smartcuts
Purpose  ..............................................................................123
Michael Bronner – Founder, Digitas, Upromise, UnReal
Arenas not Markets ..............................................................137
Rita Gunther McGrath – Author The End of Competitive Advantage
Better Brand Values .............................................................151
Alex Bogusky – Creative Director of the Decade 2000-2010
PART IV – THE ECONOMY OF THE FUTURE
The Sharing Economy ...........................................................167
Arun Sundararajan – NYU Stern, Author Sharing Economy
The Growth Trap ...................................................................183
Douglas Rushkoff – Author Throwing Rocks at the Google Bus
The Future of Employment ....................................................197
Martin Ford – Author Rise of the Robots
Connectography ...................................................................211
Parag Khanna – Global Strategist, Author Connectography

Co-Creation By Donation
My intention with Empower is to start a global conversation 
about how to co-create the future. The full version of the e-book 
is available by donation at CoCreateTheFuture.com Anyone can 
download it for free. 
I believe equal access to knowledge and ideas is more important 
than pursuing proits, and a $15–$25 retail price is too expensive 
for millions of entrepreneurs, students, and people in opportunity 
markets like Eastern Europe, Africa, India or Southeast Asia with 
average salaries of $200–$400/month. 
I am also a strong proponent of giving irst, in the spirit of the col-
laborative and sharing economy. As a practitioner of meditation for 
20 years and former scholar of religion, I consider my work part 
of a longstanding tradition to give teachings without expectation.
I greatly appreciate the generosity of all who can afford to give. 
Thanks for your support. I hope you enjoy the book!
With Gratitude,
David Passiak


Foreword
The emergence of new technologies is changing human behavior 
and causing rifts in society, business, and the economy. It is imper-
ative that we pay attention to this rising movement and its ripple 
effects across the world, as it will impact each of our lives. 
What is this movement? The Collaborative Economy is borne out 
of new Internet technologies and enables people to get what they 
need from each other. You’ve heard of young tech startups like 
Uber, Airbnb, BlaBlaCar, Instacart, Lending Club, Blockchain, and 
Kickstarter, all of which enables peer-to-peer commerce. They are 
displacing ineficient institutions like taxis, hotels, railroads, banks, 
credit systems, and inanciers. Since this is a global movement, each 
region of the world sports its own versions: India has Ola, China 
has Didi, and the Arabian nations have their own versions. The 
people are even creating their own goods by using 3D printers, 
maker spaces, and online tools that help them learn, transact, and 
support these goods in the Maker Movement. 
This movement shows no sign of slowing down, as our research 
has found that more than half of North Americans are partici-
pating, and we’ve read reports of growth across all regions, even 
with these startups being less than a decade old. The funding for 
this market is unprecedented; investors have deployed more than 
$30 billion in these startups, fueling a market economy that is 
quickly lourishing. Of course, this hasn’t occurred without fric-
tion; incumbents are pushing back, and city and federal regulators 
are struggling to stay abreast of the rapid changes. 
All of this is happening at a dizzying pace, and whether you work 
at a startup, company, nonproit, or government agency, there are 

xii EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
even more changes to come in the future. What the industry needs 
is a guide, and David Passiak provides just that. 
David Passiak encourages us in Empower to think about the future 
like we are building a movement. Big companies and startups collabo-
rate with empowered people. There are shared values, common goals, 
and purpose. David presents a series of conversations about collabora-
tion and sharing from a variety of perspectives within an inner circle. 
Who’s in this inner circle that’s now made available to you in this 
book? These perspectives on the Collaborative Economy range 
from its best-respected advocates, such as Robin Chase, Neal 
Gorenlo, Antonin Léonard, Arun Sundararajan, and Chelsea Rus-
trum, to likeminded business leaders and bestselling authors, such 
as Adam Grant, Brad Feld, Alex Bogusky, Shane Snow, and Rita 
Gunther McGrath. David makes all of this insight easily accessible 
to a general audience and groups people together.
I irst met David Passiak three years ago when he interviewed me 
about the Collaborative Economy for his last book, Disruption  
Revolution. David gathered an impressive group of disruptive think-
ers, including Seth Godin, Chris Anderson, Robert Scoble, Sarah 
Lacy, James Altucher, Erik Qualman, and Brian Solis. I liked that 
he took a wisdom-of-the-crowd approach to trends in innovation.
At the time in 2013, I was preparing to launch Crowd Companies, 
an innovation council to help large companies participate in the Col-
laborative Economy and Autonomous World. David and I were both 
seeing and articulating how these changes would impact the world.
Three years later, the Collaborative Economy and the Autonomous 
World are top of mind for many entrepreneurs and business lead-
ers. Crowd Companies has grown internationally to include mem-
bers like BMW, Cisco, MasterCard, Pepsi, Visa, Nestle, and more.
The pace of innovation will continue exponentially. The Collabo-
rative Economy is positioned to become the world economy. David 

Foreword— xiii
has once again gathered an impressive group of visionary leaders to 
help us understand what lies ahead. Empower: How to Co-Create 
the Future is a great starting point for entering the conversation.
—Jeremiah Owyang
Silicon Valley
November 2016


Acknowledgments
First and foremost, I am grateful to all of the participants in this 
book. Thanks for the precious gift of your time and for the honor 
to share our conversations with a wider audience. Thank you espe-
cially to Jeremiah Owyang for writing the foreword and encourag-
ing me to take on another monumental book-length project.
Thanks also to my business partner and lifelong friend Marc 
Joseph, my literary agent and good friend Matthew Guma for his 
support and guidance, to Jessica Baker for her wonderful tran-
scription work, and to Tom Lau for an incredibly awesome cover 
that captures the themes of collaboration and co-creation in a sim-
ple and powerful way.
I visited around 40 countries since my last book Disruption  
Revolution came out. That never would have happened if I didn’t 
make it available by donation. There are too many people to thank 
by name along the way, but thanks to Alex Hutley and Arto Joen-
suu of Dubizzle for inviting me to join you in Dubai as your Head 
of Innovation and Research, which was the irst stop on a magical 
journey. 
I’m deeply humbled by the power of collaboration and sharing 
that makes it possible to do this work. May we continue to take 
risks and trust in the power of humanity. I honor and acknowledge 
the potential within us all.


Introduction
This is an incredible time to be alive. Not only are we living 
through the period of the most rapid innovation and exponential 
change in human history, but for the irst time we have the tools 
and resources to solve the world’s biggest problems. The collabo-
rative economy and rise of the autonomous world will radically 
reconigure business, society, and culture. Everything is going to 
change, faster than we think.
Humanity is building a bridge from an analog to digital world, 
taking a giant leap forward on par with the discovery of ire, 
invention of writing, or going to the moon. Each of us plays a 
role in co-creating the future. Entrepreneurs, investors, activists, 
employees, students, politicians, and community leaders must 
work together with passion and purpose. The leadership decisions 
we make on how to coexist with technology will shape the evolu-
tion of civilization for the next 1,000 years:
Will we live in abundance, leveraging the power of technology to 
share value and realize our true potential in an emerging networked 
society? Or will automation from AI, drones, robots, self-driving 
vehicles, and the Internet of Things (IoT) decimate jobs, lead to 
mass inequality and a dystopian nightmare?
Empower advocates an approach to co-creating the future akin to 
building a global movement. It is not enough to think about how 
to protect our individual jobs from automation or save our com-
panies from disruption. If you are reading this book, then there 
is a higher likelihood that you have the skill sets and resilience to 
succeed in this new era, but millions of people will not. We need 
to think about how to connect our efforts to a greater purpose, 

xviii EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
shared goals, and a global community of like-minded individuals 
committed to building a collaborative society.
Movements require collaboration among members that mutually 
support and look out for each other. Their strong sense of com-
munity provides a safe space to share and test ideas, transforms 
failures into learning opportunities, and builds resilient networks 
that allow us to adapt and grow. Movements have visionary lead-
ers that inspire us to embrace challenges and transcend differences 
for the sake of the greater good. They foster a sense of optimism 
and aim to accomplish what seems impossible.
In the context of movements, technology is a great enabler. It brings 
people together by allowing them to communicate better, forge new  
relationships and communities organized around like-minded inter-
ests, and facilitate exchanges of ideas, goods, and services. Early- 
adopters test new technologies and baptize innovations into popular 
culture through reviews, recommendations, blogs, and social media. 
Terms like “evangelism” and “conversion” borrowed from religious 
movements relect the passion and purpose at the heart of every  
startup team. Technology provides access to knowledge and opportu-
nities irrespective of race, religion, ethnicity, or gender.
The irst step toward building a movement is to start a conver-
sation around the issues and challenges that lie ahead. Empower 
takes a holistic and integrated approach covering: (1) Collabora-
tive Leadership, (2) The Power of Sharing, (3) Companies and the 
Crowd, and (4) Better Economics. Each participant in the book is 
a recognized thought leader whose contributions help to advance 
a new way of being and conducting business. Because the full 
e-book is available by donation, anyone with access to a computer 
or handheld device can join the conversation. 
Movements are my area of expertise. I have 20 years of pro-
fessional and research experience building movements around 
brands, organizations, and startups. My industry experience 
ranges from leading social media for Volkswagen, where I 
launched and grew a community of tens of millions of fans across 
Facebook, YouTube, Twitter, and their irst company blog; to a 
year in Dubai serving as Head of Innovation and Research for 

Introduction xix
Dubizzle, building a movement around a website that 40% of 
the country visited once/month; to writing three books Red Bull 
to Buddha, Disruption Revolution, and Empower. I have visited 
around 40 countries, speaking with innovators and entrepreneurs 
about this shared vision.
Prior to industry, I was a Ph.D. student at Princeton studying 
grassroots religious and cultural movements referred to as “Great 
Awakenings.” My research covered the Sixties Counterculture 
and Civil Rights movements, which became templates for mod-
ern activism, community building, and word-of-mouth marketing. 
My M.A. thesis at Arizona State University explored the Great 
Awakenings of the 1700s and 1800s that led to democracy and the 
abolition of slavery. At the Tanenbaum Center for Interreligious 
Understanding, I ran the Religion and Conlict Resolution Pro-
gram, promoting the work of religiously-motivated peacemakers 
that put their lives at risk to build nonviolent peace movements 
around the world.
We need a different mindset to co-create the future. This includes 
a new approach to leadership characterized by collaboration and 
sharing, cooperation and openness, transparency and honesty. We 
have to think holistically about the roles that our brands, orga-
nizations, or startups play in the world. New technologies and 
platforms generate new business models, create opportunities to 
share value, and allow us to rethink the basic building blocks of 
business, society, and culture. 
DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION, THE COLLABORATIVE ECONOMY,  
AND THE RISE OF THE AUTONOMOUS WORLD
Empower is a follow-up to Disruption Revolution, a survival guide 
and innovation handbook on how to succeed when disruption is 
the new norm. After the economic crash of 2008–2009, I noticed a 
pattern of innovators and entrepreneurs rallying around the term 
“disruption.” TechCrunch baptized the term with its irst Disrupt 
conference in 2011. As the rest of the world struggled to get back 
to normal, billions of dollars in venture capital accelerated efforts 
to leapfrog ahead. Innovation across every industry gave rise to 
what I termed a “disruption revolution.” 

xx EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
I decided the best way capture the strategies, best practices, and 
emerging trends in innovation was to interview the visionary 
thinkers creating them. Disruption Revolution includes over 20 
leading innovators such as Seth Godin, Chris Anderson, Robert 
Scoble, Brian Solis, Sarah Lacy, James Altucher, Alex Osterwalder, 
Erik Qualman, and Jeremiah Owyang. The book is organized 
around an integrated and holistic innovation process covering: 
(1) Research and Trends, (2) Mission and Purpose, (3) Teams and 
Operations, and (4) Sales, Marketing and Communications. This 
parallels the same four-part framework of Empower. 
Disruption Revolution was the irst comprehensive and in-depth 
collection of perspectives on disruptive innovation. After release it 
“went viral” and caught the attention of Dubizzle, the sixth most 
visited site in the UAE and largest P2P marketplace in the Middle 
East. Within a week I had an offer to be Head of Innovation and 
Research and moved to Dubai. I introduced Jeremiah Owyang to 
the founders of STEP Conference. They invited him to give a key-
note on the Collaborative Economy. Our conversations in Dubai 
led to the idea for Empower. 
A lot has changed in three years since I published Disruption Rev-
olution. The global economy recovered, though in many ways 
this bounce-back effect gave business leaders a false sense of 
conidence: The crash accelerated trends in innovation that will 
radically disrupt traditional industries. As Brian Solis said at the 
time, constraint drives innovation. Forced to do more with less 
resources, companies embraced new products, services, and busi-
ness models. Many startups founded in the wake of the crash are 
now thriving. At the time of writing, there are 177 unicorns (pri-
vately held companies with over $1b valuation) with a cumulative 
valuation of $677b.
The collaborative and sharing economy is now mainstream, includ-
ing a number of unicorns like Uber, Airbnb, Lyft, and WeWork. 
Empowered people can get whatever they need directly from each 
other. Growth in this arena outpaced the rise of social media and 
will continue exponentially. However, as Chelsea Rustrum points 
out, what began as a movement is being eaten by an on-demand 
everything model. People-powered platforms of the collaborative 

Introduction xxi
and sharing economy face disruption with the rise of the auton-
omous world (drones, robots, AI, self-driving vehicles, etc.) All 
of this innovation will bring a tsunami-sized wave of disruption. 
Every industry will require new business models and management 
processes, face huge regulatory challenges, and automation could 
lead to mass unemployment. 
The traditional career path is oficially over, replaced by the gig econ-
omy and project-based temporary workers competing with machines 
for jobs. A recent report indicated 83% of jobs making less than $20/
hour are at risk of automation. This trend could be exacerbated by 
indings that millennials “don’t like dealing with people.” Instead, they 
prefer kiosks and automated services. White-collar, ofice jobs could 
also be replaced. In fact, they are often easier to automate because 
software and AI doesn’t require physical installations. As Martin Ford 
puts it, any repetitive task can be automated.
The doom and gloom of techno-dystopia is counterbalanced by a 
profound shift in values and behavior. Millennials buy less stuff, 
prefer access to ownership, embrace collaboration and sharing, and 
want to support and work for companies that have a social purpose. 
New communities form around likeminded interests, challenging 
the importance of traditional identity categories of race, gender, eth-
nicity, nationality, and religion. The collaborative economy empow-
ers people to create, share, and exchange goods and services directly 
from each other, eliminating the need for intermediaries. 
We are also seeing widespread interest in meditation, mindful-
ness, and awakening. This is accompanied by a new generation of 
apps, devices, and tools to help relax and attain altered states of 
consciousness. What my meditation teacher Kenneth Folk calls 
“contemplative itness” could be incredibly important as we need 
to train our minds for immersion in a world saturated by virtual 
and augmented reality. The giant leap we are making with tech-
nology may be a catalyst for the next Great Awakening. This was 
a main theme in my irst book Red Bull to Buddha and will be 
the subject of a future project called Technologies of the Soul.
The next generation of collaborative economy startups can leverage 
technology to distribute and share value with users. Decentralized 

xxii EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
platforms built on the blockchain could enable new types of company 
creation and eliminate the need for hierarchical power structures. 
Digital cooperatives and open innovation models present opportu-
nities to reorganize society around communal interests. The world is 
getting more interconnected, giving rise to what Parag Khanna calls 
an “emerging networked society.” 
As Brad Feld points out in his interview on giving irst, part of 
the challenge we face is that humans are very bad at predicting 
outcomes of exponential technologies. Cycles of rapid change and 
adoption that previously took decades to unfold can now happen 
in a matter of weeks or months. The ripple effects from break-
throughs in innovation become more complicated when factoring 
in the idea of AI learning from AI. We are tasked with preparing 
for the future when even the best minds in the world can’t predict 
what it will be like 10–20 years from now.
Equally dificult to predict are the changing dynamics of global com-
munities. Current economic leaders like the U.S. and Europe face 
vast challenges, plagued with regulatory red tape, legacy infrastruc-
ture, massive organizations that will need to be restructured, and 
millions of jobs at risk of automation. Meanwhile emerging markets 
across South America, Africa, and Asia present greenield opportuni-
ties to improve the quality of life for billions of people coming online 
for the irst time. Access to the same tools and platforms could allow 
developing nations and megacities to leapfrog ahead, changing the 
global low of people, money, and power.
Recent history has shown that underemployment and social media 
can be a recipe for nationalism and religious extremism. The same 
platforms that connect billions of people through collaboration 
and sharing, community and open dialogue, serve as ampliiers 
and echo chambers of polarizing anger and hatred. Attempts to 
enforce isolationist immigration policies distract from the omi-
nous threat of AI replacing jobs, while the rise of the autonomous 
world presents new security risks as self-driving vehicles, drones, 
and robots could all be used as weapons.
The interrelationship between technology and humanity, innova-
tion and tradition, globalization and local identities, community 

Introduction xxiii
and the individual, is vast and complex. Although we cannot con-
trol the rapid pace of innovation, we can choose to face the future 
with a sense of hope and optimism, mindfulness and compassion. 
We can be part of the problem, or part of the solution. 
EMPOWER: BUILDING A MOVEMENT  
TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
If Disruption Revolution attempted to answer the question, “How 
do we innovate?” then Empower asks, “How do we co-create the 
future we want to live in?” 
The short answer and main idea throughout the book is to approach 
the future like we are building a movement. Movements follow pre-
dictable patterns. First, the founders have an idea to bring about 
some type of change in the world. Next, they form a team or core 
group around a shared mission and purpose. The team then evan-
gelizes their product, service, or message with friends and family, 
who share with their friends and family, and so on to spread by 
word-of-mouth. As this process continues, the message and story 
become crystalized, allowing the movement to build momentum 
and scale, taking on increasingly more ambitious goals. Empower 
is organized around these predictable patterns, creating a holistic 
framework for everyone to join the conversation.
Part I - Collaborative Leadership Adam Grant shares insights on 
how givers command respect, encourage collaboration, and can be 
more successful leaders based on his bestselling books Give and 
Take and Originals. Robin Chase presents her Peers Inc. model 
for companies of the future that combine the power of platforms 
and the crowd (Peers), with the scale of industrial production 
(Inc.). Brad Feld speaks about his philosophy to #GiveFirst and 
the power of networks in startups and startup communities. We 
end with Douglas Atkin detailing how to build movements based 
on his experience as Global Head of Community for Airbnb and 
author of The Culting of Brands.
Part II - The Power of Sharing presents a vision for a people- 
powered movement where startups, companies, nonproits, and 
governments work together to co-create a more prosperous society.  

xxiv EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
It opens with Neal Gorenlo’s inspiring personal journey going from 
a corporate executive to founder of Shareable, a catalyst for thou-
sands of sharing initiatives around the world. Next we speak with 
Prince EA about his message of love and hope that organically built 
a platform of six million fans and a billion video views. Antonin 
Léonard shares lessons learned from co-founding OuiShare, a decen-
tralized global organization working towards building a collabo-
rative society. Chelsea Rustrum reminds us why we should resist 
reducing the sharing economy to an on-demand everything model, 
and instead focus on how technology can serve and empower us to 
live in abundance.
Part III - Companies and the Crowd looks at the leadership chal-
lenges faced by people working in larger organizations to tap 
into and align with the power of the crowd. Shane Snow shares 
insights from building Contently, a leading crowd company with 
a community of 55,000 journalists servicing some of the biggest 
brands in the world. Michael Bronner explains why the essence of 
strategy is sacriice and how leaders could be more successful if 
they focused on consciousness. Rita Gunther McGrath presents a 
new model for strategy where companies compete in arenas, not 
marketplaces, due to the end of sustainable competitive advan-
tage. And last Alex Bogusky, Creative Director of the Decade for 
2000–2010, tells us about the future of brands and why consumers 
get what they allow, not what they deserve.
Part IV - The Economy of the Future looks at wide-scale, macro-
economic trends emerging from the collaborative economy and 
rise of the autonomous world. Arun Sundararajan opens with a 
survey of ideas on “crowd-based capitalism” from his latest book 
The Sharing Economy. Douglas Rushkoff explains how we can 
stop being trapped in an unsustainable economic model based on 
unlimited growth. Martin Ford advocates a public conversation 
about the risk of widespread unemployment due to AI based on 
his bestselling book Rise of the Robots. The book closes with a 
vision of an emerging networked society from Parag Khanna’s 
groundbreaking book Connectography.
I hope you are challenged and inspired as much as I am by these 
incredible conversations with some of the world’s most visionary 

Introduction xxv
thinkers and change agents. Each interview required extensive 
research, preparation, and editing in an effort to present the irst 
comprehensive book of its kind on the challenges and opportunities 
we face as a society. Together we can empower each other to reach 
our true potential and co-create the future we want and deserve. 


PART I
COLLABORATIVE LEADERSHIP
Why does success come from  
empowering others? 
How can you build a movement  
around your organization? 
Why are networks a  
leader’s greatest asset?


GIVING AND ORIGINALITY
Adam Grant
Adam Grant demonstrates in Give and Take that giving and col-
laboration can lead to greater success than acting out of greed and 
self-interest. This is especially true when networks and social media 
make our actions more transparent and the world of work is more 
relational. His latest book Originals builds upon this foundation 
by teaching people to champion new ideas in the workplace:
• 
Authenticity can be more powerful than charisma
• 
Why givers make great leaders
• 
Who you know matters as much as how you work
• 
Having a meaningful impact increases productivity
Adam’s passion for sharing comes through in the irst moments  
of our conversation. His commonsense examples and thought- 
provoking research break down conventions to illuminate a new 
framework for leadership. It is easy to see why he is the top-rated 
professor at Wharton for ive years and counting. I can’t wait for 
his next book, which will be co-authored with Sheryl Sandberg. 
This is a fun and engaging read.
DP: I love “a-ha” moments where something unexpected leads to 
profound insights. One of my favorite stories of yours is from a 
call center experience, where a ive-minute speech by a very quiet 
woman led to a 400% increase in results from the entire team. Can 
you tell us about that experience and how it helped you to under-
stand the importance of giving in the workplace?

4 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
AG: I was in this call center working on a research project for my 
Ph.D. University fundraisers were calling alumni for donations. We 
had a massive amount of turnover. A lot of the callers described 
the job as repetitive and demotivating. They complained that they 
were yelled at all the time or rejected very frequently. My thought 
was if the callers knew how their work was making a difference, it 
might make it more meaningful and motivating. 
We had a couple of managers tell their best stories about how the 
money was being used, and we saw no impact whatsoever. We real-
ized it was the right message, but the wrong story. Instead of being 
motivated secondhand by managers who had an ulterior motive of 
getting you to work harder, we should invite people who were being 
served and helped by the work that the callers were doing. 
We brought in a scholarship student who talked about how the 
money raised by callers enabled him to go to school, and how 
much he appreciated the work that the callers were doing. The 
average caller spiked 142% in weekly phone minutes and 171% in 
weekly revenue. The student was really charismatic. He had been 
named “Most Likely to Become President” out of his college class. 
I was like, “Ok, is this the Scholarship Student Effect or is this the 
Charisma Effect?” I tried to ind the opposite of the charismatic 
student, and that was Emily. She was an extremely quiet, shy stu-
dent who basically looked at her feet the entire time. I was worried 
that none of the callers were going to be inspired by her, but the 
Emily Effect ended up being about two and a half times as strong. 
The average caller spiked at more than 400% in weekly revenue. 
I think it was easier to empathize with someone who believed so 
deeply in the work you were doing that she was willing to over-
come her natural introversion and tell her story. Her authenticity 
helped the callers see that their hard work opened the doors for a 
lot of students who are hardworking, passionate, and motivated 
but cannot afford to go to school. 
A lot of people are doing work that makes a difference, but they 
don’t get to see for whom or how. Once you get to see that, you’re 
much more willing to give your time, energy, and creativity to this 

Giving and Originality—Adam Grant 5
cause that might have previously mattered to you but seemed too 
abstract to understand. 
DP: According to conventional wisdom, successful people have 
three things in common: motivation, ability, and opportunity. 
They need a combination of hard work, talent, and luck to suc-
ceed. 
Your research in Give and Take focused on interactions with other 
people and team dynamics, which led you to identify three dif-
ferent reciprocity preferences: givers, takers, and matchers. I’m 
curious, why is reciprocity important, and how does it signify a 
fundamental shift in approach to management?
AG: I think it’s important because we all live and work in a con-
nected world. If you track any industrialized economy, what you’ll 
ind is that the majority of people are working in service jobs, 
teams, or both. And literally, if you’re working in a service job, 
then your entire goal is to help somebody else. If you’re in a team, 
then your success is heavily dependent on how well you collabo-
rate with and contribute to your colleagues. It’s hard to succeed 
without having effective interactions and meaningful relation-
ships—that is what drew me to the importance of reciprocity. 
It’s hard to succeed without having efective 
interactions and meaningful relationships
This is increasingly important in the sense that we’ve seen a dra-
matic growth of the service sector, so there are fewer people work-
ing in manufacturing and production kinds of jobs. The world of 
work has become more relational. There is also the rise of team-
work. People used to work independently on pieces of a product 
that would then get assembled, and now we’re seeing more inter-
dependence and back-and-forth collaboration, which makes inter-
actions more important than they were before. 
DP: Reciprocity and connection are keys to understanding the 
workplace, which makes you think that maybe givers totally defy 
conventional wisdom and are always on top. Your research showed 

6 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
that givers were on both ends of the spectrum in terms of being the 
most productive and also the lowest performing. The correlation 
of giving to productivity and performance is contextual. How does 
giving relate speciically to success?
AG: I think about givers as people who enjoy helping others and 
regularly do it with no strings attached. They made up both the 
most successful and the least successful performers across all types 
of jobs from engineering to medicine to sales. 
The least successful givers may not be thoughtful about how they 
help, and so they end up helping takers who exploit them or they 
help in ways that don’t energize them. This may lead to burn out or 
not contributing much. They drop everything to help other people, 
so they’re busy doing other peoples’ jobs or they run out of energy 
to do their own work, as opposed to blocking time to achieve their 
own goals, separate from their contributions to others. 
he time you spend solving other people’s  
problems makes you better at solving  
your organization’s problems
Successful givers are thoughtful about whom, how, and when to 
help. Giving has all of these unexpected advantages to it. One 
is learning. The time you spend solving other people’s problems 
makes you better at solving your organization’s problems. When 
givers lend their knowledge to other people and go out of their 
way to share their expertise, they acquire new skills and diversify 
their capabilities. 
The second beneit is social capital. In the long run, people want 
to work with givers. No one wants to trust a taker. Givers end up 
building broader and deeper networks, have more good will, and 
that social capital pays dividends when it comes to relationships 
and occupation. 
A third beneit is motivation, which ties back to the fundraising 
callers we discussed earlier. Givers are able to tie their actions to 
something larger than themselves. They experience more mean-

Giving and Originality—Adam Grant 7
ing and purpose than their peers, which energizes them to work 
harder, smarter, longer, and more creatively. That tends to work 
out in pretty exciting ways and can drive success.
DP: We live in an era when massive changes in the structure of 
work and the technology that shapes it have further ampliied the 
advantages of being a giver. For example, regardless of whether 
someone is a giver or a taker, service providers would hopefully 
be givers and on-demand workers would focus more on the team, 
shared goals, and these types of things. Can you help us under-
stand why giving is so important now? Are we moving away from 
traditional hierarchies and reorganizing around teams?
When a giver helps, it feels like an expression  
of commitment and concern, like “I actually  
cared about this relationship and was making  
an investment in it.”
AG: Work increasingly gets done through networks. Your ability 
to solve problems is partially a function of who you know, not 
just what you know. Givers have a much easier time reaching out 
to people in their networks because they constantly give help and 
established a track record. What I call “matchers” also believe in 
fairness or reciprocity, like, “You helped me, now I help you.” 
However, this isn’t simply about activating connections with your 
network. Givers are known as good, decent human beings. Peo-
ple like to surround themselves with and gravitate themselves 
toward givers. What’s interesting is that takers and matchers do 
plenty of helping too, but it creates a different impression that can 
feel transactional, like, “I didn’t really care about you. I was just 
doing something for you so you would help me back.” When a 
giver helps, it feels like an expression of commitment and concern, 
like, “I actually cared about this relationship and was making an 
investment in it.” 
The other reason giving is so important is that as the world’s gotten 
more interconnected, you can’t take advantage of somebody in one 
relationship and then start over fresh. There’s usually an opportunity 

8 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
to trace back your common connections through LinkedIn or Face-
book or other vehicles. Networks are not as invisible as they used to 
be. It’s more likely that what goes around comes around. Givers have 
an easier time with their good reputation following them, and takers 
are easier to punish than before. 
DP: This trend of interconnection and the visibility of networks 
that you describe will be more pronounced in the future, with rat-
ings and reputation becoming key drivers of employment in the 
context of the gig economy and on-demand workers. The more 
data points and positive correlations to giving, the more likely 
someone is to get hired. This makes me wonder if givers are so 
important to successful organizations, how do you screen out the 
takers and turn takers into givers?
AG: Screening out is important because the negative impact of 
takers on culture is usually double or triple the impact of givers. 
The basic idea is if you can weed out the takers, the givers will be 
more generous because they don’t have to worry about the conse-
quences. The beauty of matchers is that they will follow the norm. 
With the presence of givers, matchers give too. You can shift a 
whole group by getting rid of the takers. 
One way to do that is look at how people explain success. There’s 
a common belief that takers use more “I’s” and “me’s” in every-
day conversation. That’s false. Takers use the same amount of “I’s” 
and “me’s” as the rest of us. You start to see disparity only when 
talking about collective achievements. Takers will take personal 
credit, where givers and matchers give credit where credit is due. 
Takers also blame their failures on others. 
Dan Gilbert, founder of Quicken Loans, says the most important 
thing he looks for when hiring is: Does someone have a victim 
mentality? When you get into “What’s a big stumbling block or 
failure in your career?” and then you ask, “Whose fault was it? 
What led up to it?” When somebody says, “Look. All these other 
people screwed me over,” that could be a red lag. 
You can often learn who is a taker by how they predict the behav-
ior of others because people tend to project their own tendencies. 

Giving and Originality—Adam Grant 9
For example, ask a question about, “How common is it for other 
people to steal?” or “to hog credit?” Takers anticipate more selish 
behavior than the rest of us, because that’s how they justify and 
rationalize being a taker. They think, “It’s not me. People are self-
ish, so I’m smart by being self-protective and cautious.” If some-
body anticipates that other people are takers, ask how they came 
to that judgment. The risky answer is, “I think at the end of the 
day, everybody is fundamentally selish.” What takers don’t realize 
is they are giving a good look in the mirror. 
The other question is, “How do you turn takers into givers?” I don’t 
necessarily think that always plays out. We have lots of choices about 
these styles but they tend to be rooted in values, beliefs, and world - 
views that are sometimes easy to change and other times pretty 
sticky. The best thing is to observe the luctuations in somebody’s 
behavior and look for moments where they’re less selish, more gen-
erous, and ask, “What do those moments have in common? Is there 
a certain role that they enjoy helping in? A kind of skill that they 
love to share?” Then tailor to relect the patterns that you see. 
Beyond that, make it clear that taking has negative consequences. 
Help them see their reputation. Most people don’t want to be 
known as takers. Being perceived that way is a reason to change 
because it impacts their opportunity to succeed. If you measure 
people’s contributions to others and not just their individual 
achievements, it’s harder to get away with being a taker. For exam-
ple, if I’m tracked on how well I mentor a direct report and how 
much knowledge I share, then it pays to be a giver. Performance 
evaluations and promotion systems should track not just what you 
achieve, but how you affect the success of people around you.
DP: I think the conventional view is that giving can take away too 
much energy or somehow make someone appear weak instead of 
being strong and assertive. You cite an example of a teacher that 
was at risk of burnout. After working long hours all week, she 
decided to volunteer on the weekends. Eventually, this decision 
helped her to become an award-winning teacher. It seems counter-
intuitive that spending more time giving instead of focusing on her 
personal health and resting on the weekends would prevent burn-
out. I’m curious, why is that? 

10 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
AG: You have the punch line here already. First of all, people don’t 
just sleep all weekend. They’re going to do something. The ques-
tion is: How are you going to spend that time? 
A lot of people think that givers burn out when they’re giving too 
much. At the extreme that’s true. If you spend 100 hours a week 
helping other people and you don’t take care of yourself, then that is 
a recipe for disaster. But there’s a more compelling case to be made 
that givers burn out when they don’t feel like they’re having an 
impact and are not appreciated, or feel like their work doesn’t matter. 
In this particular case, we’ve got a teacher working in an inner-
city school feeling like her teaching wasn’t getting through. She 
was really struggling to help her students. Many of them didn’t 
show up for class and weren’t engaged in the learning experience. 
She volunteered on the weekends with a group of high-potential, 
underprivileged students. They were identiied and selected on the 
basis of their future possibilities and were more invested in the 
learning process. 
You need to feel like your contributions are 
making a real, lasting, meaningful diference
That rejuvenated her by showing, “Look. I am having an impact. 
I can have an impact.” It restored conidence in her ability to give. 
To bring this full circle, I think this is part of what we did with the 
fundraisers. They’re raising all this money and they don’t know 
where it goes or if it’s useful. Once they see it matters, they have 
these reserves of energy that they can invest to do the job. You 
need to feel like your contributions are making a real, lasting, 
meaningful difference. 
DP: In Give and Take, you champion this new paradigm for suc-
cess that highlights the importance of giving, empathy, and altruis-
tic behavior in the workplace. And in your latest book, Originals: 
How Nonconformists Move the World, you present a bold new 
vision for why people need to battle conformity, break tradition, 
and stand out. How has your thinking evolved, and can you tell us 
what led to your latest book?

Giving and Originality—Adam Grant 11
AG: One of the most frequent questions people ask is, “OK, I 
work in a culture of takers. How do I change it? Am I better off 
jumping ship for another organization?” Those questions are tied 
to research I’ve done for a few years on: How do you speak up 
effectively? How do you challenge the status quo? How do you 
champion change, especially if you’re not the senior leader in an 
organization? 
This led me to focus on originality. There are lots of ways to cham-
pion new ideas that can reduce the likelihood that other people 
squash them. That is different than trying to change your culture 
from taking to giving. There are many kinds of new ideas that 
people struggle to champion, where they feel like they are not fully 
understood or other people don’t see why these new ideas are 
worthwhile. 
My thinking evolved from “How do I as an individual in the world 
navigate my interactions?” (which is the focus of Give and Take), 
to, “If I’m in a system that doesn’t make sense, whether it’s a com-
pany or a community, how do I adjust the way that it operates 
and how do I effectively challenge what’s wrong around me? How 
do I make sure that I’m not somebody who allows an undesirable 
status quo to persist?”
DP: The marriage of giving and originality, or nonconformity, 
seems like it would create an environment that encourages the 
open exchange of ideas, focuses on more eficient serving of clients, 
resolves issues with client services, and embraces rapid innovation. 
In a sense, giving and originality become interdependent. 
AG: I would like to think that is true. I did a study with a col-
league a few years ago showing that when you got people in a 
giving mindset, they actually became more creative. When people 
focused on producing a creative idea, they were seduced by the 
most novel ideas or the ones that were most interesting to pursue. 
Whereas when directed to think about how they can help others, 
that gave them a ilter for separating the ideas that were novel, but 
not practical, from ones that were novel and could be beneicial 
to others. In this way, the giving mindset can make people more 
original. 

12 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
I think to your point, it goes in the other direction too. As you 
think about championing changes, you have to igure out how they 
will help other people. If it’s always about you, people won’t want 
to make adjustments to the way that the world works. They have 
to see if there’s something in it for them or for the group. In this 
way, championing original ideas could be an act of giving or force 
you into a mindset of giving. 
As you think about championing changes, you 
have to igure out how they will help other people
DP: When I think of originality and nonconformity, what comes to 
mind are breakthrough innovations by bold entrepreneurs. We’re 
arguably living in a period of the most rapid innovation in human 
history, so there are lots of examples of nonconformists ruling the 
world, like Steve Jobs, Mark Zuckerberg, Elon Musk, and so on. 
How does nonconformity and originality translate into the work-
place on a day-to-day basis for people working inside companies?
AG: People underestimate their own originality. When they think 
of originals, they think of Steve Jobs, and they say, “That’s not 
me.” We all have ideas for improving our world, right? 
Originality in the workplace translates through things like speak-
ing up with an idea or suggestion to make a process work more 
eficiently. For example, we studied people at Google, and it 
was amazing how many opportunities Google salespeople had 
to think: “Here’s a better way to serve our clients. We have all 
these clients who want ads, we’re basically doing the job as it was 
handed to us.” 
I had a former student say, “You know what? I’m going to go 
visit a bunch of my clients,” and nobody on his team had ever 
done that before. They did all of their communication by phone 
and email. It deepened the relationship in meaningful ways, and 
he found it to be one of the most worthwhile aspects of the job. 
That’s an everyday active nonconformist. Everybody’s managing 
the relationship one way; he thinks, “You know, maybe there’s a 
better way to do this.” 

Giving and Originality—Adam Grant 13
The funny thing is, it starts to catch on with the team and then 
you begin to wonder who is the conformist. We can all look at the 
organizations around us and say, “There must be ways that we can 
help them be more effective. We can challenge outdated traditions 
and practices that don’t make sense.” 
DP: You mentioned Google. In a talk at Google, you jokingly said 
that you may have never become a professor if you knew at the 
start of your career that you could work for a company like Goo-
gle—it institutionalized giving and collaboration, and is purpose 
driven in terms of not being evil. I found that interesting because I 
dropped out of my Ph.D. studies at Princeton to work in startups, 
also unaware when I started my academic career path that this 
type of work was possible. 
You have coauthored a series of op-eds for The New York Times 
with Sheryl Sandberg, COO of Facebook, sit on the board of 
Lean In, and are co-authoring a book with her. How are manage-
ment practices and leadership styles coming out of Silicon Valley 
and companies like Google and Facebook impacting the broader 
workforce and the type of things that you teach your students at 
Wharton? 
AG: I think they’re having a huge impact. There are so many cases 
where I’ve seen leaders in other industries say, “Well, you know, 
Google hires this way, so now we can give it a try,” and “Hey, 
Facebook decided that work-life balance is really important, so if 
they can do this, we can too.” It’s exciting to see so many people 
thinking about a better way to organize work. 
Google launched their re:Work website to share as many of their 
HR practices as possible, and that in and of itself is having a huge 
impact. Five years ago, a couple of colleagues and I started work-
ing at Google on people analytics research to help make HR and 
talent more data driven. At the time, to our knowledge, Google 
was the only company doing this. Fast forward and now we have 
400 Heads of HR, Talent, and data scientists coming to a confer-
ence we host at Wharton, asking, “How can I implement better 
data-driven management? How can I bring more research into 
how I think about HR and talent?”

14 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
DP: We have the Googles and the Facebooks of the world leading 
this new style of management. Then in an op-ed for the New York 
Times called “Friends at Work? Not So Much,” you noted that 
in 1985, about half of Americans said they had a close friend at 
work. That number dropped to 30% by 2004. 
The research shows that friends are more trusting and committed 
to success of one another, and opportunities to form friendships 
make jobs more satisfying. Yet the numbers suggest this isn’t hap-
pening. In the article, you attributed the decline and move towards 
a transactional view of work in part as related to Max Weber’s 
thesis of the Protestant work ethic, which as a former scholar of 
religion I ind interesting. 
If there is all of this interest in collaboration and sharing, and tons 
of data to support why this behavior is good for us, why is work 
becoming more transactional and less friendly? What legacy issues 
do you think we’re dealing with that need to be overcome? 
AG: Lots of people think about work as a place where they go to 
be results-oriented, productive, and eficient. Especially as we move 
toward 24/7 connectivity, the pressures that people feel to make sure 
they’re not falling behind has grown because they can be reached 
anytime and work never ends. You can also make a case that people 
are less invested in making new friends when it’s easier than ever to 
stay in touch with their old friends through social media. 
Part of the reason people are still drawn to  
the Googles and Facebooks of the world…is  
they foster a sense of community at work
Part of the reason people are still drawn to the Googles and Face-
books of the world, aside from the missions and work that they’re 
doing, is they foster a sense of community at work. That’s increas-
ingly rare in a world of employment where nobody stays in the 
same job as long as they used to. Most people bounce from 10 to 
12 careers over the course of a 30-year period. It’s less likely that 
people are thinking about the place they currently work as the 
place they want to invest in building relationships. 

Giving and Originality—Adam Grant 15
DP: When I interviewed Seth Godin for my last book, he spoke 
about the idea that people need a unique voice. The press con-
stantly talks about the next Mark Zuckerberg or the next Richard 
Branson, but that encourages you to conform to somebody else’s 
ideal instead of nurturing what’s unique and original. Seth also 
has this idea that innovators need to be separated so that they have 
autonomy to test and fail without the pressure and constraints of 
how the rest of the company operates. 
How does the idea of originality and giving relate to innovation, 
and how should collaborative leaders strike a balance between 
encouraging innovations and making sure that their company is 
run eficiently?
AG: It’s helpful to have separate innovation units, where the job 
that somebody has is to come up with and test new ideas. Maybe 
that is separate from the actual day-to-day work of running the 
organization. You can also bring in the rest of the workforce by 
running an innovation tournament, where you come out with 
a focused call, like “We’re looking for solutions to this kind of 
problem and we’re going to take as many ideas as people can 
submit. We’re going to bring in subject matter experts to evalu-
ate the proposals.” The tournament might be a few weeks. This 
becomes a great source of variety and you get lots more people 
involved in idea generation. You also make sure that they’re still 
doing their jobs. 
DP: We covered a lot of ground around sharing and originality, 
how giving can be a driver of success, and innovation within the 
workplace and larger organizations. The collaborative economy is 
all about sharing and exchanging products and services on plat-
forms created by entrepreneurs that rejected the status quo. In this 
sense, giving and originality, or nonconformity, are the drivers of 
the collaborative economy. 
One of the main ideas of this book is that we need to focus on 
empowering each other with the tools and resources to succeed, 
and through mutual support and help we can co-create a better 
future. What would a fully realized vision of the world look like if 
everyone embraced giving and originality?

16 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
AG: Overall, people would be less paranoid. They wouldn’t worry 
as much that other people are looking to one-up them, steal 
their ideas, or shoot down their suggestions. They would instead 
approach most of their relationships by assuming that other people 
were there to help. If they had an idea for how to make something 
better, they could speak up without feeling like they were going to 
get squashed. That would allow much more diversity of thought. 
People who have great ideas could come together more often as 
opposed to working separately in silence. A lot more innovation 
would emerge through these kinds of trusting collaborations. 
Companies in turn might focus more on partnerships and think 
less in terms of cutthroat competition. Leaders could be more will-
ing to take risks and tackle some of the big problems that we face 
as a society because they would be less concerned about failing 
and short-term results. We could reevaluate how we educate our 
children, train people for jobs, and think about innovation. In this 
way, the world would get incrementally better.
ADAM GRANT  has been recognized as Wharton’s top-rated teacher for ﬁve straight 
years, and as one of the world’s 25 most inﬂuential management thinkers and 
Fortune’s 40 under 40.
Adam is the author of two New York Times bestselling books translated into 35 
languages. Originals, on how individuals champion new ideas and leaders ﬁght 
groupthink, is a #1 national bestseller and one of Amazon’s best books of February 
2016. Give and Take, on why helping others drives our success, was named one 
of the best books of 2013 by Amazon, the Financial Times, and the Wall Street 
Journal—as well as one Oprah’s riveting reads and Harvard Business Review’s 
ideas that shaped management.
Adam received his Ph.D. and M.S. from the University of Michigan in organiza-
tional psychology, ﬁnishing it in less than three years, and his B.A. from Harvard 
University, magna cum laude with highest honors, Phi Beta Kappa honors, and the 
John Harvard Scholarship for highest academic achievement.

PEERS INC.
Robin Chase
Robin Chase pioneered a new model of company creation when 
she co-founded Zipcar, and in doing so she changed consumer 
behavior forever. Paying for access instead of ownership, trust-
ing customers to make transactions without an employee pres-
ent, selling and tracking assets in real-time on a local commu-
nity platform—these are pillars of what Robin calls Peers Inc. 
companies. 
• 
Excess capacity and leverage drive exponential growth
• 
The balance of open vs. closed platforms
• 
Why self-driving cars alone get us nothing
• 
How connectivity can help address climate change
Peers are the community of users on platforms, and Inc. refers to 
the scale we associate with industrial capitalism. I included Robin 
in the opening section on Collaborative Leadership because her 
Peers Inc. model represents the future of how all companies will 
run and operate. She also presents a beautiful vision for how inno-
vation can be a force for social good, generating value and improv-
ing the world.
DP: Peers Inc. describes a new organizational paradigm that com-
bines the beneits of small-scale localization and customization 
with the quality and scalability we associate with the industrial. 
The book also draws upon your experience as Co-Founder of Zip-
car, a pioneer of this new type of company. What is the Peers Inc. 

18 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
model, and why are these new types of companies better than what 
existed before?
RC: A lot of people are seeing the rise of this new way of doing 
things, with many different names for it: the Platform Economy, 
the Gig Economy, the On-Demand Economy, the Sharing Econ-
omy. What I like about the Peers Inc. thesis is that it calls out 
the reality that this new economy is a collaboration involving 
two parties, each with distinct and important roles to play. The 
larger entity (the Inc.) builds the platform: simplifying complex 
processes, making use of economies of scale, applying standards. 
And then small, distributed peers (people, devices, data) deliver the 
local, customized, and specialized components.
Because they leverage excess capacity and  
invite the co-investment of peers, they can  
grow at exponential rates
We see this structure in companies like Uber, Airbnb, Kickstarter, 
Zipcar, Facebook, and Google, as well as in Bitcoin, Yelp, Massive 
Online Open Courses, and the impending 3D printing revolution. 
Even in governments such as Estonia moving citizenship and com-
pany creation onto digital platforms. These narrow and eficient 
structures are intended to harness and leverage excess capacity—a 
critical component that transforms the economics of these new 
companies—and invite the participation of diverse peers. Together, 
Peers and Inc. give us everything that we love about the industrial 
economy—things like scale, low prices, high-quality standards, 
and consistency—as well as everything we love about the local—
unique, personal, adapted, creative, innovative.
Organizations built on this new collaboration grow faster, learn 
faster, and adapt faster. Because they leverage excess capacity and 
invite the co-investment of peers, they can grow at exponential 
rates. Think about the growth of Airbnb and Uber, or any app 
downloaded on a user’s smartphone: The company didn’t have to 
make the consumer buy an expensive phone to use their service. 
Instead, they are making use of the “excess capacity” available on 
the person’s already-paid-for phone.

Peers Inc.—Robin Chase 19
Peers Inc. organizations can learn exponentially faster because dig-
ital platforms enable serious analysis of gigantic amounts of vari-
ation and data. The platform is able to analyze and make use of 
all of the variation that peers deliver. Peers Inc. organizations can 
optimize their growth by determining and encouraging best prac-
tices, and spotting and discontinuing worst practices. This type of 
learning and pace was previously unimaginable. 
Peers Inc. organizations also give us the chance to have things that 
are hyper-specialized. I think of it as “the right person will appear” 
or “the needle will ly out of the haystack” because the platform 
attracts such a diversity of offering and can reveal relevant details 
at the very right moment. It is because the peer collaborators are so 
diverse that these organizations can experiment, adapt, and evolve 
quickly at low cost.
Our new ability to connect easily and quickly has fundamentally 
changed the way businesses get the most value out of resources. 
Today, Peers Inc. collaborations extract the most value, innovation, 
and resilience through shared assets, shared networks, shared intel-
ligence, and shared opportunities. It is a higher-value way to move 
forward than the old way that induced scarcity by heavily guarding 
a company’s assets, employees, and intellectual property. Instead, it 
is the shared collaborative economy that creates abundance. 
DP: Zipcar was one of the pioneers of the Peers Inc. model. You 
processed the entire transaction through a platform—from pur-
chase online, to hardware and software, to unlock cars and get 
keys—and lowered transaction costs down to almost zero, vs. 
$8–$12 for traditional car rental companies. 
Zipcar also tapped into the wasteful economics of current car 
consumption models, where personally owned cars tend to sit idle 
95% of the time. This was a pioneering example of what became a 
pillar of the collaborative economy, which you refer to as unlock-
ing excess capacity.
Can you expand upon that and walk us through the early days 
of Zipcar? What type of assumptions were you testing, and what 
obstacles did you overcome?

20 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
RC: Zipcar did a number of things right, and early. 
We built a platform that gave our customers the powers that used to 
be reserved for employees only. Our customers choose speciic cars 
and open that car themselves (with a proximity card). They could 
also see and manage their own accounts (this was back in 2000!).
We thought of our customers (the peers) as collaborators and 
asked them to do things that used to be done by company employ-
ees. For example, we ask our members to walk around the car 
and decide whether it is in good condition. We ask them to use 
our credit cards to refuel the tank when it is ¼ full. Before Zipcar, 
nobody imagined that rental companies could trust the customer. 
They thought an employee and customer had to go around the car 
together checking boxes that said, “A scratch on the left,” “This is 
all right,” “This fuel tank was full,” and so on before and after the 
rental. It was inconceivable that there would be an element of trust 
and you would let the customer do all of that. 
The dificulty of the technology was really the largest challenge and 
most amazing feat, but investors were most stuck on the change 
in behavior in car use. They didn’t believe that we could rent cars 
without having a person there to do that walk through before and 
after, and they didn’t believe that people would want to rent a 
car rather than own it. If we think about the whole peer-to-peer 
model and the sharing economy, Zipcar fundamentally proved 
that you could trust people, that you didn’t have to have your own 
employee on the ground to make that trust handoff, and that there 
was demand for shared assets.
DP: Zipcar changed behavior and also inspired new types of entre-
preneurship. You not only pioneered the trust-based transactions, 
but the ease and accessibility of Zipcars at scale made it possible 
for people to not need to own a car. Zipcar in turn inspired other 
entrepreneurs to found similar companies, because if you don’t need 
to own a car, maybe you don’t need to own other things.
In the book, you mention that your initial goal for Zipcar was “to 
make renting a car as easy and convenient as getting cash from an 

Peers Inc.—Robin Chase 21
ATM.” We wanted to make clear that like ATMs, Zipcars would 
be available everywhere, 24/7, and take just a few seconds for the 
transaction. In hindsight, you credit success to making it easier and 
more convenient to rent a car than to own one. 
This points to the concept of access vs. ownership. What is the 
significance of access models to the broader shifts in a Peers 
Inc. world?
RC: Start with the basic question: Why do we own things? A 
large part of the reason is to make sure that it’s always going to 
be there when we need it. We used to think “I can’t lend out my 
car or I can’t have it part-time because it won’t be there when I 
need it.” In academic language, we call this a “rivalrous good.” 
Zipcar showed that by creating pools of cars, this rivalrous asset 
suddenly became non-rivalrous. I could share it and still have it 
at the same time. 
The music industry is an interesting example because it’s gone the 
whole cycle—back in the olden times, you bought records or CDs 
because by owning them, the songs would be there whenever you 
wanted them. Then we unbundled songs so that you could buy just 
one song you wanted instead of the whole set. Now we’ve moved 
into Spotify and Pandora, where you don’t need to own any songs 
because you can listen to whatever song you want on demand at 
any moment. The shift has happened because it is more conve-
nient and cheaper to enjoy music this way than the old way, which 
required going to the store, buying physical versions of the songs, 
storing, managing, and caring for them. 
In the case of Zipcar, I think people always would have liked to pay 
for a car just when they needed it instead of having to own, park, 
and maintain it. We demonstrated that this dream was indeed pos-
sible: “You know what? I can have a car only when I need it.” Our 
tagline was “Wheels when you want them.”
I worry about the “on demand” label. It makes people seem rude, 
privileged, and entitled. I snap my ingers and I get something. But 
I don’t think that was really what was driving Zipcar customers or 

22 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
others in this new way of consuming. Rather, people are realizing 
that it is more convenient, more economical, and more . . . rational 
. . . to access something rather than own it full time. 
It is more convenient, more economical,  
and more…rational…to access  
something rather than own it full time
DP: That makes me wonder what other hidden assumptions we 
have about ownership and attachments to things that are breaking 
down. Access in some contexts has the same connotations that 
you associate with ownership, this entitlement and sense that this 
is mine. I wonder how we get away from this binary thinking of 
mine/not mine.
RC: One of the key innovations with Zipcar was that each of our 
cars felt unique. Each car has a name and a particular location 
where it lives, and so it feels very much like mine. I see it and 
recognize it when I pass by and when I drive it. People become 
attached to that particular asset because it is parked in their neigh-
borhood, and they are going to see it again and again, unlike 
shared bikes that are all alike. When things are plentiful and all 
alike, I think that causes a little bit less care in the usage. If I had 
a box of a thousand ballpoint pens, I lose one, whatever. But if I 
have my fancy, unique, with-my-own-name-on-it pen, I don’t lose 
it, because it’s one of a kind.
DP: People say the same thing about renting apartments or 
rooms off of Airbnb. They take great care renting something 
unique from a person, cleaning up after themselves and treat-
ing it like it was their own home, vs. recklessly throwing towels 
everywhere and leaving the place a mess like they do in hotels. 
Even when hosts charge cleaning fees and you know that a pro-
fessional cleaner is coming after you leave, there is still a level of 
care and consideration.
That leads into another interesting question. BlaBlaCar, Airbnb, 
and Zipcar are examples of very closed platforms where peers 
can operate only within certain constrained and limited choices, 

Peers Inc.—Robin Chase 23
resulting in relatively uniform collaboration. Then, on the other 
hand, you have these wide-open platforms such as the iOS and 
Android, open APIs and GPS. Can you help us navigate the differ-
ence between open and closed platforms? 
RC: If you think about closed platforms, the platform creator has 
an idea about how that asset is going to be used. Typically, that 
means it will be used as it’s always been used, just more eficiently. 
If we think about a closed platform like Zipcar, you’re going to 
use the cars to drive. Airbnb, you’re going to use places to sleep 
in because those are places to be slept in. Zipcar and Airbnb (cars 
and rooms) can exist in any geography and have varying price 
points, but the platforms are used in a speciic way.
In open platforms, the end use or the means of the content use is 
wide open. For example, I can take photographs of my breakfast 
on Twitter or incite revolution by saying, “Let’s meet up and have 
a demonstration.” It’s still constrained by 140 characters, but its 
use is wide open. The more open a platform, the more ideas peo-
ple are going to put into it. That brings more innovation, so open 
platforms should ultimately have more value than the closed ones. 
DP: Many readers of this book will be entrepreneurs or founders 
working on Peers Inc. companies. There is an ininite array of pos-
sible conigurations between open vs. closed platforms. How do 
you igure out the right amount of structure and balance in think-
ing about organizing a platform?
RC: I think at the inception of their idea, founders often believe 
they need a lot more structure than they do. The objective early 
on should be to simplify! And apply a minimum of constraints. 
There’s a kind of deconstruction that goes on in the very beginning 
to make your platform as open and easy as possible. 
At the inception of their idea, founders often believe  
they need a lot more structure than they do
For example, think of Airbnb. Early on it shocked me that for 
years there was no way to sort by number of beds. You’d think the 

24 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
bed is the most basic thing. How many people does this offering 
sleep? That was not a ield that they decided to include. Instead 
they minimized the number of ields for hosts to ill out. They set-
tled on what was the smallest number of ields a host could ill out 
in order to deliver a viable space to rent. Airbnb sought to mini-
mize the constraints to create a listing so that they could maximize 
supply, with the fewest possible barriers to creating a listing. 
In the very early stage, you should have a conception of what 
you think your platform is going to be, and then work back-
wards and make it simpler. Add complexity later when everyone 
understands what the value is. You can’t do that in the begin-
ning. You should also choose a deined geography or sector in 
which you can deliver success to both sides of the market, buyers 
and sellers.
DP: You mentioned Twitter earlier, and in Peers Inc. you talk 
about Twitter shutting down APIs as the ultimate betrayal for par-
ticipating peers. Another example that you mention is AppGratis 
being shut down by Apple. Facebook similarly leapfrogged ahead 
of MySpace with an open platform that allowed apps developers 
to keep all of their revenue, and then years later it killed the apps 
ecosystem. 
This pattern seems to repeat itself over and over again. Successful 
platforms become monopolies and transition from open to closed 
systems. Then new companies come along to challenge the new 
monopoly incumbents. I’m curious, with so many billion-dollar 
unicorn companies in the collaborative economy space that appear 
to be carving out monopolies, how do you see the space continu-
ing to evolve? Are we entering a consolidation or maturity phase? 
What’s next?
RC: Right now, everyone’s saying, “Is Uber really worth (whatever 
it’s up to right now…like $70 billion or whatever crazy number)?” 
And I feel like it’s way too early to tell. We’re at the beginning of 
all of this.
If I had to evaluate valuations from a theoretical point of view, 
I would say that some of these are overvalued because of their 

Peers Inc.—Robin Chase 25
monopoly status or the expectation that they will become 
monopolies. 
Society only dislikes monopolies when they exercise their monop-
oly power—through predatory behavior that eliminates compe-
tition or high prices to consumers. But monopolies don’t have to 
behave badly. The challenge is when monopolies are pushed, by 
CEOs or investors, to take advantage of their monopoly power. But 
remember that Peers Inc. companies have two parts: the platforms 
and the peers. If the platform gets too greedy, they risk angering 
the collaborating peers who may well choose to stop collaborat-
ing. Without them, there is no business.
Society only dislikes monopolies when  
they exercise their monopoly power
I feel like there’s this hole in the periodic table, and I’m predicting 
that the hole will resolve itself. If I look and understand the struc-
ture of these peers and platforms, the peers should stop partici-
pating when they feel like they’re getting screwed. We see drivers 
are on both Uber and Lyft, doing whichever one serves them best 
at that moment. New companies are coming along trying to offer 
a 5% take instead of a 30% take. Uber is also losing money to 
undercut competition, but that isn’t sustainable. When the mar-
gins are better and new companies scale, what incentive is there 
for drivers to stay? I want to believe what Elinor Ostrom, winner 
of 2009 Nobel Prize in Economics, says—that the peers will stop 
participating if they can’t make the rules of engagement and if it 
feels unfair—but that will take time to play out.
One of the problems with capitalism is that private sector compa-
nies are not playing for long-term gain; they’re playing for a short-
term gain. My prediction would be that companies that don’t treat 
their peers well can’t succeed in the long term. But sadly, right 
now in capitalism, we don’t play the long game; we play the short 
game. So I don’t know what will happen.
DP: You talked about the long-term game, and I would love to 
hear your views on the long-term game of transportation. Most 

26 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
of your experience comes from founding several different trans-
portation companies. When I think of on-demand transportation 
services like Zipcar, Uber, Lyft, BlaBlaCar, etc., they’re all becom-
ing increasingly popular. Self-driving cars are also on the hori-
zon, leading to speculation that car ownership may completely 
come to an end.
Self-driving cars open up all types of possibilities from allowing 
longer commutes because people could work or rest in their cars, 
to radical disruption to insurance industries and car manufactur-
ing. We may even reimagine cities with less congestion and more 
pedestrian areas due to a decreased need for parking and other 
ineficiencies. Looking ahead, how do you see the future of trans-
portation? What should we expect in the next 10 to 20 years?
RC: I expect autonomous cars will completely disrupt the entire 
sector. They will transform how we live in cities and how we 
spend our money. We will see the irst mass market sales of AVs 
within 5 years (and as early as 2019), and I believe that within 5 
years of that, the majority of vehicles in dense urban areas will be 
self-driving. 
There’s two ways that this can play out in terms of whether this is 
going to be a good thing or a bad thing from a transportation point 
of view. There’s a high risk of what I think of as zero-occupancy 
vehicles. Right now, 80% of the cars on the road are single occu-
pancy and people only think about the cost of driving as the cost of 
fuel, unless they’re paying by the hour with Zipcar or by the minute 
with Uber, Lyft, or car2go. 
Self-driving cars alone will get us nothing
Once you take human bodies out of the equation, it is cheaper to 
have that car drive around the block continuously than to pay for 
parking. It’s also cheaper to send the car to Home Depot and back 
than it will be to pay for shipping. I think 50% of the cars on the 
road will be empty and that could lead to grotesque amounts of 
congestion. Someone commented in one of my talks that if you 
think of places like Mumbai, Cairo, and Delhi, those are effec-
tively self-driving cars because the cost of labor is so incredibly 

Peers Inc.—Robin Chase 27
low. Those cities have horriic trafic and pollution. Self-driving 
cars alone will get us nothing. 
On the other hand, we can put a high penalty on zero-occupancy 
cars and encourage shared trips in shared cars. Add electric cars, 
and we get some cleanliness. What Zipcar showed is when you 
share the car itself, you reduce the number of cars needed, and 
that’s critical. There’s been a lot of research showing that we only 
need 30% of the cars currently in use. That will free up or elim-
inate on-street parking space. If we have shared trips in shared 
cars, then we address congestion and we may only need 10% of 
the cars. 
If we have shared trips in shared cars (and address the zero- 
occupancy problem), we will transform cities. We can add more 
trees, more sidewalks, more bike lanes, and with no parking garages 
or parking lots there is a tremendous opportunity to do more with 
lots of developable space. It transforms access into opportunity. 
The Holy Grail would be a transit-priced trip door-to-door from 
home to work without the congestion. That is the potential if we 
get all of the policy pieces right.
But if we don’t, I see a ton of missed cars delivering in vastly 
more congested cities. In addition to zero-occupancy private 
cars running around because they don’t care, I think we’ll see 
retail cars because having a car rolling down the street costs 
way less money than a retail store where I have to pay for the 
location. You can think of the liquor store, pharmacy, or the 
latte car roaming around, or pop-up roaming retail cars selling 
shoes and clothes or whatever. It all depends on what rules we 
put in place.
DP: Your latest company, Veniam, is building an Internet of  
Moving Things. The company proved out a model for mesh net-
working in Porto, Portugal, where Veniam transformed vehicles 
like buses and garbage trucks into mobile Wi-Fi hotpots, creating a 
seamless Wi-Fi network connection that allows people to go from 
one hotspot to another. Why is connectivity so important in a Peers 
Inc. world?

28 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
RC: If I think about all the things we’ve talked about, what is clear 
to me is that Internet connectivity is a mandatory part of this new 
economy. The ability to be networked-people and have access to 
networked assets is a fundamental requirement to a sustainable and 
just future. Without being accessible and indable, we can’t get any 
of these beneits. The difference between the un-networked and the 
networked is going to become an even increasingly larger chasm 
than it is today, so we have to make sure that everyone is connected. 
he ability to be networked-people and have 
access to networked assets is a fundamental 
requirement to a sustainable and just future
DP: You are a big advocate for addressing climate change, and at 
irst glance connectivity doesn’t seem like an obvious part of the 
solution. What type of unlocked potential is there on the horizon 
for the Internet of Moving Things, and how might connectivity 
help us to address some of humanity’s most pressing problems like 
climate change? 
Regarding climate change, smart homes and smart cities are all 
about a platform collecting and analyzing huge amounts of data to 
push forward best practices and knock out worst practices. Con-
nectivity makes distributed energy easy to build and easier to con-
nect it to a larger grid; we get the beneits of both the grid and the 
distributed networks. I see Veniam and this pervasive connectivity 
as a key element of all of that eficiency. Reductions in CO2 and 
trafic congestion require shared, networked connectivity, with 
platforms collecting and analyzing the data, and empowering the 
diversity of the peers (people, cars, washing machines, renewable 
energy!) to deliver the energy eficient outcomes—all while deliv-
ering a high quality of life, of course!
ROBIN CHASE  is a transportation entrepreneur. She is co-founder and former CEO 
of Zipcar, the largest carsharing company in the world; Buzzcar, a peer-to-peer 
carsharing service in France (now merged with Drivy); and GoLoco, an online ride-
sharing community. She is also co-founder of Veniam, a vehicle communications 
company building the networking fabric for the Internet of Moving Things.

Peers Inc.—Robin Chase 29
She is on the Boards of Veniam, the World Resources Institute, and Tucows. She 
also served on the board of the Massachusetts Department of Transportation, the 
National Advisory Council for Innovation & Entrepreneurship for the U.S. Depart-
ment of Commerce, the Intelligent Transportations Systems Program Advisory 
Committee for the U.S. Department of Transportation, the OECD’s International 
Transport Forum Advisory Board, the Massachusetts Governor’s Transportation 
Transition Working Group, and Boston Mayor’s Wireless Task Force.
Robin lectures widely, has been frequently featured in the major media, and has 
received many awards in the areas of innovation, design, and environment, includ-
ing Time 100 Most Inﬂuential People, Fast Company Fast 50 Innovators, and Busi-
nessWeek Top 10 Designers. Robin graduated from Wellesley College and MIT’s 
Sloan School of Management, was a Harvard University Loeb Fellow, and received 
an honorary Doctorate of Design from the Illinois Institute of Technology. 


#GIVEFIRST
Brad Feld
Brad Feld embodies the philosophy of giving irst. Since 1987, 
he has played an astonishing number of leadership roles in the 
startup community—entrepreneur, investor, author, speaker, and 
co-founder of Techstars—helping to build great companies and 
sharing his wisdom via his blog and books like Venture Deals and 
Do More Faster. This interview is so jam packed with insight it’s 
hard to summarize:
• 
Why giving irst is part of conducting good business
• 
The Boulder Thesis to build a startup ecosystem
• 
The seemingly limitless potential of networks
• 
Why exponential change makes the future uncertain
Brad encourages founders to constantly learn about themselves 
and each other because building a great company is a journey that 
requires mutual honesty and support. He strikes a rare balance 
between strategic and technical thinking, and deep inner relec-
tion, which makes this a thought-provoking read. #GiveFirst is 
also the name of Brad’s next book. Here’s your glimpse into what 
will surely be a bestseller.
DP: You have been a long-time advocate of giving without expec-
tation, or giving irst. This philosophy is institutionalized in Tech-
stars and your next book will be named #GiveFirst. What does 
it mean to give irst, and why is giving irst so important to the 
startup community? 

32 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
BF: The concept is pretty simple. The notion is that you are willing 
to engage in a relationship and put energy into something without 
knowing what you will get out of it. It’s not altruism. You expect 
that you will get something out of it, but you don’t know when, 
from whom, over what time period, or how. You enter into rela-
tionships non-transactionally, meaning you don’t deine the trans-
action or value exchange of things upfront. 
The reason this is so important is that part of the challenge of 
startups—and startup communities in general—is that you have to 
get a lot of energy into the system. You have to get a lot of people 
working on stuff to make any progress. If everybody is trying to 
igure out what they are going to get out of it before they start put-
ting in energy, then the startup community will be stillborn. 
Giving irst is mutually beneicial for everyone. It gets the energy 
and excitement lowing across a whole ecosystem so there is not 
this continual transactional tradeoff of expecting things in return. 
What happens is you end up getting things back from people or 
places that you don’t expect because you were willing to put in 
that energy in advance without consideration of how you might 
directly beneit.
DP: The conventional view is to think about giving in the context 
of philanthropy or nonproit work, but in the startup community 
giving leads to innovation, deal low, and new business. Giving 
breaks down barriers and gets people talking and helping each 
other, and that builds momentum and relationships of trust across 
the whole ecosystem.
On the lip side of giving irst, there is this notion that entrepre-
neurs and founders need to understand and know who they really 
are. The journey of being an entrepreneur is lonely and tough, and 
you can’t waste time trying to imitate or be someone else. I spoke 
with Jerry Colonna about this for my last book Disruption Revo-
lution, and I know you are great friends that go back years.
In an interview that you did with Jerry for his Reboot podcast, he 
recalls you giving him advice back in 1996. Jerry was struggling 
with what he referred to as “imposter syndrome” where he was 

#Giveﬁrst—Brad Feld 33
stuck feeling inadequate and comparing himself to other VCs. You 
told him to “Stop trying to be a VC like everyone else. Be the best 
VC like you are.”
That simple advice had a profound impact on him and the follow-
ing year Jerry became recognized as one of the top 50 VCs in the 
country. This brings up the importance of radical self-inquiry. There 
is a way in which knowing the self allows one to understand his or 
her true purpose. How does that help make great entrepreneurs, 
and how do you see purpose coming together in founding teams? 
BF: The irst part is that we’re on a journey through this thing 
called life, and at some point it ends and we die. It doesn’t matter 
what you think happens after we die, but the particular journey 
construct that we have ends and is not static. 
The most successful and interesting people constantly are look-
ing for new things, trying new things, and learning new things. 
Some things work, some things don’t, and they build on that. A big 
part of that process is internal and self-relective—in other words, 
you’re going on your own journey and you’re learning about your-
self, not just about the work you’re doing. That leads to learning 
what you care about and want to do, how it works, and your rela-
tionship to what matters most to you. 
This is a fundamentally systemic phenomenon for founding teams. 
You have to constantly learn about your cofounders, yourself, and 
your relationship to each other as the business goes from a couple 
of people and an idea to hopefully a very large organization. There 
is such incredible change that even if you built a large organization 
before (and by the way, even if you built a large organization with 
the same people you’re building this new large organization with), 
the context, the backdrop, the stuff you’re working on, the chal-
lenges you’re going to face, the stressors, the exogenous world that 
impacts you in ways that you don’t expect, etc.—they’re totally 
different than the last time. You have to be on this continuous 
process of learning. 
To link it back to what I said to Jerry about being the best ver-
sion of himself, I think he had a lot of fear about being different 

34 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
that he understood as “imposter syndrome.” Being different was 
part of his brilliance. He wasn’t like every other board member 
or VC. That was why I liked working with him and probably 
why he liked working with me because I’m not like everyone 
else either. 
This notion of a singular archetype—for a VC, founder, entrepre-
neur—is nonsense. Different people approach problem solving in 
different ways. You can learn from role models, but trying to emu-
late what you perceive to be an archetype of success will probably 
make you unhappy and may not lead to success. When you let 
yourself behave the way you want to behave, you actually work 
more effectively with people around you. That is why knowing 
yourself and your co-founders is so important. 
When you let yourself behave the way you  
want to behave, you actually work more  
efectively with people around you
DP: Boulder is one of my favorite places in the world. It has the 
highest per capita number of PhDs and people working in start-
ups, ranks highest in quality of life, is home of University of Col-
orado, and with a population of around 100,000, Boulder feels 
intimate enough that you have a real sense of community. 
Boulder is also the place that you call home, and your book, 
Startup Communities, is based on what you call the “Boulder The-
sis” for building a startup ecosystem: (1) Entrepreneurs must lead 
the startup community; (2) Leaders must have long-term commit-
ment; (3) The startup community must be inclusive of anyone who 
wants to participate in it, and (4) The startup community must 
have continual activities that engage the entire entrepreneurial 
stack. Can you tell us more about The Boulder Thesis?
BF: My hope is that today it’s simplistic and fairly obvious. The 
phrase “startup communities” and the construct of The Boulder 
Thesis didn’t exist in 2011–2012 when I wrote the book. At the 
time, we were dealing with a recession and many people were 
talking about a jobless recovery. 

#Giveﬁrst—Brad Feld 35
The book was a chance to look at the future opportunity for us 
as a society, in terms of economic growth, through new company 
creation and entrepreneurship. From my perspective, you have to 
take responsibility for your future. People who take responsibility 
for their future are the ones who have the most impact on society. 
The way to do that in a noncommercial construct is to take 
responsibility for yourself, which is similar to what we just talked 
about. In a commercial construct, that means being an entrepre-
neur, creating your own business, getting involved in a startup 
community or entrepreneurial ventures, and helping them grow. 
This bottom-up approach with entrepreneurs as the leaders of the 
startup ecosystem goes against a number of top-down historical 
mythologies that I talk about in the book.
For example, there is the misplaced idea that the university is the 
center of the entrepreneurial ecosystem. Even if you look at cities 
like Boston or the Bay Area—the area around MIT in Cambridge, 
Boston; the area around Stanford in Silicon Valley—the university 
is an important input into the startup community, but it’s not the 
center of it. 
Another example is this mythology that governments should play 
a key role stimulating small business and economic development. 
How can government help? The answer is to allocate capital. 
The problem is that governments have no capital to allocate. Com-
ing out of the recession they had no money. They should have cut 
themselves in half and laid off a bunch of people, and then let them 
go try to do something productive. Governments are particularly 
bad at rationalizing their size—and people are constantly trying to 
justify their involvement. 
This is not to say governments or universities are useless. Both can 
play a very interesting role. But the point of The Boulder Thesis 
was to shift the discussion to center on entrepreneurs. They need 
to be driving the activity proponents in the startup community.
Another key tenant of The Boulder Thesis is to be inclusive. This 
is not just in terms of diversity of gender, race, and ethnicity, but 

36 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
also diversity of thought, experience, training, and interests—to 
be inclusive of anyone who wants to engage. Today, there is this 
whole meta-layer of discussion about diversity. For example, think 
of what happened in North Carolina around sexual identiication. 
Not just politically, but the economic impact in terms of compa-
nies like PayPal and Google Ventures not wanting to invest or con-
duct business there because they support diversity. 
Be inclusive…not just in terms of diversity of  
gender, race, and ethnicity, but also diversity of  
thought, experience, training, and interests
DP: It is important for entrepreneurs to be the leaders of the 
startup ecosystem, and also to be inclusive of everyone that 
wants to participate. Inclusivity has this expanded deinition to 
encompass traditional conceptions of diversity, and diversity of 
ideas and perspectives. 
In your framework, entrepreneurs are at the center and everyone 
else serves as a feeder into the startup community. Can you explain 
the idea of feeders and the role they play in supporting the startup 
ecosystem? If the goal is to be inclusive, what is the best way to 
include non-entrepreneurs?
BF: First, there is one important clarifying point. It didn’t occur to 
me in writing the book that some people would interpret “feeders” 
as a pejorative phrase or think leaders are more important than 
feeders. They’re both important categories; they’re just different in 
terms of what function they play. 
Feeders are institutions or hierarchical organizations—universities,  
governments, large companies, nonproits, etc. The powerful thing 
that I’ve learned over time is the best way for feeders to be helpful 
to the startup community is to engage proactively and have indi-
vidual members of the institution engage as nodes in the startup 
community. Give responsibility to the individual person to become 
an active participant as a representative of the organization, instead 
of somehow having the organization try to manage or control the 
activity of the startup community.

#Giveﬁrst—Brad Feld 37
This builds a positive reputation for the institution that you repre-
sent. Do something actionable instead of saying, “Hi. I’m from the 
Boulder Economic Development Council, and our job is to stim-
ulate economic development.” That doesn’t mean anything. Get 
involved in the startup community and do something. 
Give responsibility to the individual person  
to become an active participant as a  
representative of the organization
DP: Techstars was one of the irst accelerator programs, founded 
around the same time as Y-Combinator. A key differentiator was 
that Techstars placed a greater emphasis on mentorship and the 
philosophy of giving irst, which we discussed earlier.
Techstars has since evolved into a global ecosystem. There are 
Techstars accelerator programs across the U.S. and in many major 
international cities. This includes programs focused on particular 
areas, such as the Internet of Things, and accelerators powered 
by Techstars for global brands, such as Disney and Nike. What 
was the initial vision for Techstars and how has it evolved over 
the last decade?
BF: We were the second accelerator (YC was the irst and we 
started about a year later), but I like to think we were the irst to 
take this mentorship-driven model after which many accelerators 
have been modeled. We try hard to open-source our approach to 
encourage and enable more. 
Our initial goal was an experiment in our backyard in Boulder: 
Let’s see if we can start some companies and then see if it turns into 
anything interesting. That was the extent of the vision. We had some 
hypotheses, “If we can get a bunch of local entrepreneurs involved, 
it would be a good way to spend time with other entrepreneurs, 
working on a thing together that’s not their own company.“
We had ideas around the energy that would go into the local startup 
community—again, that wasn’t the phrase for it then— getting a 
bunch of people for a limited period of time (not continuously,  

38 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
but for 90 days) working with a set of new founders. As experi-
enced entrepreneurs and angel investors, we knew how satisfying 
it was to help other founders, which is hard to do in any quasi- 
organized way. 
That was the starting point. We ran the experiment for the irst two 
years. By year three, we started to have this notion of the power 
to build a signiicant network of founders, mentors, investors, and 
experienced entrepreneurs working together in support of found-
ers who were creating new companies. There were lots of different 
ways to engage and participate that had quantitative economic 
opportunity as well as qualitative opportunity. As we had more 
companies go through Techstars, the network would get stronger 
and grow in an unmanaged or non-managed way, the same way 
the best networks grow, vs. the hierarchical “here’s where you it 
and here’s what you do.” 
By around 2012, we started to view ourselves as having a signii-
cant opportunity around company creation and how innovation 
occurs. Building on the power of the network, we started to put 
more energy into ways to work with large companies to build start-
ups and startup communities around their brands and their much 
larger orbits. It’s a way to get much larger companies engaged in 
the innovation process. That’s very powerful both in geography 
and across geography. 
We’re creating essentially a  
new type of innovation asset
I think that evolved another layer: We believe that we’re creating 
essentially a new type of innovation asset. It’s the opportunity for 
founders to engage in a much more effective form of company 
creation on a long list of variables or factors, but it’s also a way 
for investors to engage in a broader set of companies that are 
highly curated in a way that previously weren’t very organized or 
accessible. 
If you’re on the founder or entrepreneur side, this is a more effective 
way to quickly get your company started and then ramp it up. If you 

#Giveﬁrst—Brad Feld 39
are looking to invest in early stage companies, this gives access to a 
category of early stage companies of high quality that’s completely 
unique. Fundamentally underlying all of that is the notion that inno-
vation (and the innovation activity that comes from entrepreneurship) 
is the most interesting characteristic around economic growth. Hav-
ing this very large network that’s constantly learning and evolving on 
how to do that is limitless in its scale potential.
DP: You mentioned the power of the Techstars network constantly 
learning and evolving, and how this has enabled the creation of a 
new kind of innovation asset. 
The accelerator beneits entrepreneurs in terms of scaling great 
companies, and for investors it creates a pipeline of high quality, 
pre-qualiied opportunities. The network continues to grow with 
every batch of accelerated companies and more accelerators, creat-
ing this seemingly limitless scale and potential.
I wonder if the power of networks can be utilized in innovative 
ways to create new types of companies. For example, imagine an 
Airbnb or Uber that shared ownership with providers or drivers, 
or a company built on the blockchain where shares and dividends 
were distributed based on the amount of work contributed by a 
decentralized group. 
As a seasoned angel investor, venture capitalist, and co-founder 
of Techstars, what are your thoughts on new forms of company 
creation? Can you expand a bit on the power of the network and 
ways in which networks might be utilized in different ways to cre-
ate companies?
BF: While I think this is one dimension, it has huge legal and regula-
tory challenges based on the current SEC rules around investment, 
solicitation, and company ownership. While there are some people 
trying to create new corporate structures that are disconnected from 
the current legal frameworks, especially in the context of block-
chain, I think this will be dificult to do in any meaningful way.
But the concept can be extended to the notion of how a network 
of participants, separate from the legal structure, can be organized, 

40 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
especially around innovation and new company creation. If you 
take the notion of Kickstarter as a model for crowdfunding prod-
uct development, you are using a network to build community, 
create market validation, and provide inancing for product design 
and development. If you extend this to a non-employment model, 
you end up in what had a trendy, but short-lived label of the “gig 
economy.” In each case, technology enables a network that enables 
a different operating model for an organization.
DP: There is this idea in the Boulder Thesis of a 20-year horizon 
for startup ecosystems, meaning that leaders should look 20 years 
ahead into the future from each day. We see lots of excitement on 
the horizon with self-driving cars, drones, AI, 3-D printing, the 
collaborative and sharing economy, virtual reality and augmented 
reality, etc. Yet with all of this innovation come concerns about 
massive loss of jobs due to automation. As a inal question: How 
do you see the next 20 years unfolding?
BF: I have no idea. I’m not a predictor. I get endless interview 
requests to be parts of the lists of predictions for the future and I 
always decline to participate.
What I think is a truism is that human beings are particularly 
bad at understanding how things work on an exponential curve. 
We understand linear lines really well. When we extrapolate 
from where we’re sitting out into the future on a linear basis, 
there is a very logical approach. But we suck when it’s exponen-
tial. Much of what we’re dealing with now in terms of innova-
tion, technology, company creation, how humans and machines 
interact with each other, how our society is changing, etc., is on 
an exponential basis.
Which is to say that if you took a log of the graph over time, you’d 
get a line, and I just don’t think we know how to think about it. 
One person predicts a 10-year horizon, and another predicts some-
thing will happen in 12 months. Or it could never happen because 
it’s a completely wrong prediction. I really don’t have any idea. I 
would assert that it’s a particularly exciting time to be doing all of 
this stuff and to be in the middle because some vectors are chang-
ing at such an incredible rate. 

#Giveﬁrst—Brad Feld 41
We have these massive step-function changes in science and tech-
nology. For example, we’re dealing with a bunch of stuff around 
new forms of computing, whether it be quantum computing or 
Biocomputing—a huge amount of research, lots of people strug-
gling, lots of things interesting (maybe not working), and then you 
get this gigantic dislocation step-function where something com-
pletely magical gets understood and all of a sudden you’ve got a 
whole body of work that builds on this completely new frame-
work for it. 
Before you had to write books and physically ship them all 
around because there was no better way for people to commu-
nicate with each other. Now there is a bunch of software inter-
acting with itself when all these things are happening. That’s 
another example of how we don’t know what happens with 
exponential change. 
Twenty years from now, I think our planet and  
our society, and the way that we interact with  
it, will be unrecognizable to us today
Twenty years from now, I think our planet and our society, and the 
way that we interact with it, will be unrecognizable to us today. 
If we teleported forward 20 years, it would be unrecognizable. 
And I don’t think it would be the same kind of unrecognizable 
as going backwards 20 years. If you went back to 1996 today, a 
whole bunch of things are very different in 2016 than 1996. But 
I think when we shift to 2036, it would be completely and totally 
unrecognizable to somebody from today.
BRAD FELD  has been an early stage investor and entrepreneur since 1987. Prior to 
co-founding Foundry Group, he co-founded Mobius Venture Capital and, prior to 
that, founded Intensity Ventures. Brad is also a co-founder of Techstars.
In addition to his investing efforts, Brad has been active with several non-proﬁt 
organizations and currently is chair of the National Center for Women & Information 
Technology, co-chair of Startup Colorado, and on the board of Path Forward. Brad 
is a speaker on the topics of venture capital investing and entrepreneurship and 
writes the blogs Feld Thoughts, Startup Revolution, and Ask the VC.

42 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
Brad holds Bachelor of Science and Master of Science degrees in Management 
Science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Brad is also an art col-
lector and long-distance runner. He has completed 23 marathons as part of his 
mission to ﬁnish a marathon in each of the 50 states.

COMMUNITIES AND MOVEMENTS
Douglas Atkin
Douglas Atkin is a pioneer in building communities and move-
ments around brands, organizations, and startups, a trend that he 
anticipated in his book The Culting of Brands (2004). We draw 
upon his vast experience in the peer-to-peer economy as Chief 
Community Oficer of Meetup, Partner at Purpose, Co-Founder 
and Board Chairman of Peers, and Global Head of Community 
for Airbnb:
• 
How small groups can change the world
• 
Why people join cults to feel like their true self
• 
How communities grow into movements
• 
Building the world’s irst super crowd brand
Douglas combines his passion to be a catalyst for meaningful 
change in the world with a relentless focus on research, often con-
ducting hundreds of interviews and surveys to validate ideas and 
create actionable strategies. His leadership and example helped 
inspire me to follow my passion to write, speak, and build move-
ments. I hope he also inspires you to live and work with passion 
and purpose.
DP: There’s a quote by Margaret Mead that you absolutely love 
and reference in every presentation, and it is also one of my all-
time favorites: “Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, 
committed citizens can change the world. Indeed, it is the only 
thing that ever has.” 

44 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
When I think about the power of small groups, one thing that 
comes to mind is Meetup, where you served as Chief Commu-
nity Oficer. Could you tell us about the power of small groups 
and some of the lessons you learned building Meetup’s global 
community?
DA: I love that quote because there comes a point where people 
realize that they need other people to pursue their passion or 
effect change. They can’t be as effective on their own as they can 
be with a group of like-minded individuals. Whether it is a small 
thing like cleaning up a local park or a big thing like ousting a 
corrupt leader, you need help from others and the strength of 
mutual support. 
If a community is strong, it’s not just the power of like-minded peo-
ple together, that’s like 50% of what represents the community’s 
power. The other 50% is about the interaction between those indi-
viduals. Relationships form when individuals interact. You want to 
support these people because you like them or they’re important or 
they need help. Those feelings become mutual and form the bonds 
of real communities.
We discovered it took someone attending a physical Meetup event 
four times or more to become really committed. The reason why 
is because it takes that long to build meaningful relationships with 
other people in the group. You’re going not just to practice your 
Spanish or your guitar or whatever, but you’re also going to be 
able to see Pablo again, or Kia, or Jane. 
When we asked people “Why do you like this Meetup?” they 
would answer by saying things like, “I feel at home,” and “I made 
new friends.” The original intention was to go and improve a skill 
or ind others who share your enthusiasm. But once relationships 
form, then a community becomes real.
It’s very hard to break a community apart once it gets to that point 
because people need and want to help each other. The relationships 
are strong, and the ties are strong between members. There is a 
power in a group that changes and transforms you to some degree 
in many positive ways. To bring this full circle to the Margaret 

Communities and Movements—Douglas Atkin 45
Meade quote, it can empower you to change the world, if that’s 
what you’re looking to do. 
here is a power in a group that  
changes and transforms you
DP: We met years ago in New York City when I reached out after 
reading your book The Culting of Brands, which looked at the 
cult-like followings of brands such as Apple, Ben & Jerry’s, and 
Harley Davidson. Research for that book laid the foundation for 
your work in Meetup and Airbnb, and building movements that 
reach millions of people. 
The Culting of Brands explored two questions: Why people have 
this cult-like commitment or loyalty, and what do you have to do 
to get that level of commitment or engagement? Can you tell us 
some of the lessons learned from your research that might apply 
to creating any type of community or community-related brand? 
DA: The reason I looked at cults and cult-like organizations is sim-
ply because those are the extreme forms of community. It is easier 
to understand the fundamentals of belonging and belief by looking 
at the extreme end of the spectrum. I also learned in the process 
that cults aren’t an aberration. In fact, they are normal and essen-
tial because new ideas help keep cultures iterating, growing, and 
moving. Without cults, cultures would atrophy and die.
The key lesson from cults that can be applied to all communi-
ties is what I call the great cult paradox: People join cults not to 
conform but to become more individual. Most people think the 
opposite is true—that people join because they’re psychologically 
lawed or socially inept. This is due to the media’s portrayal of 
cults that are destructive organizations. Most members of cults 
and cult-like organizations join for the same reasons that you or 
I would join anything. 
It works like this. As we grow up and become individuals, we 
realize that to get on in the world you have to shave the rough 
edges off of you, your identity, just to get on at school, not to 

46 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
be bullied, to form groups of friends, get on with your family, at 
work, etc. This doesn’t mean that your individuality completely 
disappears, but rather that you compromise in a way to it in, 
unless you can ind a group of people who share the same differ-
ences you have. 
Basically, what cults say is, “Hey, Douglas, you’re different. We’re 
different in the same way. Come and join us.” That difference could 
be anything, such as a passion for big motorcycles. Harley riders 
used to tell me this. Despite having a fantastic job, being a manage-
ment consultant or dentist by day, lovely family, a good suburban 
house, that wasn’t them. They only felt at home when they were 
among like-minded others who shared a passion for rebellion and 
freedom, which they felt Harley users did. 
People join cults not to conform  
but to become more individual
When you ind other people who share your passion and, like you, 
feel different in the same way, you feel “at home.” You psycholog-
ically relax and feel secure that no one’s going to laugh or ridicule 
the things you’re passionate about. In fact, they love you for your 
differences. That creates—I kept hearing this again and again—a 
psychologically safe space to become yourself. They use the word 
“become.” 
People joining cults and cult-like organizations—even the Marines 
or a corporate cult—all said the same thing: It doesn’t change you; 
it enables you to be more yourself. And this is because you feel 
“safe enough” to express your unedited self. 
DP: You mention the Marines and corporate cults. How does the 
loyalty, sense of belonging and purpose, identity formation through 
differences, etc., relate to building community in the workplace?
DA: Most recently, I’ve been working on the internal community 
at Airbnb. I found the same story here. For example, one woman 
expressed it by saying, “I can be my full fat version of myself rather 
than the skim milk version.”

Communities and Movements—Douglas Atkin 47
DP: That’s a great quote.
DA: Yes it is! People told me that when you don’t feel at home in 
your job, you edit yourself because you don’t feel secure or safe 
enough to express yourself fully. It’s normally only with your clos-
est friends or members of your family that you can do that, unless 
you’re lucky enough to ind a company, or a church, or Meetup 
group, or whatever it is that makes you say, “A-ha! I’ve inally 
found where I feel at home.” What that basically means is I feel 
psychologically safe and secure enough to be myself like I nor-
mally am only at home. 
Brian Chesky, our co-founder and CEO, wrote an essay that was 
widely shared on social media titled “Don’t Fuck Up the Culture” 
on the advice Airbnb’s investors gave him. Culture is so important 
to maintain as you grow.
Airbnb culture is incredibly strong. Not everyone would like it, but 
those who do, really do. They say the same things and use the same 
vocabulary: “I can become myself.” “I can be myself.” “I don’t have 
to edit.” “I feel psychologically safe and secure because I’m sur-
rounded by people who welcome me for who I am and celebrate 
my differences.” “They don’t criticize or laugh at me.” 
Google also studied what makes teams successful. They identiied 
ive characteristics, the most important of which is “psychological 
safety,” as they call it, which is the same thing I’m talking about. 
What they found is that no matter what teams are working on, 
they need to feel a kind of security that only appears when you 
trust each other. And you trust each other because you know and 
respect each other. 
It happens because that team is a community. You have relation-
ships built through individual interactions. You know each oth-
er’s strengths and weaknesses and trust each other. Relationships 
of trust and mutual support create the psychological safety to be 
yourself. That enables you to take the risks you need in order to 
learn something new, to be entrepreneurial, highly creative, or take 
any kind of business or personal risk. This all goes back to what 
we talked about earlier from my experience building communities 

48 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
at Meetup. The same thing happens in communities everywhere, 
including the workplace.
Relationships of trust and mutual support  
create the psychological safety to be yourself
You need to be surrounded by people who are creating a psycho-
logically safe work environment. New team members arrive as 
strangers. They’re welcomed, made to feel they belong, and then 
they’re given some huge, crazy challenge. Some describe it as “I 
feel I’m supported by my teammates and my boss to take a massive 
risk.” Other people might not think I can succeed, but then they 
do and realize, “Oh, I can do it after all.” This would never be pos-
sible without that psychological safety net of freedom, trust, and 
support from their community of colleagues. 
DP: I’d like to shift from communities to movements. You describe 
movements as basically like communities in action, or communi-
ties on the move. After The Culting of Brands, you left advertising 
to be a partner at Meetup, and you co-founded Purpose, a consul-
tancy for movements that also incubated and created movements. 
For example, you helped build All Out, the largest gay rights 
movement in the world, from 2,000 to 2,000,000 people. 
Through your work at Meetup and Purpose, you developed a 
systematic approach to grassroots organizing and movements. I 
want to dive into some of the speciics around your approach. 
People always talk about the mission and purpose, but one of 
the things that I ind especially interesting is this idea that it is 
important to have an improbable goal, which you refer to as the 
“fuck off” goal or “fuck off” metric. I love this term. Can you tell 
us what you mean? 
DA: The purpose of social movements is to make a difference and 
change in the world. They do this by mobilizing huge numbers 
of people to take the same action (such as signing a petition). 
One of the most important ingredients of their success is having 
a seemingly impossible goal. It isn’t actually impossible; it’s just 
improbable.

Communities and Movements—Douglas Atkin 49
Let me give you an example, marriage equality. I’m gay. I’m mar-
ried to my partner of 26 years, but even ive years ago we thought 
the goal of the equality movement seemed impossible. It was never 
going to happen, with a Republican congress and so on. But it has. 
This is the difference between impossible and improbable. 
Many things that seem impossible are not impossible, just improb-
able. The reason why you need the “fuck off” goal and ideally a 
“fuck off” metric is that you need to create a vision that’s worth 
all of the effort. It has to be literally visionary, as in I see a new 
world. Like Martin Luther King said, “I have a dream.” Basically, 
you’re saying I have a vision of the world that doesn’t exist yet but 
should. That’s exactly what your vision needs to be for an organi-
zation, whether it’s a company or a movement that wants to make 
a positive dent in the world. It needs to be desirable enough to say, 
“Yes. I will do all these hard things to help make that become a 
reality.” 
Basically, you’re saying I have a vision of  
the world that doesn’t exist yet but should
Ideally, you also have a “fuck off” metric. For example, with All 
Out we wanted equality everywhere; for gay, transgender, lesbian, 
etc. people, and we have a metric for that. When we launched, 
there were 76 countries in the world where it’s illegal to be gay 
and 10 where you can be executed or receive life imprisonment 
for being gay or transgender. Our fuck-off metric was to go from 
76-10 to 0-0. 
DP: This same idea of a big “fuck off” improbable goal can be 
applied to the vision for companies.
DA: Yes, exactly. For example, at Airbnb we take extremely seri-
ous our vision of a world where “Anyone Can Belong Anywhere.” 
We know we can make that world happen in millions of small 
ways through the actions of our hosts. They enable strangers to 
feel like locals by welcoming them and weaving them into the 
social fabric of their neighborhoods and cities. We’re developing 
a metric that will enable us to measure how much guests felt they 

50 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
belonged. It will be used to measure our success, together with 
our business metrics. 
DP: In contrast to the big “fuck off” goal that’s improbable, you 
also have this idea of the commitment curve, where grassroots 
organizers start with a basic irst action that is a minimum level of 
commitment, such as signing a petition or joining an email list, and 
then move on a curve through stages of increased participation up 
to attending a rally or physical event. 
Can you tell us about how a commitment curve works? Why is it 
important to start at the bottom instead of jumping ahead to the 
big ask? 
DA: The commitment curve is a very simple model that enables 
you to make “asks” of your members and users such that a larger 
number of people become committed, and committed more com-
pletely, to your movement or organization. The top axis measures 
the degree of commitment. The bottom axis is time. The commit-
ment curve travels from lower left to upper right. The idea is that 
you plot asks on the curve from easy at the bottom, to hard at the 
top. Start with a low-barrier-to-entry ask, such as signing an online 
petition.
Next, follow up with a slightly harder ask. Not a massively larger 
ask, but a slightly harder ask. For example, tweet at your Senator 
or post something on Facebook. It takes a little bit more effort 
and a little bit more personal commitment, but you do it. Then 
you might follow up with a slightly harder ask, such as making a 
donation. 
The idea is to make increasing, incrementally harder asks, which 
in turn lead to incrementally more commitment. Any given ask on 
that commitment curve is only slightly harder than the one before, 
so it never seems like a huge jump. Then before you know it, you 
ind you will have ramped large numbers of people up the curve to 
ever-higher levels of commitment.
DP: At Airbnb, on one hand, you have these decentralized com-
munities of hosts around the world that are self-organized. There 

Communities and Movements—Douglas Atkin 51
are forums that hosts can join and provide mutual support to each 
other. They can also form meet ups and take innovative initiatives. 
One example you mentioned in a talk was a woman started a peer-
to-peer group where people could sell items and raise money to 
decorate places and become hosts. 
On the other side, Airbnb proactively engages communities to 
take action around legislation or to engage in their communities 
to raise awareness for the economic beneits of home sharing. As 
the Global Head of Community, can you tell us about the bal-
ance between these decentralized, self-organizing communities vs. 
the more hands-on, proactive engagement of communities to take 
action in the form of grassroots organization.
DA: We created the community platform because we know that 
hosting can be hard, and the mutual support of other hosts will 
make it easier and more fun. For example, a new host may be 
thinking, “Oh my God, what do I do? Do I have to put clean tow-
els out; do I do this? So I do that?” Getting tips and advice directly 
from other, more experienced hosts can be enormously helpful.
Conversations are about everything from “How do I create a good 
welcome for a honeymoon couple?” all the way down to “Oh 
damn, my washing machine’s broken and I need to change the 
bedding. Is there someone nearby whose washing machine I could 
use?” The basic idea is that hosts help hosts become better hosts. 
And that’s exactly what happened. 
It’s a new economy bumping up against  
old laws in cities around the world
Grassroots organizing is a different methodology that’s required 
for a different purpose. Airbnb hosts and guests are participat-
ing in the peer-to-peer economy. It’s a new economy bumping up 
against old laws in cities around the world.
We’ve used grass-roots organizing techniques to invite our hosts 
and guests to become part of the political process in their cities, 
and to create laws that both recognize this new economy and are 

52 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
fair to their fellow citizens. Grassroots organizing is truly excellent 
at scaling the effects of community.
Unlike the traditional community manager model that exists in 
most organizations (usually startups), grassroots organizers iden-
tify and then train members of your community to become com-
munity leaders. In others words, they try and make themselves 
redundant by recruiting and training your members to be leaders.
In San Francisco, for example, we had 11 host-leaders that ran 
communities of hosts in each of the 11 Supervisor Districts (Super-
visors are the governing body in the city). The organizers trained 
and equipped them to tell their stories to their representatives 
effectively, to attend hearings and testify, to give press conferences 
and so on. They used the commitment curve to make the right asks 
at the right time. The result was a new law that involved unheard 
of community involvement in its making.
DP: You have such a wide range of organizing experience, from 
building small groups at Meetup to global communities and move-
ments through Purpose and Airbnb. Most people today talk about 
“community” in generic terms, as if all communities are the same 
regardless of size or interest.
Can you help us understand the different nuances based on your 
extensive experience?
DA: Let’s go back to the irst two things that we talked about, 
movements and smaller communities. Never be confused by think-
ing they are the same thing; they’re not. They exist for different 
purposes and offer different beneits. 
A smaller community like a Meetup group, or a PTA or church, 
exist to create a sense of belonging, so that people can learn, do, or 
change something together. Social ties between members tend to be 
strong within small intimate communities. 
It’s different for movements. The whole point of movements is not 
to be small and intimate; it’s to have massive scale. Your goal is to 
mobilize large numbers of people to take action on a single leverage 

Communities and Movements—Douglas Atkin 53
point (normally a government, and ideally a person, such as a Prime 
Minister, a Mayor or whatever). The social ties in a modern move-
ment tend to be weak. But the effectiveness comes from many people 
taking the same action at the same time.
DP: I want to ask one inal question and build upon this idea of 
world irsts. Airbnb is arguably the biggest crowd brand in the 
world doing pioneering work at massive global scale. Recently, 
you launched the Belo, a new logo that is also a symbol for people, 
places, love, and the letter A. 
I’ve heard you speak about the Belo in the context of launching a 
global super brand, in the sense of being a universally recognizable 
icon similar to a Coca Cola or Nike. There is this big idea behind 
the Airbnb brand that anybody can belong anywhere, and you 
encouraged your 1 million hosts and 25 million guests to embrace 
the Belo and make it their own brand. People created and uploaded 
over 80 thousand versions of the logo to your website. Airbnb is 
basically going into uncharted territory as the worlds irst super 
global crowd brand. 
As Global Head of Community and as a former branding expert, 
this seems like an awesome culmination and triumph of your life’s 
work. Can you tell us about the Belo and the story behind launch-
ing the world’s irst super global crowd brand?
DA: I irst joined Airbnb as a consultant. I thought it was to help 
them with community because I’m a community guy. But Brian 
said, “Hey Douglas, you know a lot about brands from your past, 
can you help us igure out what ours is?” 
“We are clearly a community, I can see that,” I said. “There are 
three stakeholders in the community (hosts, guests, and employ-
ees.) Employees are both hosts and guests; and guests are also 
hosts; and vice versa. We have this massive community. I think the 
question to ask is: What’s the purpose of our community? Why 
does it exist? What is it in the world to do and what difference is 
it going to make? In other words, what is the vision and how will 
this community make the world a better place?” 

54 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
Once we have established what that is, then we’ll know what the 
brand should become. But the brand is only one manifestation of 
the vision. Vision will also be manifested in product design, our 
ofice space, and who we hire—all of those things.
We ended up talking to 485 hosts, guests, and employees. The sto-
ries that people told, and the data from surveys, suggested that 
the community’s purpose was something in the area of, “We are 
trying to create a world where anyone can belong everywhere.” 
Eventually it became “Belong Anywhere.” That’s what was used 
to brief the Design Studio in London that developed the Belo with 
our in-house design team.
When we launched the Belo, we wanted to launch a symbol, not 
a logo. There’s a big difference between the two. A logo is simply 
a graphic design. A symbol is a graphic design that has a meaning 
attached. We simultaneously launched the Belo (our symbol) with 
the idea of Anyone Belonging Anywhere. 
Brian, Joe, and I lew to New York to show both the symbol and its 
meaning to some guests and hosts. We shared the story of “Belong 
Anywhere”—what it means, and where it came from. One host 
from Brooklyn said, “Thank you for explaining to me what it is 
exactly that I do and why I do it.” That’s when we knew we had 
something that really resonated. Some people even had tears in 
their eyes!
When we launched the Belo and “Anyone Can Belong Anywhere,” 
we also invited our community to submit their own versions of 
the Belo to our site. Over 80,000 people submitted their own ver-
sions. This just reinforced the idea that the Airbnb brand is a com-
munity brand. 
One of our current marketing campaigns called “Live There” is 
another great articulation of the brand and our vision of “Anyone 
Belonging Anywhere.” It says don’t go and visit somewhere, go 
and live there, even if it’s for a night because that’s what it feels 
like. Feel like you’re so immersed in the culture and have an inside 
track on the place that you feel like you’re living there, even for a 
short time.

Communities and Movements—Douglas Atkin 55
DOUGLAS ATKIN  is Global Head of Community at Airbnb; Co-Founder and Board 
Chair of Peers.org, a Global Movement for the Sharing Economy; Founder of the-
glueproject, a blog and venture about social glue; and Board Member of AllOut.org, 
the world’s largest LGBT movement. Previously, he was Co-Founder of Purpose, an 
organization that mobilizes millions for social change, and Partner and Chief Com-
munity Ofﬁcer at Meetup—the world’s largest network of communities. 
Douglas is also a former brand strategist and partner at leading NY and London 
agencies and the author of The Culting of Brands: How to Turn Customers into True 
Believers, a book about how to build cult-like community around almost anything. 
He lives in San Francisco with his partner, Matthew, and two beagles.


PART II
THE POWER OF SHARING
How can we build a  
collaborative society?
Why does sharing make  
life more meaningful?
How can you provide and  
share value with others?


SHARING COMMUNITIES
Neal Gorenﬂo
Neal Gorenlo has one of the most inspiring personal stories you 
will ever hear. His radical life change from corporate executive 
to co-founding Shareable exempliies the type of transformation 
that is possible when we let go of material deinitions of suc-
cess and pursue a life illed with meaning and purpose. For Neal, 
sharing isn’t a thing we do; it deines who we are and and helps 
us realize our true potential.
• 
How sharing transforms lives and communities
• 
The power of open networks to make change
• 
Liberating work from the cage of jobs and money
• 
The importance of the commons to Sharing Cities
Neal has participated in thousands of sharing events and is a 
pioneer of the sharing economy movement. He has a dynamic 
ability to encourage participation from everyone in a decentral-
ized, open network; and then shift to strategic thinking about 
policy recommendations on how to scale Sharing Cities around 
the world. What an inspiration . . . get ready to quit your job and 
start sharing!
DP: What is Shareable and why did you found it?
NG: Shareable is a non-proit with a mission to empower every-
one to share. We have two programs: publishing and community 
organizing. 

60 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
For publishing, we are best known for our online magazine at 
Shareable.net where we serve about 100,000 unique visitors per 
month. Our editorial strategy is to inspire and empower. The dom-
inant narrative in society is that you succeed through shopping and 
competition, that it’s every person for themselves. We tell another 
story—how to succeed through sharing and collaboration. We’re 
all in it together. And we show through many examples in nearly 
every dimension of life that sharing works.
For community organizing, we bring together the people who put 
these principles into action. That’s everything from how to host a 
potluck to starting a worker cooperative. For us, sharing is very 
broad. It’s not just about sharing items but also sharing power, 
ideas, and ownership, so it extends from neighborly sharing where 
you borrow a cup of sugar to sharing a stake and a voice in an enter-
prise or government. Our community organizing connects people 
who share this vision and want to live it out and make it real.
About two years ago, we started the Sharing Cities Network. The 
basic goal is to foster strong, local sharing movements in cities 
around the world. The Sharing Cities Network connects sharers in 
a knowledge exchange at a global level. We are also working on a 
book to solidify a vision of what it means to create a Sharing City.
DP: Many readers of this book want to share more, but might feel 
stuck in a job they don’t like or they just don’t know where to 
start. We tend to get trapped into this conventional way of think-
ing that sharing is something we do part time, instead of being an 
essential part of who we are, what we do, and how we interact 
with the world.
I would love to start this interview with your personal story, 
because it is so powerful and inspiring. You had an epiphany that 
led you to leave the corporate world. Can you tell us a bit about 
that experience and the realizations you had on how to live a more 
meaningful life?
NG: June 2004, it was a sunny Saturday afternoon and I was stay-
ing at the NH Hotel in Brussels. I had been travelling a lot working 
for a big multinational corporation, DHL, part of the backbone of 

Sharing Communities—Neal Gorenﬂo 61
the global economy. I ate a hearty European breakfast and headed 
out on a jog through my normal route in this business park. When 
I got to the irst turn at the top of the hill, I stopped in a parking 
lot of a warehouse. 
Then something unexpected happened—I started to cry. I real-
ized this was not what I wanted to do with my life and that I 
would never realize my creative potential on this corporate path. 
I would not have the type of relationships I want, become the 
type of person I want to be, do meaningful work, or be part of a 
real community.
It’s every man for himself, every woman  
for herself. his is not the way to get  
what we really want out of life
My life lashed in front of my eyes. I saw all of the personal strug-
gles and challenges I had up to that point, and there was a thread 
that connected them all: I had been doing all life on my own and 
was deeply alone and lonely. Along with this, I felt hopelessness, 
disempowerment, and even shame that I hadn’t been able to make 
a real life. 
Even though on paper I was a success in terms of my career, I felt 
like a failure in life. I realized that this was the general condition 
many people feel in the capitalist system and corporate world. It’s 
every man for himself, every woman for herself. This is not the 
way to get what we really want out of life, which is a basic desire 
to become a fully realized human being. This wasn’t just about me, 
but also feeling that pain in others.
I made a decision on the spot to change my life and do whatever I 
could to create a world where it was easy to ind love and friend-
ship, community and meaningful work, and where every day could 
be illed with authentic human connection. Except, I didn’t know 
how to do that. I kept asking myself, “What should I do?” and I 
didn’t have an answer. I made a vow to ind out. I ran back to my 
hotel room, sent in my letter of resignation, and booked the irst 
light home to start a new life. 

62 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
DP: Wow, that’s a powerful story. The moment at the end reminds 
me of the story of the Buddha, where after attaining enlightenment 
he basically stood there for three days wondering what to do next. 
Even with total clarity of mind on the inside, we sometimes don’t 
know what to do or how to navigate the world. 
I agree 100% that many people want to break out of the corporate 
world but don’t know what to do. When I read through some of 
the policy docs, initiatives, and writing at Shareable, I see a lot 
of different applications of strategic thinking from the corporate 
world. This makes me curious how you shift directions in life with-
out starting completely over. 
How has your background been helpful in the work that you do 
now, and how might readers from similar corporate backgrounds 
start sharing initiatives or contribute more to their communities?
NG: It was helpful to have some experience, but I would say that 
the most powerful thing going for me is my level of commitment. 
It is deep and real, and it goes to the marrow of my bone and the 
core of my soul. I had this unexpected a-ha moment that I didn’t 
ask for. I listened to it and acted on it.
My advice for people who may not be satisied with their life direc-
tion or career is to provoke that kind of moment—to search and 
question, not necessarily to recreate the same thing as me, but to 
tap into their deepest desires and beliefs. That’s a process and it 
takes a while. I had this moment, but there was a lot of prepara-
tion and build up to it. It didn’t come out of nowhere.
Ask questions, be curious, listen and be open, particularly to what 
comes through you. One of my favorite quotes is by Martha Gra-
ham, the famous American modern dancer and one of the greatest 
artists in the 20th century: 
There is a vitality, a life force, an energy, a quickening that is trans-
lated through you into action, and because there is only one of you 
in all of time, this expression is unique. And if you block it, it will 
never exist through any other medium, and be lost. The world will 
not have it. 

Sharing Communities—Neal Gorenﬂo 63
It is not your business to determine how good it is, nor how valu-
able, nor how it compares with other expressions. It is your busi-
ness to keep it yours, clearly and directly, to keep the channel open.
That’s what I would say to anyone in a similar situation as I was. 
The change can’t come from just your intellect. The mind can help, 
but there has to be a spiritual shift, and that takes time. 
DP: I love this. It’s so important to remember that life is a journey 
and not a chain of decisions from job to job, project to project, 
venture to venture. The power of sharing comes from within and 
opens us to new possibilities in every aspect of our lives.
I heard you talk about a similar idea before. If you help someone 
with the thing that they are dying to do or that’s the most import-
ant thing to them in the world, then they will want to help you 
back. By totally focusing on the intent and the purpose of helping 
others, you create this kind of network or ripple effect of profound 
change in the world.
NG: After I left my corporate career, I came back to San Francisco 
and started a salon with friends called the Abundance League and 
that was precisely the design. One evening each month, everyone 
connected based on their purpose: not their job and the thing that 
put money on the table, but the thing they were dying to do in the 
world, the unique contribution they could make. We connected on 
that basis to help each other on our passion projects. 
If you help someone out with something that they  
are dying to do in the world, you make a fast  
friend who is willing to go the distance for you
If you help someone out with something that they are dying to 
do in the world, you make a fast friend who is willing to go the 
distance for you. If you do that hundreds of times, then what 
comes back to you is more substantial and meaningful than you 
can plan. That changed my life more than anything. The salon 
was the smartest, most meaningful, and most powerful thing that 
I’ve ever done. 

64 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
It showed me how you can get things done in a different way that is 
organic, powerful, and without struggle. I am such a strong believer 
in sharing, generosity, and collaboration because I experienced the 
transformation personally. So have many of the people at Share-
able. It is not just an idea to talk about. Sharing is our experience, 
and it’s life changing, so we want others to experience it too.
DP: You mentioned Shareable, and how your personal commit-
ment to sharing led to creating this salon and an organization to 
promote and facilitate sharing. Since you left your corporate job 
back in 2004, you have now led or been a catalyst for thousands 
of different sharing initiatives all over the world. 
How do you ind a balance between someone being a community 
leader vs. more open collaboration in a group? Or to rephrase that 
question: How do you balance a core strategy vs. letting things 
evolve organically over time? 
NG: I think this comes down to the type of organization that you 
have, whether it is a traditional organization or an open network. 
Operating in an open network is very different from the way you 
would operate within a traditional organization.
You are not commanding people to do 
something. Instead, you make the invitation  
to join in what you are doing
There are different principles at work in an open network like 
the power of example, the power of suggestion, and the power 
of empowerment. You can get massive levels of impact by that 
approach. You are not commanding people to do something. 
Instead, you make the invitation to join in what you are doing and 
it’s the power of your purpose that makes the invitation attractive. 
The open network approach brings people on the stage with you 
to make change. This is how we operate at Shareable. It’s partially 
a strategy, but also we adapt to things as we learn and see oppor-
tunities unfold. If you are at the center of a conversation and help 
start a movement, then you are in a unique position because you 

Sharing Communities—Neal Gorenﬂo 65
have a sense for what’s going to happen next and you can prepare 
the way.
DP: This search for a more meaningful life rooted in sharing and 
collaboration led you to leave the corporate world and rethink 
things on a massive scale. Part of that involves the nature of work 
and the application of startup thinking to re-engineering how soci-
ety functions. 
There is a way in which peer-to-peer platforms and the sharing 
economy can evolve to tackle bigger societal problems and inefi-
ciencies at massive scale through offering co-ownership to provid-
ers and members. Next generation companies that offer more value 
through co-ownership incentives could undermine the monopolies 
of irst generation sharing economy platforms that charge fees per 
transaction. 
Could you tell us your thoughts on the future of work and the 
direction that you see the sharing economy and peer-to-peer plat-
forms evolving in the future?
NG: I think we see a limited and unambitious exploration publicly 
around the future of work that centers on how we can make this 
freedom-limiting institution better or make the cage more com-
fortable. This seems completely backwards and un-American in 
the sense that it’s anti-freedom. It shows how conditioned we are 
in this economy that we cannot think beyond a job.
In a sense, this is like going backwards to before the 19th cen-
tury. The labor movement had some focus on improving wages and 
working conditions, but the priority was to shorten the workweek 
over time until there was no work. In other words, the goal was 
freedom through prosperity and abundance. The real question we 
should ask about the future of work is: How do you get from a job 
to no job? 
Let’s try to imagine it from our contemporary situation. We have 
lots of on-demand workers on peer-to-peer platforms and things 
like InstaCart delivering groceries, etc. One possible transforma-
tion that is partially under way is these platforms could give their 

66 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
stakeholders (the users and providers) a say and an ownership 
stake. This would help platforms remain competitive. This kind of 
shift would allow you to go from just being a worker on a plat-
form to also being an owner and a decision-maker, and perhaps 
have a say and stake in multiple platforms.
DP: This seems like a natural evolution of the sharing economy 
business model. There is this kind of assumption in Silicon Valley 
around companies that have incredibly high, multi-billion dollar 
valuations that they will maintain their monopolies. However, they 
often operate at massive losses, and it’s unclear how they will ever 
make enough money to please their investors without doing some-
thing drastic that undermines their communities. 
Meanwhile, more nimble startups that did not sell the majority 
stake in their company to venture capitalists keep pushing the 
sharing economy business model further by offering a share of 
ownership to their users and providers. You speak about this else-
where with the idea that ownership is the new sharing. 
NG: Yes, exactly. Imagine you are an owner and decision-maker 
in platforms, instead of working for wages. Perhaps you occa-
sionally work to get some income but maybe you are getting divi-
dends or building up equity to help these platforms be successful. 
That stake in ownership also provides additional incentives for 
you to work harder, be loyal, refer friends and family, and so on. 
Ownership could create more sustainable business models instead 
of this hyper growth fueled by venture capital that is ultimately 
unsustainable.
That’s a vision for platforms. But you can have a similar arrange-
ment for housing, food, and transportation using less technology- 
intensive modes like cooperatives. Instead of buying what you need 
by working and earning wages, you are a member of a community 
that creates, manages, and uses a shared asset—i.e., a commons—
that provides you beneits like food, water, electricity, transporta-
tion, housing, etc. That is where we need to go.
Then the question is: What do you do with all that? You start to 
get out of the trap of always having to work. The idea is that you 

Sharing Communities—Neal Gorenﬂo 67
want free time to develop yourself, which in turn develops into 
capacity to contribute even more to the community. 
You have support for what you want to gift to the world, but 
you are creating a gift that only you can give to your community. 
That’s a reality that already exists in part, but how can we create a 
world where everyone has a shot at that reality?
You start to get out of the trap  
of always having to work
DP: This big picture, visionary perspective on how the future could 
or should be creates a great transition into your work on Sharing 
Cities. To start, could you explain what is a Sharing City and what 
types of initiatives are you doing at Shareable to empower them?
NG: First, the idea of a Sharing City hasn’t been deined and is in 
some ways contested. Corporations have grabbed hold of it and 
are deining it in a certain way, and nonproit organizations like 
Shareable have a different perspective. 
Our view is that a Sharing City is deined primarily as a commons 
rather than a marketplace or a political or governmental entity. 
That doesn’t mean there isn’t a market; it’s that the commons 
is dominant. Examples of commons are things like public parks 
and cooperatives, co-working and hacker spaces, time banks and 
tool libraries.
A complete Sharing City doesn’t exist in any one place, but parts 
of it exist everywhere. The effort we engage in is to bring all those 
pieces together into a singular vision. Every function of the city 
can be operated as a commons, from utilities and transportation, 
to food and housing—people working together as peers in a com-
mons can manage most if not all of a city.
DP: One of the great things about the commons is that everyone 
is equal, so it puts politics, career, job roles, class, and economic 
issues aside for common interests. You mention that parts of 
Sharing Cities exist everywhere, but there isn’t a complete Shar-
ing City. 

68 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
What advice would you give to people that want to participate in the 
commons and live up to the ideals and principles of a Sharing City?
NG: You want to build a movement. First, ind others who believe 
in what you believe in and create community around the idea. 
Next, ind shared priorities. Then come up with common projects. 
I don’t think it should be done like a bureaucracy where there’s 
centralized decision-making and a single plan or strategy. Rather, 
empower people to work on the things they are passionate about 
and are able to execute. Don’t get hung up on a singular focus 
because that can dissipate the energy and be a roadblock to action. 
Have a portfolio of projects that work towards a common vision, 
even if that is lots of small things that you can get done. In Sili-
con Valley, there’s a mindset that only values high-impact, scalable 
ideas. That leaves so many people off the stage of action. It is also 
elitist and un-democratic. It’s not that we don’t need those kind of 
big solutions or that we shouldn’t be strategic. Rather, the fetish 
for the “big idea” at the exclusion of everything else wastes a lot 
of potential.
he fetish for the “big idea” at the exclusion  
of everything else wastes a lot of potential
Start with small projects like neighborhood potlucks, clothing 
swaps, and little free libraries. They get the ball rolling and are 
powerful cultural artifacts that signify something important about 
the community—that everyone here is in it together. The new rela-
tionships that form around these small projects lead to other often 
larger projects, which is the more important and almost always 
overlooked thing. Spillover effects like increased social capital can 
shift the trajectory of an entire community toward ever increasing 
levels of sharing and cooperation. 
DP: This gets back to what you spoke about earlier in terms of an 
open network. People come together with shared intentions and a 
common purpose, and projects spark ideas and become catalysts 
to think bigger, draw in new members, and grow in unanticipated 

Sharing Communities—Neal Gorenﬂo 69
ways. There is still this common core identity of the community, 
but it’s not hierarchical. Can you give us an example of how a 
small project created this kind of snowball effect that transformed 
the entire community?
NG: One of my favorite examples is the Sungmisan neighborhood 
in Seoul, South Korea. The catalyzing event was a community-lead 
campaign to stop the development of a water treatment plant that 
would have necessitated the destruction of their neighborhood for-
est. This campaign put in motion a chain of events that resulted in 
a 700 family urban village. 
First, they created a childcare co-op. That led to a consumer co-op 
and then an entire elementary school, which was unique. It was 
a public school, but they incorporated peer learning. The elders 
teach kids things like carpentry, pottery, photography, and so 
forth. Then they formed a collection of clubs for hiking, farming, 
parenting, and photography, and that led to annual festivals and 
theatrical productions.
This village went from a protest campaign to an entire village 
economy where everyone is deeply interconnected. There’s a sense 
that they are all in it together. That’s why these little neighborhood 
projects are so important. One small thing can be the start of a 
community heading in a totally different, positive direction. 
One small thing can be the start of a community 
heading in a totally diferent, positive direction
DP: That is a great example of how an entire community changed 
through sharing. I know that you cover these types of things on 
Shareable.net, but it makes me wonder why we don’t hear more 
stories like this. It reminds me of the work that I did years ago 
when I ran the Religion and Conlict Resolution Program for the 
Tanenbaum Center for Interreligious Understanding.
We studied the efforts of religiously motivated peacemakers that 
put their lives at risk to resolve conlict through nonviolence. Part of 
our challenge was that nonviolent conlict resolution doesn’t make 

70 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
headlines. Media would cover almost any story about extremism 
and violence, but a community of people reconciling differences 
and working together wasn’t deemed newsworthy. Your work and 
that story of the small village in Korea are important reminders of 
sharing and collaboration all over the world. 
NG: Yes, this kind of thing happens all the time and no one talks 
about it. They don’t get the headlines because it isn’t easy to talk 
about like one platform or one CEO. I believe we’re entering an era 
where the community is becoming the hero. They are the central 
change makers. It’s people coming together voluntarily, not because 
anyone tells them to do it, but because they choose to do it. 
This is heroic. This is what we should admire in society. Collective 
actions like this lead to the type of answers that I sought when I 
left my job in search of a more meaningful and connected life. We 
can think big about changing the world through Sharing Cities, 
and we can start locally with small projects in our neighborhood. 
It is all interconnected. That is the power of sharing.
NEAL GORENFLO  is the co-founder and Executive Director of Shareable, a nonproﬁt 
that publishes the world’s leading online magazine about sharing and supports the 
global sharing movement through campaigns. He is a speaker, consultant, and 
writer on sharing cities, the sharing economy, travel, and the future of work. He 
is the co-editor of the sharing-themed books Share or Die, Policies for Shareable 
Cities, and How to Share. As a pioneer of the sharing cities movement, he advises 
mayors, communities, and organizations around the world how to meet their goals 
through sharing. 

LOVE IS THE ANSWER
Prince EA
Prince EA has a unique style of inspirational content that embod-
ies the types of values we need to co-create the future. He claims 
that he has nothing to teach; he merely helps reveal what is found 
within us all. His humility and authenticity helped him organic- 
ally build a platform of around 6 million fans and a billion video 
views—a feat even more impressive considering his medium is 
spoken word poetry.
• 
Why the only true reality is in the present
• 
Mindfulness combats the roar of social media
• 
The ideal way to collaborate with inluencers
• 
How self-awareness could shape the future
Prince EA covers topics like our addiction to social media, how 
labels of race and gender create divisions, and our impact upon 
the environment, yet his videos come back to a simple message: 
Love Is the Answer. A 28-year old native of St. Louis, Prince EA 
has become a global ambassador of peace and an international 
phenomenon. I’m grateful to share his wisdom with you.
DP: I heard that your name Prince EA comes from a 6,000-year-
old story about the Prince of the Earth. It seems like such a great 
it for the vision that you have today to grow the world through 
motivational, inspirational content. This makes me wonder if you 
always had a vision of transcending the label of “hip-hop artist.” 
Can you tell us about the origin of your name?

72 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
PE: Prince EA, Prince Earth, comes from a place called Sumer. I 
was totally fascinated by this culture—they had so many techno-
logical advances right out of the Stone Age like political systems 
and inventing the wheel. They created language, cuneiform, let-
ters with the characters etched in the stone. How did they know 
so much? 
If you asked a member of this society, they would have said that 
their living gods bestowed this knowledge upon them. Prince EA, 
Prince Earth, Enki was the creator god of the Sumerian people, 
and he freed them from bondage through knowledge and wisdom. 
The name was so fascinating to me. I took it upon as my moniker 
because through my music, through my art, through my ilm, I 
want to free people—at least, to open their minds through knowl-
edge and wisdom. 
Before that, my name was Richie Rich. My real name is Richard. I 
was rapping about money I didn’t have, cars I never drove, women 
I didn’t get with. I was always very lyrical, and I rapped about what 
I saw, but it was very braggadocio. I wanted to be more authentic. 
DP: Authenticity—that is deinitely the irst impression I had when 
I came across your videos. There are so many people trying to be 
‘inspirational’ but your content seems to tap into a deeper source. 
My sense is that the evolution of your public persona and content 
was parallel to a more personal transformation. Can you tell us 
about your personal journey and how that shaped what you create? 
PE: I come from St. Louis. The FBI just came out with statistics 
that called St. Louis the most dangerous city in the U.S. I grew up 
with drug dealers and criminals all around me, though I was lucky 
enough to have my family—my mother and my father—here. I 
knew that I didn’t want to waste this opportunity that I have in 
this mystery of existence by following in the footsteps of another 
man. I wanted to carve a new path and my desire for truth, under-
standing, and happiness led me to teachers like Papaji, Mooji, 
Thich Nhat Hanh, and Ramana Maharshi. 
I think the West advanced technologically and they look outward, 
and the East advanced technology of the heart and they look inward. 

Love is the Answer—Prince EA 73
The external world is created from the internal. Shakespeare said, 
“Nothing is good or bad, but thinking makes it so.” Is reality differ-
ent from how you perceive it? Realizing that allows you to relax and 
know that everybody’s doing the best that they can. 
We’re not here for very long; we’re just walking each other home. 
I want to squeeze as much juice out of this experience called life as 
I can. We live a very ephemeral life on this planet. The worst thing 
we can do is to die without having lived and so I wanted to live 
a full life. I wanted to create and be my truest self, be vulnerable 
in my music, in my spoken word poetry, and so that’s what I did. 
That’s how the evolution happened. I began to create pieces of 
content that were meaningful out of service. 
We live a very ephemeral life on this planet.  
he worst thing we can do is to die without  
having lived
My content relects my inward journey. I take experiences that 
I’ve gone through, look inward to my reactions to things, and 
watch my emotions. Joseph Campbell said, “If you want to help 
the world, what you must teach is how to live in it.” That’s what I 
do. I teach people how to live in it, because there’s one Earth, but 
there are billions of worlds. We’re all trying to igure out our indi-
vidual world, so I bring it back to the individual and created this 
platform. This is me. This is the story.
DP: I love this idea of one Earth, but billions of worlds. It reminds 
me of a powerful line in one of your recent videos “Everybody 
Dies, But Not Everybody Lives” where you apologize and say, 
“Martin Luther King didn’t have a dream; that dream had him. 
People don’t have dreams; dreams choose them. And we all need 
the courage to live out the dreams we have inside.”
Many of the people reading this book are entrepreneurs and 
innovators who are constantly illed with doubts and struggle 
with the courage to pursue their dreams. Even when they suc-
ceed, at times they experience imposter syndrome, where they 
feel like an imposter for looking successful, when deep down they 

74 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
are consumed with doubt. Do you remember when your dream 
chose you? How did you overcome doubt and have the courage 
to pursue your dream?
PE: One word: death. Perhaps the greatest teacher of how to live 
is death. There’s a book called The Tibetan Book on Living and 
Dying. In the beginning, it quotes the Buddha saying, “Don’t think. 
But if you must think, let it be on the certainty of your death.” The 
Buddha says that of all footprints, those of the elephant are great-
est, and of all meditations, that upon death is the greatest. Death 
reveals what’s important. It takes away the ego and leads you to 
realize the ephemeral nature of life and existence. Every moment is 
so leeting, this unrepeatable miracle that we call “moments.” 
We have to live our most authentic selves. The path to serenity is 
that which is not reliant upon a certain result. We must give up the 
desire for a certain result and put all of our effort into the action 
itself, the creation, and the service. The result will be up to God, 
the universe, Buddha, Allah, I don’t know. But all we can do is our 
best. When we realize that we don’t know if we have 50 years, 5 
years, or 5 minutes left, then it dissolves the ego. We’ve got to be 
here now and ind out how can we live the truest versions of our-
selves today. Not tomorrow. Today. 
DP: What you just said touches on this idea of awakening this 
power within us all. You have this great quote on your Facebook 
page where you say, “Prince EA is devoted to growing the world 
through motivational and inspirational content. He has nothing to 
teach; he merely shows people the power that they already have 
within themselves. He believes that Love is the answer to every 
problem we face on this planet, and will continue to spread that 
message as far as he can.” Can you tell us a little bit about the role 
that you see yourself playing, in terms of helping to awaken or 
show this power within us all? 
PE: I have no grand ideas about some universal or global raise in 
consciousness or awakening. I don’t know about any of that stuff. 
All I try to do is create content that’s important and that can reach 
as many people as possible. I try to make my message very relat-
able. I use humor, and what the Buddhists call “skillful means.” I 

Love is the Answer—Prince EA 75
try to speak the language of society and the generations of today to 
convey these messages because, as you said, I really have nothing 
to teach. 
I think a lot of it is simply unlearning. Once we begin to question 
our thoughts and beliefs, we step into a space of vigilance and 
awareness. That state of awareness is our true being. Every belief, 
every label, every nationality, it is not original to us. I simply want 
to show people who and what they are and do that however it 
may unfold.
A lot of it is simply unlearning. Once we begin  
to question our thoughts and beliefs, we step 
into a space of vigilance and awareness
DP: You organically built a following of millions of fans and your 
content has reached hundreds of millions of people. I wanted to 
interview you for this book because I think you’re a great example 
of how social media can have a positive social impact and purpose. 
Yet in some of your videos, like “Can We Auto-Correct Human-
ity?”, you talk about how social media keeps us from interacting 
with others and building meaningful relationships. We’ve become 
glued to our smartphone screens and obsessed with status updates, 
forgetting about the people around us. 
How do we ind balance, and what lessons can we learn from your 
example in terms of using technology for social good without let-
ting it control us? 
PE: You said it: “Without letting it control us.” We must main-
tain our position and not allow it to dictate our lives and our 
thoughts. The piece “Can We Auto-Correct Humanity?” wasn’t 
about throwing your cellphone in the Mississippi River or getting 
a sledgehammer and breaking your new Samsung Android phone. 
It was about mindfulness. If you had a very romantic dinner with 
your wife or loved one, then you don’t need a cell phone to distract 
you. Your mind could be on the future, on the past, a million miles 
away from the present moment.

76 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
Once we can develop a state of mindfulness, a maturity of mind-
fulness, it doesn’t matter what we do. Anything can distract us. 
The cell phone is probably the most modern-day distraction that 
we have—the Internet and social media—but we can be present 
once we cultivate complete mindfulness, which is the best place we 
can be. It’s the only place we ever are really. We just don’t realize 
it. Once we’re here, fully present, that’s when we can truly create a 
great future and reconcile the past. 
To get back to your other point, I think social media and the Inter-
net allows our minds to roar and it has certainly done that with 
me. It also allowed me to spread my messages far and wide, from 
Portugal to the Democratic Republic of Congo. It’s very beautiful 
to connect each other, all of us together, and I love it. But like you 
said, we cannot allow it to control us and dictate our thoughts and 
behaviors. We must maintain a state of awareness and mindfulness 
and I think everything will be all right. 
DP: I want to shift directions a little bit and talk about your cre-
ative process. Your most popular videos have reached 50 to 100+ 
million views and are several minutes of spoken word, which in 
itself is amazing, considering the average attention span on social 
media. You tackle some complex subjects like the environment, 
labels, and depression, and how technology and social media can 
control our lives. 
In an interview with Glenn Beck, you mentioned that for one piece 
you went through a kind of thought experiment about death. If 
you were going to die in a week, what would your last message 
be? From that place of vulnerability, there’s only love and com-
passion. How do you strike a balance between being serious and 
giving depth to your subject matter vs. being light enough to reach 
a general audience? 
PE: I’m a simple man. I don’t consider myself to be extraordinarily 
intelligent by any means. I enjoy simplicity, and ironically, I think 
the highest form of sophistication is simplicity. Think of Einstein, 
his theory of relativity is an inch long and yet it explains so much. 
The profundity of it is universal and simple. When we frame things 
simply, that’s how we get the messages out. That’s what I try to do. 

Love is the Answer—Prince EA 77
I don’t consider my topics very heavy. I believe that everything is 
perfect as it is right now. Everything is perfect. My desire to want 
to help the world and to change the world is also perfect. When 
you can come from that place of “everything is ine as it is,” it’s a 
different energy, as opposed to “I need to change this. The world 
needs to be like this and this.” There’s still urgency, but it’s just a 
different energy, and I try to come from that place. 
When you can come from that place of 
“everything is ine as it is,” it’s a diferent  
energy, as opposed to “I need to change this”
Alan Watts has this great talk on perfection. He says to imagine 
if we had the ability to choose our dreams. The irst would be 
a dream where everything is lovely and goes right, and the next 
dream will be just like that. We would get to a point where we get 
tired of everything going right. Then, we would choose a dream 
where some things go right, and some things go wrong. Let it be a 
mystery. Surprise me. And that is the reality that we exist in today. 
This mystery, this perfection, it couldn’t have been better. 
DP: This goes back to what we talked about earlier in terms of 
authenticity and teaching people how to live. There is this magical 
gift of life that we are all blessed with having, and we are all on 
this journey together going through life doing the best that we 
can. There are these kind of universal experiences to tap into, and 
yet each piece of content tells a unique story. Can you tell us a bit 
about your creative process?
PE: As far as my creative process goes, ultimately, the messages 
are the same. For example, “Dear Future Generations: Sorry,” 
the message on the surface is about deforestation and environ-
mental destruction, but when you dig deeper it’s about knowing 
who and what we are, inding our connection with each other 
and the environment, to realize that there’s no separateness. In 
the video “I Am NOT Black, You are NOT White” on the sur-
face it seems like it’s about cultural tolerance and racial har-
mony, but ultimately it’s about knowing who and what we are 
deep down. 

78 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
Osho talks about the problems in the world and likens them to 
leaves on a tree. When we pull one leaf from a tree, another one 
will grow. When we focus on the problems of society, racism, 
deforestation, all of these issues, another leaf will grow, another 
problem will come. We must get to the root of the problem. I like 
to get to the root and dig deeper. 
When you realize that the real cause of these problems is identity 
and who and what we think we are, then imagine if we realized 
that we were all one. What happens to racism or sexism? There 
wouldn’t be any legs left to stand on because that realization gets 
to the root of the problem. This isn’t a belief that I want to try to 
convince people. When you look deeply, you know it, or you are 
it. My content is about taking you on a journey. This is the process 
of how I create.
DP: Social media has given rise to the category of inluencers, these 
people whose recommendations and opinions inluence millions 
of people to take action. Inluencer marketing has also become 
incredibly popular. Most people would consider you to be an inlu-
encer, and I know you’ve done content and forged partnerships 
with Stanford Trees and Neste, for example. 
Lots of people reading this book will be marketers or work with 
companies that are interested in partnering with people like your-
self. What do you think is the ideal way to approach an inluencer 
partnership so they have a positive impact that’s mutually benei-
cial for everyone involved?
PE: The brand identities have to it like Legos. I think that that’s 
crucial. I’ve been contacted by a lot of different companies 
brands that were diametrically opposed to what I create and 
what I stand for. 
DP: Because those people just see the numbers on your videos, 
fans, and that’s what they want.
PE: Exactly. They should do their research on the inluencers, have 
conversations with them to make sure that everything lines up, and 
then allow the inluencers to have freedom to create. For me, my 

Love is the Answer—Prince EA 79
personal experiences have been good and bad. Sometimes corpo-
rations want to direct you to do or say things in a way that it’s just 
not going to create the best outcome for anybody. 
One piece of advice is to trust that the inluencer knows how to 
message whatever it is that the brands are marketing. Trust that 
the inluencers know what they are doing. Give them that trust and 
freedom, but to approach it collaboratively would be ideal. Make 
sure things align and trust the inluencer to create—those are the 
two principles to stick by that will yield great results.
Trust that the inluencers know what they are 
doing. Give them that trust and freedom
DP: I agree 100% that collaborative approaches are always ideal. 
You’re doing a very cool collaborative project right now with 
Neste, which sounds like a great example. This book will come 
out when that project is still going on and unfolding. Can you tell 
us a little bit more about that?
PE: I was speaking in London at a sustainable brands event and 
met a representative of Neste, which is the world’s leading pro-
vider of renewable diesel. They power the city of San Francisco 
transportation and are doing great things like creating fuel from 
waste. They are in total alignment with what I believe in terms of 
creating a sustainable society. We chatted a few times, and they 
lew me out to meet the CEO. They are a beautiful company trying 
to do great things for the world. 
That led to a collaborative project called Pre-Order the Future. 
Essentially, we’re giving people the opportunity to create a product. 
It can be in the ield of education, transportation, entertainment, 
so we are getting all types of great ideas submitted to our website. 
These ideas are voted upon and at the end of the year, we will take 
the best idea and build that product out of renewable materials. 
This project not only has the potential to create a successful prod-
uct globally but also be successful in the sense that it will be in 
alignment with environmental integrity and help create a better, 

80 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
healthier world. It’s something I’m very excited to create. We’re in 
the process now of narrowing down the ideas, so by the end of the 
year we should have something great. It should be big. I’m excited. 
DP: That’s awesome! It sounds like a perfect example of the col-
laboration between a company, inluencer, and the crowd, which is 
what this book is all about. 
I have one last question: Years ago, I went to a talk by Thich Nhat 
Hanh that had a profound impact on me. There was a point where 
he said that the future can be like a prison. We have so many 
thoughts and expectations about how it could or should be that 
we become trapped instead of allowing it to unfold naturally. That 
talk was a spark that led me to quit my job, buy a one-way ticket 
to Thailand, and placed me on a path to write my irst book, Red 
Bull to Buddha. 
I mention this because the idea of being trapped by expecta-
tions reminds me of one of your most popular videos, “Dear 
Future Generations.” The narrative opens with you apologiz-
ing for how we ruined the environment. There are no longer 
trees and our mindset was to call all of this destruction and 
pursuit of money and profits “progress.” There’s this dramatic 
buildup about how terrible the future will be, and then the 
music stops and you refuse to accept the future that we appear 
trapped into expecting. 
That video has been viewed over a hundred million times, a great 
testament to the vision and inspiration of your content. So many 
of your videos look ahead to the hope of a better future, which is a 
main theme of this book. What would a fully realized vision of the 
future look like if all your ideas were implemented? 
PE: A world in which we know who and what we are. Where we 
are no longer identiied with who we think we are, with what we 
think about the world, what we can be. The Buddha was asked 
that very same question, “What do you think the future will be? 
Will there ever be an enlightened society? What do you think?” 
And he said, “Why are you worried about the future when you 
can’t even stay in the present?” Nobody ever gets to the future. 

Love is the Answer—Prince EA 81
There is no tomorrow. Yesterday is a graveyard. All of these are 
notions. The only true reality that we ever live is the now, and if 
we can stay here, present, my goodness. The future will unfold as 
it may. As it may.
here is no tomorrow. Yesterday is a graveyard. 
All of these are notions. he only true reality 
that we ever live is the now
PRINCE EA  has touched the hearts, minds, and souls of millions of people world-
wide. By producing creative, inspirational, and thought-provoking content, he has 
accumulated over 500 million views on the Facebook and YouTube platforms alone.
Born and raised on the North Side of St. Louis Missouri, the 28-year old poet, ﬁlm-
maker, and speaker graduated Magna Cum Laude from a full scholarship at the 
University of Missouri St. Louis, with his BA in Anthropology.
Today, when he’s not creating, he speaks at conferences and gives lectures to high 
school/university students nationwide, on the topics of self-development, living your 
passion, and the importance of being motivated and engaged in the classroom.


COLLABORATIVE SOCIETY
Antonin Léonard
Antonin Léonard is Co-Founder of OuiShare, a global com-
munity working to build a collaborative society around values 
of fairness, openness, and trust. Through empowering people 
and decentralizing power, we can ind new ways to share value 
and create prosperity for all. This strongly aligns with the main 
theme of Empower to approach the future like we are building 
a movement.
• 
Decentralized organizations without hierarchies
• 
Why the collaborative economy isn’t sustainable
• 
Changes coming from the next generation of leaders
• 
Grassroots movements, companies, and governments
For Antonin and OuiShare, many companies considered to be 
part of the collaborative economy remain trapped by an outdated 
model of capitalism. Massive growth accelerated by venture capi-
tal is unsustainable and creates risks of being forced to serve inves-
tors at the expense of the crowd. OuiShare is there to incubate the 
next generation of companies and ideas that put people irst.
DP: The OuiShare website says, “Welcome to the Collaborative 
Society. OuiShare is a global community that connects people, 
organizations and ideas around fairness, openness and trust.” You 
also wrote a book The Collaborative Society: The End of Hierar-
chies. What is your vision for a collaborative society?

84 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
AL: OuiShare started covering the collaborative economy in 2007 
and we were among the irst to approach it like a movement with 
different dimensions. At that time, “the sharing economy” and 
“collaborative consumption” were the two expressions mainly 
used by entrepreneurs, strategists, and thinkers covering those top-
ics. To us, it appeared to be going beyond sharing and consump-
tion, so we started using the term “the collaborative economy” as 
its main expression. 
Today in France, the term “collaborative economy” is mainly used 
to describe Airbnb and Uber. Since day one, it was our intention to 
go beyond just covering those companies and show that there were 
a lot of movements converging together that were about empow-
ering people and decentralizing power, basically giving tools to 
people for them to be entrepreneurs and producers instead of only 
consumers. 
We eventually left the term “collaborative 
economy” in favor of “collaborative society”
That’s why we eventually left the term “collaborative economy” 
in favor of “collaborative society.” It’s not only about economics 
or business. We are sharing a human-driven vision of economics 
in society. Right now, we are focusing on emerging initiatives—
whether they are startups, nonproits, or grassroots movements—
that are empowering people. For example, we just did a ive-
week-long accelerator for open-source hardware and open-source 
manufacturing initiatives. We are slowly but surely moving from 
the startups in the collaborative economy space towards openness 
as a driver for innovation. 
This is especially because these new models are struggling to be 
sustainable, whereas companies with massive amounts of venture 
funding like Airbnb, Uber, and others are not struggling at all. 
Pretty much the opposite. We are also in contact with policymak-
ers in France and across Europe to help them address the eco-
nomic and social impacts of these movements—but always with 
the vision focused on what it means for people to have a better life, 
be more autonomous, and have more power.

Collaborative Society—Antonin Léonard 85
DP: Ending hierarchies and decentralizing power does not mean 
that you are anti-capitalist. Rather, you are pioneering and sup-
porting the next wave of collaborative organizations with alter-
native business models and corporate structures, such as shar-
ing ownership and co-investing from members, crowdsourcing, 
and cooperatives. 
OuiShare applies these same principles in its own operations. You 
have local groups, knowledge groups, events and conferences, and 
also an online magazine. Can you tell us how OuiShare is orga-
nized, your membership and initiatives, and how these relate to 
your values and purpose?
AL: We are a very decentralized organization. There are a lot 
of initiatives, a lot of autonomy, and a lot of power to local 
chapters. For example, the team in Barcelona is doing their own 
Spanish-language OuiShare Fest, and we are trying to help them 
the best way we can. Sometimes we see them do things that we 
might do differently. We may have a conversation about it, but 
they decide what is best for them. This is because certain things 
might make sense for us in Paris, but for political or economic 
reasons, they don’t make sense for Barcelona. We try to eat our 
own dog food.
Our leadership and governance are decentralized locally and glob-
ally. Every time there’s a big decision that impacts the whole organ- 
ization, we use an open source collaborative decision-making 
online tool called Loomio. The people that can use the tool are 
called Connectors and there are currently 80 around the world. 
Connectors are responsible for leading the community at a local 
level. Every six months, we all meet during what we call a sum-
mit. That’s when we make decisions that impact the organization 
inancially or in terms of exposure.
DP: OuiShare is a nonproit with volunteers all over the world, 
and you have a major focus on collaboration and community. To 
what extent do you think the collaborative economy is a move-
ment, and how do you empower it with this highly lexible, decen-
tralized structure?

86 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
AL: First of all, I think the collaborative economy is too broad 
and it is not clear what it means. We stopped using that term. 
It’s already old-fashioned, in a way, and it’s too business oriented. 
We are creating and growing an organization focused on meaning, 
purpose, and having a positive impact in the world. Helping grow 
the collaborative economy might not make the world a better 
place, because the organizations that are leading the collaborative 
economy right now are very traditional. 
What I mean is they are traditional in the way they raise money, 
how they work with people, and in their main focus on business. 
Many of them don’t seem to be interested in something other than 
money and making their investors richer. I’m not trying to be 
anti-capitalist saying that. Our interest in the collaborative econ-
omy as a movement—and what we now call collaborative soci-
ety—is based on an opportunity to create and grow different kinds 
of organizations. 
We are still very interested in the impact the larger collaborative 
economy organizations have on society and politics as a whole. It’s 
not like, “We don’t want to work with Uber or Airbnb.” It’s more 
that we want to focus on startups or nonproits that are still small 
and have the opportunity to grow and scale in a more decentral-
ized way. That’s why we are a big supporter of the open-source 
movement. We think there is an important opportunity to think 
and do things differently.
DP: One of the key things with many peer-to-peer organizations is 
this kind of blurring between movements and platforms with things 
like digital cooperatives. OuiShare and Shareable are examples of 
organizations that also function like platforms, which is why I like 
the term “people-powered platforms” for these next-generation, 
open network organizations that bring people together and create 
leverage through technology to affect real social change.
AL: I think “people-powered platform” applies well to OuiShare. 
First, it’s clearly people powered, both in terms of governance and 
on the power people have in the organization. It also aims to be 
a platform or an incubator of people and products. People join 
OuiShare and become entrepreneurs or they start an initiative. 

Collaborative Society—Antonin Léonard 87
They can be local leaders, startup entrepreneurs, writers, or even 
creators of a local union for Uber drivers, which is a project we’re 
working on in Paris. What matters is that they are driven by a set 
of values to make society work for everyone in a more inclusive 
and fair way. 
What matters is that they are driven by a set of 
values to make society work for everyone in a 
more inclusive and fair way
DP: You talked about ending hierarchies, and I think the collabo-
rative economy has a lot of potential for emerging markets, espe-
cially when billions of people will be coming online for the irst 
time in the next ten to twenty years. What are your thoughts on the 
collaborative economy in a more global perspective?
AL: I think we need global platforms that people can use to scale 
their projects in a different way. One of the big visions behind 
OuiShare is to have Connectors all around the world that are 
knowledgeable about how innovation works in every city. Then 
you can scale a lot of meaningful initiatives in a different way. 
Policymakers and governments are really far away from all of this, 
and by spending time with them and sharing what we learn, how 
we work, and the way we operate, that can have a big impact. 
Big corporations, startups, grassroots innovators, and local gov-
ernments don’t always talk to each other. Through OuiShare Fest 
and the online platforms we design, our goal is to create spaces 
where those people can have meaningful conversations. It’s not 
an easy task because they don’t have the same values or the same 
control codes, so it takes some experience to design spaces for 
enabling those conversations.
DP: I agree 100% that big corporations, startups, grassroots inno-
vators, and local governments don’t always talk to each other. A 
big goal of this book is to bring these various perspectives together 
in the hopes of starting a global conversation about collaboration, 
sharing, and prosperity for everyone. That is also the idea behind 
the title Empower: How to Co-Create the Future We All Deserve. 

88 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
This also draws attention to tensions within the collaborative 
economy that we touched on earlier. When I attended OuiShare 
Fest in 2014, I noticed a lot of the conversations focused on ideas 
and values, whereas collaborative economy startups in the U.S. 
are heavily focused on metrics, revenue, and raising investment 
to scale very fast. This goes back to what you said about why  
OuiShare prefers the term “collaborative society” over “collabora-
tive economy.” How do you ind a balance between these? 
AL: Clearly, there’s a big difference in the approach. Americans 
are much more pragmatic and interested in designing solutions. 
Theory matters to them to the extent that it can be translated into 
practical outputs. Europeans, and the French especially, are pretty 
much the opposite. Someone who gets a lot of authority in France 
is someone who can speak and write well. It’s not someone who 
delivers practical solutions. It’s about change and vision of society. 
I think the two approaches should feed each other. 
We spend a lot of time talking, reading, and thinking about how 
to build the next generation of purpose-driven organizations. 
OuiShare Fest has become one of the main places where people 
can share ideas about theoretical impacts or emerging projects in 
that space. This enables us to have a unique vision that makes us 
more willing to support bold and radical ideas instead of some-
thing like the next Uber for X. That type of approach doesn’t 
need us.
DP: One thing that comes to mind here is that Americans are often 
too focused on the short-term at the expense of the long-term. The 
irst generation of unicorn collaborative economy startups coming 
out of the U.S. all took on so much venture funding that it is ques-
tionable whether they can sustain their market advantage. These 
startups may also have a devastating effect on the U.S. economy 
in terms of hollowing out good jobs, whereas Europeans are more 
conscious of maintaining a good quality of life and doing things 
that beneit the interests of everyone.
I’m curious what is the perception of U.S.-based collaborative 
economy startups around the world. Do you see tensions of them 
competing with local collaborative economy startups or disrupting 

Collaborative Society—Antonin Léonard 89
industries, such as what Airbnb and Uber have done? Or does this 
go back to approach in terms of what you said earlier regarding 
traditional vs. radical and new? 
AL: I don’t think it’s so much about U.S. vs. Europe or the world. 
It has more to do with how they are set up, how money is raised, 
and the values established by the founders. We try to share this 
with national governments.
National governments are still in the mentality of nations vs. nations, 
France vs. U.S. or whatever, which is old-fashioned. It’s more about 
if you’re a company in the collaborative economy space, then you 
should operate in a different way. There’s an interesting framework 
from Jeremy Heimans of Purpose on old power vs. new power. We 
expect collaborative companies to be new power companies. That 
means new power values around sharing, collaboration, decentral-
ized power, and some of the things we talked about earlier. 
Uber and some of the big venture-backed companies in the collab-
orative economy space operate with old-power values. This creates 
risks because it creates expectations that the new power compa-
nies should also take on lots of venture funding and do things 
that undermine their new power values. Especially if you’re a com-
munity-driven platform, you cannot operate the same way as the 
worst of capitalism used to operate. 
We think the moves from Kickstarter, Etsy, and a few companies 
here in France are really interesting. They became B-Corps, which 
basically says to their community and stakeholders that they try to 
respect a set of rules and principles that make them different. To 
me, that’s where the main difference lies. 
It’s not so much about U.S. vs. Europe. For example, BlaBlaCar, 
Drivy, and The Food Assembly are all global leaders in the collab-
orative economy space based in Paris. It’s great to have European 
unicorns leading the way globally, but it’s also great to have com-
panies operating in a different way.
DP: This makes me wonder how the collaborative economy contin-
ues to evolve and be a people-powered movement when there are 

90 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
these massive investments of venture capital. Investors will inevi-
tably expect massive returns. Larger companies are also acquiring 
local competitors or putting them out of business, suggesting a kind 
of consolidation phase similar to what happened with the rise of 
social media. Do you think the collaborative economy could evolve 
into some type of distributed network, similar to the way that 
OuiShare is organized? What do you see the future looking like?
AL: My main argument is that the collaborative economy is not 
like social media. I don’t think it is going through this consolida-
tion phase like social media did, where you had lots of social apps 
and startups, then slowly everything became consolidated by a 
few big companies like Facebook, Twitter, Google, and Apple. A 
lot of these unicorn companies are also probably unsustainable. 
I mean, they raised so much money and they will need to give a 
massive return to their investors. I don’t see how that is possible 
over the long term.
The collaborative economy will continue to grow and evolve. The 
types of companies and movements that we support at OuiShare 
will be the next generation. They are the future. To build a col-
laborative society, we need collaboration and the people to be at 
the center, not investors and venture capitalists. That doesn’t mean 
there is no place for investors because raising money can help them 
to scale, but rather that companies should be accountable irst to 
their community.
I’m very interested in what Union Square Ventures is doing. I think 
blockchain is going to be a main disruptor and a great enabler 
for more decentralized models to happen. Uber, Airbnb, and Bla- 
BlaCar are leading the way and are amazing disrupters. They’re 
going to enable new models to operate in the future. I don’t know 
when it’s going to happen, but I’m sure that there will eventually 
be disruptors to this irst generation of unicorn companies. Disrup-
tion is inevitable in every industry. 
People tend to think that a company gains a monopoly and then 
the game is over. That’s it. They think all of these unicorn compa-
nies disrupted traditional industries, and now they will last for-
ever. But that’s not how the world works. As Jeff Bezos said, one 

Collaborative Society—Antonin Léonard 91
company’s margin is another company’s opportunity. These big 
unicorn companies take too big margins, and people are not going 
to use them forever.
People tend to think that a company gains a 
monopoly and then the game is over. hat’s  
it….But that’s not how the world works
DP: Another thing that comes to mind is that young people don’t 
like to be on platforms with their parents. For example, part of the 
big exodus of people under 25 from Facebook to platforms like 
Snapchat was that their parents were joining Facebook. 
When I look at OuiShare’s commitment to knowledge sharing, 
grassroots communities, local events, your ideals and values, you 
appear positioned to be a leader in the evolution of the collabora-
tive economy in the next generation. As we look into the future, do 
you see any generational trends with the collaborative economy? 
What do you think young people are doing now that will become 
mainstream in the next 10–20 years?
AL: Yes, you said it. Operating with new values is going to be the 
mainstream. New generations want new values. When Generation 
Y or Z or whatever you call them comes to power, nothing will 
ever be the same. I’m pretty convinced about that. They have the 
values of the new power companies that we talked about earlier. 
There are few of these people at the top of big companies or with 
political power. When this happens, decisions that are going to be 
made will be very different than the ones today. 
DP: Today we are seeing a lot of nationalist, right-wing politi-
cal movements gaining stronger support in Europe and around 
the world. There is talk about the EU, Brexit, Trump, the refu-
gee crisis. As we think about the idea of a collaborative society, 
what role might OuiShare play at a national or international level? 
With your strong grassroots community and organization, could 
you imagine OuiShare becoming involved in politics or helping to 
shape economic policy in the future?

92 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
AL: Of course. To what extent and with which design, I don’t 
know. It’s part of the ways we can make big changes happen. The 
challenge is that right now, if we had to do it, we would compro-
mise ourselves because the people that are in power operate in a 
horrible way. We are waiting for big changes to happen, and we 
will support them when they do. But I think it’s too soon. We need 
probably between 5–10 years for a generation to leave power. 
In that time frame, the values and things that we discussed will 
become more mainstream and we can start operating differently.
DP: I agree that the next generation will bring signiicant change, 
not only politically but also economically. Buying habits are chang-
ing. People want access vs. ownership, and prefer to work for or 
buy products from socially conscious companies. They are sharing 
and collaborating more, and all of that contributes to creating the 
type of collaborative society that you aspire towards. What does 
the future look like to you?
AL: I think the future is about decentralization. That means a 
decentralized economy and decentralized power, enabled by decen-
tralized tools and decentralized or collaborative culture. What the 
collaborative economy is today is not the future because the way 
it is designed right now is not sustainable. It’s just the same as the 
non-collaborative economy in the sense that it is focused on short-
term proits, rapid growth, making money for investors, and these 
types of things. 
What the collaborative economy is today is  
not the future because the way it is designed 
right now is not sustainable
DP: This reminds me of Timothy Wu’s book The Master Switch. 
The telephone, radio, television, and cable were all invented by 
people with optimistic views of what the world should look like. 
Then as they evolved and money got involved, their inventions 
turned into these dominant monopolies. That gave rise to the 
Internet and blogging. There’s ways in which when a monopoly 
forms, something forms in reaction to it. This cycle repeats itself 

Collaborative Society—Antonin Léonard 93
over and over throughout history. Every time another monopoly 
gets dominant, we think the cycle will stop. Except it never does.
AL: Yes, exactly! I think for the irst time in history, we could have 
decentralized autonomous or decentralized collaborative organiza-
tions that cannot be centralized by design. That’s the big difference 
with what happened before. The design principles were not estab-
lished at the beginning. Things like collaborative decision-making, 
collaborative inance, and all kinds of peer-to-peer tools make it 
more eficient to scale an organization in a decentralized way than 
in a centralized way. When it becomes more eficient, then that 
means those decentralized powers get a way. 
ANTONIN LÉONARD  is a social innovator, collaborative economy specialist, and digi-
tal strategist. Co-founder of OuiShare and OuiShare Fest, he researches, consults, 
and speaks and on the power of collaboration and communities in a networked 
age. Antonin is a leading source of expertise for businesses and governments that 
want to embrace the collaborative economy.


IT’S A SHAREABLE LIFE
Chelsea Rustrum
Chelsea Rustrum is passionate about sharing and bringing peo-
ple together. She advocates for action: Stop talking about the lat-
est technology and do something meaningful. Join a co-op. Rent 
your spare room. Share your car. Go to a clothing swap. Meet 
your neighbors. Be part of your community. Create a society that 
empowers everyone to enjoy A Shareable Life.
• 
How the sharing economy meets basic human needs
• 
The world we want to live in isn’t about technology
• 
The sharing economy evolution and business cycles
• 
It’s important to be careful about what we are creating
The sharing economy began as a community focused, values-driven 
movement, which today is being eaten by on-demand everything. 
Our obsession over massive valuations and short-term gains jeop-
ardizes the underlying mission to live in prosperity and abundance. 
Let’s leverage technology to uplift humanity and build cooperative 
communities.
DP: The title of your book is called It’s a Shareable Life. Let’s 
start with a simple opening question: What does it mean to live a 
shareable life?
CR: Living a Shareable Life means to think about everything that 
you have and have access to in a way that can be shared: Your car 
being idle 90% of the time, a couch or an extra bedroom that you 

96 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
could open up, all of your stuff like clothes and books, how you 
eat, and how you get where you’re going and the ways to do that 
with other people. It’s also thinking about the things that you own 
or perhaps have access to. Do you need a car or can you use public 
transportation or one of many ride-sharing apps?
Sharing is about connecting your stuff to relationships in order 
to live a more simple and meaningful life. There are many extrin-
sic beneits. People tend to save or make money when they share. 
Sharing also provides a greater context for human interaction, 
prevents isolation, and gives people more stability when they can 
sense their place in a community. When you visualize your life in 
terms of what you can share, you naturally realign with what it 
means to consume vs. have access, and what is a liability vs. an 
asset. Ownership takes on a whole new meaning. 
The book is a practical guide to sharing with plenty of stories and 
antidotes, but it’s important to ind a place to start and experiment 
with what works for you based on your interests and comfort level. 
If you love to cook and maybe someday want to own a restaurant, 
have strangers over for dinner. If you enjoy being hospitable and 
nurturing others, have a guest and see how that feels. If you own a 
car, try offering access when it is idle. If you are into fashion, bring 
a few items to a clothing swap. Start with what excites you and see 
what happens. 
DP: I’m a former scholar of religion and culture, and I used to do a 
lot of research on the birth of the modern world. One of the things 
that I love about It’s a Shareable Life is that you open with the discus-
sion of how people used to share a lot more than they do now. Even 
though we’ve seen an increase in wealth and prosperity in the last 
ifty years, with average house sizes more than doubling and incomes 
growing dramatically, over 25 percent of the population suffers from 
diagnosable mental illnesses such as anxiety and depression. 
You suggest that this may have something to do with going from 
a shared economy to an individuated economy. This raises a lot of 
interesting questions about values. What do you think happened 
and how is the sharing economy in a way a kind of return to how 
things used to be?

It’s a Shareable Life—Chelsea Rustrum 97
CR: We seem to be in transition, where adoption of sharing prac-
tices and platforms is reaching the masses, but there’s a ine line 
between sharing and the eficiency of straight up convenience. 
There’s a real beauty to people opening their homes, allowing their 
neighbors to drive their cars, treating strangers like friends along 
the way. I think we’re feeling disconnected with all of our technol-
ogy and individual apartments and single-family homes. In cities 
like San Francisco, people have their own stuff and can easily get 
their laundry done with an app, have food delivered within 30 
minutes, and receive massages on-site, but all of that convenience 
can come at the expense of not knowing who lives next door and 
not contributing to your local community. 
All of that convenience can come at the expense 
of not knowing who lives next door and not 
contributing to your local community
I often like to think about what we actually need as human beings. 
I contend we need love, belonging, food, shelter, and creative 
expression. We’ve created a world with a lot of stuff that we don’t 
need and we can be seduced into believing that those are needs 
instead of just desires. At a certain point, we can’t continue buying, 
buying, buying. We only need so much stuff. As a society, continu-
ing to grow bigger and bigger doesn’t make sense and won’t work. 
So the question becomes—What do we need and what’s the best 
way to arrange a society around that?
DP: This is what Douglas Rushkoff refers to as the growth trap.
CR: Yes, exactly. It’s about greater eficiency, so a lot of these plat-
forms focus on removing friction to make sharing and collabora-
tion easier. But I think there’s a step beyond that which is where we 
started in the sharing economy. How do we connect at a greater 
level? How do we get our needs met both collectively and individ-
ually and maybe even do that at the same time? 
This movement of sharing has a long horizon that will need to 
be written into our social structures at a deeper level than apps 
can provide.

98 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
The focus is less on “me” and more on “us.” I irmly believe that 
this is just the end of the beginning, moving toward shared own-
ership, shared value, and a new economy or new paradigm that 
looks very different. If we serve economic instead of human needs, 
eventually that has to crash. 
DP: This sense of disconnection and emphasis upon the individ-
ual over community is a modern phenomenon. It reminds me 
of my research at Princeton on the origins of self-help. In the 
1800s, etiquette books became very popular in part because peo-
ple basically had to learn how to walk past strangers. There were 
mass migrations from rural areas to cities and people weren’t 
used to ignoring others or making judgments based on social or 
economic status.
Earlier you touched on the signiicance of access to knowledge, 
resources, tools, and services. In the book, access is the foundation 
of progress in the sense that it is an enabler to empower people 
with opportunities for more meaningful lives. Yet we continue to 
operate under an ownership model where things are owned by a 
single entity. Tell us about access vs. ownership and how access 
models relate to the sharing economy?
CR: Everything is on loan in the sense that you can’t take things 
with you when you die. We have models like “this is mine” and 
“that is yours,” so don’t touch it. Our economy is wrapped up 
in these images where ownership is associated with status. Ulti-
mately, what we want is access to stuff when we need it. Not hav-
ing to own things and sharing resources frees us to live with more 
meaning and purpose. That was the premise behind the idea of my 
book It’s a Shareable Life. 
The challenge is that the sharing economy started as a move-
ment and is becoming an emblem for a business model. It takes 
only a small step back to realize that many leading compa-
nies in the space are absorbing the value of assets and time 
that people exchange on these platforms. Wealthy investors 
and venture capitalists that back most of these startups expect 
generous returns on their investment, which will create greater 
economic divide. 

It’s a Shareable Life—Chelsea Rustrum 99
Right now, on-demand services are eating the sharing economy. 
The next iteration of this will be the rise of the autonomous world 
with things like drones, self-driving cars, and the IoT (Internet of 
Things). This will happen at the expense of peer-to-peer connec-
tions becoming less important in part because the autonomous 
world will be fueled by massive investments of venture capital and 
big corporations. 
We need to look at access vs. ownership in the context of who 
owns the platforms. The technology powering the sharing econ-
omy is not expensive to build, and yet these companies have sky-
rocketing valuations based on the value of other peoples’ assets 
and time. There is a way to more equally distribute wealth and 
transfer value. For example, we can easily build technology to 
account for, assign, and distribute value as it’s created. 
We need to look at access vs. ownership in the 
context of who owns the platforms…to more 
equally distribute wealth and transfer value
Value distribution is coming, but it needs to start with the deci-
sions made by founders. For example, things like sharing owner-
ship or creating terms that favor users instead of investors. This 
will ultimately create greater access for everyone.
DP: One thing that really excites me is that we’re the irst genera-
tion in history to go from an analog to a digital world. There is this 
fundamental, irreversible shift happening right now for human 
civilization and the sharing economy is laying the foundation for 
a new way of being in the world. Given the challenges that we just 
discussed around access vs. ownership, what is your vision for a 
shareable life as we go into the future?
CR: I think technology is the less interesting part. Right now 
we’re at the point where technology is ubiquitous. It’s replicable 
and a commodity. For example, it’s still dificult to build these 
things, but you can pay someone twenty thousand dollars to build 
a look-alike Kickstarter. The barrier to entry is low on the tech-
nology side.

100 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
What I see is people working on new business models and try-
ing to harness them or use the technology that we already have. 
I call them digital cooperatives because they distribute the value 
through sharing online. Sharing goes through the very structure 
that teaches us where value comes from. Sharing becomes the 
incentive that drives us. And instead of building marketing in as 
an add-on, the community is the company. 
For example, people work so they can earn enough money to pay 
their mortgage. But what if we reframe housing and build connected 
communities where people share costs? What if you don’t have to use 
an app every time you want to share a car or rent a room on Airbnb, 
but instead it’s just built into how we live? This is a kind of rewiring 
of our inner technology. It’s a cooperative model for everyday life.
DP: On the one hand, “on-demand everything” is eating the shar-
ing economy in the sense that the sharing economy is being equated 
with a new type of on-demand capitalism. This is happening at the 
expense of overshadowing peer-to-peer interactions and connections.
Then there is this idea that the technology is the least interesting 
part. The sharing economy is about sharing. It’s a people-powered, 
community-driven movement with all of this incredible potential 
to revolutionize every aspect of our daily lives. People are sharing 
more and more, leveraging existing technology to create digital 
cooperatives and new business models. 
It’s as if there is all of this momentum to force technology and cap-
italism to it into this on-demand everything framework, yet at the 
same time there is a growing awareness and adoption of a sharing 
economy movement that is decidedly egalitarian and democratic, 
driven more by community than by capitalism. In fact, this move-
ment may lead to value distribution and decentralized ownership, 
disrupting venture capital. 
Can you tell us more about the sharing part of the equation? How 
do you see the sharing movement continuing to unfold?
CR: Business goes through a predictable cycle: idealism, adoption, 
and integration. The same patterns repeat over and over. The sharing 

It’s a Shareable Life—Chelsea Rustrum 101
economy is no different. We simply haven’t integrated sharing yet. 
This is what I meant earlier when I referenced this idea that we are 
sort of midway through the adoption of sharing practices.
While the sharing economy seems to have lost much of its original 
meaning, we now have a social movement that is full force, break-
ing down the social constructs of ownership and exchange. People 
are thinking more about the value that they already have, consider-
ing access over ownership, integrating sharing into their daily lives, 
and slowly this is creating a new consciousness around abundance.
While the sharing economy seems to have  
lost much of its original meaning, we now  
have a social movement that is full force
This type of thinking is also coming into venture capital. For 
example, Fred Wilson of Union Square Ventures and author of the 
popular blog A VC, recently wrote, “As more and more businesses 
leverage the power of networks to create economic value, there is 
a question of whether the network participants should share in 
the value they help create.” In this way, we are starting to map the 
possibilities of an economy that shares the responsibility and value 
with its participants.
DP: The thing about movements is that they change behavior and 
shape expectations that the general public has from larger institu-
tions. As the sharing movement continues to build and grow into 
a mainstream phenomenon, I would expect venture capitalists and 
larger corporations to explore how to integrate sharing into the 
fabric of business in order to meet consumer demand and remain 
competitive. 
What are some examples of integrations that could become com-
mon as the sharing movement continues to grow?
CR: We need to start thinking about the type of world that we 
want to live in, and that will impact how we integrate sharing. 
For example, if you think about the autonomous world, we need 
to consider how the ownership of machines will impact everyone 

102 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
and build models that will ultimately share wealth because we 
don’t want to live in a world controlled by machines and a few 
wealthy people.
There are many different ways to structure organizations to dis-
tribute value. We already discussed cooperative models, for which 
there can be multi-stakeholder approaches allowing for outside 
investment. Then there are ESOPs (Employee Stock Ownership 
Plans) that can distribute value among value creator employees. 
Unlike cooperatives, the beneit of that approach is that the busi-
ness can be sold. 
Cooperatives can also be utilized in digital environments to create 
what are referred to as platform cooperatives. Crowds can act like 
a marketing engine if they are given the proper incentives, driving 
growth of platforms where users share in value creation. A few 
examples include Stocksy (a stock photo marketplace), Fairmondo 
(a more conscientious eBay based in Germany), Lozooz (a block-
chain version of Uber), and Loomio (a group decision-making tool 
used by organizations like OuiShare.)
There is also a lot of potential for the blockchain, a technology 
that records exchanges to create more secure transactions. Sharing 
is about peer-to-peer exchanges, and a truly peer-to-peer system 
built on the blockchain would allow for transactions to happen 
without the need of an intermediary platform. It can also be utilized 
to create self-reinforcing contracts and make it possible to facili-
tate transactions between strangers without the need for lawyers, 
accountants, and bankers.
Crowdfunding led by companies like Kickstarter and Indiegogo 
has also become an explosive industry. Recently, legislation was 
passed that allows crowdfunding of equity in companies. If this 
trend continues, crowdfunding could become a worthy alternative 
to venture capital, especially among entrepreneurs that want to 
build new types of peer-to-peer companies that distribute value.
For example, there are emerging platforms like Republic and 
Wefunder that give anyone the ability to invest money in start-
ups and existing companies in exchange for ownership equity. 

It’s a Shareable Life—Chelsea Rustrum 103
Imagine a reality where companies that aren’t publicly traded or 
even formed yet can make their users, members, providers, and 
participants part owners.
But we need to look at all of this together. We haven’t fully real-
ized the power that individual transactions have. Our individual 
purchasing power as a collective can directly impact all industries, 
leading to an improved quality of life for everyone. 
Imagine a reality where companies that 
aren’t publicly traded or even formed yet can 
make their users, members, providers, and 
participants part owners
DP: One of the challenges in talking about the impact of the shar-
ing economy movement that you describe is that it is so ubiquitous 
and wide reaching. There is the groundswell from the bottom up 
of peer-to-peer sharing, and then this kind of top-down impact 
of things like platform cooperatives that could disrupt traditional 
industries and even disrupt the irst wave of sharing economy start-
ups funded by venture capital. 
When I think about integration and the different layers of sharing 
that you describe, it’s as if the sum is greater than the individual 
parts. I’ve heard you describe the sharing economy in a similar 
way. Can you elaborate on this and help us understand where you 
think the sharing economy movement is heading in the future?
CR: It’s a mentality shift, a cultural shift, a movement from 
“me and mine” to “us and me” and deining a space where all 
of that comes together. The power of the individual in combina-
tion with the power of the crowd is the superpower. There is a 
kind of realization of individuality in the context of being part 
of the collective. 
The big, venture-backed leaders of the sharing economy like 
Airbnb and Uber are necessary just like AOL and Compuserve 
were necessary in providing original entry points to the Internet. I 
don’t think the future of the sharing economy will look much like 

104 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
what it does today, and it is important for us to decide what it will 
look like together—as a collective. 
We need to be careful about what we are creating. It’s important 
for people to stand up for the integrity of the movement. There 
is this sense of a renewed faith in humanity that millions of peo-
ple share feeling connected to each other, sharing what they have 
access to, and doing things that are mutually beneicial. 
We need to be careful about what we are creating
Businesses will need to consider the value of sharing beyond the 
typical rationale of needing “ambassadors” for marketing pur-
poses. They will have to ind creative ways to compete with new 
and copycat sharing alternatives that will empower people to do 
more with less. Once sharing is built into the inancial models, 
legal structure, and the very backbone of our economy, collabora-
tion and cooperation will be a foregone conclusion. 
DP: We talked about the idea of a shareable life, building a shar-
ing economy movement, and the focus on peer-to-peer coop-
eration, collective actions, and value distribution being more 
important than technology. All of this points to a sense of pur-
pose where sharing helps to actualize or manifest the potential 
hidden within us all. 
Through sharing and participating in something greater than 
ourselves, we are able to realize our true potential, which in turn 
allows us to contribute more for the sake of the greater good. I 
love the utopian optimism of this vision, particularly how it stands 
against the dystopian view of a world dominated by machines and 
controlled by a handful of wealthy elites. 
As a inal question, how do we continue to live with purpose and 
make sure that the sharing economy retains its integrity and val-
ues? To draw upon the title of the book, how do we empower each 
other and co-create the future we all want and deserve?
CR: I live in San Francisco, and being there puts a lot of pressure on 
people. There is always this sense that you are never “enough”—

It’s a Shareable Life—Chelsea Rustrum 105
rich enough, successful enough, unique enough, social enough, etc. 
This leads to lots of criticism, name dropping, fear, anxiety, uncer-
tainty, and so on.
I think we need to focus on being happy and alive in this moment. 
Let go of the never-ending comparisons and chasing money or 
perceived success. Be comfortable with our laws, surrender to 
our aging bodies, and let go of this idea that you have to earn 
your right to exist. Maybe it’s enough to be alive. If we start from 
that place, then we can approach each moment with compassion, 
mindfulness, and that will shape our relationships.
The social transformation of “enoughness” is key to evolving the 
economy. All of the innovation and creativity is great, but to create 
the new structures in the material world that we need in the future, 
we must start as locally as we can—with ourselves.
CHELSEA RUSTRUM  is a sharing economy author, facilitator, and consultant with 
deep practical knowledge and hands-on understanding of how the collaborative 
economy has come to fruition, grown, and continues to change business and dis-
rupt industries. She’s the author of It’s a Shareable Life, the founder of a social and 
educational series in the Silicon Valley, dubbed The Sharers, has advised dozens of 
marketplaces, and speaks to corporate audiences such as PwC and J&J, helping 
organizations understand the changing nature of business. Chelsea has partici-
pated in various conferences and summits speaking on the growth and develop-
ment of the collaborative economy, including TEDx, Expo Italy, Grow Co., and has 
also contributed to articles in Inc. Magazine, Wall Street Journal, Wired, Forbes, 
and The Economist.


PART III
COMPANIES AND THE CROWD
How can you co-create  
solutions with the crowd?
What strategies are needed  
to adapt and innovate?
Why does purpose drive  
success and growth?


SMARTCUTS
Shane Snow
Shane Snow is a passionate storyteller who revolutionized  
how brands tell stories. He went from a struggling freelance 
journalist with at one point only $0.48 in his bank account, 
to co-founding Contently, a leading content marketing platform 
powered by a community of 55,000 journalists with clients 
including American Express, General Electric, GM, PepsiCo, 
Coca-Cola, Google, and Walmart.
• 
Building a business based on the needs of the crowd
• 
Why content can be more direct than advertising
• 
Asking smart questions leads to breakthroughs
• 
Great innovators stand on the shoulders of giants
Contently pioneered a new crowd-based business model that Arun 
Sundararajan calls a hybrid services-marketplace, where a com-
pany provides services to enterprise clients that are crowdsourced 
from a marketplace of providers. Shane remains a journalist at 
heart, writing his bestselling book Smartcuts while he built Con-
tently. Packed with insights and great stories, this interview is a 
pleasure to read.
DP: There is this idea with content to start everything with a story. 
You have a great story of having 48 cents in your bank account 
at one point before raising money for Contently. Why don’t we 
start there?

110 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
SS: Sure (laughs). Three of us had this idea to start a company. One 
had a good amount of savings from his last startup—that’s Joe, 
our CEO—and the other had six months before his student loan 
payments started. He also owned his own place. I had credit cards 
and not really any savings. We basically had a six-month window 
to prove that there was an opportunity, business potential, and 
that we were the people to build that business. Then we needed to 
start making money or raise money. 
The 48 cents in the bank account was right at that point when 
we igured out a lot of things about the freelance economy, where 
the supply and demand were, and what was going to work for 
Contently to turn it into a real business. We started making a little 
bit of money, but not much, and we had been courting investors. 
It came down to the wire: “We need to raise money soon because 
we’re going to be broke and the dream might slip away, but we’re 
past the point where it’s totally ludicrous to invest.” 
I took a screenshot when I checked my bank account and it had 48 
cents. It was kind of a panic moment, but then I had the foresight 
to take a screenshot so that I could remember later, no matter what 
happened. We ended up raising money soon after that, so I was 
able to start paying rent. But yes, times were tight.
DP: We met after Contently got into Techstars in 2011, and that 
was before most marketers or investors were familiar with the con-
cept of content marketing. What was the initial vision, and what 
was the journey like for you and the founding team? 
SS: The initial vision was to solve problems for freelance journal-
ists and the companies that hire them. Everyone that I knew in 
journalism was graduating with no job, losing their job, or looking 
for a job. Basically, we were all hustling as freelancers. 
There’s a whole list of problems, or challenges, that go along with 
being a freelancer—in any ield, but in journalism, it was pretty 
severe: inding work, getting clients to pay you on time and consis-
tently, marketing yourself, doing your taxes as essentially a small 
business owner, getting credit for your work, etc. How do you 
help these people whose skills are in demand, but who are on their 

Smartcuts—Shane Snow 111
own? How do you help them deal with the business side of being 
a freelancer and a creative? 
How do you help these people whose skills  
are in demand, but who are on their own?
The other side of the problem was that companies still demanded 
those skills at a level that you weren’t inding on typical online 
talent labor marketplaces, like Elance, where it’s more about out-
sourcing commodity labor, and less about highly paid creative 
labor. Initially, Contently was about matching those groups up—
people who wanted to pay more for creative talent as freelancers, 
and freelancers that needed help running their business, getting 
work, and getting paid on time. That was the initial business.
We were platform agnostic regarding who the buyer was, but the 
theory was that our main customers would be media companies—
newspapers, magazines, and the digital arms of NBC and CBS. It 
wasn’t long before we igured out that commercial brands had the 
biggest, most acute need for these people to do content market-
ing. They were blogging and trying to put content out on social 
media, but they couldn’t make it work with Elance or their staff, 
and agencies were too expensive or were more interested in doing 
television commercials and big projects than web content. 
We still do some work with media companies but for the most part 
we went all in on content marketing. This basically turned Con-
tently into a software company, where we build analytics, project 
management and worklow tools, integrations into Marketo, and 
all sorts of things like that to streamline content marketing based 
on the needs of big brands. But the initial core vision remains the 
same, which is you need high-quality, talented, creative people to 
help you make good content and tell good stories. 
DP: I want to dig a little bit deeper into that. Contently has grown 
to over 100 employees with 55,000 storytellers and journalists, 
and 8-igure revenue with an impressive list of top-tier brands like 
American Express, General Electric, GM, PepsiCo, Coca-Cola, 
Google, Walmart, and so on. If you started off solving problems 

112 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
for the storytellers and journalists, what problems did you need to 
solve to scale and meet the demands of the brands? 
SS: Content marketers or brand publishers basically go through 
a step-by-step process. First, you need a content strategy. Second, 
you need ideas for what you’re going to write, shoot, and publish. 
That is the ideation part. Third is actually creating and managing 
content. 
Creation is not only who’s going to create it but who’s going to 
approve it, how do you (especially if you’re a big brand) track who 
touched what so that you can go back and audit things if some-
thing goes wrong (lawyers have all that), how do you make sure 
that the lawyers, PR people, and whoever else needs to be involved 
in approving content are always in the loop, etc. 
Then there is the actual publishing of content. You have to put it 
places where people are going to ind it, you may promote content 
(so, advertising it or basically using media buys to get people to your 
content using things like Outbrain or Facebook-sponsored ads), 
then reporting and measurements, and inally, learning from all of 
that so you know what to do next time (what we call “optimizing”). 
Successful content marketers were largely doing this manually 
either internally or with agencies, and many companies coming 
to us couldn’t do anything with just the talent. They needed the 
worklow and process to be able to manage the internal bureau-
cracy of approvals, publishing, reporting, and measurement. We 
basically baked the entire creation process into our software. 
Our freelance network, in turn, got to this point where we no lon-
ger had a problem with supply. We had all these people who want 
work and all of this data about them, so we can match a brand 
with very speciic, vetted, and talented people. In order to keep 
them on our platform, we had to provide value by helping them 
to ind work, get paid, do taxes, market themselves, and manage 
their business. 
We realized that we could actually do our own content marketing 
on those topics in order to keep our community happy, engaged, 

Smartcuts—Shane Snow 113
and associated with Contently. We have a blog, a huge mailing list, 
daily newsletter for freelancers, and free tools. Taking care of our 
community allows us to build stuff for the brand, since the throttle 
on how much work we can get our freelancers is based on how 
many brands we have as clients doing content marketing success-
fully enough to want to do more of it.
DP: Contently is a great example of how brands can collaborate 
with the crowd. In this case, it’s a crowd of high-quality con-
tent creators. Contently is also a lagship example of what Arun 
Sundararajan referred to in our interview about crowd capi-
talism as a hybrid-irm marketplace, one of the new emerging 
business models for the future of work that combines freelance 
marketplaces with enterprise-level services typically found in 
large irms.
Can you relect a bit on what you think is innovative about your 
approach to managing the relationship between companies and 
the crowd? What lessons might other companies learn from what 
you’ve done?
If you are not providing for the crowd, then 
they’re not going to do any work for you and 
they won’t help you out
SS: You need to provide value on both sides. You can’t just think 
about how to make money from your clients. If you are not pro-
viding for the crowd, then they’re not going to do any work for 
you and they won’t help you out. We learned that by giving irst—
by putting stuff out there to help freelancers, by building them 
free tools to market themselves and build their portfolio without 
asking anything of them—we engendered a lot of good will. That 
helped build our reputation, get users, and create marketing that 
drives the business—but it also makes them more likely to look 
at an offer from our brand clients who want to work with them. 
They know that they’re not just mercenaries for hire.
DP: The idea of “giving irst” makes a lot of sense, especially 
since you are a Techstars company. I spoke with Brad Feld about 

114 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
this. Can you dig deeper into a few examples of how to provide 
for the crowd?
SS: The payoff needs to be immediate. The biggest surprise to us 
was that getting people paid early and on time is more important 
than how much they get paid. We try to keep rates high, but people 
are willing to bend over backwards if you’re going to pay them on 
Saturday instead of three months from now. This is a big deal in 
the freelance economy and when you’re working with a crowd. If 
the payoff is immediate, then you can get a lot of people to collab-
orate and jump through hoops that you might normally need to 
pay more money for. 
You should also think about clever uses of the crowd. For example, 
look at the CAPTCHA project to digitize old books. They didn’t 
ask people to digitize text, because that is boring and uninteresting. 
Instead, what they did is ask you to ill out a CAPTCHA to authen-
ticate you are a real person. Instead of paying people 10 cents or 
something per CAPTCHA, they motivated the crowd to complete 
tasks, not realizing that they were actually transcribing books. 
You can’t make people take a gamble on something that they don’t 
know or can’t see. That again goes back to the idea that the payoff 
needs to be immediate. Your relationship is pretty tenuous because 
they are the crowd. There needs to be this kind of instant gratii-
cation component, which may be isolated or removed from the 
bigger picture like with CAPTCHA, where they transcribed text 
and were instantly rewarded with an eBook download or access 
to a website.
On the lip side, the more that you can make people feel like they 
have a relationship with you, the more they’ll go to bat for you and 
the better work you’ll get. For example, we started with this sort 
of crowdsourcing paradigm: Let’s get as many people as we can, 
let the good ones rise to the top, and then ilter out the rest. It was 
a “may the best man or woman win” sort of thing. We’ll get the 
best quality that way. 
What we found is that things got better when we treated people 
personally or made work feel personal. For example, things like 

Smartcuts—Shane Snow 115
personalized emails and once in a while a talent manager calls you 
on the phone. Have in-person events where people can see that 
we’re human and meet the people that are hooking them up for 
work. Then word spreads. Even if only 1% of the people we’re 
working with ever talked to us, we give them such a good experi-
ence that they’re going to tell other people. 
I think many companies are great doing that for paying customers, 
but you need to apply the same idea to the crowd. Yelp is a great 
example of this. They invite their top reviewers to exclusive parties 
where they meet them and hook them up with stuff. Make the 
crowd feel special by doing things that build relationships, because 
otherwise your brand is faceless and they won’t care.
DP: Storytelling has always been important for brands, but clearly, 
something changed in the past few years with the rise of content 
marketing championed by crowd companies like Contently. In 
parallel, we’ve seen the radical disruption of journalism that you 
talked about earlier.
Thousands of media brands went bankrupt while others such as 
BuzzFeed had a meteoric rise to become billion-dollar companies, 
monetizing exclusively through branded content with no ads. If 
you were a journalist reporting from the frontlines, what would the 
story be around content marketing and the media landscape? Can 
you help us navigate the shifts that happened in the last few years?
SS: Media, stories, and content were always subsidized, usually 
by brands. In the early days, we paid for the newspaper and mag-
azines. It might be only a couple bucks, but that’s not the whole 
cost. They made their proits from advertisements. As a brand, you 
were subsidizing the stories because the newspapers, magazines, 
and everyone else had the audience that you wanted to reach. 
Today, brands can make that content instead of simply advertis-
ing by it. You used to need a staff of journalists, a printing press, 
and a leet of trucks, or you paid that company for an ad. Today, 
companies like ours can connect you to freelance journalists all 
over the Internet, the printing press is WordPress, and the trucks 
are social media. Across any category—entertainment, education, 

116 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
general information—companies see it better to create stories that 
people want rather than buy ads next to them.
This basically gives them more control over the branding and 
advertising experience, especially if you can get people to come 
to your own website to read the story, or if you can get them to 
open your email. That is what shifted. It leaves a bit of a question 
mark for the hard news, investigative journalism, that orphanage 
ire story. How do we pay for that if brands are doing content 
elsewhere? 
People’s attention is getting so split that  
it is a smart strategy for brands to build  
their own audience directly
The other big thing that happened is there used to be a limit to the 
places where you could reach people. This is why media compa-
nies could charge so much money for commercials and ad space. 
The Internet provided unlimited space, and especially with compa-
nies like Google and Facebook, you can reach people more directly 
in a more targeted way than before. This basically means that ads 
cost less on media sites and they get less attention.
As a result, people’s attention is getting so split that it is a smart 
strategy for brands to build their own audience directly through 
things like email and social media rather than rely on side 
sources. Content marketing becomes cheaper and more effective 
than competing with traditional advertising spots. To summa-
rize, there is more stuff out there, and brands can now make the 
stories and give people the media and entertainment that they 
want. The basic idea is get people to know who you are and pay 
attention to you.
DP: I’d like to switch directions and turn to your best-selling book, 
Smartcuts. To start, what is a “smartcut”?
SS: Smartcuts are about rethinking the way things are done, or 
what psychologists call “lateral thinking.” It’s approaching prob-
lems from unconventional angles or taking things on by rejecting 

Smartcuts—Shane Snow 117
the rules and conventions that are already there. The term “short-
cuts” is amoral. You could take a shortcut through the woods and 
it’s ine, doesn’t hurt anyone, or you could take a shortcut that 
brings the inancial industry down, and that’s not good. 
Any time in history that you’ve seen breakthroughs happen—
whether it’s in business or the arts or science—it’s because some-
one has fundamentally rethought the way things are done. A clas-
sical example is gravity. Everyone took it for granted. Einstein was 
bold enough to rethink Newtonian gravity and that’s how we got 
relativity and all sorts of breakthroughs. Being willing to question 
things that we assume leads to doing things in a new way. That’s 
what Smartcuts is about.
DP: Rethinking how things could or should be done leads to 
breakthroughs by forcing us to break conventions. A key com-
ponent of this process in the book is to ask challenging ques-
tions that are impossible to answer by simply working harder. For 
example, “How might you make a 10x improvement?” or “How 
might you cut costs by 500%?” What types of questions should 
people ask? 
SS: The kinds of questions that I like are ones where the question 
itself literally puts you in someone else’s shoes. How would x per-
son who’s very different than me look at this problem? For exam-
ple, the ones I always use are “How would a ballet dancer look at 
this problem? How would a ireighter . . . ? How would a racecar 
driver . . . ? How would a child . . . ? How would my grandmother 
look at this problem?” 
When you seriously consider things from other perspectives (you 
can even go as far as asking those people what they think, which 
can get into the idea of customer development), that’s a good way 
to help you realize what are the assumptions you take for granted. 
There are inherent rules in any industry or project, so then the 
questions becomes about the inherent rules themselves. “What are 
the assumptions inherent to this problem? If we changed them, 
what would happen? Does that lead us to something new?” I like 
those kinds of questions.

118 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
DP: When I think about the importance of questions, the next 
logical step for me is the idea of testing. There are all types of great 
digital tools that we can utilize to test and optimize. These allow 
us to eliminate guesswork and reach the right people with the right 
message at the right time.
There’s a great example in Smartcuts from Upworthy, where they 
sent a video to different subscribers with different headlines. After 
examining feedback and click-through rates, they found a 20% 
better click-through rate on one headline. Then they repeat the 
same process 75 times, pairing headlines and images, to eventually 
get an astonishing 69% click-through rate and 186% increase in 
video views. 
That leads to the question: Why is rapid feedback important? How 
can companies leverage their relationship with the crowd to test 
and iterate faster?
SS: That example connects to lateral thinking because in media it’s 
assumed that once you publish a story, if it takes off, it takes off, 
and if it doesn’t, it doesn’t. It’s like, “Is it a hit or not?” 
What they questioned is: Is that actually true? And they said, 
maybe it’s the packaging that makes a difference, and maybe you 
can repackage something. That was the lateral thinking, the smart-
cut. The rapid feedback idea is similar in the sense that the faster 
you can go through the iteration process on an idea, the faster 
you’ll get to whether it will work or not. 
An analogy I like to use is to imagine that you are trying to land 
on an aircraft carrier. You have one shot, so you can’t blow it. A lot 
of the way companies think about launching products and putting 
our ideas out there is to wait until it’s fully baked and ready. Then 
we try and land on the aircraft carrier. Things that are worthwhile 
and important are hard, and so it’s easy to miss the aircraft carrier. 
One tiny thing can go wrong, or everything can go wrong. 
This is why they built light simulators. You can practice land-
ing on the aircraft carrier thousands of times without ever risking 
dying. In the light simulator, you work your way up to harder 

Smartcuts—Shane Snow 119
and harder scenarios rather than starting by landing on an aircraft 
carrier in a real plane. You start off doing small tasks in an envi-
ronment where if you die, it’s just a game, so it’s okay. That’s the 
idea of rapid feedback. You test in a low risk situation over and 
over, so by the time you’re in a high-risk situation, you’ve already 
ensured that you’re going to be successful.
DP: When I think of how smartcuts relate to Contently, you made 
it easier for brands to tap into the crowd by radically rethinking the 
entire process. Only high-quality journalists are allowed on your 
platform, you make payments easy for the brand by not having to 
hire everyone individually, and then you pay journalists upfront to 
mitigate the risk. Each step bakes smartcuts into your platform. 
How do you transition from smartcut thinking to building a 
startup or creating breakthrough innovations? Can you tell us a 
bit about the importance of platform thinking and leverage?
SS: Platforms and leverage are about lots of people doing lots 
of great work. As Newton said, everything that he owed was by 
standing on the shoulders of giants. You could stand on the shoul-
ders of giants or you can be too proud or ignorant and try to 
stand on your own. But someone else who stands on the giants’ 
shoulders will be taller than you. That’s the idea. Look for places 
where people have already done work that you can build on top 
of, rather than reinventing the wheel. 
The analogy that comes from my childhood is it’s really tough to 
pry up a nail with a hammer. However, it’s easier if you put a piece 
of pipe on the end of the hammer and make a lever. It’s a math-
ematical law by Archimedes, the Law of the Lever. You can push 
down with less effort and get more or equal results. This is what 
your business should do—make something easier, cheaper, faster, 
or whatever for the same amount of effort that you had before. 
That’s what you’re trying to do as an entrepreneur. 
This goes back to asking smart questions. In every aspect of your 
business, you should ask, “Where can we get more leverage? 
Where can we get more bang for our buck?” Give yourselves chal-
lenges that are so big that you can’t solve them by working harder. 

120 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
Force yourself to ind leverage or be creative. At Contently, we 
periodically have meetings where the topic is “How do we make 
this thing ten times better?” We call each other out on ideas that 
are smaller than 10X, and that forces us to come up with bold and 
weird new things. 
Starting from there is a much better place for innovation. There 
are a lot of different approaches you can take. Think about who 
has already done work, made the science, or built something that 
you can leverage instead of building from scratch. How can you 
get more results for a lot less effort, as much bang for your buck 
so that you can double down on something else? That’s the idea 
of leverage. 
hink about who has already done work, made 
the science, or built something that you can 
leverage instead of building from scratch
DP: In Smartcuts, there is a cool YouTube case study of a one-
hit wonder vs. a runaway success story. One was the double  
rainbow video by Bear Vasquez, which received millions of views 
after Jimmy Kimmel called it the funniest video in the world, 
and the other one was by Michelle Phan, a 23-year-old Vietnam-
ese-American makeup artist who showed how to recreate makeup 
in Lady Gaga’s video, “Bad Romance.” 
The former became a one-hit wonder, whereas the latter went on 
to become the cosmetic queen of the Internet with 800 million 
views, 5 million subscribers, and her own makeup line by L’Oréal. 
As a inal question about companies and the crowd: What lessons 
can be learned in terms of how big brands can tap into the power 
of the crowd, and how the crowd can collaborate with big brands?
SS: The irst is the myth of the overnight success. A lot of us get 
our hearts broken when we build up to this grand moment and the 
grand thing doesn’t go viral. The one-hit wonder is often random 
and hard to predict. Michelle spent a couple years making lots 
of really good content that served as potential energy for when 
she was discovered. This is what you see with a lot of people that 

Smartcuts—Shane Snow 121
seem to pop up out of nowhere, including inventors and business 
successes. There’s almost always a lot of behind-the-scenes work 
building up potential energy before they become a success. 
She was able to show people more when her date came and she 
was discovered by the masses. Once you’re done with the video 
that you saw, it said, “Here’s 50 more videos by Michelle.” She was 
going after subscribers and fans, not just views. In contrast, Bear 
Vasquez was a happy accident. He kept pursuing one-hit wonder 
type of videos instead of trying to get true fans and subscribers. 
Michelle also igured out how the YouTube homepage worked. 
She realized that she could get exponentially more leverage if she 
could get on the YouTube homepage, and the easiest way to get the 
most time on the YouTube homepage was to get a certain number 
of views to a video on a Friday afternoon. If that happened, then 
you’d stay on the homepage for the whole weekend because they 
didn’t do anything over the weekend. Over the course of 50 vid-
eos, she built up a small audience of really big fans. She would post 
on Friday afternoon and beg everyone that she knew and all of her 
fans to check it out at the same time so that she could get that little 
boost and accidentally stay on the homepage over the weekend. 
The strategy is to basically study how the system works and ig-
ure out the easiest injection point. Eventually after doing this for a 
while, someone discovered her on one of those weekends and wrote 
about it for BuzzFeed. This was the classic “someone with a big 
megaphone discovers something, it goes viral, everyone talks about 
it, and then it goes away”—except in her case, it doesn’t go away. 
She had all of this potential energy there to capture people, and 
then she kept on building more stuff and parlaying that momentum 
into more things, including makeup lines and businesses.
For a brand, there are a few lessons. The main one is that if you 
want to be smart with content marketing and social media, then 
you need to spend a lot of time studying the environment. You can’t 
do the same thing that everyone else does, and you can’t try to rec-
reate hits—yours or other peoples’. You need to aim for subscribers, 
and that comes from deep, consistent, high-quality content aiming 
for the right relationship rather than a mass widespread audience. 

122 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
There’s this great article by Kevin Kelly from Wired about having 
a thousand true fans. If you have a thousand true fans, then they 
can get any ball rolling, vs. a million people who just glance at you. 
You can’t do the same thing that everyone  
else does, and you can’t try to recreate hits—
yours or other peoples’
I think what a lot of brands do is they give up too early. They try 
and aim for a hit they see (“Oh, Dollar Shave Club did a funny 
video. Let’s do one exactly like that.”), not realizing that some of 
the success of that video is random chance and it’s a better strategy 
to do consistent, high-quality content and build up to get those 
thousand true fans. Then, when their time comes and people do see 
their random viral hit or whatever, they’ll have sustainability that 
they can then parlay into more. 
SHANE SNOW  is an award-winning journalist, celebrated entrepreneur, and the 
bestselling author of Smartcuts: The Surprising Power of Lateral Thinking. He is 
co-founder of the content technology company Contently, which helps creative 
people and companies tell great stories together, and serves on the board of the 
Contently Foundation for Investigative Journalism.
Snow’s writing has appeared in Fast Company, Wired, The New Yorker, and dozens 
more top publications. He’s been called a “Wunderkind” by The New York Times, 
a “Digital Maverick” by Details, and his work “Insanely addicting” by GQ—though 
he wishes they had been talking about his abs.

PURPOSE
Michael Bronner
Michael Bronner is the founder and chairman emeritus of Digitas, 
a global digital marketing agency employing six thousand people 
worldwide. Under his leadership, Digitas redeined modern mar-
keting. Michael’s next company Upromise helped 10 million fam-
ilies save over $70 billion for college, becoming one of the irst 
major success stories of the collaborative economy. 
• 
Building the most successful rewards program ever
• 
The power of leading from a place of consciousness
• 
Why the essence of good strategy is sacriice
• 
Investors want to back founders that change the world
Michael’s success stems from his commitment to serving the needs 
of others. He embodies the type of integrity and values that we 
need in large companies. Michael is also one of my favorite people 
in the world. I am grateful for the opportunity to work with him 
on his latest company UnReal, I am proud to consider him a men-
tor and friend, and I am honored to share this incredible interview 
with you. 
DP: Your personal story sounds a bit like a fairy tale. In your 
junior year of college, you found and turned in a wallet of a banker 
who gave you a line of credit that allowed you to found your irst 
company creating hundreds of thousands of coupon books for 
Harvard and other Boston schools. Eventually, you went on to 
corporate clients, including American Express and AT&T. Coupon 

124 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
books existed at that time. Can you tell us about your backstory, 
and what was revolutionary about what you were doing?
MB: I have a strong memory walking across campus one day and 
they were selling a big, fat coupon book for $10. I remember look-
ing through it saying, “Hardly any of these I would ever use,” and 
kept going. Then I thought, “Why should you have to pay for a 
book of ads?” 
It’s one of those things where an idea comes out of something 
that you see. I went to the Dean of Housing at BU and said, “I’m 
a student. I know what students want. If I create a coupon book 
with all local merchants (‘Buy 1 pizza, get 1 free,’ ‘25% off at this 
store,’ access into clubs, things like that), would you put it in the 
mailboxes?” He said, “Yes.” 
I went to merchants and convinced them to pay for an ad, and I 
required them to do something very aggressive to drive business. 
In one day, 20,000 of these books were given to students in their 
mailboxes, and the merchants couldn’t handle the volume. It was 
insane. That was the beginning. I was a biochemistry major. I didn’t 
know much about business. It just became very clear, this idea of 
targeted, direct marketing. 
In the next few weeks, I locked up 100,000 mailboxes at most of 
the universities across Boston and started selling the advertising 
into these books, and then I took the same concept into downtown 
ofices. I igured they have all of these people going up and down 
elevators all day. There were hundreds of thousands of people in a 
three-square-mile radius. I went to these big companies like Han-
cock, Gillette, and Prudential and said, “If I create a coupon book 
with great offers from the local merchants, would you give it to 
your employees?” I got 100,000 committed and that took off. 
Then I went to American Express and said, “What if we did a 
mailing”—I was still in college, 20 years old—“to your card 
members?” At the time, it was not a card you used close to home. 
“We’ll give them incredible deals done in an American Express 
way. They’ll be very upscale mailings.” Then I went to the furriers, 
jewelers, high-end clothing stores, and top restaurants to sell space 

Purpose—Michael Bronner 125
in this mailing. That just crushed it for American Express, so they 
asked me to do ten more cities. 
At that point, I dropped out of school. That was the beginning of 
what evolved into Digitas. At irst it was a coupon company, but 
I would redeine it to became a direct marketing company, then a 
customer-based management company, then ultimately a digital 
marketing company that used direct marketing and customer base 
management skills. 
My next big break came in 1982 when I met somebody from 
AT&T at a tradeshow. They were going to divest and break up 
the Bell Phone System, and he asked if I had any ideas to address 
that AT&T was going to be 40% to 50% more expensive than the 
Baby Bells, regulated from discounting their price for some time. 
I lew home that night and had the idea to create “AT&T Oppor-
tunity Calling,” which was building on the original concept of the 
coupon books. 
“Since we can’t discount the phone bill, what if we said that we’ll 
give it for free?” The idea was that every dollar a customer spent on 
AT&T, we’d give them a dollar of savings on purchases, like Amer-
ican Airlines seats, GE appliances, GM cars, etc.? I said, “You have 
the greatest database in America. You know what people spend 
and where they call. You have their addresses and a long-term rela-
tionship.” They committed $100 million to it, and I set out to pitch 
these companies. It was credited with boosting AT&T’s stock price 
since Wall Street did not expect AT&T to have a marketing pro-
gram. It became a long-term, successful program for them. 
DP: These programs weren’t just about getting new customers. 
They were also about providing additional value and building rela-
tionships that increased loyalty and retention. Can you tell us a bit 
about this kind of holistic view or philosophy of marketing and 
the customer relationship? How do you put together a program 
like that?
MB: We called our philosophy “behavior optimization.” If a cus-
tomer was exhibiting certain behaviors and you want them to do 
something different, like stay longer or spend more, then you have 

126 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
to think: What is that behavior worth? And, what are the barriers 
to getting the behavior? We would organize all of our ideation 
around levers. We’d look with honesty at whether the idea really 
would overcome the barrier. 
It didn’t seem very complicated. We built program after program 
upon the process of behavior optimization. We got our clients to 
do a lot of research and we broke everything down systematically. 
It was a combination of big ideas and the day-to-day customer 
management—through the phone, through the mail, and then ulti-
mately through digital. 
DP: What you describe in terms of levers and behavior optimization 
aligns with what today marketers refer to as the customer journey. 
Instead of thinking about getting eyeballs on ads or driving trafic to 
a website, you take the customer on a journey with deeper levels of 
engagement in each point of contact, thinking holistically about the 
brand experience. It’s incredible that you pioneered this 30 years ago.
You were just 20 years old when you started working with Amer-
ican Express and 24 years old when you launched Opportunity 
Calling for AT&T, which at the time was the largest direct mar-
keting campaign in history. You founded your latest company, 
UnReal, with your two teenage sons, Nicky and Kristopher.
I think a lot of especially young entrepreneurs shy away from 
founding businesses that service big companies because they either 
don’t know how to pitch or land them as a client, or they somehow 
feel intimidated by them. At the same time, I think many big com-
panies are struggling to serve the needs and connect with young 
people that really want to make a difference. This is one of the big 
themes of the book—how companies and the crowds can work 
together. What advice would you give to young entrepreneurs that 
want to work with big companies?
MB: That’s a great question. There is an imaginary fear that big 
companies don’t want to work with young entrepreneurs. I think 
it’s absolutely not true. The challenge is how to break in. When I 
started working with American Express, I went to their local travel 
ofice and I just built a relationship with the manager. He said, 

Purpose—Michael Bronner 127
“I know somebody in New York,” and then connected me to a 
woman that was a low-level marketing manager. She was able to 
make the decision. She eventually ended up becoming the CMO of 
IBM, which also became a client. 
here is an imaginary fear that big companies 
don’t want to work with young entrepreneurs.  
I think it’s absolutely not true
Big companies crave creativity and innovation. I still maintain rela-
tionships with executives at my former clients, and I bring them 
young people who are doing cool things regularly. They’re not part 
of the big agencies or technology companies or consulting irms. 
They’re people with ideas. That’s what they want. I think we forget 
that ideas are what make things happen for these big companies. 
The bigger the company, the less likely they are to consistently 
be able to deliver big ideas. They’re craving them—entrepreneurs 
need conidence and to be fearless. 
DP: That’s actually really helpful because the next question I was 
going to ask was if you had a guiding philosophy or approach to 
scale from these kind of experimental days when you were just ig-
uring things out until you grew to a thousand employees or more.
MB We only worked with big companies. When I led Digitas, 
we never had more than nine clients, and that took us to a thou-
sand people. Everybody used to say, “You’re crazy. You’re at 
such risk. What if you lose a client?” I always said, “Look at the 
agency model. It’s all about churn. At a 1,000 people, an agency 
our size would have about 30–50 clients and they’d be turning 
10% to 15% of them constantly. They’re using a lot of their best 
resources to pitch and that’s why they lose their clients—because 
they’re so distracted.” 
For me, I always loved our clients. What I did wasn’t about the 
brand American Express. It was about the people that I worked 
for, and I’d do anything for them. I think that came across. Con-
centration is the opposite of risk. I think it’s low cost to serve, to 
be deeply entrenched, and high cost to pitch. Yes, you have to be 

128 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
obsessed with doing a great job, or you will get ired, but you can 
build amazing companies on concentration, attention to detail, 
and deep relationships.
DP: Digitas was eventually acquired by Publicis. As you 
approached 40 years old, you decided to focus on helping families 
save for college. Many people might think that you would do that 
through founding a nonproit or a scholarship fund, but instead, 
you started Upromise, which was a for-proit business that helped 
families save through earning rebates and rewards on purchases. 
Upromise has been praised for being a pioneer in social entrepre-
neurship and creating an innovative inancial business model that 
leveraged the power of the crowd and corporate partnerships to 
help over 10 million families save for college. And you did this 
many years before the term “collaborative economy” existed. Can 
you tell us about Upromise?
MB: I started Upromise because of my own situation with not 
having family savings to pay for college. That is what drove me 
to start the coupon books—to pay for expenses at school. So I 
wanted to help families get started saving earlier and save more, 
and I felt that you can’t preach to them to save.
All of these college savings companies were out there saying, “Save 
money in a qualiied 529 plan” and only a small percentage of 
families that should save, actually enrolled. Of course they want 
to save, but it’s really tough. The hardest part is just getting an 
account open. What happens it that people say, “I’m saving for my 
kids’ college as part of my savings account,” but as soon as there 
is need for a new washer-dryer or a new car, they pull that money. 
Our idea was to say, “We’ll give you free money for college. All 
you have to do is open a free college savings plan.” We got the 
biggest brands in the country to agree to give between 2% and 
10% of what a customer spent into a college savings plan for their 
son, daughter, niece, nephew, grandchild—it didn’t matter who, 
and accounts could all be linked, so lots of people could save for 
one or two kids. That was really cool, it made saving for college 
this big family affair where everyone could help.

Purpose—Michael Bronner 129
The real thing that was happening that I don’t think people ever 
understood about Upromise is that when you signed up for a 
free college savings account, you were signing up for a quali-
ied account. You were giving us all of the information that we 
needed to open that account, so we had your kids’ birth date, 
social security number, etc. We also had all of your credit card 
and store loyalty card info to track and automatically credit your 
free college saving.
Once we had this, we were able to go to you and say, “David, you 
have a one-year-old and a two-and-a-half-year-old. Did you know 
that if you save $22 per month of your own money between now 
and the time they graduate, based on some assumptions, here’s 
how much you would have?” The point was that we already had 
you in motion. You didn’t have to open an account because you 
had to put money in. You opened an account because you wanted 
to get free money for your kid or someone else’s kid. 
Over 10 million families signed up. We gave away over a billion 
dollars of free money, but we also got over $70 billion of people’s 
own savings into these accounts. That was the idea. We made it fun 
and a collaborative group effort to help put kids through college.
It was originally conceived as a not-for-proit, but I quickly real-
ized that to get the talent that we needed to build all of the back-
end infrastructure it was necessary to make it a for-proit. My 
shares went into a foundation and the rest were made available to 
investors and employees. That was the idea and it was an amazing 
business model. Sally Mae acquired it in 2006. I wish I hadn’t sold 
it. We could have taken that same idea into retirement or health-
care. We could have engaged the country to save for a range of 
milestones.
DP: Upromise is a lagship example of a company that serves the 
crowd—helping 10 million families put kids through college is 
awesome. You founded it in 2000, right in the wake of the dotcom 
crash and years before the concept of the collaborative economy, 
and back in the 1980s founded revolutionary rewards programs 
that were among the irst to take a 360 holistic view of customer 
experience, retention, and loyalty.

130 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
There is this common thread throughout your career of building 
successful businesses by bringing partners together and creating 
new kinds of business models that are mutually beneicial for 
everyone involved. I think a lot of CEOs at big companies are 
struggling with this. On the one hand, they have the mandate to 
build shareholder value, while on the other hand, they’re trying to 
do the right thing in terms of making the world better. How do you 
lead a company that’s proitable and also beneits the world? What 
is the best way to approach leadership?
MB: I think the biggest issue and the biggest opportunity is con-
sciousness. And I say that having personally worked with some of 
the biggest companies in the world and spending lots of time with 
their CEOs and leadership teams. A lot of leaders are caught up in 
optimization of business models rather than being conscious and 
looking at all of the constituents—including the planet, employ-
ees, customers. 
Companies would be incredibly more successful 
with their customers and employees if they 
could collaborate with each other and solve 
needs from a place of consciousness
I put planet in there very purposely. If most CEOs consciously 
thought about the planet, consciousness, and the whole crowd, 
they could solve for authenticity with their brand in ways that 
they’re not thinking about. They’re turning to the ad agency to 
solve for the brand, and they’re turning to the employees with 
incentives for productivity, but what about, “We as a company, 
we’re doing the right thing all the time, every day, authentically”? 
These companies would be incredibly more successful with their 
customers and employees if they could collaborate with each other 
and solve needs from a place of consciousness. 
I had this dream after I was done with Upromise to set up a phys-
ical center that would bring together the most enlightened, aware, 
conscious leaders—I’m talking conscious gurus—and igure out 
how to bring through corporate leaders so that they can have this 
shift and see things differently. Some of these CEOs are still very 

Purpose—Michael Bronner 131
close friends. Their lives are so overwhelmed. They have no time. 
They’re sitting there on phone calls and meetings, under stress and 
pressure. They are missing the one thing that could bring purpose 
to their life and to the lives of every employee and customer that 
wants to do business with them. It’s the ultimate collaboration 
from my perspective.
DP: On a lipside of that, several times when we worked together, 
you said, “The essence of good strategy is often what you don’t 
do.” This really stands out for me because I think today there’s this 
sense that brands always need a new strategy for every new app or 
new platform or new social media innovation. They end up getting 
totally fragmented and lose focus. I have a keynote talk around 
this called “Don’t Outsource Who You Are.” Can you tell us about 
simplicity and focus, and the idea that strategy is often about what 
you don’t do?
MB: I’ve seen it over and over. The essence of good strategy is sac-
riice. It’s being so clear about who you serve and how you serve 
them from a place of trust and collaboration, that you can get rid 
of so much extra stuff. So many companies are always about the 
next new service or product. It gets to the point where nobody can 
even keep track of all the stuff that they offer. 
he essence of good strategy is sacriice
What’s your real promise? What do you do in my life? Not just for 
me but for everybody? And not the “We contribute x percent to the 
whatever-it-is charity fund.” It doesn’t matter. That’s not real. I know 
it’s marketing trying to inluence me. Instead, what do you really do 
that matters in the world? Why can’t companies start there? Why 
can’t they convene their senior management with that question? 
Focus on your purpose. “What do we do to create good in the 
world?” Not “What do we have to append to what we do?” 
Not “What can we market?” Get rid of all the other stuff. Just 
be that. Be the true value creator for the world and for your 
customers’ lives. And, it’s bigger than just your customers. Your 
customers are part of something bigger. Why are we not serving 
that bigger purpose? 

132 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
It would be awesome if every company did that and used capitalism 
as a force for change for good. I think the potential of for-proit 
companies to create good is bigger than not-for-proit companies, 
by far. But that’s not where they’re coming from. The crazy thing 
is that’s what customers and the market want them to do. They 
would improve their earnings, attract top talent, and be widely suc-
cessful if they operated from a place of authenticity and purpose.
DP: You’re applying a lot of these ideas around purpose and 
authenticity to your latest company, UnReal, in terms of authen-
ticity around ingredients—where they’re sourced, non-GMO and 
Fair Trade and these types of things. You also founded UnReal 
with your two teenage sons, and their authenticity and purpose 
comes through in the company’s mission to “un-junk the world.” 
Can you tell us about UnReal and why authenticity and purpose 
are so important for companies today?
MB: I’ll tell you a story that illustrates this. I fell in love with 
this restaurant recently because it was one of the coolest places 
I’ve ever been. When you go in, it’s clearly a values-based place. 
It’s super hip. All the food is amazing. When I started talking to 
the owner, he told me where everything came from—everything is 
organic, the meats are grass-fed and more. I said, “You don’t say 
‘organic’ on anything. You don’t say everything is from a local 
farm or the meats are grass-fed.” He simply said, “You either are 
or you aren’t.” 
He talked about his values, which communicated his purpose. He 
didn’t have to explain authenticity because he was authentic. He 
shook my hand and I thought, “wow, that’s really cool.” He went 
on to say that he thinks it’s annoying when you see labels like 
“organic,” “local,” and “grass-fed.” This place has a line that’s 25 
people deep nonstop. This is on Cape Cod. I think to myself, “It’s a 
year old. How does a place like this just become overwhelmed with 
people and they’re constantly selling out of stuff?” It’s because it’s 
so damn authentic and purpose-driven. I think that’s very much 
the future. 
UnReal was founded by a 13-year-old who asked a question, in 
anger because candy, soda, and cookies were not allowed, “Why 

Purpose—Michael Bronner 133
do the foods we all love so much have to be so bad for us?” 
And he was challenged by me with: “Well, maybe they don’t…” 
We started the company with his stated mission to “un-junk the 
world.” What we mean by that is, we want to create a ripple that 
creates change, by getting people to ask questions about their 
food. If we can make much healthier products for people and 
the planet that taste as good as America’s favorites, people would 
ask themselves why can’t all products be like this? We try to be 
as authentic as we can—sourcing the ingredients sustainably and 
doing no harm, trying to prove that it can be done the way we 
know it should be done. 
We try to be as authentic as we can…to  
prove that it can be done the way we  
know it should be done
Frankly, if the big companies truly cared, they could do it ten 
times better than we could. It comes back to consciousness. If they 
really cared about people’s health, the farmers, and the planet, they 
wouldn’t be using the ingredients and practices that they are and 
they could ind a way to make it all work. Imagine if the CEOs of 
Hershey, Mars, Nestle, or one of these big companies sat down and 
said, “We’re going to spend the next two years iguring out how 
we can do it. If we have to raise prices, that’s okay, but we’re going 
to do the right thing in everything that we do.” 
Wouldn’t that CEO live a much happier life? They’re smart enough 
and have the resources to be able to do that. They’re not bad peo-
ple; they’re just not thinking that way. They’re not actually asking 
that question and challenge their organization. All companies in 
every industry should operate from a perspective of “How can we 
leave the world a better place?” What a different world it would 
be. Given it’s the only world we have, and the thing that matters 
most is love and relationships, how can this not be happening? 
DP: One of the things that always impressed me about working with 
you is that you’re a very giving and a compassionate person. You 
also have an incredible attention to detail and a lot of these intangi-
ble qualities that make you a great leader by inspiring greatness in 

134 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
others. These things seem to be part of who you are, and it makes me 
wonder how much leadership can be taught. 
You dropped out of school before inishing your degree, but then 
you also started an entrepreneurship program and you were on 
the board at your college, Boston University. You also started 
Upromise to help families save for college. Clearly you believe in 
the power and importance of education. Given all your experi-
ence, can you teach entrepreneurship and leadership? If so, how 
do you do that?
MB: First, thank you for such a special compliment. I think you 
can. It depends upon the student. The reason is, I think that the 
best leaders and entrepreneurs tap into authentic passion and pur-
pose—the purpose to do something great and the passion to be 
your best self; to fulill your true potential. Not everyone has these 
qualities and they aren’t qualities that you can teach. They come 
from within and motivate everything that you do. 
People with passion and purpose will usually seek out advice, 
guidance, and help. You can be inspired by others—that’s why I 
think the best teaching is case studies and learning how people 
have done things before. It’s important to hear their stories and 
that can lead to learning what that you don’t know how to do.
There are also the entrepreneurs that do things without advice and 
direction. They just go do it, work their way through the nuances, 
and igure it out. Like when I saw that coupon book, I had an idea, 
and I just did it. But the truth is since I was in third grade, I was 
always doing something—I grew up in Miami, so I was cracking 
coconuts, washing cars, whatever. I certainly didn’t think that I 
was becoming an entrepreneur. I just did each of those things from 
a place of passion and purpose. When I started in business, I had 
no clue how to do accounting or “business stuff” but I tell people 
I didn’t need to go to college because I just needed addition, sub-
traction, and multiplication. It was largely instinctual and I sought 
examples and people to show me. If you have that inner drive—
that passion and purpose—you’re going to go learn what you need 
one way or another. 

Purpose—Michael Bronner 135
If you are purpose and passion-driven, you can be a great leader 
because leadership is about treating people the way you would 
want to be treated, being fair, and realizing that when you do that, 
it comes back. That’s not why you do it (to come back), but it’s 
true. When you go through tough times, don’t write good people 
off; ind ways for everybody to stay together. There is a personal 
reward in doing the right thing that people underestimate. 
I think if you’re purpose and passion–driven, you can absolutely 
learn everything yourself, through a combination of inspiration 
and education. Yes, you can teach entrepreneurship and leader-
ship, but inspiration may be more important than education— 
seeing what other people have done and believing that you can 
go for something that really matters and excites you. To borrow a 
line from Dave Quirke: Believe that everything is possible. That is 
the deining line between an entrepreneur and a non-entrepreneur. 
If you believe it can be so, it can be so. If you don’t believe it, it 
cannot be so.
Believe that everything is possible. hat is  
the deining line between an entrepreneur  
and a non-entrepreneur
DP: Imagine that this whole interview has been in front of a class-
room of aspiring entrepreneurs, As a inal question: What parting 
words of wisdom would you give them?
MB: In anything that you want to do, no matter what kind of com-
pany you want to build, you can add a component to it that makes 
a difference in the world and has a positive impact on the lives of 
others. A lot of people ask me: “Would you take a look at what I’m 
doing? Would you consider investing?” I irst say, “I’m not going to 
invest in anything that isn’t going to make the world a better place.”
Anybody that wants to change the world and do something good, 
with a good plan for how to do it, is going to attract good energy 
and support. There’s no question in my mind. That’s also what 
most investors want to get behind. They look for entrepreneurs that 
want to do something good and have a good economic business 

136 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
model. Everything else, to me, is a snore. Don’t do anything just to 
make money. Create a better world at the same time. Lead from a 
place of purpose, passion, and love.
MICHAEL BRONNER  is the founder and chairman emeritus of Digitas, a global digital 
marketing agency employing over 6,000 people. Digitas was purchased by Publi-
cis Groupe in 2006. Michael also founded Upromise to help make college more 
attainable for middle class families. Upromise is the largest private source of college 
funding, with over $1B of free money given to participating families. Upromise was 
acquired by Sallie Mae in 2006. In 2012, Michael co-founded with his two sons, 
UnReal, a new generation food company, with a mission to “unjunk the world” by 
reinventing America’s favorite junk foods, making them without the bad stuff. 

ARENAS NOT MARKETS
Rita Gunther McGrath
Rita Gunther McGrath is the top business strategist in the world. 
The End of Competitive Advantage shows that much of what we 
believe about strategy is based on assumptions that are no longer 
true. The world is now highly interconnected and constantly chang-
ing. Competition can come from almost anywhere. We compete in 
arenas, not marketplaces. We need a new strategy toolbox.
• 
Twisting markets to compete in new ways
• 
How the Internet accelerated changes in strategy
• 
Companies can’t shrink their way to greatness
• 
The future of work and sharing prosperity
Large organizations have scale and resources, but often strug-
gle to adapt and innovate. Her pioneering approach to strategy 
integrates frameworks familiar to startups and entrepreneurs like 
customer development and business model innovation from Steve 
Blank and Alex Osterwalder. This versatility makes Rita an expert 
in navigating paths to success in rapidly changing and volatile 
environments.
DP: The preface of your book The End of Competitive Advantage 
opens with the sentence “Strategy is stuck.” This has to do with 
legacy assumptions about competitive advantage that you think 
are wrong now. The irst is that industry matters most; and second, 
once achieved, advantages are sustainable. 

138 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
In contrast to thinking about competing in marketplaces shaped 
by industries, you propose strategies focused on arenas or spaces 
that are not industry or market speciic. Can you tell us how strat-
egy got stuck around the notion of competitive advantage, and 
explain your new strategy framework? 
RM: The strategy ield as we know it took hold in the 1970s and 
1980s with the lowering of tools like Five Forces Analysis, the 
BCG matrix, tools for portfolio analysis, the value chain, and 
those kinds of ideas. That material became embedded in business 
textbooks and how we teach and think. What these tools all have 
in common is an underpinning alignment to this notion of stability 
and sustainable competitive advantage. 
When you think about the era in which those tools became normal 
practice, it was very different than today. India and China were 
closed. South America and Africa weren’t doing much. Mostly 
American and European irms had a lot of markets pretty much 
to themselves. There was competition, but it wasn’t completely 
global, digital, fast-moving competition. The world changed, and 
strategy as a ield became stuck. 
We really need a whole new way of thinking 
about strategy…a whole new strategy playbook
One of the purposes of my book was to unblock that a little bit 
and say, “We really need a whole new way of thinking about strat-
egy. We need a whole new strategy playbook.” Although my book 
is called The End of Competitive Advantage, I’m beginning to be 
of the mind that the very term “competitive advantage” almost 
leads us astray, because it says you should be focused on the com-
petitors, who by deinition are other companies in your industry 
that compete to do various things. 
The arena concept has leadership deining the space in which to 
compete, and the space may not have anything to do with con-
ventional industry boundaries. For example, think of the kinds of 
deinitions of space when a technology company like Google goes 
after advertising, which traditionally was the domain of the media 

Arenas not Markets—Rita Gunther McGrath 139
industry. What they did was say, “We can get users on our site 
looking for things, and what better way to pitch ads than to users 
on our site looking for things.” 
What you’re seeing are companies saying, “Hey, we can twist this 
market and look at it in a really different way.” When you think 
about a lot of the high-growth irms over the last few years, what 
they’ve basically done is that. They’ve taken an existing set of mar-
ket relationships and twisted them—the hot startups like Uber and 
even more traditional companies like Ikea have some kind of edge 
with their customers and twist convention. 
DP: The pillars of traditional strategy are based on assumptions 
of a more stable, predictable world that existed before the Inter-
net and even before widespread international trade. Big companies 
need a new strategy tool set to integrate the constant change and 
unpredictability that arises with the digital world. 
The digital world, in turn, is being layered on top of the phys-
ical to facilitate more eficient exchanges of goods and services 
through the creation of new types of crowd companies. The col-
laborative and sharing models from Web 2.0 and social media are 
now empowering people to get what they want from each other 
without necessarily needing brands. These are the types of changes 
covered in this book.
How has the digital world and the collaborative economy impacted 
the changes you see in strategy? 
RM: I think they accelerated the changes. One thing that is differ-
ent is the Internet makes it much easier to build a platform that 
others can tap into. Before these Internet businesses, the transac-
tion costs were too high or the dificulty of getting the information 
was very substantial. Take McKinsey as an example. If you wanted 
to igure out where to put a bank branch in 1980, what did you 
do? You hired a bunch of McKinsey consultants with stopwatches 
and clipboards that stood on street corners and counted how many 
people went around. Today, you can get that same information 
from a Google search. 

140 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
The theory that I’ve been working on has to do with markets vs. 
hierarchies, which relates to the collaborative economy. Basically, 
the idea is hierarchies are necessary under certain conditions, such 
as when the quality of the information is opaque (neither party 
to a transaction is able to establish a realistic value), or when 
there are strong incentives on the part of either party to cheat. 
There are certain conditions when transactions are expensive. 
These types of transactions lend themselves to being conducted 
within an organization.
Hierarchies are necessary under certain conditions
I think the digitization of the economy made it possible for mar-
kets to emerge where before you could only have organizations. 
When you think about things like eBay’s user rating system, Ama-
zon’s comment system that can inform prospective buyers of the 
experience of previous buyers, or Uber drivers and customers being 
able to rate each other, those are all examples of how markets are 
creating the kind of trust that used to be the job of organizations 
to provide. Now they are being replaced by collaborative kinds of 
markets. 
On top of that, you have the power of network effects, which 
means every single additional user adds to the value other users 
get from participating in these markets. Once you have accelerated 
adoption rates, it creates the potential for exponential growth. 
Ironically, that can become a sustainable competitive advantage, 
because once you’re the marketplace where everybody wants to 
be, for whatever reason, that makes you stronger and stronger. It’s 
hard to overcome that sheer volume of market exchanges. In this 
context, I think of the collaborative economy not necessarily in an 
intentionally collaborative way, but more in terms of transparent 
market transactions. 
Then the question is: Will there come a tipping point at which 
that begins to unravel? Once your grandmother is on Facebook, is 
that really where you want to be? If you look at the social media 
sites that have failed (such as MySpace), you see that the net-
work dynamics act in reverse—as users start to leave, the network 
becomes less and less valuable to those that remain. 

Arenas not Markets—Rita Gunther McGrath 141
DP: My last book Disruption Revolution looked at the revolution 
of innovation that occurred in the aftermath of the 2008/2009 
economic crash. There was a basic idea that Bryan Solis talked 
about that constraint drives innovation. Cutting back on resources 
forced companies to ind new ways of generating revenue. Mean-
while, entrepreneurs rallied around the term “disruption” to cre-
ate all of these new innovative products and services. This became 
a catalyst for the collaborative and sharing economy with the 
meteoric rise of companies like Airbnb, Uber, Lyft, TaskRabbit, 
and so on. 
So much discussion about innovation and economic recovery 
focuses on disruptive startups. How do the big companies that you 
work with view the trends since the crash? What can we learn from 
what happened, and how might they approach strategy differently 
going into the future?
RM: Let’s start with your idea that constraint drives innovation. 
Any design thinker can tell you that what designers want most 
when they start a project is to understand the constraints, because 
that helps drive where the creativity is going to be focused. 
Post-2008, the basic strategy was to stop everything, downsize, 
cut, get rid of anything unnecessary, and try to right the ship. The 
downside of that was a lot of people working on innovation either 
got booted out or were taught to funnel their innovation towards 
cost cuts. Then starting in around 2010/2011, we started to see 
more of these companies beginning to say, “Hey, we need to get 
back to growth.” 
We need to get back to some kind of innovation, because you can’t 
shrink your way to greatness. Lots of companies struggle doing 
both—running today’s business and having the right practices for 
a system of innovation—so there’s a lot of talk about innovation, 
but not very much actual innovating. 
The public markets exacerbate this because you can’t make a plan 
to drive innovation that diminishes the pressure in the short term 
to forecast earnings. Your typical manager will say, “I can get by 

142 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
for two, four, six, eight more quarters before lack of investment in 
the future catches up. What’s the incentive?” 
We need to get back to some kind of innovation, 
because you can’t shrink your way to greatness
DP: I love your comment that you can’t shrink your way to great-
ness. It’s a simple statement of the complex problem that so many 
companies face being trapped in the cycles of quarterly earnings 
reports and struggling to make the necessary investments in inno-
vation needed for growth. 
If the world is constantly changing faster and faster, leading com-
panies to compete in arenas instead of marketplaces, how should 
they think about advantage and approach innovation? 
RM: I think of advantages in terms of waves. You’ve got the begin-
ning part of the wave where you can see the differentiating advan-
tage, incubate it, get it into the market, and ramp up. Speed is crit-
ical here. If you ramp up too slowly, then competitors can match 
your efforts. 
Then you have the exploitation phase of the wave. It’s a steady 
state. You’re doing great stuff for today’s customers. Then if the 
advantage erodes, you have the disengagement process that involves 
reconiguring your team, assets, and capabilities to transition to 
another advantage. The disengagement part is often done very 
painfully, with a lot of damage and not much value recaptured.
I would say today’s large organizations are pretty good at running 
the exploitation phase. I think one of the reasons my book has been 
so well received is most companies know that they can’t continue 
to exploit, exploit, exploit, but they don’t know what other tools 
to put into their toolkit. People like Alexander Osterwalder are 
trying to crack that. What are the tools to help companies manage 
these complete cycles? 
We need companies to build innovation as a proiciency. Most com-
panies think their problem is getting good ideas, so they do ideation 
boot camps. But ideation is only the irst part of innovation. After 

Arenas not Markets—Rita Gunther McGrath 143
you get the ideas, you need to incubate and turn them into a busi-
ness concept. 
Build innovation as a proiciency. Most companies 
think their problem is getting good ideas…but 
ideation is only the irst part of innovation
One of the big shifts in innovation is the increasing supremacy of 
design thinking. People are embracing those principles and saying, 
“Yes. Let’s build prototypes. Let’s do customer development. Let’s 
make what Steve Blank calls ‘minimum viable products.’” 
DP: A lot of strategy traditionally focused on competitive advan-
tage in industries, and they also used words like “competition,” 
“exploit,” and “battling” to describe this cutthroat state of the mar-
ketplace. 
In this new framework of transient advantage that you present, 
what role might collaboration or sharing play, such as forming 
strategic partnerships or leveraging relationships with fans?
RM: The irst thing is that there are a tremendous number of large 
organizations today that simultaneously compete and cooperate. 
Samsung and Apple would be examples. One part of the organiza-
tions competes like hell and then other parts rely on collaboration. 
Part of what we’re seeing is a breakdown of the traditional notion 
of what a competitor is. There are a lot more tactical decisions 
made to cooperate for whatever reason, like common enemies or 
“the market’s moving really fast and those are the guys that hap-
pen to have the solution at this particular moment, so let’s collab-
orate with them.” 
In terms of collaborating around customers, I have a concept that I 
call “the consumption chain,” which basically says any potential cus-
tomer is constantly meshed in these sets of experiences—developing 
awareness, searching for solutions, inding a solution, picking a pro-
vider, making payments—that are a whole chain. Most companies 
today have a pretty primitive understanding of how customers make 

144 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
their way through that whole chain, so they focus on the pieces of 
it that they sell or that they work on. They don’t look at the whole 
experience. When you think of the value of collaborative relation-
ships, a lot of times what that means is to ill out the whole chain and 
make it a complete experience. If the chain’s broken, the experience 
breaks down and the customers may go to someone else. 
A irm that does a good job of this is Amazon. If you think about 
Amazon’s business model, they have something at every single 
link in the chain. For example, search. How do I become aware 
I have a need? “Well, people who have bought this book also 
bought that book.” “We noticed you bought titles by so-and-so. 
Would you like to be informed when their next book comes out?” 
“We’ve got recommendations for you based on proiles of peo-
ple similar.” That one link in the chain has ifty possible points 
of differentiation. The driver of collaboration is the need to get 
into customers’ experiences in a way that companies never had 
to before. 
Conversations between customers and companies are also chang-
ing. This involves the whole idea of social marketing, having back 
and forth communications with your customers, creating authen-
tic messages, etc. This has become high on the agenda of senior 
leaders because it’s a two-way conversation now and companies 
don’t control the message. The message is out there, and they have 
to igure out how to plug into it authentically or they’ll be at a 
disadvantage. 
The conversations can have a spiraling effect. Once a cadre 
of people gets upset enough, you can have a real problem as 
a company because the message out there may not be the one 
you want to see. I think for customers it’s liberating to be able 
to ask 12 people in the network that you trust, “What do you 
think of the service? What do you think of that product? Which 
phone operator are you happiest with and why?” The questions 
and knowledge exchanges opening up all over the place are very 
empowering.
An entrepreneur that I interviewed mentioned the social media 
version of a very traditional technique, which is igure out where 

Arenas not Markets—Rita Gunther McGrath 145
your customers’ pain points are. He will troll through the com-
ments made by customers or users and look for certain words—“I 
love,” “I hate,” “I wish,” “wouldn’t it be great if”—and then see if 
he could build a business around solving that pain point. Often, 
social media provides the validation for an idea that entrepreneurs 
come up with in solving their own pain points. Social media man-
agement service Buffer got started this way. Its founder wished 
for a way to enter tweets but have them spaced out throughout 
the day and used social media feedback to reine the idea before 
launching it in a very simple, bare-bones way. 
DP: When Etsy went public, in their IPO, they made 5% of their 
stock available to store owners that built businesses on top of 
their platform. This promotes loyalty and community in a critical 
growth phase by basically making their best customers into strate-
gic partners with a vested interest to grow the business. 
How might companies approach relationships with their share-
holders, investors, or most loyal customers differently based upon 
the implications of your ideas? 
RM: I think right now we are in the grip of what Steve Denning 
calls the worst idea in the world, which is that companies exist pri-
marily for shareholders. The average shareholder in a large public 
company in America holds their shares for seven days. Running 
your entire organization for that is a bit crazy. 
I think we need a balance between various stakeholder interests. 
We had a much better sense of that balance years ago, as the work 
of William Lazonick has pointed out. He wrote a fascinating arti-
cle in the Harvard Business Review called “Proits Without Pros-
perity.” He was able to show that until about the mid-1980s, cor-
porations took their proits and invested some for the employees, 
some for their returns to investors, and some for investments in 
the future. 
In the 1980s, three things happened. First, Congress changed the 
rules on stock buybacks and made it much easier to buy back 
your own stock, which has the effect of raising the stock price. 
Second, was the ascendance of the shareholder returns concept. 

146 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
Third, as an unintended consequence of laws that tried to limit 
CEO compensation, it became common for CEO compensation to 
come from stock price appreciation, stock options, and stuff like 
that. In fact, a recent study featured in the New York Times clearly 
showed that companies that over-use buybacks suffer long-term 
slowdowns in growth compared to similar companies that were 
less prone to giving buybacks and dividends.
What Lazonick argues is that you can see how, up until about the 
1980s, the pace of worker compensation, investment, and produc-
tivity improvement kept pace with growth. Then you saw returns 
to labor trail off, even as productivity continued to rise. We need 
to rethink the relationship between the owners of capital and the 
owners of the means of production and labor. 
We have to go back to a very traditional idea in economics. Because 
right now, the owners of capital are being treated as though capital 
is a scarce resource that should be conserved, when it isn’t. There’s 
money everywhere. People are desperately chasing returns right 
now, which is causing asset bubbles all over the world. 
People are desperately chasing returns right now, 
which is causing asset bubbles all over the world
What we’re seeing is this kind of bifurcation (some people call it 
the “Hourglass Economy”) where those with rare skills, or those 
who have a particular network, are getting compensated very well; 
those at the bottom are not doing well at all; and in the middle, it’s 
just being hollowed out. And all the growth is coming at the very 
top or the very bottom. I think we’re ready for a real rethink of the 
relationships between stakeholders and investors, how companies 
invest, and what they invest in innovation. 
My research suggests if they don’t get that balance right, they 
might succeed quarter by quarter in the short term, but they won’t 
last. The other thing that has really changed is the ability to do 
things very quickly at scale. The small entrepreneurial irm that 
wants to do something can make it happen very fast. Using mar-
ket-based services such as Amazon Web Services and contractors 

Arenas not Markets—Rita Gunther McGrath 147
from companies such as Upwork allows even small companies 
to get to scale quickly and move fast. Big irms with budgeting 
restrictions and lots of politics are much slower. 
DP: You work with and study large organizations with billions in 
revenue. In the last few years, there have been many billion-dol-
lar companies created from the tech space like Facebook, Twitter, 
Airbnb, Uber, and so on. How do large companies remain compet-
itive with tech companies entering these arenas, and how does the 
massive reach and scale of these new platforms impact strategy?
RM: The irst observation I would make is the big companies 
never worried much about Silicon Valley because they were kind 
of doing their own thing in different industries such as semi-con-
ductors and communication. It didn’t bother Nestlé or the taxi 
business or the hotel industry. The most recent wave of Silicon 
Valley startups is gunning for the establishment, so there’s a lot 
more nervousness in management among the big companies. That 
being said, big companies have a lot to work with. 
One of the irms I’m a faculty partner with right now is a com-
pany called mach49, which is an incubator designed to help global 
Fortune 1000 companies create new businesses from within their 
organization. Their thesis is big companies have assets, talent, and 
resources that entrepreneurs can only dream of, but what they 
don’t have is the way of getting those to market fast in a non- 
bureaucratic kind of way. 
I think you’ll start to see big companies using incubators, accel-
erators, and that kind of thing a lot more than they have in the 
past. With luck, you will see big companies learning to control the 
power dynamics and the politics that often get in the way with 
respect to innovation.
DP: We covered lots of ground around strategy and big com-
panies. There is great speculation about the future of the work-
place, including the threat of automation and AI described by 
Martin Ford, author of The Rise of the Robots. As a inal ques-
tion, I’d love to hear your thoughts on how big companies should 
approach hiring differently so they can succeed in this new era of 

148 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
collaboration, sharing, and disruption? What does the future of 
work look like to you?
RM: Younger generations coming into organizations are bringing 
a lot of fresh insights, perspectives, and unencumbered thinking. 
I think that will produce some really surprising outcomes. They 
relate differently to people at work and think differently about 
what work is. It’s a thing you do, not a place you go to. We’re going 
to see a real transformation of the workplace as we know it as 
this group—which is now the largest group of employed people—
begins to ascend to more signiicant positions of decision-making 
authority. 
Data is also changing the way that we make decisions. There was 
just an article in The New York Times about how a lot of these 
younger Internet companies don’t need middle managers to make 
decisions because they run an A/B test and automate that. You 
have different ways of dealing with vast amounts of data corralled 
so that you’re not making guesses, judgments, and hypotheses. 
You’re actually able to say, “Let’s test these out and see what the 
right answer should be.”
We are increasingly going into what Reid Hoffman calls a “tour of 
duty economy.” If you think about that in terms of human resource 
practices, you might bring somebody on to do innovation work, 
and when that tour is up that person either renegotiates for the 
next gig or they move on. Maybe they come back again when 
there’s another opening for their skills, or maybe not.
We are looking at dynamism in hiring practices because we’re not 
doing career ladders with ixed mandates. We build jobs around 
people in the context of a tour of duty. There are already irms that 
operate this way like Accenture or the big building construction 
irms. They bring together the right skills when something needs to 
be accomplished, and then those skills go somewhere else.
The way that we structure organizations is going to change. When 
I’m optimistic, I think the workplace of the future is going to be great 
in many ways. People like you and me will be able to have periods 

Arenas not Markets—Rita Gunther McGrath 149
of time with a company and periods of time doing something really 
different. We’re going to be able to shape these interesting careers in 
a much richer way than people were able to in the past.
When I’m on the pessimistic side, I worry that organizations and 
people that have not igured out this transient advantage stuff will 
start to treat people like disposable cogs. We see this in services 
and fast food. The attitude among the hiring managers is “Ugh. 
They’re completely replaceable. Why pay them more than mini-
mum wage?” and I think that’s terrible. 
I’m hopeful that we will start to recognize this is not the kind of 
society we want to build and it will start to shift. I’m doing some 
work with MIT and one of the things we are interested in is why 
more companies haven’t igured out that if you use human beings 
to increase revenues, that’s actually more valuable than taking the 
same human beings and treating them as a cost—because there 
are a lot of things human beings can do to drive more sales, create 
more expertise, and connect and build relationships than people 
that are just being treated like a pair of hands. 
We have a choice here about what kind of  
society we want to build and how broadly  
prosperity is shared
We have a choice here about what kind of society we want to 
build and how broadly prosperity is shared. Without sounding too 
Utopian, new technologies show promise to give us healthier lives, 
more lexible career structures, and more interesting jobs. To make 
that happen, however, we need to re-write some of the rules of 
competition and career structures. At the better companies, this is 
already happening. 
RITA GUNTHER MCGRATH  is a globally recognized expert on strategy, innovation, and 
growth with an emphasis on corporate entrepreneurship. Her work and ideas help 
CEOs and senior executives chart a pathway to success in today’s rapidly changing 
and volatile environments. McGrath is highly valued for her rare ability to connect 
research to business problems. Thinkers50 named Rita in their top ten global list 

150 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
of management thinkers overall for 2015 and 2013 and presented Rita with the #1 
award for Strategy, the Distinguished Achievement Award, in 2013. Rita has also 
been inducted into the Strategic Management Society “Fellows” in recognition of 
her impact on the ﬁeld. She consistently appears in lists of the top professors to 
follow on Twitter. McGrath is the author of four books; the most recent being the 
best-selling The End of Competitive Advantage (Harvard Business Review Press), 
rated the #1 book of the year by Strategy+Business.

BETTER BRAND VALUES
Alex Bogusky
Alex Bogusky left advertising shortly after being named Creative 
Director of the Decade 2000–2010, the industry’s most prestigious 
award. Under his leadership, Crispin Porter + Bogusky pioneered 
modern brand building and viral marketing. Now he does mean-
ingful work with people he loves, from helping Al Gore with cli-
mate change to being an advisor and investor in startups like Lyft 
and HealthySkoop.
• 
If you have a business, you have a brand
• 
The rights we demand vs. the rights we deserve
• 
Ask questions even if we cannot answer them
• 
How bullying holds back the evolution of society
Alex is one of my personal heroes. He has uncompromising ethics 
and convictions, is bold enough to speak out and push boundaries 
around issues that matter, and had the courage to walk away from 
an incredibly lucrative position to do work that positively impacts 
society. This is a thought-provoking, wide-ranging interview with 
one of the world’s most brilliant creative minds. 
DP: We both left advertising out of a need to do more with our 
lives. I was Senior Director and account lead at the social media 
agency of record for Volkswagen, and CP+B was their creative 
agency, so we also shared the same client. I sold everything in New 
York City, bought a one-way ticket to Thailand, and spent six 

152 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
months in Southeast Asia and India. That story is the basis of my 
irst book Red Bull to Buddha.
One of the things that had a profound impact on me during my 
travels was the encounter with poverty. It made me rethink what’s 
most important and led me to focus on how I can give back in my 
life and work. I thought it would be interesting to open the inter-
view with that because you have an interesting hobby of collecting 
signs from homeless people. Can you tell us about that?
AB: I found the signs interesting because I saw them as this form 
of advertising that people pay attention to. Sometimes they’re very 
creative, so as an ad and creative guy, I enjoyed what I saw. Plus 
I imagine I’m like a lot of people. I don’t know what to do, like 
do I give? Do I not give? Is it right to give? Am I doing the wrong 
thing by giving because a lot of people tell you it’s the wrong thing 
to give? Do you look forward? Do you look at them? Do you…? 
There’s all that.
I thought it would be neat to buy the signs that I think are cre-
ative and that will be my way of giving. I value creativity so it will 
simplify that little aspect of my life. I don’t know what to do with 
them, but I’ll do that. Then I was like, Do I give them a marker and 
cardboard because I can’t leave them without their sign? That’s 
how they make a living.
Finally, I felt all set and roll up to this guy. “I’d love to buy your 
sign. It’s very funny. It’s very creative,” I said. “Would you consider 
selling it?” and he was like, “Yeah. Totally.” The irst time, I didn’t 
do it from the car. I parked and walked around because I felt like 
this could take a little while. He had a lot of fun with it, brought 
his buddy over, and they thought it was crazy that I was buying 
the sign. 
I was a little worried, like, “Are they going to be offended? How 
are they going to take it?” And then I said, “Hey, I have cardboard 
and markers,” and they were like, “No, no. We’re good. We got 
cardboard and markers for more signs.” No one has ever taken 
me up on the cardboard and the markers. That was just something 
I assumed would be important. And no one has ever been upset. 

Better Brand Values—Alex Bogusky 153
They get a kick out of it and they get excited so now I do it. It’s 
really quick. I just roll up. 
Sometimes I think people know there’s a dude that buys signs 
in Boulder. Then, of course, friends hear that you buy signs and 
they’ll buy you signs, so the collection’s grown, but I haven’t done 
anything with it. I just save them at this point. I’ve made some 
t-shirts out of some of my favorites and donated money from sales 
to the homeless shelter. 
Mostly I learned about giving. You hear all the time that there 
are lots of reasons not to give, and I think everyone in our culture 
can repeat the reasons that you shouldn’t give to someone who’s 
begging or asking for money on the streets. You wind up talking 
to people a lot, inding out shelters are ine, but they are not great 
places to be. Stuff gets stolen, ights break out, people are afraid 
for their safety, and there are lots of contagions. I’m not saying 
shelters are bad, but they’re not for everybody in every situation.
People also say they will use the money to buy drugs and alcohol. 
Well, I had a thousand people on my payroll and lots of them 
used the money to buy drugs and alcohol. No one ever said to me, 
“Don’t pay them.” If that’s what they’re going to do with it, then 
that’s what they’re going to do with it. 
Right now, the best thing I can do is just say, “Hey, somebody cares 
enough and I’ve got a little extra, and it’s good to give. Generosity 
is a good thing to cultivate.” What I learned from the process is 
don’t overthink it. If you want to be generous, just be generous. 
DP: That’s a good takeaway. Many readers of this book work in 
startups, or they are aspiring entrepreneurs that have little or no 
experience building a brand. I think it’s safe to say you’re one of 
the world’s best at brand building. You transitioned from the agency 
world to become an investor, advisor, and founder of startups, includ-
ing BoomTown, one of the leading accelerators based in Boulder. 
Imagine you are speaking to a room full of entrepreneurs that may 
not understand branding. Why are brands important and where do 
you start building one? 

154 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
AB: I have a very basic notion around branding, and in anything, 
I try not to use language or sophisticated terminology to distance 
ideas from people. If you have a business, you have a brand. And 
you can’t avoid it. You have a brand. The question is really: Can 
you build a good brand, or is the brand going to be neutral or sort 
of bad? 
If you have a business, you have a brand. he 
question is really: Can you build a good brand, or 
is the brand going to be neutral or sort of bad?
We often rename startups because they come in with terrible 
names. I don’t think a name has to be great. The name and the 
brand are an accumulation of everything that you do—the com-
munications, business, interactions—and those all it to whatever 
is your brand. It’s prudent when you’re small and young to ind a 
brand that suggests what you do. Also, don’t get too attached. 
Early-stage entrepreneurs often came up with their brand name 
before anything else. “The name of my product is Blah Blah.” 
That’s not necessarily their expertise. When someone is not lexi-
ble around the name, they also tend to not be approachable in any 
other way. One of the irst things I’ll say to test an entrepreneur 
is, “How would you feel about changing the brand name if you 
needed to? If it turned out to be necessary?” If they absolutely 
think it’s a terrible idea without any consideration, that’s more 
of an indicator that he or she is not a very good entrepreneur—at 
that early stage. It’s one of the things that you can do that can 
have the biggest effect at that early stage. Later on, you can’t nec-
essarily do it. 
I’m also excited about the march of design as an important ele-
ment. I think tech lifted the proile of design in the last 10 years, 
and if you go back to business books 20 years ago, design doesn’t 
come up very much. Every business book that deals with tech 
startups now seems to reinforce the notion that design is hyper-
critical. Lots of successful tech startups will have a designer on the 
founding team, which is pretty radical. As a guy that started as a 
designer, I kind of love that. 

Better Brand Values—Alex Bogusky 155
DP: Instagram is a good example of that. They were very 
design-conscious, and that was one of the things that really led 
them to differentiate. There were a million different photo apps at 
the time. So many, in fact, that it’s become kind of an inside joke in 
Silicon Valley to talk about building a photo app, which is to say 
you don’t have an original app idea to work on so let’s try to jump 
on the bandwagon of what everyone else is doing.
AG: You’ll see big VCs advise people, like, “Go out and ind a 
great designer”—because there’s more value in design, and I think 
people understand it. Maybe tech in some ways has understood 
it because its lexibility and real-time ability to change highlights 
the effect that good design can have. It’s instantly apparent. Prior 
to the Internet age, you couldn’t see the effects as quickly or at 
all. It would take six months to notice a design change I think vs. 
today, which takes six minutes when you get the instant feedback 
from data. 
DP: When you left advertising, you partnered with your wife and 
Rob Schuham to start the Fearless Cottage. There was this idea of 
being fearless in terms of taking on the impossible, and also to fear 
less and love more, so the name had an interesting double mean-
ing. Fearless evolved from an incubator of ideas and projects, into 
Fearless Unlimited, a social impact agency. 
One of the Fearless projects that I found particularly interesting 
was a new Consumer Bill of Rights, which encouraged companies 
to be transparent about things like donations, ingredients, labor, 
etc. Can you tell us about Fearless and what led you to advocate a 
new Consumer Bill of Rights?
AB: I had so many large clients by the end of my ad career. You 
become a mouthpiece for every client, and so it’s dificult to say 
anything and navigate every issue that your clients have. It was 
kind of a maze. My words would go through a maze to get out. 
Eventually, that maze became so dense that I felt like I couldn’t 
say the things that I believed. I don’t know if a lot of people 
wind up in that position. Some people would say that describes 
everyone in corporate America. I don’t really know, but I found 
myself there. 

156 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
I left the agency business because I wanted to get back to being 
able to voice what I thought. At the time, my thoughts were fairly 
heretical and upsetting to corporate America around things like 
transparency, ingredients, and GMOs. Those issues have gone 
mainstream, but six years ago were radical. During that arc, Fear-
less got created. It was a kind of experiment for exploring these 
ideas and doing work that we believed in with nonproits and with 
Al Gore on climate change.
People will treat you the way that you allow them to treat you. 
I think that with consumers, it’s the same contract: You will be 
treated the way you allow brands to treat you. When you ask, 
“What rights should Americans have?” If you ask the British in 
1770, they had a very different answer to that than where we 
wound up. You have the rights that you demand; you don’t have 
the rights that you deserve. 
People will treat you the way that  
you allow them to treat you
Some consumers are very aware of that contract. They think 
about it, work on it, and press for it. But the vast majority don’t 
care. Businesses are beholden to their customers. They’re going 
to behave in whatever way customers want and they’ll live up or 
down to whatever standards customers demand. 
Some visionaries like Patagonia, Ben & Jerry’s, or Paul Polman at 
Unilever will say, “No one’s asking me to create a higher standard, 
but I’m going to go do it.” But most companies stay barely in front 
of consumer expectations. That’s the way the world works. People 
will have the brands and transparency that they demand, and they 
won’t have anything more. 
DP: You went from building some of the biggest brands in the world 
and being awarded Creative Director of the Decade from 2000–
2010, to applying those same skill sets to nonproits and climate 
change. It seems like now companies are trying to have a more pos-
itive impact on the world, while many nonproits struggle to make 
a difference that really breaks through to public consciousness. Can 

Better Brand Values—Alex Bogusky 157
you relect on your experience building brands across the entire 
spectrum?
AB: Nonproits are way more messed up than the for-proit space, 
and messed up in a way that would surprise most people. You 
think they would be more cooperative than for-proits, but it is 
absolutely the opposite. You see much more cooperation between 
for-proit companies than nonproits. The reason is the way both 
are funded. 
Big foundations and endowments have big pools of money and 
evaluate nonproits based on their success. Not the audacity of 
what they took on or their incremental progress, but “We said 
we’d do this and we did it. And we told you last year we’d do this 
and we did it.” As a result, nonproits promise to hit minute little 
goals that measure success and are on a funding treadmill. They 
can’t cooperate with other nonproits because they all ight over 
the same pool of money, and they can’t take on real issues because 
if they fail then funding will not get renewed.
We are not getting out of our nonproits  
what I think most people want and expect
There are fewer and fewer examples of nonproits like Greenpeace 
willing to take on impossible challenges like driving your boat 
between the harpoons and the whales, and chaining yourself to 
trees, or like 350.org taking on the Keystone Pipeline. When you 
think of the nonproit space, you imagine an attitude of “It doesn’t 
matter if we win; we have to try” but in practice most nonproits 
only focus on things that they can win because of the way that 
fundraising works. We are not getting out of our nonproits what 
I think most people want and expect.
The same type of thing happens in politics. Al Gore told me that 
before Citizens United, you would run, you would win, and then 
you go legislate. The heightened polarity of every issue would 
exist during that campaign. Then it would end and both sides of 
the aisle would work together to legislate. Eventually, you cam-
paign again because the ight generates funding. Now, you need 

158 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
so much money that you can’t stop ighting because without 
the ight, there’s no funding. Sides don’t come together because 
they can’t afford to stop ighting and it’s so expensive to run a 
campaign.
DP: At one extreme, we have nonproits that don’t take on the 
impossible because they are trapped into focusing on small achiev-
able goals to keep getting funded, and at the other extreme poli-
ticians constantly focus on the impossible because the polarizing 
messaging and ight creates a constant state of emergency to raise 
more money. 
What this suggests is that billions upon billions of dollars pour 
into efforts that may never make any meaningful, lasting differ-
ence. It makes me think of Peter Diamandis and the idea that the 
best way to become a billionaire is to solve a problem for a billion 
people. Look at what Elon Musk is doing with Tesla and Solar 
City to wean us off of fossil fuels and reduce our carbon footprint.
If nonproits and politicians aren’t getting the job done, should we 
expect the for-proit sector to change the world and take on the 
impossible? How could corporations work with the crowd to take 
on big problems?
AB: I think you see the private sector stepping in where govern-
ment used to be, because government’s going broke and they can’t 
do it. The tax base has shifted. There used to be more corporate 
tax in the 1970s, and now the tax burden is more on individuals. 
Corporations need to step in where there’s been that gap in fund-
ing where government used to be. 
They’re compelled to in two ways. First, they might be compelled 
to because they see a need and they might see an opportunity to do 
something that builds their brand. Second, they do it because no 
one in the system can afford for this thing to collapse. It’s just plain 
necessary to step in. It’s similar to the shift where a lot of social ser-
vices were done by the church and they moved into government. 
Now they are moving out of government, and a lot of what are 
essentially social services will need to be funded by corporations 
working together with community. I don’t have an idea of how or 

Better Brand Values—Alex Bogusky 159
the best way to do it, but I identify it the same way you do. I see it 
as a megatrend. 
DP: This notion of identifying a problem, without necessarily 
knowing what the solution is, points to the importance of asking 
questions. In several of your talks, you emphasize the importance 
of asking questions even when it may not be technologically or 
economically possible to answer them. 
In your own work, this translated into excitement around pitch 
events and optimism that innovation can help solve the world’s big-
gest problems even though they might seem impossible today. I share 
the same philosophy. This book in many ways is about asking impos-
sible questions in an attempt to shape a larger conversation. Why is 
asking questions so important even if we can’t know the answers?
AB: People don’t ask questions because of intimidation. When you 
have a culture of fear it can be dificult to ask questions because 
you’re going to be attacked. Look at Twitter ive years ago. You 
could tweet or retweet. Today, the retweet hardly exists. There’s 
a “like.” You tweet something and then tons of people will like it 
because that’s pretty safe. Retweeting says, “I believe this too” or 
“I believe other people should think about this,” and that behavior 
is down on the platform. 
There’s a giant social cough around suggesting that you believe 
something because there is a risk of backlash. There is a culture of 
fear and intimidation that—I don’t know if it’s conscious—works 
to get people not to say things. When that dialogue doesn’t take 
place, change can never take place. Dialogue in front of change 
really matters, and questions drive the dialogue. They never go in 
any other order. There is never change and then people talk or ask 
questions about change. 
I might be willing to tweet about something that other people 
aren’t, like climate change and GMOs. For somebody else, it might 
be a much smaller increment of what they’re comfortable with. If 
everyone pushes a little bit from where they are to a place where 
they’re a little bit uncomfortable and lean into that, that’s doing 
your part. If that doesn’t happen, then we really are fucked. 

160 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
We have this interesting opportunity where social media is still the 
Wild West, but every day you see people working to get it under 
central control. There’s a window for humanity to keep pushing 
and make sure that doesn’t happen, because mass media has never 
been owned by the people until about 10 years ago. 
Humanity now consumes more peer-to-peer media than top-
down, state-down, corporate-down. That’s a massive shift and lots 
of folks don’t like it, which is why it’s important for everybody 
to keep pushing whatever little bit you can and where you feel 
comfortable. Own and take advantage of it, because it may be a 
limited time offer. 
Humanity now consumes more peer-to-peer 
media than top-down, state-down, corporate-
down. hat’s a massive shift and lots of folks 
don’t like it
DP: One of the things that comes up in your writing is this idea that 
things keep getting bigger and bigger. For example, in The 9-Inch 
Diet, you talk about an experience of how you couldn’t it your 
plates in the cabinets of your cottage, and then it turns out that din-
ner plates used to be much smaller because portions were smaller. 
There is a story you often tell from your Dad—that you can always 
tell who has the most power by the size of their buildings. There’s 
this kind of evolution from the castle to the cathedrals to the state 
capitals, and now you have these massive ofice buildings. 
AB: What that illustrates is that the corporations have more power 
than the nation state. But people don’t see that change happened. 
I think lots of people are nostalgic for the notion that the govern-
ment is the most powerful force, but I think that’s nostalgic think-
ing. Corporations are more powerful than government—there’s no 
doubt. Last I checked, there was over $20 spent lobbying per vote 
in the U.S. Your vote doesn’t compare to the lobbyist doing an 
ofice visit. 
Everybody wants a certain kind of world. They’ve got ideas and 
concepts that they’d like to see executed through their government. 

Better Brand Values—Alex Bogusky 161
It’s important to realize that you vote with every dollar spent and 
you vote occasionally in elections. If you want to be an involved 
citizen that participates in social change, don’t give up either of 
those votes. The voting dollar is a lot more work, unfortunately. 
It’s not every two or four years; it’s constant, every day. 
DP: That goes back to what you said before around you get what 
you allow. 
AB: Yes. You get what you buy and you get what you fund. You 
are funding ideals with every purchase, and it’s dificult to do the 
homework to make sure those ideals are aligned. For example, 
AT&T makes me crazy because they give so much money to peo-
ple I wouldn’t give money to politically. Yet it took me forever to 
dump my AT&T account, because it’s a pain in the neck. 
You’re funding ideals with every purchase
It’s a lot of work for every dollar spent. Who do they give to? What 
do they support? What kind of policies? What does that mean for 
gay and lesbian rights? Oh, they’re against it. It’s too much work 
for most people vs. going to the polls once every two years and 
poking a hole. When you see the opportunity to learn something 
and then make a change, that ability will trend up. If you don’t 
take it, then that ability will trend down.
The bigger issue around everything getting bigger and bigger is 
that now the global economy isn’t expanding. I’m not trying to 
put the genie back in the bottle with things like artiicial intelli-
gence, but no doubt there is a massive disruption coming to jobs. I 
think we can deal with it economically through things like a basic 
income. My bigger concern is that the job is the number one way 
we understand ourselves as human beings because we don’t really 
use religion that much anymore. 
DP: When I think of all the stuff we spoke about in terms of non-
proits vs. for-proit and how to take on the impossible, the work 
that you did on Truth was incredibly effective at getting people 
to stop smoking. You used these factoids to educate people about 
things like ammonia, how light cigarettes aren’t better for you, and 

162 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
you had compelling imagery that really had a lasting social impact. 
Your work with Al Gore on climate change is another great exam-
ple of meaningful work with social impact. 
Hypothetically speaking, if there was an agency for planet Earth 
and budgets weren’t an issue to scale production and creative exe-
cutions, what type of campaigns and projects would you do? How 
might the types of solutions that advertising typically provides its 
clients be utilized to make the work better?
AB: I would focus on online bullying in every form, including stuff 
that I don’t think is considered bullying like trash talk and trolling. 
People with bully-like mentalities who don’t want to hear what 
other people think use online tools to try to shut down conversa-
tions. I think that has enormous costs to society.
I was at a meeting one time at Al Gore’s house and Van Jones 
was there. Afterwards he walked up to my wife and says, “You 
didn’t say anything. What do you think?” My wife’s a crazy smart 
Duke math major, and she said something insightful about climate 
change. He replied, “The reason why I ask is I learned that the 
quietest person in the room has the most to offer, so I always seek 
out what they are thinking.” 
That’s the cost, right now, of having this culture of bullying and 
outrage that seems to exist with every online discussion. We’re 
wasting the opportunity. We all can talk and not have anyone in 
between us. We don’t have corporations or government or any-
thing that’s trying to intervene. We can really talk about stuff that 
matters to all of us, and that opportunity is wasted right now. 
ALEX BOGUSKY’S  career began over 20 years ago when he joined a 16-person ad 
agency called Crispin and Porter. Under Alex’s direction, Crispin Porter + Bogusky 
grew to more than 1,000 employees with ofﬁces in Miami, Boulder, Los Angeles, 
London, and Sweden, and with annual billings over $1 billion. During Alex’s lead-
ership, CP+B became the world’s most awarded advertising agency, and in 2010, 
Alex received the rare honor of being named “Creative Director of the Decade” by 
Adweek magazine.
Always drawn towards a cause, Alex created groundbreaking initiatives such as 
the “Truth” campaign, which was named the most successful social advertising 

Better Brand Values—Alex Bogusky 163
campaign in U.S. history. His work with Vice President Al Gore debunked the notion 
of “Clean Coal.” And in 2011, Alex rebranded The Climate Reality Project and 
launched 24 Hours of Reality—the most highly viewed streaming web program of 
its time. 
Since leaving CP+B in 2010, he and his wife, Ana, keep busy investing and advis-
ing in over 40 advertising and tech ﬁrms including his investor/advisor role for Lyft, 
the ride-share platform; investor/advisor in Fearless Unlimited, an agency dedi-
cated to positive social change, where he continues his work on climate change 
with Al Gore; investor/founder in MadeMovement, an ad agency with a focus on 
clients that create U.S. jobs; investor/advisor in Humanaut, a marketing agency in 
Chattanooga; investor/founder at HealthySkoop an organic plant-based nutrition 
company; founder of Boomtown, a tech-startup accelerator; and general partner in 
Erli Ventures, an early-stage tech fund. 


PART IV
THE ECONOMY OF THE FUTURE
How will crowd-based capitalism  
reshape the economy?
What are the costs of pursuing  
unsustainable growth?
How can we leverage  
technology for abundance?


THE SHARING ECONOMY
Arun Sundararajan
Arun Sundararajan delivers groundbreaking analysis in Sharing 
Economy by revealing the profound transformation and under-
lying economics of what he calls “crowd-based capitalism.” He 
makes a compelling argument that peer-to-peer commercial 
exchanges could supplant traditional corporate-centered mod-
els, effectively becoming the dominant model in a new global 
economy. 
• 
How trust enables crowd-based capitalism
• 
Digital Darwinism and the future of work
• 
Why the blockchain is like the early Internet
• 
Decentralization can turn providers into owners
As a Professor at NYU’s Stern Business School and Member of the 
World Economic Forum’s Global Futures Council on Technology, 
Arun backs up his bold analysis with serious economic credentials 
and extensive research. I love his ability to connect aspirational 
ideas about sharing and collaboration to a new peer-to-peer eco-
nomic model that appears superior to industrial capitalism. 
DP: The Sharing Economy begins with a story of you looking 
through Mary Meeker’s slides of annual predictions, which have 
become infamous for forecasting the future of tech. She foresaw 
an asset-light generation that wants everything on demand, shifts 
from access to ownership, lexible work hours, etc. 

168 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
You describe this kind of a-ha moment where you realize there was 
much more going on. In fact, this signiied a radical shift where the 
crowd would eventually replace the corporation as the center of 
capitalism. Can you tell us about this radical shift towards crowd-
based capitalism?
AS: The notion of an asset-light existence focuses on shifts in 
consumption and the idea that we are going towards a more 
on-demand, collaborative form of consumption—where you’re 
not buying music; you’re streaming it. You’re not buying a car, 
but ordering it on-demand. That gets rid of assets in favor of 
experiences, or replaces ownership with access. But that is one 
slice of a broader transition. 
The mechanism of producing the world’s goods and services at 
the end of the 20th century was very organization-centric. A lot of 
large institutions employed people full-time making a set of prod-
ucts and services that were then delivered to consumers. Now we 
are seeing the creation of systems that draw on resources as needed 
from a crowd of distributed providers.
Crowd-based capitalism signiies a  
fundamental shift in how we organize  
the world’s economic activities
For example, there is the Airbnb model where you draw on a crowd 
of distributed homeowners to provide short-term accommodation; 
or a crowd of distributed Lyft or BlaBlaCar drivers to get trans-
portation on demand; a crowd of individual investors to assemble 
small business loans at Funding Circle. More broadly, all of this sig-
niies a fundamental shift in how we organize the world’s economic 
activities. I refer to this as the rise of “crowd-based capitalism.”
This is a new system of capitalism that is a hybrid between the 
18th-century, Adam Smith peer-to-peer marketplace of the small 
shop owner, and the 20th-century, industrial scale corporation. 
Platforms do some of the things that a traditional organization 
might do—accumulate demand, create uniformity across the cus-
tomer experience, provide trust through branding—but then they 

The Sharing Economy—Arun Sundararajan 169
facilitate scale through this kind of crowd-based supply across a 
wide variety of goods and services. 
The economic fundamentals of crowd-based capitalism seem fun-
damentally superior. A lot of this activity was falling under the 
umbrella of the sharing economy or peer-to-peer, which seem to 
connote a philosophy of commerce that is non-capitalistic, whereas 
what I see emerging is decidedly capitalist. Thus the title of my 
book is called The Sharing Economy but I refer to this broader, 
fundamental shift as the rise of crowd-based capitalism.
DP: This hybrid new model of crowd-based capitalism that you 
describe in economic terms parallels the Peers Inc. model of com-
pany creation from Robin Chase, where “crowd-based” and 
“Peers” draw attention to peer-to-peer platforms leveraging the 
power of the crowd, and “capitalism” and “Inc.” underscore the 
scale and beneits of the modern industrial economy. 
One key concept in your approach is the notion of trust. The crowd 
builds trust through things like relationships and ratings systems, 
and industrial brands build trust through providing reliability and 
quality at scale. I read that your interest in trust led you to study 
the sharing economy. Can you tell us about why trust is so import-
ant in crowd capitalism, and explain this revolutionary idea of a 
new trust infrastructure?
AS: I have been interested in trust for as long as I’ve been a student 
of business because I believe the trust systems of a society deter-
mine the possibilities for economic exchange. We used to live in 
tight-knit communities where the only people you could trust were 
the people who lived in your village and they were your only trad-
ing partners. Over time, governments started providing some form 
of trust by certifying food or creating common currency. Then 
countries created institutions that granted things like the ability to 
sign a contract and go to court if it was violated, or the notion of 
property rights. These trust-based systems expanded trading rights 
and became drivers of economic growth.
If you think of trust today, you don’t write a contract when you 
buy small things like a cup of coffee. Instead, you trust a brand, 

170 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
which signiies a commitment by a company that “I will consis-
tently deliver a high-quality service and stake my reputation and 
the future of my business on it.” This is why you comfortably drink 
a Coca-Cola when you’re in a country where you don’t know the 
food safety rules, or you ride the roller coasters at Six Flags, but 
hesitate if the roller coaster was on the side of the highway. 
We expanded the economy each time we created these new bases 
of trust. From the time of eBay, it seemed like we were seeing 
the genesis of a new system of trust that could expand economic 
exchange more signiicantly based on either digitized informa-
tion about you or digitally represented information about the 
experiences. The creation of this digital trust infrastructure is 
fundamental to why we’re going to see the shift to crowd-based 
capitalism. 
DP: Throughout history there have been these forms of innova-
tion like currency, government institutions, contracts, and brands 
that add incremental layers to trust infrastructure. You describe the 
emergence of how community and peer-to-peer platforms create a 
new trust infrastructure that has six different parts:
• 
Government Certiication
• 
Third-Party Certiication
• 
Platform (or Brand) Certiication
• 
Digital Conduits to Digital Traits
• 
Digitized Social Capital
• 
Digitized Peer-to-Peer Feedback
Can you help us navigate the shifting landscape of the digital trust 
infrastructure?
AS: Let me go through each of the items. Government or third-
party certiication involves having someone other than the con-
tracting parties inject a credible quality signal into the transac-
tion—like the Taxi and Limousine Commission saying that this 
taxi is safe to ride in or a background check on the driver. Brand 
certiication has to do with a company saying, “You can trust that 
the quality of this product is good because it bears my name and I 
have a reputation for high-quality provision.” 

The Sharing Economy—Arun Sundararajan 171
Institutions and contracts have to do with sets of terms that you 
know will be adhered to and the possibility of recourse through 
courts if contracts are violated. They make you more comfortable 
to buy from suppliers. A license is like a contract. For example, 
we sign contracts when we buy music from iTunes or books from 
Amazon. In some sense, that has to do with the continued exis-
tence of trust cues in the pre–crowd-based capitalism world or the 
pre-digital world. 
There is still a government-injected form of trust in many of 
the transactions that we engage. For example, Uber administers 
background checks and has guidelines that shape what drivers 
can and can’t do. Every smart sharing economy platform invests 
heavily in their brand because they realize that while the lower 
digital layer is getting stronger, we are still a society where peo-
ple trust brands and that’s an important gateway to trying a 
new service. 
DP: This relates to the idea that people conducting exchanges on 
crowd platforms beneit from something similar to a franchis-
ing model. For example, when they advertise their apartment on 
Airbnb, they beneit from the halo effect and trust of Airbnb’s 
brand, community, user experience, and platform the same way 
that a franchisee beneits when they franchise a business. There is 
this kind of standardization of quality and experience provided by 
the crowd-capital brand.
AS: Yes. They beneit from the good experiences that other peo-
ple had with the same branded experience. The investments made 
in getting people familiar with the model provide a sense of reas-
surance that there’s a large company backing this transaction. 
This type of brand consistency and service is similar to the fran-
chising model.
DP: Providers also organize communities and standardize their 
own best practices. For example, Douglas Atkin, the Global Head 
of Community for Airbnb, describes how their communities of 
hosts self-organize around the world. In the digital trust infra-
structure, there is this layer of peer-to-peer community that basi-
cally standardizes delivery of products and services in addition to 

172 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
the standardization and trust from the brand itself—it’s all mutu-
ally reinforcing, going back to what you said earlier in terms of 
a hybrid between the Adam Smith, peer-to-peer marketplace vs. 
industrial capitalism. 
AS: Yes, I think those kinds of decentralized, guild-like ways of set-
ting standards are going to be an important part of the future regu-
latory infrastructure. We have some self-organizing, self-regulating 
components in other industries that have historically been peer-to-
peer—like the lawyers have the Bar Association, the doctors have 
the American Medical Association, and real estate agents have the 
National Realtors Association. Governments dictate some of the 
safety of these businesses, but there is a strong community-based, 
self-regulatory component to setting and enforcing standards of 
provision. It seems like a natural evolution for the sharing econ-
omy as well. 
In terms of the digital trust infrastructure, there is basic proof of 
who you are with respect to providing mobile number, govern-
ment-issued ID, membership in different organizations, etc. I can 
hold my passport up to a webcam to identify who I am. We can 
also add individual interests (“I like jazz music”) that could cause 
someone else on the platform to trust you more depending on 
shared characteristics. 
Looking into the future of where this is all heading, we’ll have 
friends, family, people who know us, and business acquaintances 
whose presence signals a particular set of characteristics that you 
are an effective or trusted member of the community. We already 
digitize and make available our real-world social networks on 
platforms like LinkedIn and Facebook, so our real world social 
capital will become part of trusted digital interactions. For exam-
ple, I look at someone on Airbnb or BlaBlaCar and discover that 
we have LinkedIn or Facebook friends in common. That plays a 
role in facilitating trust.
Then there is the digitized peer feedback, which is based on the 
rating and reputation systems invented by eBay many years ago 
that were the basis for their rapid growth. “abc123 has had 73 
successful transactions and a 4.9 star rating.” By itself, it is unlikely 

The Sharing Economy—Arun Sundararajan 173
to be a suficient basis of trust for a more high-stakes interaction, 
like you can sleep in my spare bedroom or get into my car and I’ll 
drive you to another city, but it was suficient for receiving a pack-
age from someone in the mail. 
Our real world social capital will become  
part of trusted digital interactions
High-stakes peer-to-peer interactions require the creation of the 
rest of the digital trust infrastructure, but they also require some 
reliance on existing trust cues, like brand. For example, I’m doing 
a study on BlaBlaCar. Early on, users place a high weight on the 
brand as a way of facilitating trust. As they gain experience, they 
rely more on different parts of a digital proile. Some focus on 
peer feedback, others care more about “Oh, this person is an Auto 
Club member” depending on what syncs best with their notion 
of trust. Brand is an important dimension of onboarding people, 
after which the digital proiles kick in as an important basis for 
continued interaction. 
DP: I’d like to shift directions to talk about how to best scale crowd-
based capitalism and peer-to-peer platforms. Your book opens dis-
cussing some tensions at OuiShare Fest among people that think 
about the sharing economy primarily in the context of a collabo-
rative society. I’ve been to OuiShare Fest before and I also inter-
viewed Antonin Léonard, the co-founder of OuiShare for the book. 
On the one hand, there are many passionate supporters of col-
laborative and sharing platforms motivated by altruistic goals to 
change the world. Investors can help these initiatives to scale faster, 
and there is certainly a movement among many investors to only 
back companies that want to make a positive impact on the planet. 
Yet on the other hand, the massive infusion of venture capital into 
peer-to-peer companies creates a situation where investors expect 
massive returns on investment that could cannibalize the egalitar-
ian nature of these community-based platforms. 
This scenario reminds me of Timothy Wu’s book, The Master Switch, 
where he outlines this pattern of super passionate innovators and 

174 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
early adopters advocating the world-changing potential of emerging 
technologies like the telephone, the radio, TV, and cable, i.e., humanity 
will be better connected than ever before, creating a new era of human 
civilization. Then business people come along that transform these 
innovations intended to beneit humanity into monopolistic empires 
through ruthless competition. The ‘master switch’ led to scale, but it 
comes at the expense of losing the vision to help humanity. 
One could argue that we see the same type of pattern around dom-
inant tech companies like Facebook, Google, and Apple, and again 
with the sharing economy. How do you think peer-to-peer compa-
nies and crowd-based capitalism will manage this balance between 
serving their communities vs. investors? Will we see a wave of disrup-
tion—a kind of sharing economy 2.0? How do you see the future? 
AS: I think it’s a very good parallel. Looking at the sharing econ-
omy in isolation, you do see the frustration. But looking at it from 
the historical perspective, the frustration among the idealists of the 
large capitalist machine taking over is a familiar story. 
In terms of the future, I expect that as we continue to exist in 
the world of intermediated peer-to-peer (the world of Kickstarter, 
Etsy, Airbnb, and Uber), we are bound to see more variety. Some 
platforms will be more investor-focused and others will focus on 
users. This may have to do with the founding philosophy or the 
nature of the industry. 
For example, look at Airbnb and Uber. Airbnb founders have 
backgrounds in design and began the company as hosts designing 
quality hospitality experiences. The genesis of the company was 
through the eyes of a host. Uber founders had a background in 
tech and inance. They started the company wanting a better expe-
rience for the customer instead of the provider. Nobody complains 
about Uber’s customer experience, but Uber drivers can be less 
than fond of the platform. On the other hand, Airbnb’s hosts seem 
to love the platform, even self-organizing communities and sharing 
with each other. 
The emphasis on community ideals vs. investor objectives is shaped 
not just by the nature of investment or capitalism itself, but different 

The Sharing Economy—Arun Sundararajan 175
companies have different personalities and each strikes a different 
balance. 
DP: This is an excellent point regarding the founding philoso-
phy and nature of the industry, one that is also raised by Douglas  
Rushkoff and Michael Bronner. It also points to a broader shift in 
values, where the short-term wins accelerated by massive invest-
ment of venture capital may not be sustainable in the long-term 
with next-generation platforms designed speciically to share own-
ership with providers. 
This leads to questions about platform design and decentraliza-
tion. There is a lot of hype and speculation around the possibility 
of decentralized platforms built on the blockchain. We are still in 
the early stages of this technology and it’s unclear where the real 
opportunities lie. What are your thoughts on the blockchain?
AS: The excitement around the blockchain today reminds me of 
the excitement around the Internet when I was a grad student. 
This is a liberating technology that will bring down governments 
and eliminate the need for intermediaries. It will free the world. It 
will encapsulate everything in code, and existing institutions will 
crumble. This sounds a lot like the Internet in 1995 through the 
eyes of the idealist.
It’s a pretty revolutionary technology, but I’m not a technological 
determinist in the sense that I don’t believe the properties of the 
technology itself shape its role in society. We should think about 
technology in conjunction with existing social structures, what 
human beings are like and how they form collectives, how some 
desire power more than others—all of these will play a factor in 
shaping what impact blockchain technologies eventually have on 
our institutions. 
DP: It’s great to remind us of how important the human element 
is in the equation, which brings us back to the importance of col-
laboration and the crowd. If society shapes the role technology 
plays, what factors should we take into consideration to evaluate 
decentralized platforms and the blockchain that may create a kind 
of sharing economy 2.0? 

176 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
AS: In the near term—or the next 10 to 15 years—there are a 
number of different reasons why we are likely to see the continued 
existence of intermediaries in the sharing economy. Any time there 
is a decentralized system that can potentially connect individuals 
with other individuals or eliminate the need for an intermediary, 
there are capabilities that the users look for that are sometimes 
not adequately provided by the decentralized system. I’ll give you 
three examples. 
We are likely to see the continued existence  
of intermediaries in the sharing economy
First, think of the early days of the Internet. Conceptually, the 
web is the ultimate decentralized publishing platform. Anybody 
can publish something that anybody else can read, so it gives 
everybody an audience of the world. Very soon you realized 
that it is hard to ind what you were looking for and to credi-
bly decide whether the stuff that you found was any good. Then 
came search engines.
Google re-aggregated this distributed value creation. They 
became an intermediary in a world where it seemed unlikely that 
we would need one because anybody could publish. They don’t 
extract all of the value, but they capture a signiicant fraction of it 
because decentralized systems require some intermediated search 
and discovery. 
By analogy, if we start to see blockchain-based peer-to-peer sys-
tems for a variety of goods and services—journalists publishing 
and trying to capture a greater fraction of their revenue, decen-
tralized peer-to-peer versions of ridesharing, peer-to-peer accom-
modations—we’re still going to see an intermediary re-inject  
itself and say, “Well, I can do better search and discovery than the 
system can.”
Second, intermediation has a similar advantage with anything 
that requires logistics. Bitcoin is convenient because it’s money. 
Payment is just the exchange of a relatively small amount of infor-
mation to clear a transaction and then you’re done. Once you 

The Sharing Economy—Arun Sundararajan 177
start to get into the trading of physical products or the delivery 
or real-world services, there are real world logistical challenges to 
deal with. 
For example, Alibaba is the dominant retail platform in China. 
It’s four times the size of eBay and much bigger than Amazon. It’s 
fundamentally peer-to-peer, but they rely on a set of third-party, 
closely tied logistics providers who handle the delivery. That has 
not been decentralized. Similarly in the dispatch of cars, even if we 
see the genesis of decentralized, blockchain-based ridesharing sys-
tems, I think they will be re-intermediated by someone who says, 
“I can help you do the logistic setup.”
Finally, there’s the issue of trust. I realize that the blockchain is 
positioned as the ultimate basis of trust because you can track 
prior transactions. But as we discussed, creating trust in a peer-
to-peer environment is a complex and multi-faceted thing that 
involves a wide variety of cues, some of which lends themselves 
well to a centralized intermediary. I don’t think that as a society, we 
are ready yet for population-scale, decentralized exchange without 
some sort of injection of trust from either a third party provider, 
like Uber, or some sort of platform, like Airbnb. 
For a peer-to-peer alternative based on the blockchain to emerge 
for properties like Airbnb, I think it will be a while before they can 
overcome the fundamental advantage of an established platform 
that has built trust and has good trust mechanisms simply because 
they are cutting out the fee that the intermediary collects. Airbnb’s 
commission is a thin margin, anywhere from 3% to 15%. If I can 
save like $10 on a $100 transaction but I have to take a bunch of 
risks, I may not be that inclined to gravitate toward the new peer-
to-peer solution. Uber’s margins approach 40% for SUVs in New 
York and 35% for car service, but those margins will come down 
through competition. 
The real potential is in communities where the providers cur-
rently get an extremely small fraction of the revenue that their 
creation generates. For example, in the music business or jour-
nalism, you have intermediated structures where the creator gets 
a very tiny fraction of the value that they create. They are also 

178 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
information-based products and services, so they don’t have the 
logistical challenges of delivery, and the trust infrastructure is 
a lot easier. Blockchain-based intermediation will probably gain 
traction there or in inancial services before it makes inroads into 
the real world goods and services that are currently the focus of 
the sharing economy. 
he real potential of the blockchain is in 
communities where the providers currently get 
an extremely small fraction of the revenue that 
their creation generates
DP: The subtitle of your book includes the phrase “the end of 
employment.” I also interviewed Martin Ford, author of Rise of 
the Robots: Technology and The Threat of a Jobless Future. The 
consensus from most of the book contributors is that employment 
in traditional career paths is basically over. 
Can you tell us about the challenges and opportunities you see 
with the end of employment?
AS: The end of employment sounds dire, but it’s actually a sort of 
optimistic prognosis for the following reason. The role of the indi-
vidual in the traditional employment relationship is one of labor 
provider for a wage. The labor might be intellectual labor or pro-
fessional, but the fundamental construct is that you give me your 
time and expertise and in exchange I will pay you a ixed wage. 
The institution remains the owner of the system of production. 
What we’re moving towards is a more decentralized system in 
which the role of the individual shifts from being a provider of 
labor to an owner of sorts. An Uber driver is less of an owner than 
an Etsy seller, but fundamentally at the heart of it is the shift away 
from provider of labor to owner of something. An optimistic view 
is that the end of employment corrects imbalances inherent in the 
employment relationship.
The employment relationship was popularized 100 years ago and 
went through a process of creating perfections, wrapping a safety 

The Sharing Economy—Arun Sundararajan 179
net around it, and facilitating stability and quality of life that indi-
viduals aspire to have. Before that for thousands of years, most 
work was basically peer-to-peer in small local communities. Fear 
about the future of work is governed in part by the fact that we 
are comparing the employment relationship to a new freelance, 
micro-entrepreneurship model that hasn’t gone through a similar 
reinement process, though I think that will happen in the next 10 
to 20 years.
At the heart…is the shift away from  
provider of labor to owner of something
DP: In an interview for the a16z Podcast, you also spoke about the 
emergence of a hybrid-irm marketplace model, which I thought 
was really interesting. Contently is an excellent example of a com-
pany that acts like a irm providing services to big brands, and is 
also a talent marketplace for over 50,000 journalists. I spoke with 
Shane Snow, a co-founder of Contently, for the book.
One of the things that I found interesting about your take on the 
future of work was this idea of Data Darwinism. You speculate 
that a day may come where the same types of ratings and review 
systems applied to products on platforms like Amazon could be 
applied to people in the on-demand workforce. 
There is the potential for new industries to emerge managing 
workers’ data and ratings across multiple on-demand platforms. 
You also talk about how the autonomous world of drones and 
self-driving cars could enable new forms of employment or direct 
peer-to-peer exchanges.
Can you tell us about the hybrid irm-marketplace model and the 
idea of Data Darwinism? 
AS: Yes, and in some ways, these will be the new institutions. 
There are consultants or individuals who provide labor and run 
their own businesses. What we’ll see emerge is some combination 
that looks like freelance work and also a bit like entrepreneurship. 
They will play an important role being actors that help us con-
struct this new social safety net.

180 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
As we transition to this world where more and more people are 
individual providers rather than full-time employees, a lot of what 
will dictate the opportunities that an individual provider has will 
be their reputation—their portfolio of prior interactions, much 
like Airbnb host prospects are determined by the feedback from 
other people on the Airbnb platform. If you’re a consultant, then 
ratings from prior clients will dictate your future opportunities. 
The idea of Data Darwinism is originally from Om Malik. He 
made an observation during the irst Uber driver protest when a 
bunch of drivers were shut off from the platform because their 
ratings went below a certain level. He imagined what happens in a 
future when there is a new form of survival of the ittest where if 
I get off to a bad start, then I can’t compete with the other people 
who started off with stronger reputations. You get this new kind 
of Darwinistic selection in the workforce. 
Darwinism is not necessarily a bad thing. Certainly we have seen 
a lot of good outcomes through the last few billion years of dom-
inant selection. What makes me cautious is that the selection is 
going to be based on assessments of individuals by other individ-
uals. They are subject to the same kinds of biases we have when 
we’re making subjective assessments. People may systematically 
and unconsciously evaluate others of a particular ethnicity, race, 
gender, religion, etc. ,higher than others. 
We know that bias exists in society, and these rating systems 
may not be sophisticated enough in their simplest forms to cap-
ture and account for this kind of bias. You might see the prop-
agation of disadvantages that have existed because of bias in 
traditional society into this world of ratings. It’s important for 
anybody running a system like this, whether it’s across multiple 
platforms or within a certain platform, to detect and correct for 
any sort of bias.
ARUN SUNDARARAJAN  is Professor and the Robert L. and Dale Atkins Rosen 
Faculty Fellow at New York University’s (NYU) Stern School of Business, and an 
afﬁliated faculty member at NYU’s Center for Data Science and Center for Urban 
Science and Progress. His new book The Sharing Economy was published by 
the MIT Press in June 2016. He has published over 50 scientiﬁc papers in 

The Sharing Economy—Arun Sundararajan 181
peer-reviewed academic journals and conferences, and over 30 op-eds in lead-
ing outlets globally. His scholarship has been recognized by six Best Paper 
awards and two Google Faculty awards. He is a member of the World Economic 
Forum’s Global Agenda Council on Technology, Values and Policy, and advisor 
to numerous other policy bodies, venture capital ﬁrms and cities. He has pro-
vided expert input about the digital economy as part of Congressional testimony, 
and to a range of government agencies. He is a widely sought-after commenta-
tor by top media platforms.


THE GROWTH TRAP
Douglas Rushkoff
Douglas Rushkoff makes a compelling case in his latest book 
Throwing Rocks at the Google Bus that we are caught in a growth 
trap—pursuing an unsustainable model of unlimited growth, lock-
ing up valuable capital in stock prices and seeking 100X returns 
on investments often at the expense of cannibalizing the health of 
good companies.
• 
Reprograming the system from the inside
• 
Mass conformity in a sea of unlimited choices
• 
Why CEOs should optimize for revenue
• 
Founding companies to keep instead of sell
Douglas presents concepts like corporatism, money, and the 
economy in a way that makes them easily accessible and fun to 
talk about. This is probably why his numerous bestselling books 
appeal to activists and Fortune 100 CEOs alike. His common-
sense approach will draw you in and leave you wanting to read 
more. After his latest book, Present Shock and Program or Be Pro-
grammed are my personal favorites.
DP: There is a recurring theme throughout your writings to ques-
tion or reprogram the basic operating systems of society, like cor-
poratism and money, to beneit people instead of extract value. I 
love this one quote from your latest book:

184 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
We need to make a choice. We can continue to run this 
growth-driven, extractive, self-defeating program until one 
corporation is left standing and the impoverished revolt. Or 
we can seize the opportunity to reprogram our economy— 
and our businesses—from the inside. 
For people unfamiliar with your work, can you explain what you 
mean by an operating system and reprogramming from the inside?
DR: The operating system is what makes your computer go. There’s 
the Windows operating system and Macintosh operating system, 
and all the software that we use runs on top of that. Sometimes 
it’s easy to forget that you are building software for a particular 
operating system—that the operating system has biases, ways of 
working, underlying assumptions about the way people interact 
with machines, what the role is of computers in peoples’ lives, and 
all that. 
If you were to wake up in a world where there was only the Macin-
tosh, you wouldn’t even know that there is such a thing as an oper-
ating system. You would look at your computer and say, “Well, 
that’s just a computer.” You wouldn’t understand that there’s a 
choice of what underlying system to use for building your soft-
ware. I think it’s a itting analogy for business and the economy.
For example, most entrepreneurs and investors look at the VC 
startup mechanism as the only operating system available. They 
don’t even see an operating system—it’s just the laws of business, 
a ixed reality. The natural condition of things is that you take 
money from these angel guys, you do a Series A, then a Series B, 
and you go for an IPO and try to return 100x or 1000x to your 
investors. As if it’s like, when a cell undergoes mitosis, it has four 
stages, or a woman gets pregnant and then there are these trimes-
ters and the baby comes out. As if that’s just the way things are. 
And it’s not. 
The VC startup mechanism is a very particular way of doing busi-
ness that was invented at a particular moment in history meant to 
leverage digital innovation towards very speciic ends. What it does 
is trap potentially innovative, sustainable, breathtaking businesses 

The Growth Trap—Douglas Rushkoff 185
in a self-destructive pattern. The obvious example is a company 
like Twitter, which can make $500 million a quarter or $2 billion 
a year on a 140-character messaging app, and it’s considered an 
abject failure by Wall Street because the operating system on which 
they’re running is a growth-based operating system. 
DP: This gets into what you refer to as a growth trap: the idea that 
the rules of the operating system of capitalism and venture capital 
trap companies into raising so much money to maximize growth 
that they are unable to pursue sustainable business models. They 
need to ramp up fast to gain a monopoly and have a big home run 
for investors at 100x or 1000x returns, becoming trapped by a 
relentless focus on growth.
DR: Yes. The trap is when a company has to grow and the capital 
gain of the shares is more important than the revenue opportu-
nity and long-term prosperity of the underlying business. It’s even 
screwed up the stock market which is growth based. Consider the 
derivatives market—which is able to show growth in advance, to 
basically time-shift your growth—is so much more important in 
this schema that the derivatives exchange purchased the New York 
Stock Exchange. The stock exchange was eaten by its own abstrac-
tion. That’s how important growth is. Growth trumps the health 
of the underlying business.
What happens if a company realizes it’s  
reached a sustainable but ultimately  
limited level of revenue?
The growth trap is part of a inancial program based on selling 
the company again and again at larger valuations. This is the same 
as during the housing boom when people would buy houses and 
inance them by reinancing repeatedly at greater and greater valu-
ations. What happens if a company realizes it’s reached a sustain-
able but ultimately limited level of revenue? What if a company 
can only make $2 billion a year? 
Well, for Joe’s Pizzeria, that’s not a problem because Joe doesn’t 
have investors to pay back. He’s not running that same operating 

186 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
system. He’s running on the family business operating system rather 
than the inancial services operating system. He doesn’t have to 
think about that. Joe can be great on making a billion dollars a 
year—that’s so much money—but for Twitter that is a problem. 
Even though Twitter can easily pay their employees good salaries 
and their original investors could make great dividends quarter 
after quarter and year after year, that’s not the plan. That’s not the 
way that this operating system works. Sustainable, revenue-based 
digital businesses are incompatible with the underlying growth-
based operating system that, as I understand it, was put in place 
in about the 12th century to support the colonial expansion of 
Western European nations. To get out of the growth trap, we need 
an operating system to support the sustainable equilibrium of a 
digital economy. 
DP: Let’s dig into the origins of this stuff in the 12th century. I 
have a background as a historian of religion and culture, and one 
of the things that I love about your latest book, Throwing Rocks 
at the Google Bus, is how you frame the rise of industrialism in the 
context of aristocrats asserting their dominance over peer-to-peer 
trading in the Middle Ages. 
You paint a picture of how local merchants used to gather in a 
bazaar that looked something like Burning Man. There were 
guilds that regulated trade and allowed people to make collective 
decisions. The prosperity from these groups basically threatened 
aristocratic power, so they intervened and set up a new system of 
colonial control. Can you tell us about how things used to be and 
the decisions made centuries ago that led to the creation of indus-
trialism/modern-day capitalism?
DR: First, I should say that things weren’t great for long periods of 
time. You have to sift through history to ind these bright spots of 
minimal exploitation. People lived for many centuries under feu-
dalism, which really—there’s no nice way to say it—just sucked. 
They worked the lands for the vassals of the lords and it was hor-
rible. Then men were sent out on the Crusades, which also weren’t 
fun. Everybody died and killed and it was an awful thing. 

The Growth Trap—Douglas Rushkoff 187
The Crusaders encountered different cultures around Europe and 
the Ottoman Empire, and when the Crusades inally ended, two 
big things happened: First, they had opened trade routes through 
their military conquests; and second, these soldiers came back to 
their towns throughout Europe having seen all of these other ways 
of doing things around the world. Whether it was new ways of 
milling one’s grain, structuring a bridge in a waterway, or eco-
nomic innovations like the bazaar. 
The bazaar was an Arabic marketplace. European towns started to 
imitate the bazaar, which is where people would bring stuff that 
they made, fabricated, farmed, or killed. One or two days per week, 
everyone went to a central location and exchanged goods and value 
added services. Barter was an ineficient way for people to trade 
with all this stuff, so they developed and borrowed a number of 
inancial innovations that they encountered in the Ottoman Empire. 
There were things like market money and different kinds of grain-
based currencies, commodities-based currencies, and even curren-
cies based on almost nothing (like poker chips that were issued 
in the morning just to promote, prime, and pump for trade). The 
economy was optimized for the exchange of goods and services. 
It became so extremely eficient that people began to work less. 
Women got very healthy because they were eating so well. Women 
were taller in medieval England than at any time until the 1980s, 
that’s how healthy they got. 
There was still awful stuff—rats and rapes, for example—but you 
saw huge economic growth as the former peasants became the 
middle class. A new rising merchant class emerged called the bour-
geoisie, and the aristocracy didn’t like this because they enjoyed 
less power. They couldn’t absolutely control the entire populations 
of their countries with a rising and prosperous merchant class. 
The aristocracy implemented a few innovations to stamp out what 
today we would refer to as a peer-to-peer economy. One of them 
was central currency, which made all of the local currencies, grain-
based currencies, and market moneys illegal. The other was the 
chartered monopoly, or what we now think of as corporations. You 
weren’t allowed to do business in a particular industry without the 

188 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
king’s oficial sanction. He only gave that to one or two companies 
in each sector, so they enjoyed monopolies by law. 
Monopolies in industries killed competition and invented the 
notion of working for time wages, or what we call employment. 
Instead of being a craftsperson, shoemaker, or ironsmith, now you 
worked in a factory for someone else. You became an employee of 
His Majesty’s oficially sanctioned smithy. That ended the peer-to-
peer economy pretty quickly and Europe went into poverty again. 
That’s when we got the Black Plague and what we now like to call 
the Dark Ages.
DP: When the Internet came along, the initial promise was similar 
to the bazaar. I interviewed Chris Anderson for my last book, who 
wrote The Long Tail, which laid out the promise of how millions 
of people could ind niche markets that service their unique needs, 
and millions of obscure artists and musicians could make livings 
from their crafts, selling goods to audiences, and so on. They might 
not get rich, but they could make a healthy living selling to custom-
ers thanks to the long tail.
One of the things that I was surprised to learn reading your book 
is that the long tail hasn’t enabled the type of prosperity among 
the outliers that we all hoped it would. In fact, the data shows a 
few blockbuster hits make up a greater percentage of music sold 
than before the days of the Internet. For example, in the past 80% 
of sales came from 20% of products, and today the bottom 94% 
sell fewer than 100 copies each. Why in a sea of seemingly ininite 
choices do people overwhelmingly choose the same thing? How 
does so much freedom lead to a shocking amount of conformity?
DR: The main reason is that Internet platforms have self-reinforcing 
loops, so if something makes it to a top ten list on iTunes or top 100 
list, those are the only things that many users see. The algorithms are 
not conigured to maximize the distribution of the long tail amongst 
as many players as possible. They’re optimized to create self- 
reinforcing loops that maximize the numbers of sales. 
For example, once Taylor Swift shows up on a list, it’s going 
to self-perpetuate. It’s the difference between 100,000 record 

The Growth Trap—Douglas Rushkoff 189
stores in America each deciding what record they’re going to play 
during the day to inluence shoppers and the same record being 
emphasized to the entirety of the world on iTunes. The more cen-
tralized and closer to a monopoly, the more inluence a platform 
has on selections. 
he more centralized and closer to a monopoly, 
the more inluence a platform has on selections
People tend to lock. They aggregate around things. If you’re out 
on the Internet, then you’re basically alone. The only way to forge 
connections with other people is through afinity, which is not the 
same thing as community. Afinity is just “Do we like the same 
stuff?” Afinities create self-reinforcing loops. “Oh, she likes Taylor 
Swift. I like Taylor Swift.” Then, you’re going to buy Taylor Swift.
DP: Lots of people champion social media for basically connecting 
humanity greater than ever before. We spend countless hours on 
platforms like Facebook, Twitter, Snapchat, and Instagram, shar-
ing and interacting with friends and family. But according to your 
model, we are all actually the products of social media companies. 
Every exchange and interaction becomes a data point that can be 
packaged and sold. Likes and engagement metrics drive the val-
uations of social media companies into the billions, even if they 
don’t generate any revenue. Can you explain the idea that we are 
all products?
DR: The easiest way to understand it is to ask: Who is paying 
the social media company? How do they make their money? Fig-
ure out who is the customer of a particular platform. Most peo-
ple think, “Oh, this social media platform exists to help me make 
friends and maintain good friendships.” But go into the boardroom 
of Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, SnapChat, etc., and they are not 
asking, “How are we going to help little Johnny make more endur-
ing friendships?” 
The real business model of social media companies is to get money 
from marketing companies and market researchers for the data 
that they can derive from people’s interactions. That means the 

190 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
question they ask in the boardroom is: “How are we going to opti-
mize Johnny’s social graph?” The activity that Johnny does is actu-
ally the product. That’s what they are selling. 
Instead of needing a market researcher to stick a camera into John-
ny’s closet, which is what they used to do to see the selection cri-
teria for his clothes each day, now Johnny voluntarily creates a 
consumer proile. This is how a young person represents him or 
herself. They work on their proile meticulously, because the mov-
ies they like, the books they read, the music they listen to, etc. is 
how they express their identity to everyone. This is why I say if 
you’re not the customer, you’re the product.
It’s not so bad if you understand that is the deal, but what most 
social media users don’t realize is that the entire platform is opti-
mized for that. It’s not optimized to help them do anything. It’s 
optimized to either market to them or to get them to reveal more 
and more useful data about themselves. Most people don’t under-
stand that things they see on Facebook have been algorithmically 
prepared to maximize certain perceptions and actions. 
Most people don’t understand that things they see 
on Facebook have been algorithmically prepared 
to maximize certain perceptions and actions
Their feed is not just a representation of what they ask to see. It is a 
combination of people paying to get their attention and algorithms 
trying to inluence their behaviors. Your Google search results are 
different from my Google search results. That’s because neither 
you nor I are paying Google for that. Who is paying Google for 
that? The people who want to inluence our search results. 
DP: There is a similar challenge within the peer-to-peer economy. 
On the one hand, you have companies like Uber who view peer-
to-peer communities as basically means to an end. They exploit 
ineficiencies in the transportation ecosystem with temporary con-
tractors that will likely all be replaced one day by autonomous 
cars. On the other hand, you cite examples like Meetup, Pando, 
and Kickstarter where the startup founders made choices early on 

The Growth Trap—Douglas Rushkoff 191
to build sustainable companies that align with their core values. 
How do you build a company from the ground up so it doesn’t get 
caught in the growth trap? 
DR: The easiest way is not to take too much money, particularly 
from investors who don’t believe in the core mission of the com-
pany. Now, I understand when you’re starting a business that 
you want to have a lot of cash around. It feels more secure. The 
problem is when you have a lot of cash around, it’s tempting to 
see investors as the customers rather than to focus on your real 
customers. 
When you have a lot of cash around, it’s 
tempting to see investors as the customers 
rather than to focus on your real customers
The key is to ind a way for the revenue that you make to sup-
port the operations of the company. If I was making pizza, then I 
would want to igure out the costs of materials, labor, rent, etc., 
and how much I can charge to make a proit. Then you try to feed 
proits back into the business and grow naturally. If the pizzeria 
had taken a million dollars upfront from the maia, it needs to pay 
the maia a million dollars. That will not be through slow revenue 
over time. That’s going to be from exploiting something or letting 
someone use your restaurant for a poker game at night—the pizza 
be damned.
DP: On the other side, most companies have shareholder agree-
ments that basically mandate the leadership team to yield high 
returns on investments, effectively legislating the growth trap. This 
forces companies to extract as much value as possible from cus-
tomers and then lock it into their stock prices. Most shareholders 
actually prefer higher stock prices than dividends, so that money 
isn’t circulated back into the economy. 
In your book, you have a term called the “steady-state CEO” 
that could be an advocate for change within the narrow conines 
of most companies. Can you explain the idea of the steady-state 
CEO, and for people working within companies, what type of 

192 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
options do you see available to them to implement some of the 
changes that you describe?
DR: The idea would be to not require a company to grow in order 
to be considered successful. For example, what happens when you 
are a multi-billion dollar company in the Fortune 100 and your 
investors are demanding gross on the bottom line? In many cases, 
the CEO sells off the company’s productive assets in order to show 
short-term growth. 
he idea would be to not require a company  
to grow in order to be considered successful
The reason they sell them is: (1) Productive assets create revenue 
and revenue is a problem because they have to pay tax on it, and 
(2) You can make a lot of money because the parts of the business 
generating revenue are the ones that people want to buy. These 
are reported as capital gains, so they are not taxed the same way 
as revenue
As companies keep doing that, they end up sitting on a mountain 
of cash gained through selling aspects of the businesses that are 
productive. This inlates the value of the stock, making sharehold-
ers happy. However, it becomes self-cannibalization. You bring 
home meat by cutting off your own arm. It also leaves companies 
incapable of showing new proit. 
This is why Deloitte found that over the last 75 years, corporate 
proit over size has been going steadily down. It’s not just a digital 
thing but a business problem. Corporations got very good at accu-
mulating cash but have gotten increasingly worse at deploying the 
cash that they collect. Ultimately, chasing growth in that way kills 
your company. 
What CEOs need to do instead is optimize their companies for 
revenue. That means accepting it’s OK to be a certain size. It’s OK 
to be just a $2 trillion company or whatever its valuation is. Then 
run the engine rather than try to igure out new ways to expand or 
new places to extract money. Even if you end up operating at the 

The Growth Trap—Douglas Rushkoff 193
same level for decades, you can still return tremendous money to 
shareholders. 
The problem is that shareholders don’t want dividends because the 
tax is biased against dividends. The tax system was lobbied for and 
put in place by growth-based CEOs and lobbyists of growth-based 
companies. They kind of jerry-rigged the tax system to favor the 
way in which they made money over the last century or so, but it 
really works against the way they should be making money now. 
What they need to do is lobby for a lip of the tax system so that 
capital gains are taxed high and dividends are taxed low. They 
need to turn their shares into something more like preferred shares 
that remain stable over long periods of time but can deliver 7/8/9% 
dividend returns. That’s not your growth-based, screaming 100-
1000x return on investment, but it is a healthy sustainable return. 
Not every company can be perpetually in its growth phase. 
DP: Given all of your writing about operating systems, corporat-
ism and money, the decentralization of power and value exchanges, 
the importance of low over growth, etc., it shouldn’t be surprising 
that you are optimistic about the potential of blockchain. There’s 
so much wide speculation around what the blockchain could 
enable, from new types of currencies and decentralized market-
places, to new types of companies with collective owners that are 
completely transparent and open. The biggest enthusiasts speak 
like it’s a panacea for all of our problems, and then that ends up 
attracting investors that may perpetuate the growth trap. What 
potential do you see in the blockchain?
DR: People have to realize what the blockchain is for and what 
it’s not. The blockchain is not a panacea. It is not something to 
use in a 500-person company that exists in a particular town. Nor 
is it something that you need in your community in order to have 
a global currency or to igure out your local tax rate. Bitcoin is 
certainly not a panacea. Bitcoin is, as I see it, a digital currency for 
gold bugs. It recapitulates all of the problems of a scarcity-based 
central currency, only it also uses a ton of energy and it favors leg-
acy players, people who have been mining it with computers since 
the beginning. 

194 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
Blockchain is interesting for global-sized collaborative enterprises 
and giant projects where people don’t trust each other. For exam-
ple, if you are doing a giant Wikipedia-sized project where people 
are going to get paid based on how many articles they’ve written, or 
if you have a global Uber of cab drivers that’s owned by the drivers 
and they want a way to verify that people drive commensurate with 
their share of ownership. Then you can use a blockchain as a way 
of doing a project in a decentralized way. Or when the automated 
clearinghouse takes too much money for its transaction services, 
then people might turn to a blockchain because they no longer trust 
the authority to authenticate what’s going on between them. But to 
be clear, there is a premise of distrust to begin with here.
I personally don’t have a problem with centralized leadership as 
long as it is honest and transparent, rather than exploitative and 
opaque. The mere existence of blockchain technologies and the 
possibility of that alternative may keep central authorities in a cer-
tain kind of check. The fact that we don’t need them in order to 
negotiate with each other or verify may be enough of a deterrent 
to dishonest practices among central authorities.
he mere existence of blockchain technologies 
and the possibility of that alternative may keep 
central authorities in a certain kind of check
I feel bad for the DAO Ethereum project that got hacked because 
they were idealistic people looking for a different future. But once 
you see the Winklevoss brothers investing in something, you should 
realize there’s a problem because as you said, it means traditional 
investors are trying to game the system. They turned Bitcoin into a 
traditional investment rather than what we were thinking it would 
be, which is a decentralized veriication system. The challenge with 
any project built on top of the blockchain is to keep that from 
happening again and again.
DP: The future can appear to be a little daunting when we think of the 
potential for joblessness from automation and all of the challenges 
that we face due to the monolithic and singular focus on growth. 
Yet in your writing and speaking, you remain optimistic—“We’re all 

The Growth Trap—Douglas Rushkoff 195
in this together” and “We don’t need to be trapped in a future that 
nobody wants.” How do we stay hopeful and persevere to get the 
well-being and security that we all deserve? 
DR: I think we need to accept that there is no free lunch and the 
easiest way to make money is to earn it. Most people look at their 
jobs and investments as if the object of the game is to make enough 
money so that you don’t have to work anymore. What I’m trying 
to convince especially developers and entrepreneurs is that it’s OK 
and noble to work for a living. 
Maybe you should found a company because you want to keep 
the company, instead of founding it for the purpose of selling. I 
know that sounds radical or socialist, but it shouldn’t be. You can 
build an application that you love and want to serve people. This is 
how you make companies that end up serving markets rather than 
killing them. Amazon killed the book industry because it wanted 
a monopoly. Uber is killing the driving business because it wants a 
monopoly to leverage into something else.
Maybe you should found a company because 
you want to keep the company
This will feel better. You’re going to wake up happier in the morn-
ing if your business promotes and serves a marketplace rather than 
destroying it. Yes, you’ll have to work. You’ll have to serve. You’ll 
have to keep doing stuff. But that’s ine. You’re still alive. If you 
enjoy your work and you’re not seeing it as a mean, exploitative 
thing, then it won’t feel like such a cop-out serving a market. You 
won’t have a sense of failure about creating something that you 
need to keep working on because you believe it’s a good and noble 
thing to do.
DOUGLAS RUSHKOFF  is a writer, documentarian, and lecturer whose work focuses 
on human autonomy in a digital age. He is the author of 15 bestselling books 
on media, technology, and society, including Program or Be Programmed, Pres-
ent Shock, and Throwing Rocks at the Google Bus. He has made such award- 
winning PBS Frontline documentaries as Generation Like, Merchants of Cool, 
and The Persuaders, and is the author of graphic novels including Testament 
and Aleister & Adolf. 

196 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
Rushkoff is the recipient of the Marshall McLuhan Award for his book Coercion, 
The Jacques Ellul Award for his documentary The Merchants of Cool, and the Neil 
Postman Award for Career Achievement in Public Intellectual Activity. Named one 
of the world’s ten most inﬂuential intellectuals by MIT, he is responsible for originat-
ing such concepts as “viral media,” “social currency,” and “digital natives.” Today, 
Dr. Rushkoff serves as Professor of Media Theory and Digital Economics at CUNY/
Queens, where he recently founded the Laboratory for Digital Humanism and hosts 
its TeamHuman podcast.

THE END OF EMPLOYMENT
Martin Ford
Artiicial intelligence and robots will initiate a new era of automa-
tion that impacts every industry and redeines the future of work. 
Martin Ford anticipated this trend in his irst book The Lights 
in the Tunnel (2009), and his bestselling The Rise of the Robots 
(2015) was McKinsey and Financial Times Business Book of the 
Year. We explore the tsunami-sized wave of disruption coming to 
employment:
• 
Why AI in the future will be analogous to electricity
• 
Manual labor can be harder to replace than ofice jobs
• 
Specialization might make your job easier to automate
• 
The economic scenarios we might face in 10-20 years
Martin Ford loves technology and doesn’t want to be the doomsday 
guy. He is passionate about starting a conversation on the future 
of work because the problems society faces will require unprece-
dented international cooperation and political solutions. Nobody 
will be unaffected, but together we can co-create the future we 
want and deserve. Please read and then join the conversation!
DP: The title of your recent book The Rise of the Robots con-
jures up images from science iction with androids taking over and 
challenging humans for control of the planet. It becomes quickly 
clear in reading that you refer to a much broader, different type of 
disruption happening across all industries. What does the rise of 
the robots look like?

198 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
MF: The word “robot” is used very broadly. Really, what I am 
talking about is artiicial intelligence and automation. Often that 
is going to be just software. One of the biggest issues I point out 
in the book is that a lot of skilled jobs held by people with college- 
degrees sitting in front of computers doing some type of knowl-
edge work are highly susceptible. That obviously has nothing to do 
with physical robots.
DP: In the late-19th century, nearly half of U.S. workers were on 
farms, then by the end of 2000 those numbers were less than 2%. 
The economy adjusted with mass migration of workers to major 
cities, and widespread access to education led to the rise of a lour-
ishing and prosperous middle class. 
There was what you describe as a nearly perfect correlation 
between increasing productivity and rising incomes. A lot of 
economists look to the past and suggest that new jobs will be 
created by new industries and fears of automation dating back 
to the Luddites smashing textile looms are unwarranted. What is 
different now?
MF: There will be new industries in the future, but they are not 
going to be labor intensive. They won’t hire many people. Look 
at Google, Facebook, all of these industries in the last decade or 
two, none of them hire huge numbers of people proportionate to 
the massive impact that they have on society. There is nothing out 
there like the automotive industry, for example, that created an 
enormous number of jobs, both directly, like people working in 
factories, and indirectly, in terms of people driving cars. The indus-
tries that we are generating now don’t look like that. This is what 
I mean by basic labor intensity. 
Next, there is the nature of the work. As you said, most people 
worked on farms. They transitioned into factories during the 
industrial era, and then from factories into the service sector. The 
key thing to understand in each of those cases is that the nature 
of work was basically routine in nature. People did routine work 
on farms, then they moved into factories and did routine assembly 
line work, and they continued to do routine work in the service 

The End of Employment—Martin Ford 199
sector. All routine work—anything that is on some level routine, 
repetitive, predictable—is susceptible to automation, machine 
learning, and other stuff. 
All routine work—anything that is on some  
level routine, repetitive, predictable—is 
susceptible to automation
This is tremendously broad-based and applies to about any kind 
of job that is on any level routine and repetitive. What that means 
is in order for workers to still have a job in the future, they have to 
make a different transition than workers in the past moving from 
one sector to another, from agriculture to manufacturing. In the 
future, if you want to have a job, you will have to make a much 
more dificult transition into something genuinely not routine that 
may be creative or in some way protected from what machines are 
capable of doing, at least for the time being. 
There is a real question as to will there be enough jobs of that type, 
because historically we haven’t had everybody doing this blue-sky 
thinking kind of stuff. Most people do routine jobs. The next ques-
tion is can most people make that dificult transition? I think a lot 
of people won’t be able. Most are probably best equipped to do 
relatively routine work. Those are challenges.
DP: There is this massive, broad shift occurring across all indus-
tries due to automation and AI. Virtually nothing will remain 
untouched in a sweeping wave of disruption and integration of this 
technology into the fabric of everything that we do. This reminds 
me of a section in the book where you refer to artiicial intelligence 
like a utility, similar to electricity or water in the future. What do 
you mean by that?
MF: AI is extraordinarily broad based and it’s going to be applied 
everywhere. The tools and building blocks for AI and machine 
learning are going to get better and easier to use. What that means 
is as any kind of niche opens up in the future, a speciic opportu-
nity in a speciic industry might be there to automate some task. 

200 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
Somewhere some entrepreneurial developer will see that and uti-
lize these tools to address it right away, maybe almost instantly at 
some point. 
This isn’t general purpose AI that can do anything, but an almost 
ininite number of speciic applications of AI and machine learning 
used all over the place. When you combine it with things like calc 
computing, it almost looks like electricity, something that is gen-
eral purposed and can be leveraged almost anywhere.
DP: The analogy of AI being like electricity or a utility is helpful 
to visualize the vast changes on the horizon. Another useful model 
from the book comes from the history of computing. Standard 
operating systems combined with inexpensive hardware and tools 
lead to an explosion of software innovation; this was the case with 
the PC, and later the iPhone, iPad, and Android Apps ecosystems. 
Can you elaborate on how you see that pattern unfolding with 
machine learning?
MF: That has been the pattern with PC, Android, iPhone, and 
the proliferation of apps; I think you will see the same thing with 
robotics. It is a bit more challenging in robotics because of the 
hardware component. Hardware components—robotic arms, 
machine vision systems, and stuff—are getting cheaper and you 
can already buy kits to build your own robot. 
You see companies like Google and Facebook open up their 
machine learning software. A lot of the components of building 
machine learning systems are free, or they are getting better and 
easier to use. Also on the software side, the components or build-
ing blocks are getting better. I expect that you are going to see the 
same kind of phenomenon with ininite numbers of these technol-
ogies out there that consume any type of repetitive work. 
DP: You mentioned Facebook and Google open sourcing their plat-
forms to developers. I interviewed Chris Anderson for my last book 
and we talked about his open-source approach to drones with his 
company 3D Robotics. He makes all patents open-source, and his 
company beneits from a community of enthusiasts that actively 
contribute. Linux, Github, and Wikipedia are other examples of 

The End of Employment—Martin Ford 201
open-source projects that drive a tremendous amount of value from 
a community’s contributors. 
Do you envision a world where these building blocks are open-
source and easily accessible to a community, or will there be a 
few key players centralizing monopolistic control? How do you 
see that playing out?
MF: I think to a certain extent, both will exist. What is happening 
with machine learning, especially deep learning and AI, is pretty 
focused in companies like Google, Facebook, and Amazon. Those 
are the big players driving it. But they are making that technology 
available to utilize in specialized applications. There is a way to 
tap into and leverage that whether it is open-sourced or propri-
etary through some kind of revenue share. 
I think there will be competing versions of the same things. Some 
might be open-source and some not. The main point is that there is 
going to be massive proliferation of this technology and an extraordi-
nary, competitive dynamic going on. Part of what is driving this for-
ward is also that Google is competing with Facebook. We are looking 
at a huge disruption in terms of where this technology is going.
DP: In my last book Disruption Revolution, the title referred 
to a pattern after the economy crashed in 2008–2009, when I 
noticed people rallying around the term “disruption” even when 
they hadn’t released a product or service. There was also this 
hype around the TechCrunch Disrupt conference and massive 
investments in new startups at incredibly high valuations across 
all industries. I viewed this wave of innovation as a disruption 
revolution.
There was this idea that Brian Solis talked about in my book about 
how constraint drives innovation. When companies are forced to 
make more utilizing fewer resources (smaller budgets, less staff, 
etc.), they refocus and prioritize differently. You wrote your irst 
book The Lights in the Tunnel at the same time. My sense is that 
you recognized a similar pattern. When jobs were eliminated 
during the recession, leaders across industries actively looked for 
solutions to automate rather than replace workers.

202 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
I am curious to what extent the economic crash became a catalyst 
for automation and the trends you describe. I also wonder if many 
people are not seeing the troubles that lie ahead because they are 
still viewing disruption through the lens of economic recovery.
MF: Yes, I think that is deinitely true. There is no doubt that 
recessions are when consolidation happens. Companies don’t 
lay off people for no reason. Very often they lay off because 
of an economic downturn and they just never hire those peo-
ple back. They realize that the technology now enables them to 
avoid rehiring. 
Economic evidence is that happens regularly in recessions and jobs 
that disappear are good, solid, middle-ranged jobs. That doesn’t 
happen gradually. It is focused in recessions. Good jobs disappear, 
and when we recover, the jobs that come back are these low-wage, 
burger lipping, Walmart-type of jobs. There is consolidation and 
a hollow-out effect. 
Actually, one of the most innovative periods in U.S. history was 
the Great Depression in the 1930s. There were lots of technologi-
cal advances, even though it was an historically apocalyptic time. 
You can think of that in other ways too. One of the points I make 
in the book is that we have many people predicting Moore’s law 
will come to at least a temporary plateau. The technology may 
be reaching its limit. If that’s true, I am not sure it’s going to be a 
bad thing.
Moore’s law has always been kind of a crutch
Moore’s law has always been kind of a crutch, something that 
everyone expects. Computers are going to get twice as fast, 
so maybe we don’t work as hard on other things as we should. 
For example, ind new ways to hook computers together in par-
allel architectures, or entirely new architectures and so forth. It 
wouldn’t surprise me if there is a slow-down in Moore’s law. That 
constraint could force people to think in new ways and actually 
open up new avenues to progress. So yes, I think constraint driving 
innovation is an important idea. 

The End of Employment—Martin Ford 203
DP: One of the basic principles of economics going back to Adam 
Smith is the division of labor—the idea that more specialized skill 
sets create a more diverse range of products and services, leading 
to a more diversiied and lourishing economy. Yet according to 
your book, one of the paradoxes of the computer age is that as 
work becomes more specialized, it may become more susceptible 
to automation. Can you explain that?
MF: Machines can do speciic things. The one tenant of artiicial 
intelligence that everyone will tell you is that we don’t have AI that 
can do general things. What we have is machines running algo-
rithms that can do very speciic things. As human work becomes 
more speciic, it gets easier to isolate tasks that people do and then 
automate them. 
I think for the foreseeable future, it is not going to be about building 
a system that can do everything a particular worker can do. It is 
going to be about automating a large percentage of the tasks a per-
son does. The things that machines are not able to do will probably 
get consolidated into fewer jobs. I see that process unfolding for the 
foreseeable future until we have science-iction level artiicial intelli-
gence that can think at the level of a human being.
DP: I would like to dig deeper into some industry speciic exam-
ples. When I read stories about robots making burgers, vending 
machines competing with retail stores, in-store robots or smart 
assistants delivering added value to my shopping experience, I get 
excited because this is the kind of future that I dreamed about 
where the quality of daily life seems to get better and better with 
these improved eficiencies. Silicon Valley is built on this type of 
techno optimism. 
The lip side is that eficiencies come at the expense of services 
jobs being cut. Every initiative to raise the minimum wage cre-
ates greater incentives for employers to outsource workers and cut 
costs. Can you tell us about some of the disruptions that you see 
coming with the retail and hospitality sectors? 
MF: I expect a big disruption there. Certainly fast food is going to 
be ripe with disruption. If you could build a robot that can build 

204 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
an iPhone in China, then you are going to be able to build a robot 
that can lip hamburgers, make coffee drinks, and all of that stuff. 
In retail, I think we are going to see robots doing things like stock-
ing retail shelves; we already have robots that can go around and 
take inventory. There are service robots that will answer questions 
and take their place in the store to show you where something is. 
Probably the most important thing in retail is that people are 
going to use their mobile device to get information. It’s going to 
be instantly available and very reliable. You will be able to engage 
with it on a natural language basis and it will probably replace 
having an employee in the store to answer questions and assist 
you. People are also using smartphones to pay for products at 
checkout, so I see that evolving. All of this will mean fewer jobs. 
DP: Rise of the Robots was the Financial Times and the  
McKinsey book of the year in 2015. Those are two of the most 
trusted sources of information for white-collar workers, whose 
jobs are also at risk of automation. What disruptions to you see on 
the horizon for ofice jobs?
MF: In some ways, it is a lot easier to automate an ofice job than 
a fast-food job because you have to build an actual robot for fast 
food. This is expensive and dificult. You have to deal with clean-
ing it, and that has a lot of challenges. Automating an ofice job 
requires only software. 
I saw a recent report that says in the biggest U.S. corporations in 
corporate inancing departments—jobs like accounting, accounts 
payable, accounts receivable, and inancial planning—the head 
count relative to revenue of the corporation has gone down by 
about 40% in the last decade. We already see those jobs disappear-
ing. Any kind of job where you are sitting in front of a computer 
manipulating information in some routine, predictable way can 
be susceptible to automation. For example, if you are cranking 
out the same basic report or doing some kind of inancial analysis 
again and again. 
There was an article in the New York Times about how Goldman 
Sachs bought a startup company that automated a lot of work 

The End of Employment—Martin Ford 205
done by its analysts. These are the people they hire out of Ivy 
League colleges. They go to Wall Street and sit in front of spread-
sheets for 12 or more hours a day cranking out numbers. A lot of 
that is highly susceptible. I think this is one of the biggest disrup-
tions we are looking at because these are the jobs that people going 
to college would like to have. This is not low-wage unskilled work; 
this is skilled work. I think the impact on these kinds of jobs is one 
of the biggest challenges we are going to face.
his is one of the biggest disruptions…these  
are the jobs that people going to college  
would like to have
DP: In the book, you have an interesting take on outsourcing. 
Instead of viewing it through the lens of free trade, maybe we 
should treat it like virtual immigration where workers are enter-
ing the country to virtually work. Offshore workers are also the 
irst step towards automation. One study estimated the future 
impact of offshoring might be 30–40 million U.S. jobs. If a job 
can be outsourced, then automation would be the next logical 
step. How might the combination of outsourcing and automation 
impact the economy?
MF: In many ways and in general, offshoring is the leading edge of 
automation. It’s what you do when you have enough technology 
to offshore the job, but not enough to completely automate it. 
That persists for a time but usually not forever. Eventually it moves 
toward full automation and you see that in many cases. A lot of 
the jobs that are offshore in countries like India and Philippines 
right now are being automated. 
They are being handled by digital voice technology, call center 
automation where machines are increasingly answering questions 
and using technologies like Watson with this powerful natural 
language capability. You can see how that is going to accelerate 
rapidly. That will potentially have a huge impact on countries 
like India that invested heavily in offshoring. They are worried 
about it. The huge numbers of jobs they created are not going to 
be around forever. 

206 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
DP: Some people suggest that education might be the solution to 
potential widespread unemployment. Learning the right skills enables 
you to get jobs protected from automation. Some economists have 
this idea of freeing up, that education empowers people to do more 
meaningful work when less desirable jobs become automated. 
However, in the book you debunk the myth that education could 
solve the problem of potential widespread unemployment. Why 
can’t we educate our way out of the disruptions that you see?
MF: Education has been the solution historically, and it worked 
well when machines were taking manual labor jobs, digging 
ditches and things like that. But now, it has become much more 
broad-based. Machines are taking skilled jobs, knowledge worker 
jobs, ofice jobs. They are moving up the skill level very rapidly, 
perhaps faster than a person is able to do. 
Machines are moving up the skill level very 
rapidly, perhaps faster than a person is able to do
For example, think of extraordinarily skilled jobs like a radiologist, 
doctors who look at x-rays, mammograms, and all of that. They 
went through years of medical school and residency to do that job. 
Yet machines are getting better and better at it, and I think those 
jobs will be gone entirely. I suspect that for two reasons: (1) More 
skilled jobs are being threatened as machines take on cognitive chal-
lenges, and (2) There is a limit to how much we can educate people.
If you take that idea to its extreme, then you get to a point where in 
order to have a job, you have to go to MIT and get a PhD in Arti-
icial Intelligence so that you can be the one developing all of this. 
You are not going to take the guy lipping hamburgers or stocking 
shelves and send him to MIT; there are basic limits to what we can 
train people to do. We may be beginning to encroach on those limits 
already. I don’t think education is ultimately a sustainable solution.
DP: On the subject of sustainability, economic growth is not sus-
tainable if there is widespread unemployment. Market-based econ-
omies need large numbers of consumers buying things to keep them 

The End of Employment—Martin Ford 207
running. Wealth consolidation and drastic unemployment could 
lead the entire economy to contract and create a kind of delation-
ary spiral. This is what you refer to as the potential for techno- 
feudalism. Can you elaborate on the scenarios that may arise? 
MF: There is a certain level of unpredictability. If you don’t have 
consumers, then you can’t have economic growth because you don’t 
have enough demand out there. The market economy or capitalism 
depends on consumers. Ultimately, consumers drive demand. With-
out them, you get into that downward spiral or maybe a real eco-
nomic crisis, not just from people not consuming but also because 
they can’t pay debt. We have been through that before. 
There is a range of possibilities. You can get a stagnation situation 
where the economy doesn’t grow or it could be much more severe 
depending on how widespread unemployment is. In that case, you 
get into a delationary spiral, maybe another depression. One of 
the ideas suggested in the book is if that happens, the economy 
could somehow adapt to basically siphon off the rich people into 
their own society where they have their own economy and every-
one is kind of left out like in the movie Elysium. That is one sce-
nario, though like I said, it’s very unpredictable. 
The general thoughts are you need broad-based consumption if 
you want a successful economy. That is very important. We want 
to adapt capitalism to ensure that happens.
DP: I think it’s important to understand the potentially drastic, 
worst-case scenarios like you describe in order to emphasize the 
necessity for radically innovative and new solutions. The consen-
sus among many economists and technologists, including yourself, 
is that basic income will become necessary to keep broad based 
consumption going and drive a successful economy. 
As we think about widespread disruption to employment and the 
ubiquitous rise of AI and automation, how would a solution like 
basic income be implemented?
MF: I think basic income is the best way to solve this problem. 
People need an income for two reasons. First, so they can survive 

208 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
and are not living on street. Second, they have to be consumers 
capable of buying the stuff that is produced by the economy. 
My vision is that we would introduce a guaranteed basic income 
at a relatively low level so that it doesn’t right away become a dis-
incentive to work. People can still want to work or start a business 
on top of that. Between this income loor, and whatever else they 
are doing, they have a suficient income to survive economically 
and be active consumers. That helps things thrive. 
As the economy continues to grow, technology advances, and 
automation becomes more prevalent, you would expect to increase 
that guaranteed income over time. Then maybe people rely less on 
work and more on this guaranteed income. That seems to be the 
best way to scale to prosperity across society and continue to have 
economic growth rather than this stagnation or downward spiral 
scenario. 
DP: We covered a lot of broad ranging topics on the future of 
employment and the economy. The question probably coming to 
the minds of many readers is “Ok, now what do I do? And what 
do we do” What advice would you give people regarding employ-
ment and how might we all work together to address the chal-
lenges that lie ahead?
MF: There are two things. First, is what you should do as an indi-
vidual. If I am talking to a college student about careers, some 
areas are harder to automate such as healthcare, nursing, and so 
forth. Don’t make a big investment in acquiring skills that allow 
you to do some routine job. What you ought to do instead is 
emphasize creativity. Do something that involves building some-
thing new rather than cranking out the same report. That is the 
advice to people. 
More importantly is the question to us as a society. It is crazy to 
give advice on how can you as a person succeed in the future if 
we know that it will not work out for everyone. A lot of people 
are going to fail and run into real problems. We need to igure 
out a solution for everyone such as a guaranteed basic income. A 

The End of Employment—Martin Ford 209
big part of what I do in writing and speaking is build awareness 
because ultimately this is going to require a political response. 
It is crazy to give advice on how can you as a 
person succeed in the future if we know that it 
will not work out for everyone
We need to get people thinking and talking so this will get on the 
political radar and we can begin to develop real policies to help 
us address the problems. But before that can happen, we have to 
build awareness; we need people thinking about this. That is a big 
part of what I am trying to do and what I would advise other peo-
ple to start doing as well.
DP: I love the sense of urgency that you bring to building aware-
ness around the challenges and disruption that lies ahead so that 
we can co-create the future society that we want to live in.
All of this talk about the challenges and disruption can distract the 
readers from the simple fact that you write about this stuff because 
you are incredibly passionate about technology. There are so many 
exciting things on the horizon like 3D printing, nano technology, 
autonomous vehicles, and the rise of big data that can create a tre-
mendous amount of value. As a inal question: What excites you 
about the future that lies ahead?
MF: It all excites me! All of these technologies and dimensions 
have terriic potential. Self-driving cars will save globally hundreds 
of thousands of lives because they will be safer and we won’t have 
as many accidents. They will be more eficient, greener, better for 
climate change and real estate utilization in cities. There are tre-
mendous beneits there. But then on the other side, you have the 
fact that millions of jobs and livelihoods are going to be at risk. 
What we want is a scenario where we can leverage the beneits of 
these technologies, and then also recognize the downside and ig-
ure out what to do about it. Otherwise we are headed for big trou-
ble. The biggest impact of 3D printing may be when that scales up 

210 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
to construction and we can 3D print houses and buildings. That 
has lots of beneits, but globally it also eliminates something on the 
order of hundreds of millions of jobs. There are huge issues there. 
We need to leverage the positive beneits of these technologies 
while addressing the downsides. That is the challenge for us all.
MARTIN FORD  is a futurist and the author of two books: The New York Times best-
selling Rise of the Robots: Technology and the Threat of a Jobless Future (winner 
of the 2015 Financial Times/McKinsey Business Book of the Year Award and trans-
lated into 19 languages) and The Lights in the Tunnel: Automation, Accelerating 
Technology and the Economy of the Future, as well as the founder of a Silicon Val-
ley-based software development ﬁrm. He has over 25 years experience in the ﬁelds 
of computer design and software development. He holds a computer engineering 
degree from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, and a graduate business degree 
from the University of California, Los Angeles.
He has written about future technology and its implications for publications includ-
ing The New York Times, Fortune, Forbes, The Atlantic, The Washington Post, Har-
vard Business Review, and The Financial Times. He has also appeared on numer-
ous radio and television shows, including NPR and CNBC. Martin is a frequent 
keynote speaker on the subject of accelerating progress in robotics and artiﬁcial 
intelligence—and what these advances mean for the economy, job market, and 
society of the future.

CONNECTOGRAPHY
Parag Khanna
Parag Khanna’s latest book Connectography presents a bold vision 
of an emerging global network civilization connected by clusters of 
megacities and supply chains. He calls upon us to reject outdated 
political geographies (nation-states) in favor of a new worldview 
where digital devices connect us all and urban areas collaborate 
and compete for resources. Cities are the main drivers of the future.
• 
We only care about things we are connected to
• 
Winners in the future will be the ones with new tools
• 
Connectivity and interdependence shape global identity
• 
Experiencing the greatest market failure in history
Parag helps connect the dots between macro-level trends like 
the collaborative economy and autonomous world, and the shift 
of power that may occur when billions of people in developing 
nations and emerging markets access the Internet for the irst time. 
This big-picture, overarching global perspective makes Parag an 
awesome inale to the book. As he says, connectivity is destiny!
DP: Your latest book outlines this idea of an emerging global net-
work civilization and a worldview that looks at geography through 
the lens of connectivity, which you refer to as “connectography.” 
What do you mean by that?
PK: Connectography is the fusion of connectivity and geography, or 
what you might call connective cartography. Our understanding of 

212 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
the world privileges political geography (nation-states) whereas we 
are building an enormous volume of what I would call “functional 
geography,” which is infrastructure that connects societies and cit-
ies across borders. Functional geography gives a much better under-
standing of how human society functions on a day-to-day level. 
My motivation is to map connectivity and trace its consequences 
in a very open-ended way, in terms of who has power in this sys-
tem, where or what are the drivers of economic growth, what are 
the consequences in terms of how we relate to the environment, 
and what are the demographic and migratory ramiications of 
total connectivity and its moral ramiications.
DP: This book explores themes of empowerment with companies, 
startups, and global citizens working together to co-create a bet-
ter future. A key component of that is how the world is being 
reorganized around cities and the themes of connectivity that you 
address in Connectography.
Some people refer to this idea of a triple bottom line: people, 
planet, and proits. What types of values and best practices do you 
see in this emerging global network civilization? What deines suc-
cess in this new world order?
PK: We need a sense of collective morality in building a global 
society. Think of connectivity in terms of things like supply chains 
and labor rights. For example, a Bangladesh factory collapsed a 
few years ago and we realized: Hey, wait a minute! All of this 
clothing is being made for Zara and H&M in this factory in 
Bangladesh, and it collapsed and killed hundreds of people. Why 
aren’t our major retailers and brands focusing more on their own 
supply chain? 
We only care about things that we are connected to. Part of the 
problem is that we think governance of relations between coun-
tries is structured according to only international treaties. We are 
not creating the human connections, which happens through the 
supply chain. For example, where your mobile phone and clothing 
came from. These connections allow us to feel each other indirectly. 
The more connections that we have, the greater sense that we are 

Connectography—Parag Khanna 213
connected. This builds a type of moral or ethical bond between 
people. Supply chains are crucial vehicles in which we get from us 
vs. them, from me to we, if you will. 
We only care about things that we are connected to
DP: When I think about connectivity, what comes to mind is an 
interconnected digital world. For example, I basically live off of 
Airbnb. I travel almost continuously working as a digital nomad. 
In the past year, I lived in Thailand, Dubai, Berlin, Macedonia, Bel-
grade, Budapest, and Boulder. I manage clients via Skype, e-mail, 
and Voiceover IP. Almost anywhere I can use Airbnb to ind an 
apartment; Uber, Lyft or some on-demand app to get rides; Google 
Maps, Trip Advisor, and other apps to navigate new cities; and I 
stay connected to people via social media. 
I feel like a global citizen. Categories like nationality, ethnicity, 
gender, and religion don’t matter as much as shared interests and 
values. I crisscross the globe from city to city along the lines that 
you describe, but that is made possible by the digital world. You 
spoke mostly about connectivity in terms of supply chains and 
infrastructure. How does the Internet factor into this new world 
that you describe?
PK: I would reinforce a lot of what you said, not only through my 
own example but in billions of people interconnected on social 
media, or using Skype and other platforms to learn languages, 
forming bonds of identity across geography. Survey data on mil-
lennials shows how young people intuitively think pro-connectiv-
ity—pro-positive relations with their neighbors, against walls, for 
environmental sustainability and intergenerational equity, all of 
these things are the new norms. There is a lot of promise in that. I 
wholly subscribe to that. 
I think the combination of connectivity, generational change, and 
economic opportunity comes together to reinforce this global 
digital society. I call it “global social capital” in the book, and I 
use it as a term to contradict the notion that the most important 
kind of capital is the local social capital, as portrayed by Robert 
Putnam or Michael Sandel, when they talk about how a market 

214 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
society is eroding the family bonds and the social foundations 
of our society. I say, “Wait a minute, that doesn’t mean that the 
alternative is just markets.” 
Young people intuitively think pro-connectivity—
pro-positive relations with their neighbors, 
against walls, for environmental sustainability
The fact is that technology enabled global social capital. I may 
be “bowling alone” to use Robert Putnam’s phrase and not live 
in a kind of 19th- or mid-20th-century archetypical social order, 
but that doesn’t mean there is no social capital. Social capital is 
now global and mediated through technology. To view every-
thing as worse than the “good-old days” and miss the idea of 
how global social capital forms through connectivity is a gigan-
tic blind spot. 
DP: Companies like Google, Facebook, Twitter, Uber, Airbnb, 
Microsoft, and Apple are the fastest-growing companies in human 
history. Apple is one example you cite in the book. It has $200 
billion in assets, in many ways making it more powerful than 
many mid-size countries. These companies connect the world. 
Facebook—when including its products Facebook, Instagram, and 
WhatsApp—has a population akin to the world’s biggest country. 
How does the view of the world change when the companies con-
trolling the platforms that connect us have more economic power 
and reach than countries? What roles and responsibilities should 
tech companies play in improving the world?
PK: First, it is important to understand that a world of sovereign 
equality of nations never existed, so it is a fantasy to presume that 
any shift away from that model represents a threat.
We lived up until very recently in a world of vertically integrated 
global empires run by Europe. For example, the British East India 
Company was vastly more powerful than most territories, pos-
sessions, and protectorates of any empire, certainly of the British. 

Connectography—Parag Khanna 215
Let’s be clear about our history irst of all so we don’t fall into a 
trap of fantasies about the world that simply isn’t true. 
The purpose of the state or government is to maximize welfare 
for its citizens. As far as I am concerned, connectivity is a human 
right, so whichever outside agent comes in to provide those human 
rights should be empowered to do so. For example, think of the 
controversy surrounding how India rejected Facebook’s provision 
of free basic Internet. I am totally on the side of Mark Andreesen, 
one of Facebook’s board members, who is critical of the decision 
because India has a long history of shooting itself in the foot as an 
independent country.
As far as I am concerned,  
connectivity is a human right
The fact is you have hundreds of millions of citizens who have 
neither physical connectivity, nor additional connectivity, sanita-
tion, nor food for that matter. Yes, there are fears of monopolism, 
data privacy, and so forth that should be monitored carefully, but 
governments should allow a company that is very cash-rich on the 
back of its hardware sales, software, advertising, or whatever the 
case to be a net provider of connectivity. I worry less about who 
provides the service than that the service is provided. 
There are always power dynamics and tensions over who gets  
to beneit, but you wouldn’t have that problem at all if people 
weren’t connected. We need to be holistic about these kinds of 
things. People talk about unfair trade, but the problem is too little 
trade. People worry about the digital divide; the problem is too lit-
tle Internet access, not an equality of access. There is often this rich 
world approach to problems that from a utilitarian standpoint is 
more about too little than too unequal. 
DP: We just contrasted countries and companies, and in the book 
you also contrast countries with megacities. Cities often have more in 
common with other cities than they do with their surrounding regions. 
For example, I do a lot of work in Dubai. Many companies succeed 

216 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
building businesses that service the local market, but they struggle  
to expand into Saudi Arabia or Egypt instead of entering a city like 
Singapore. How does connectography impact how companies view 
the world when they think about developing a global strategy? 
PK: Megacities relate to the idea that cities not only have more 
in common with each other than they do with the hinterlands of 
the countries to which they belong, but cities also think of each 
other as their biggest markets. Partnerships among cities are the 
drivers of strategy and in the book I map the future of markets 
in 50 main megacities. Companies should focus on how human 
societies organize rather than think of political maps of 200 dis-
crete nations. 
DP: We have gone from approximately 1 billion people online in 
2005 to around 5 billion today, and that number will continue to 
rise exponentially until about 2030 when almost everyone on the 
planet will be connected to the Internet. There are a lot of these 
green ield opportunities for entrepreneurs because there is no leg-
acy infrastructure or incumbents to get in their way. 
For example, some of the greatest innovation in mobile payments 
is happening in Africa, where people basically skipped having a 
bank account and they now do all of their transactions on their 
phones. They don’t even need physical money to buy stuff locally. 
How you see the world evolving as billions of people come online 
for the irst time in the upcoming decades?
PK: We can think of this not only in terms of digital infrastruc-
ture and leap-frogging, but even in physical infrastructure. For 
example, in the Northeastern U.S. you could have high-speed rail 
that people want, but because you have the current Amtrak sys-
tem there isn’t space to build a parallel track and no one wants it 
in their backyard. Whereas if there were no legacy or incumbent 
system, you could just build a new one.
The difference between winners and losers in the 21st century is 
not rich vs. poor or democracy vs. authoritarian but rather old 
vs. new. Those who have the newer stuff are going to get ahead. 
Billions of people are coming online and they have newer mobile 

Connectography—Parag Khanna 217
phones, faster bandwidth speeds, and cheaper access to data. It is 
remarkable how this is transforming developing countries. They 
are able to do mobile payments; some are embracing Bitcoin. You 
can appreciate how competitive they could be from this leap-frog-
ging you describe.
he diference between winners and losers in the 
21st century is not rich vs. poor or democracy 
vs. authoritarian but rather old vs. new
DP: One of the things that I deeply admire about your work is 
that you are putting forth an ambitious vision for the future and 
are asking tough questions about how the world should or could 
be. That is the same spirit of this book. When I look at the model 
you present, there are so many forces pushing and pulling at such 
massive scale that it can feel hard to locate agency. How do you 
inluence systems that are so widespread? 
PK: There isn’t one organized global governance structure to which 
we all respond and direct our efforts and inluence. Deinitely life 
would be a lot easier if that was the case, but that world might not 
be desirable to live in. In my last book about global governance, I 
advocated a form of decentralized corporate anarchy, so in many 
ways I am the last person to go to when it comes to recommenda-
tions for how to coordinate efforts that inluence global institutions. 
I advocate this principle of subsidiaries. Subsidiary is the word for 
pushing resources and responsibilities to the most local level pos-
sible. Ultimately, this means that you have to get your hands dirty 
if you want to combat exploitation of labor, alleviate poverty, or 
reduce gas emissions—to wrap your mind and your hands around 
the supply chain at every step of the way in order to regulate prac-
tices. Writing treaties and declarations won’t get you anywhere. 
Climate change is a great example of this.
Personally, I spend a lot of time with mayors at the city level 
because that is where humanity is. If you want to touch human 
lives, you need to operate in cities and a lot times with companies. 
The reality is they are providers of welfare and need to have a 

218 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
certain responsibility in the world, whether it is asset management 
companies or with governance. 
Talk to anyone who will listen—that is the right way to think 
about how to have inluence or impact today. In the media world 
things are a little different. There are a few key amplifying mouth-
pieces such as the New York Times, The Daily Mail, or China Peo-
ple Daily. But in the world of actually changing outcomes, there is 
a lot more conversation to have and a lot more networks to build. 
Of course, that may be some rationalization of the fact that I am a 
bit all over the place (laughs). 
DP: I spent most of the last 5 years outside the U.S. working with 
entrepreneurs in various startup ecosystems. One of the things I see 
is a standardization of infrastructure to support startups in terms of 
co-working spaces, accelerator programs and incubators, meetups 
and pitch events, trainings and workshops, etc. At the same time, 
almost all jobs are becoming on-demand with the rise of the gig 
economy. How does the rise of the startup ecosystem it within the 
context of connectivity? Are we becoming a planet of entrepreneurs?
PK: That would be nice. Yes, there are a lot more entrepreneurs, 
and I consider anyone making ends meet in a gig economy to be 
an entrepreneur. We tell our 6-year-old daughter she is an entre-
preneur when she is doing her chores. There are obligations or 
responsibilities to take part in helping out. We want her to think 
that life is about doing good for the world. 
People see gaps all around them because we 
are presently living through the greatest market 
failure in human history
People see gaps all around them because we are presently living 
through the greatest market failure in human history, which is to 
say that governments are not collectively capable of meeting the 
needs of their population. United Nations estimates that govern-
ments underserve 4 billion people in terms of basic needs and wel-
fare. That is the textbook deinition of a market failure. We need to 
empower anyone willing to ill those gaps and that is what social 

Connectography—Parag Khanna 219
entrepreneurs, impact investors, and crowd funding does. My pre-
vious book How to Run the World is all about that.
DP: We have talked a lot about megacities. I am curious what hap-
pens to all of the smaller cities and towns along the supply chains 
and trade routes when we see the rise of the autonomous world, 
things like drones or self-driving cars, robots, AI, etc. 
On the one hand, there is this risk for massive disruption to unem-
ployment. For example, what happens when self-driving trucks 
become mainstream. In 30 out of 50 U.S. states, the truck driver is 
the number one job. There are 10 million truck drivers in the U.S. 
Then there are 10–15 million more people working in hotels, restau-
rants, gas stations, etc., that service truck drivers. Automation from 
self-driving trucks could impact 20–25 million jobs in the U.S. alone. 
On the other hand, the biggest cost of trucking is the driver. Elimi-
nating labor would cut shipping costs by as much as 70% and since 
self-driving trucks don’t need to sleep, they could be 50% faster. 
Self-driving trucks could enable people to work from anywhere, 
receiving supplies and allowing them to pursue utopian visions of 
community with solar power and energy eficient batteries, vertical 
farming, and living off the grid.
How do you see things changing outside of cities? 
PK: There are a lot of countervailing trends. Many people say 
things like, “Hey, why do we need all of this urbanization? You can 
just plant a iber cable out to a farm and let people work remotely 
in their blue collar country-side home, tend to their livestock and 
cattle, and have their cappuccino while online trading Bitcoins and 
checking marketplaces for commodities.” 
That is not the way world really works. We are not going to plant 
iber cables out to the most distant farms and people don’t move to 
cities just so they can have iber cables. People are in search of dig-
itization of things like healthcare and jobs. We will never reverse 
urbanization. People will always move to cities. 
We should connect remote geographic areas through better roads, 
highways, and so forth. For example, in the New York Times I 

220 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
talked about the Appalachia region. We declared war on pov-
erty 50 years ago in Appalachia and didn’t make a real dent in 
it because we didn’t build good roads, highways, and railways. It 
would have been smarter to do that over the last 50 years than to 
wage a so-called war on poverty. 
When it comes to the technology, of course there is going to be 
labor displacement as a result of things like driverless trucks. The 
question becomes: Do we want to be a nation of truck drivers? If 
you don’t want to be a nation of truck drivers, then let the driv-
erless trucks come along and train truck drivers to be mechanics. 
Give them jobs in an advanced automobile manufacturing hub, 
which is what Tennessee and Kentucky should become rather 
than ighting for low-wage jobs in Korean automobile plants.
We can take advantage of technological disruptions and transplant 
people into new and higher wage industries. I point out endlessly 
in the book that countries like Germany and South Korea have 
vocational education systems that focus on apprenticeship. That is 
how they maintain low unemployment and keep wages growing in 
higher end sectors of the economy. The U.S. isn’t doing that, and it 
is our own fault if we don’t do so.
We can take advantage of technological 
disruptions and transplant people into  
new and higher wage industries
Health care and education are non-trainable sectors that tech-
nology doesn’t really displace. Robots don’t teach our kids; 
robots aren’t doctors. This is the fastest growing area in the U.S. 
economy, but it could grow a lot more if we ixed the mismatch 
between what we train people to do and what the needs are. Peo-
ple want to do those jobs, but they are not educated in the right 
way. We can ix these problems and have been ignoring them for 
more than a decade
DP: I did Ph.D. studies in Religions of the Americas at Princeton. 
One of the things that I studied was the history of colonialism and 
the rise of fundamentalism in the modern world. 

Connectography—Parag Khanna 221
There is this way in which fundamentalist or extreme views tend 
to pop up at the boundaries between rural and urban areas. Often 
times people on the fringes are marginalized and they struggle 
economically due to disruption in traditional industries like agri-
culture and manufacturing. Groups that are “different” such as 
immigrants or refugees are often blamed for problems like loss of 
jobs or rises in crime that result from unemployment. All of the 
disruption can lead to an emphasis of identities anchored in reli-
gion, nationalism, or tradition. 
I think of that in contrast to people in major megacities. They 
view the world through economics, cooperation, and shared value 
created by living together. They embrace collaboration and shar-
ing, invest in education and the commons, and the types of things 
that we talked about. It seems like the polarizing extremism of 
contemporary identity politics could be viewed through the lens 
of connectivity. How does your model relate to identity in the 
modern world?
PK: Global identity cannot just be this wishful aspirational thing. 
It emerges from the process of building more connectivity and 
interdependencies between people economically, digitally, and 
socially. That sense of global identity ampliies by generational 
change, in which a cohort of people views this as natural to them 
because it’s the way things have always been. It’s a process that 
happens not simply through infrastructural connectivity. I hope 
that we will not unwind or reverse it because in some ways it’s 
just getting started now.
DP: I love how you keep bringing conversations about ideas and 
big picture vision back to pragmatic things like infrastructure and 
connection that are very tangible. As a inal question: What advice 
would you give in terms of practical steps on how to succeed in 
this new emerging world?
PK: Be connected. Be mobile. For example, be willing to transplant 
geography from failing cities to successful cities, or from slower 
domestic markets to more thriving international markets. Be resil-
ient and capture these trends. That is how you prepare to stay 
aloat and succeed. 

222 EMPOWER: HOW TO CO-CREATE THE FUTURE
In terms of the betterment of humankind, there are all types of 
things we could do right if we built more connectivity, but we are 
not there yet. We talked earlier about technology companies being 
important agents of connectivity. I want to see a lot more of that. 
We want more peer-to-peer capitalism, which I call the global digi-
tal workforce. There is a strong case for Internet penetration as an 
agent of economic growth. This can also boost the services share 
of economy. Societies have to transition over to services more 
rapidly because of what Martin Ford writes about, who you also 
interviewed for this book. 
Be connected. Be mobile…Be resilient and 
capture these trends. hat is how you prepare  
to stay aloat and succeed
If we want a world built more around the sharing economy and 
peer-to-peer capitalism, it is going to rest on the backbone of dig-
ital infrastructure, supply chains, and all of the things we spoke 
about earlier. There are reinforcing dynamics between what we 
are doing in physical infrastructure, which we take entirely for 
granted, and what our goals are for human society and for our 
economy. It’s all interconnected.
PARAG KHANNA  is a leading global strategist, world traveler, and best-selling author. 
He is a Senior Research Fellow in the Centre on Asia and Globalisation at the Lee 
Kuan Yew School of Public Policy at the National University of Singapore. He is also 
the Managing Partner of Hybrid Reality, a boutique geostrategic advisory ﬁrm, and 
Co-Founder & CEO of Factotum, a leading content branding agency.
Parag’s latest book is Connectography: Mapping the Future of Global Civili-
zation (2016). He is also co-author of Hybrid Reality: Thriving in the Emerging 
Human-Technology Civilization (2012) and author of How to Run the World: Chart-
ing a Course to the Next Renaissance (2011) and The Second World: Empires 
and Inﬂuence in the New Global Order (2008). In 2008, Parag was named one of 
Esquire’s “75 Most Inﬂuential People of the 21st Century,” and featured in WIRED 
magazine’s “Smart List.” He holds a PhD from the London School of Economics, 
and Bachelors and Masters degrees from the School of Foreign Service at George-
town University. He has traveled to more than 100 countries and is a Young Global 
Leader of the World Economic Forum.

