Ender’s Game and Philosophy: The Logic Gate Is Down, First Edition. Edited by Kevin S. Decker. 
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
202
Ender’s Dilemma
Realism, Neoliberalism, and the 
Politics of Power
Ted Henry Brown and Christie L. Maloyed
The world is always a democracy in times of flux,
and the man with the best voice will win.
—Peter Wiggin
What child hasn’t dreamed of ruling the world? Of having power over 
siblings, parents, classmates, and teachers? Of being thought of as 
more than just an ignorant and immature kid? What makes the dreams 
of the Wiggin children so remarkable is that despite their youth, their 
dreams aren’t the fanciful reveries of children; they’re all in positions 
to wield real power. At the tender age of nine, Ender’s given command 
of his own army in Battle School, and is placed in charge of the 
International Fleet only two years later. Peter and Valentine are under 
the age of 13 when they begin their opinion- shaping careers on the 
nets. Despite being children whose true identities were hidden, and 
who were never elected into positions of authority, the Wiggins 
influence the fate of the inter-galactic system simply with their voices. 
Their understanding of the politics of war rivals that of politicians 
and commanders generations older than them.
Written during the United States’ Cold War with the Soviet Union, 
Orson Scott Card’s novel is an exploration of political power. The 
Cold War focused tremendous energy on building the biggest weapons 
with the longest range and the highest sophistication. The assumption 
that the side with the most firepower had the most political power 
Chapter 17
0001975208.INDD   202
4/10/2013   4:13:03 PM
UNCORRECTED PROOFS

 
REALISM, NEOLIBERALISM, AND THE POLITICS OF POWER 
203
fueled the war. But as the Wiggin children show, power doesn’t 
 necessarily lie in technology or troop numbers. The power to per-
suade can be just as potent as detonating the Little Doctor.
Survival of the Fittest
When Ender’s Game opens, the buggers are preparing to attack the 
Earth for a third time, or at least that’s what the I.F. would have 
the  citizens of Earth believe. There are only two options: wait for 
the Third Invasion to destroy the planet or launch a preemptive attack 
directly against the buggers and permanently eliminate the enemy. 
The formation of the Hegemony and the International Fleet clearly 
illustrates that Earth has opted to attack the buggers at their home 
world, but all the while a far more subtle battle is being waged for 
control on Earth.
To understand political power it’s necessary to comprehend why 
individuals and entire nations make the choices they do. When should 
we expect countries to choose preemptive, rather than defensive 
action? When is it possible to reach a truce or compromise? And when 
is military conflict the best solution?1 Specialists in political philos-
ophy, political science, and international relations have tried to answer 
these questions and predict the future course of events by first under-
standing the reasons behind our actions. Two influential approaches 
to understanding the intentions behind human behavior are known as 
realism and liberalism.
For realists, power is everything and it’s assumed that people are 
motivated primarily by their own self-interest. As the realist Thomas 
Hobbes (1588–1679) explained, without government, humans live in 
a state of nature in which man is in a constant struggle to survive and 
life is “solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short.”2 In order to avoid this 
war of “all against all,” individuals create a society to gain protection 
through superior numbers. Realist thought can thus be reduced to the 
belief that gaining power is necessary for survival and whoever has 
the most power is the most likely to survive.
Self-interest and the will to survive govern relationships between 
individuals, and, according to the realists, relations between coun-
tries. As international relations theorist Hans Morgenthau explains, 
“International politics, like all politics, is a struggle for power.”3 Every 
0001975208.INDD   203
4/10/2013   4:13:03 PM
UNCORRECTED PROOFS

204 
TED HENRY BROWN AND CHRISTIE L. MALOYED
country, and in the case of Ender’s Game every species, must try to 
gain the most power—as defined by material, military, and economic 
advantage—or risk being overtaken by other countries (or species) 
willing to stop at nothing to ensure their own survival. Colonel Graff 
embodies the realist philosophy in thinking that humans are moti-
vated by their most primal self-interest: “Humanity doesn’t want to 
die. As a species, we have evolved to survive.”4 Within the realist’s 
world, there is no room for moral principles because survival is the 
primary concern. As Graff later attempts to convince Ender, “When it 
comes down to it, though, the real decision is inevitable: if one of us 
has to be destroyed, let’s make damn sure we’re the ones alive at the 
end.”5 Defining the universe in such basic terms, however, only 
partially explains the actions of Ender, Peter, and Valentine.
Why Can’t We Be Friends?
While the I.F. fights for the survival of the human race, the countries 
on Earth are united against the buggers. The positions of Hegemon, 
Polemarch, and Strategos evolved as a means to ensure that political 
infighting wouldn’t constrain the resources and ability to fight the bug-
gers. The question remains, though, would the Hegemon be strong 
enough to ensure peace on Earth once the threat of the buggers had 
subsided, or would the age-old tensions between countries resurface 
and engulf the efforts of the International Fleet? As Dink Meeker, a 
Battle School comrade, explains to Ender, “As long as people are afraid 
of the buggers, the I.F. can stay in power, and as long as the I.F. is in 
power, certain countries can keep their hegemony. But keep watching 
the vids, Ender. People will catch onto this game pretty soon, and there’ll 
be a civil war to end all wars.”6 Peter comes to the same conclusion: 
“When the bugger wars are over, all that power will vanish, because it’s 
all built on fear of the buggers. And suddenly we’ll look around and 
discover that all the old alliances are gone, dead and gone, except one, 
the Warsaw Pact.”7 Dink and Peter believe that without an external 
threat looming on the horizon, societies will return to the realist strategy 
of scrambling for power in hopes of guaranteeing survival. Even 
Valentine concludes that the alliance that had come together since the 
bugger wars began had been a “façade of peace and cooperation.”8 But 
is the possibility of continued cooperation really so unlikely?
0001975208.INDD   204
4/10/2013   4:13:03 PM
UNCORRECTED PROOFS

 
REALISM, NEOLIBERALISM, AND THE POLITICS OF POWER 
205
Against the view that power is both necessary and sufficient for 
survival, liberalism suggests that the nature of the world is not so 
clearly divided into black and white. Realists think states are likely to 
move toward conflict when there’s an imbalance in the levels of power 
between them. When an imbalance exists, conflict necessarily emerges 
as each state struggles to survive and gain power. Liberal political 
thinkers also assume that world politics is fairly anarchic, but they 
diverge from realists by insisting that states shouldn’t be solely or 
even primarily motivated by their narrow self-interest. If states are 
willing to forego the quest for absolute power, then it’s possible that 
all or most states could benefit from working together. Associated 
with thinkers such as John Locke (1632–1704), Immanuel Kant 
(1724–1804), and later with President Woodrow Wilson, liberalism 
stresses that humans are capable of working with one another in 
hopes of achieving more together than they would individually.
Neoliberalism developed in response to the charge that liberalism 
represented an overly utopian view of the world. This variation on 
liberalism stressed the importance of institutions and information in 
facilitating cooperation over conflict. Neoliberals don’t view the 
world as a zero-sum game where a gain for one side always represents 
a loss for the other. Instead, they say that mutual advantage can be 
achieved when states work together. Reducing uncertainty about the 
intentions of other actors in the anarchic world is the key to increasing 
international security and continued cooperation. Neoliberalism’s 
focus is on developing international organizations providing all states 
more and better information, and neoliberals believe this kind of 
communication is paramount in order for cooperation to occur.
Ender’s Dilemma
To explain whether cooperation or conflict should be expected bet-
ween two parties, international relations scholars often try to calcu-
late costs and benefits of either strategy. Among the most famous of 
their scenarios is the “Prisoner’s Dilemma,” which starts by presuming 
two individuals have committed a crime and are being interrogated 
by the police. The police need a confession in order to convict either 
of the suspects and so each is placed in separate interrogation rooms. 
During questioning, each prisoner is given two options: they can 
0001975208.INDD   205
4/10/2013   4:13:03 PM
UNCORRECTED PROOFS

206 
TED HENRY BROWN AND CHRISTIE L. MALOYED
remain silent or betray their partner in crime. If both suspects betray 
each other, both receive jail time. If only one rats out the other, the 
betrayer is set free and the other suspect is given a jail sentence. If 
both prisoners refuse to confess, this will force the investigators to 
charge each suspect with a minor offense with minimal jail time for 
each. Both prisoners get the best outcome if neither chooses to coop-
erate with investigators, but this only works if each of them can trust 
the other to not confess. Given that each prisoner realizes that serving 
the least amount of jail time is the best outcome, there’s a high 
likelihood that each prisoner will betray the other, resulting in more 
jail time for both.
The Prisoner’s Dilemma gives us several key insights into decisions 
about cooperation and betrayal (or “defection”) generally. The best 
outcome for both is also the most difficult to achieve, since they’re in 
isolated cells and can’t communicate with one another. Because they 
have limited information, they’re both likely to defect. If they were 
given the chance to communicate with one another, increase their 
information, and develop a joint strategy, they both would remain 
silent and suffer a short sentence, but reap larger benefits on the 
whole. In the case of Ender’s Game, the humans and buggers face a 
similar dilemma about whether or not to cooperate with one another 
or defect, which means fighting a war for survival. If only one side 
decides to defect (in this case, attack the other), then the aggressor 
would benefit. If both sides choose the option of defecting, then the 
resulting war would be costly for both sides. Cooperation leads to 
minimal damages.
The dilemma for Ender and the I.F. is complicated by the fact that 
there seems to be no possibility of communication between humans 
and buggers. Without communication, it might still be possible to 
foster cooperation when there is a “shadow of the future,” or expec-
tations that they’ll meet again in the future. As Robert Axelrod 
explains, “What makes it possible for cooperation to emerge is the 
fact that the players might meet again.”9 According to Graff, the 
reason the two sides went to war in the first place was the failure to 
communicate: “This isn’t just a matter of translating from one lan-
guage to another. They don’t have a language at all. We used every 
means we could think of to communicate with them, but they don’t 
even have the machinery to know we’re signaling. And maybe they’ve 
been trying to think to us, and they can’t understand why we don’t 
0001975208.INDD   206
4/10/2013   4:13:03 PM
UNCORRECTED PROOFS

 
REALISM, NEOLIBERALISM, AND THE POLITICS OF POWER 
207
respond.” As Ender pithily responds, “So the whole war is because we 
can’t talk to each other.”10 Without the ability to communicate, the 
best strategy that either side can take is the realist position—fight for 
survival at all costs. Both humans and buggers defect rather than 
cooperate, leading to massive losses of life on each side. This is the 
real-world equivalent of jail sentences for each side. It certainly isn’t 
the desirable outcome, but as Graff rightly notes, “If the other fellow 
can’t tell you his story, you can never be sure he isn’t trying to kill 
you.”11
This problem about communication that overshadows the Third 
Invasion isn’t as much of a problem for the nations on earth. Despite 
this, the realist and neoliberal debate thrives among those vying for 
power on Earth as the Third Invasion draws to a close. Peter and 
Valentine use their online personas of Locke and Demosthenes to 
 perpetuate this debate and promote the assumptions of realism and 
neoliberalism in order to persuade the masses to their preferred out-
comes. While Locke champions the idea of cooperation, Demosthenes 
emphasizes the probability of conflict.
There are two constant battles being waged: the war for the survival 
of the human species and the war for continued peace on Earth. One 
battle requires that Ender succeed. The other battle requires that Peter 
and Valentine stabilize the tensions between factions on Earth. These 
intentions are not completely selfless, though, as Peter desires to 
someday conquer the world. Valentine explains to Ender, if Peter 
“… had allowed the League to fall apart completely, he’d have to con-
quer the world piece by piece. As long as the Hegemony exists, he can 
do it in one lump.”12 As Peter and his online persona of Locke have 
suggested, the power of the Hegemon should be upheld, even in the 
absence of the bugger menace, because it ensures that cooperation 
will continue between countries. If cooperation and communication 
are the keys to global survival, then the power to persuade is the 
essential ingredient to wielding political power.
The Power to Persuade
The I.F. finds it laughable when it first discovers two children are 
behind the identities of Locke and Demosthenes. Given that Valentine 
and Peter are so young, and because they haven’t done any real 
0001975208.INDD   207
4/10/2013   4:13:03 PM
UNCORRECTED PROOFS

208 
TED HENRY BROWN AND CHRISTIE L. MALOYED
damage, they’re allowed to continue writing without interference. 
Since “they’re still just talking,” one I.F. officer reasons, “they have 
influence, but no power.” But as the other officer astutely cautions, 
“In my experience, influence is power.”13
How do Peter and Valentine come to command attention and 
respect on the nets and eventually among news publishers and even 
government leaders? The Wiggin children are not born into a 
prominent family, nor are they politically connected. To gain influence, 
they have to create their own opportunities and build their own net-
works. Niccolò Machiavelli (1469–1527), a notorious political realist, 
advised that a person can acquire power either through fortune or 
ability, but “… rulers maintain themselves better if they owe little to 
luck.”14 Peter’s nothing if not a good Machiavellian. When he first 
proposes creating online personas to Valentine, he stresses to her that 
his study of history has revealed the insight that in order to make a 
difference, a person has to take opportunities that are presented. 
Despite Valentine’s mocking that it’s apparently up to a couple of pre-
pubescent children to save the world, Peter retorts: “It’s not my fault 
I’m twelve right now. And it’s not my fault that right now is when the 
opportunity is open. Right now is the time when I can shape events.”15 
The ability to shape events doesn’t necessarily depend on who you 
know, on being in an elected position, or even on commanding troops. 
As Peter explains to Valentine, political power merely rests on the 
ability to persuade others at certain times: “There are times when the 
world is rearranging itself, and at times like that, the right words can 
change the world.”16 Much as Machiavelli did in his controversial 
book The Prince, Peter undertakes a study of history, focusing on 
great leaders and statesmen in order to understand how they came to 
power. He argues that historians have spent too much time “[quib-
bling] about cause and effect” and too little time studying actual 
power. Peter no doubt hopes to have his own name listed alongside 
those he thinks had “the right voice in the right place”: Thomas Paine, 
Ben Franklin, Bismarck, and Lenin.17
Of course, Peter doesn’t dismiss the importance of strength and 
force entirely; far from it. Peter turns to the example of Adolf Hitler 
in claiming that political power lies in the balance between force and 
persuasion. “Everybody thinks Hitler got to power because of his 
armies,” Peter explains, “because they were willing to kill, and that’s 
partly true, because in the real world power is always built on the 
0001975208.INDD   208
4/10/2013   4:13:03 PM
UNCORRECTED PROOFS

 
REALISM, NEOLIBERALISM, AND THE POLITICS OF POWER 
209
threat of death and dishonor. But mostly he got to power on words—
on the right words at the right time.”18
The different tactics needed to win power initially and to keep 
power are also one of Machiavelli’s interests. While Peter repeatedly 
emphasizes the importance of delivering the right message to per-
suade others, keeping power often rests on force. Machiavelli was 
concerned with the relationship between persuasion and force as tools 
of power, and he thought, “… the people are fickle; it is easy to per-
suade them about something, but difficult to keep them persuaded. 
Hence, when they no longer believe in you and your schemes, you 
must be able to force them to believe.”19 It’s not only important to 
have the right words at the right moment but also to know at which 
moment force is required.
Even Valentine recognizes the usefulness of this approach after the 
end of the bugger war. She tells Ender that it’s inevitable that Peter 
will eventually win power. She observes that even though Peter has 
often been a “destroyer” he also has something of the “builder” in 
him: “He isn’t kind, but he doesn’t break every good thing he sees 
anymore. Once you realize that power will always end up with the 
sort of people who crave it, I think that there are worse people who 
could have it than Peter.”20 Valentine’s endorsement is less than enthu-
siastic, and yet she also recognizes the need to balance building and 
destruction as complementary components of political power. 
Although this view of power owes a lot to the realist tradition of 
political thought, it also embraces neoliberal ideas. Peter’s goal isn’t to 
destroy his enemies for the sake of his own survival, but to forge alli-
ances and build institutions that will facilitate cooperation.
Fighting for the Future
This model of political power works perfectly well on Earth because 
communication exists and interactions among rival groups continue 
to be possible. For the battle with the buggers, however, the ability to 
influence and persuade can’t get off the ground, making physical force 
more important than political power. Ender, who personally wishes to 
have as little in common with Peter and his realist mode of thinking 
as possible, surprisingly adopts a realist position in order to survive. 
After his fight with Bonzo, Ender despondently realizes that he’s the 
0001975208.INDD   209
4/10/2013   4:13:03 PM
UNCORRECTED PROOFS

210 
TED HENRY BROWN AND CHRISTIE L. MALOYED
only one responsible for his own survival and that power is ultimately 
rooted in force: “Peter might be scum, but Peter had been right, always 
right; the power to cause pain is the only power that matters, the 
power to kill and destroy, because if you can’t kill then you are always 
subject to those who can, and nothing and no one will ever save 
you.”21
This is a disturbing and paradoxical conclusion, given that Ender 
had displayed gentleness and compassion, especially in contrast with 
Peter’s penchant for cruelty. And yet, Ender agrees with Peter that 
destruction is necessary. What is even more confusing to Ender is that 
he realizes in order to destroy his enemies, he has to first understand 
and even love them.22 This requires a degree of empathy and under-
standing. Once Ender stops focusing on the threat of the buggers, he 
finds they have been communicating with him and the war was unnec-
essary. Card’s verdict on realism says that just as long as one group is 
convinced that another—with a different language and unknown 
values—are committed to erasing their way of life, then the desire to 
survive will be used to justify conflict. But as Peter’s appearance in the 
mirror in the Giant’s Drink game shows us, perhaps there is truth in 
the old axiom that “we have seen the enemy and he is us.”
Ender realizes after he has committed xenocide that all species wish 
to survive, and that contrary to the realist position, war’s not neces-
sarily the answer when communication fails. This is not to say that 
conflict should always be avoided. Nor should we presume that all 
communication is beneficial, in earnest, and without an agenda. 
Power by persuasion is inherently political. But as Ender learned in 
governing his own colony in the new world, there are “differences 
between military and civilian leadership” and the most successful 
leader governs “by persuasion rather than fiat.”23
Notes
1. For insight into the military side of such decisions, see the chapters by 
Kody Cooper and James A. Cook in this volume.
2. Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, ed. Edwin Curley (Indianapolis: Hackett 
Publishing Company, 1994), 76.
3. Hans Morgenthau, Politics Among Nations: The Struggle for Power and 
Peace, Brief Edition (Boston: McGraw-Hill, 1993), 29.
0001975208.INDD   210
4/10/2013   4:13:03 PM
UNCORRECTED PROOFS

 
REALISM, NEOLIBERALISM, AND THE POLITICS OF POWER 
211
4. Orson Scott Card, Ender’s Game (New York: TOR Books, 1991), 35.
5. Ibid., 253.
6. Ibid., 110–111.
7. Ibid., 126.
8. Ibid.
9. Robert Axelrod, The Evolution of Cooperation (New York: Basic 
Books, Inc., 1984), 12.
10. Card, Ender’s Game, 253.
11. Ibid.
12. Ibid., 311–312.
13. Ibid., 228–229.
14. Niccolò Machiavelli, The Prince, ed. Quentin Skinner and Russell Price 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988), 19.
15. Card, Ender’s Game, 130–131.
16. Ibid., 128.
17. Ibid.
18. Ibid., 131.
19. Machiavelli, The Prince, 21.
20. Card, Ender’s Game, 239.
21. Ibid., 212.
22. Ibid., 238.
23. Ibid., 315.
0001975208.INDD   211
4/10/2013   4:13:03 PM
UNCORRECTED PROOFS

