
Contents
Sound Recordings
Prefaces to the First Edition
Preface to the Second Edition
Acknowledgements
Figure 1 The organs of speech
Figure 2 The International Phonetic
Alphabet
1 English Phonetics: Consonants (i)
1.1 Airstream and Articulation
1.2 Place of Articulation
1.3 Manner of Articulation Stops, Fricatives
and Approximants
Notes
Exercises
2 English Phonetics: Consonants (ii)
2.1 Central vs Lateral

2.2 Taps and Trills
2.3 Secondary Articulation
2.4 Affricates
2.5 Aspiration
2.6 Nasal Stops
Notes
Exercises
3 English Phonetics: Vowels (i)
3.1 The Primary Cardinal Vowels
3.2 RP and GA Short Vowels
Exercises
4 English Phonetics: Vowels (ii)
4.1 RP and GA Long Vowels
4.2 RP and GA Diphthongs
Notes
Exercises
5 The Phonemic Principle
5.1 Introduction Linguistic Knowledge
5.2 Contrast vs Predictability: The Phoneme
5.3 Phonemes, Allophones and Contexts

5.4 Summing Up
Notes
Exercises
6 English Phonemes
6.1 English Consonant Phonemes
6.2 The Phonological Form of Morphemes
6.3 English Vowel Phonemes
Exercises
7 English Syllable Structure
7.1 Introduction
7.2 Constituency in Syllable Structure
7.3 The Sonority Hierarchy, Maximal Onset
and Syllable Weight
7.4 Language-Specific Phonotactics
7.5 Syllabic Consonants and Phonotactics
7.6 Syllable-Based Generalizations
7.7 Morphological Structure, Syllable
Structure and Resyllabification
7.8 Summing Up
Exercises
8 Rhythm and Word Stress in English

8.1 The Rhythm of English
8.2 English Word Stress: Is It Entirely
Random?
8.3 English Word Stress: Some General
Principles
8.4 Word Stress Assignment in
Morphologically Simple Words
8.5 Word Stress Assignment and
Morphological Structure
8.6 Compound Words
8.7 Summing Up
Notes
Exercises
9 Rhythm, Reversal and Reduction
9.1 More on the Trochaic Metrical Foot
9.2 Representing Metrical Structure
9.3 Phonological Generalizations and Foot
Structure
9.4 The Rhythm of English Again: Stress
Timing and Eurhythmy
Notes
Exercises

10 English Intonation
10.1 Tonic Syllables, Tones and Intonation
Phrases
10.2 Departures from the LLI Rule
10.3 IPs and Syntactic Units
10.4 Tonic Placement, IP Boundaries and
Syntax
10.5 Tones and Syntax
10.6 Tonic Placement and Discourse
Context
10.7 Summing Up
Exercises
11 Graphophonemics Spelling–Pronunciation
Relations
11.1 Introduction
11.2 Vowel Graphemes and Their Phonemic
Values
11.3 Consonant Graphemes and Their
Phonemic Values
Exercises
12 Variation in English Accents

12.1 Introduction
12.2 Systemic vs Realizational Differences
between Accents
12.3 Perceptual and Articulatory Space
12.4 Differences in the Lexical Distribution
of Phonemes
Notes
Exercises
13 An Outline of Some Accents of English
13.1 Some British Accents
13.2 Two American Accents
13.3 Two Southern Hemisphere Accents
13.4 An Overview of Some Common
Phenomena Found in Accent Variation
Notes
Exercises
References
Suggested Further Reading
Index

8

9

This second edition first published 2013
© 2013 Philip Carr
Edition History: Blackwell Publishing Ltd (1e, 1999)
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in
February 2007. Blackwell’s publishing program has been
merged with Wiley’s global Scientific, Technical, and Medical
business to form Wiley-Blackwell.
Registered Office
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate,
Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial Offices
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5020, USA
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19
8SQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services,
and for information about how to apply for permission to reuse
the copyright material in this book please see our website at
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
The right of Philip Carr to be identified as the author of this
work has been asserted in accordance with the UK Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior
permission of the publisher.
10

Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic
formats. Some content that appears in print may not be
available in electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products
are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and product
names used in this book are trade names, service marks,
trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners.
The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide
accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject
matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the
publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If
professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the
services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Carr, Philip, 1953–
English phonetics and phonology : an introduction / Philip Carr.
— Second edition.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4051-3454-5
1. English language—Phonology. 2. English language—
Phonetics.
PE1133.C34 2013
421′.5—dc23
2012005351
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library.
Cover image: Patrick Henry Bruce, Peinture/Nature Morte, c.
11

1925–6. Corcoran Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C. Photo ©
SuperStock.
Cover design by Simon Levy.
1 2013
12

Sound Recordings
These sound files accompany exercises, the treatment of
intonation, and the description of some of the varieties of
English given here. They are marked in the margins with a
headphones symbol (as shown), and are available at:
www.wiley.com/go/carrphonetics
Track 1.1: Exercise 4
Track 1.2: Exercise 5
Track 1.3: Exercise 6
Track 2.1: Exercise 1
Track 2.2: Exercise 2
Track 2.3: Exercise 3
Track 3.1: Exercise 3
Track 4.1: Exercise 3
Track 5.1: Exercise 4
Track 6.1: Marry Merry Mary (vowel neutralization in
GA)
Track 6.2: Exercise 3
13

Track 7.1: Exercise 4
Track 8.1: Exercise 1
Track 8.2: Exercise 2
Track 8.3: Exercise 3
Track 8.4: Exercise 4
Track 8.5: Exercise 5
Track 8.6: Exercise 6
Track 9.1: Exercise 2
Track 9.2: Exercise 3
Track 9.3: Exercise 4
Track 10.1: Example (1) (falling tone)
Track 10.2: Example (2) (rising tone)
Track 10.3: Example (3) (rise-fall)
Track 10.4: Example (4) (fall-rise)
Track 10.5: Example (5) (last lexical item)
Track 10.6: Example (6) (last lexical item)
Track 10.7: Example (7) (last lexical item)
Track 10.8: Example (8) (contrastive intonation)
Track 10.9: Example (9) (last lexical item)
Track 10.10: Example (10) (contrastive intonation)
Track 10.11: Example (11) (contrastive intonation)
Track 10.12: Example (13) (given information)
Track 10.13: Example (14) (given information)
Track 10.14: Example (15) (synonyms and given
14

information)
Track 10.15: Example (16) (tonic placement and
presupposition)
Track 10.16: Example (17) (tonic placement and given
information)
Track 10.17: Example (18) (final temporal adverbials)
Track 10.18: Example (19) (final temporal adverbials and
contrastive intonation)
Track 10.19: Example (20) (fronted temporal adverbials)
Track 10.20: Example (21) (event sentences)
Track 10.21: Example (22) (no one, nothing, nowhere,
nobody)
Track 10.22: Example (23) (someone, something,
somewhere, somebody)
Track 10.23: Example (24) (pro-forms)
Track 10.24: Examples (25), (26), (27) (clefting and
focus)
Track 10.25: Example (28) (deixis)
Track 10.26: Example (29) (deixis)
Track 10.27: Example (30) (deixis and contrast)
Track 10.28: Examples (31), (32) (non-restrictive and
restrictive relative clauses)
Track 10.29: Example (33) (noun phrases in apposition)
Track 10.30: Example (34) (other parentheicals)
Track 10.31: Example (35) (co-ordinated constituents)
Track 
10.32: 
Example 
(36) 
(short 
co-ordinated
constituents)
Track 10.33: Example (37) (lexicalized co-ordination)
15

Track 10.34: Example (38) (more lexicalized co-
ordination)
Track 10.35: Example (39) (list intonation)
Track 10.36: Examples (40), (41) (subordinate clauses)
Track 10.37: Example (42) (sentence adverbials)
Track 10.38: Example (43) (sentence adverbials)
Track 10.39: Example (44) (pseudo-clefts)
Track 10.40: Example (45) (the is … is that construction)
Track 10.41: Example (46) (reporting clauses)
Track 10.42: Example (47) (reporting clauses)
Track 10.43: Example (48) (subject noun phrases)
Track 10.44: Examples (49), (50) (tag questions)
Track 10.45: Example (51) (tag questions)
Track 10.46: Example (52) (tag questions)
Track 10.47: Example (53) (transitive phrasal verbs)
Track 10.48: Example (54) (intransitive phrasal verbs)
Track 10.49: Example (55) (intransitive phrasal verbs and
event sentences)
Track 10.50: Examples (56), (57) (degree adverbials)
Track 10.51: Example (58) (so as a degree adverb)
Track 10.52: Example (59) (so as verb phrase adverbial)
Track 10.53: Example (60) (WH questions)
Track 10.54: Example (61) (echoic WH questions)
Track 10.55: Examples (62), (63) (declaratives as
questions)
Track 10.56: Example (64) (vocatives)
Track 10.57: Example (65) (final non-vocative vs final
16

vocative)
Track 10.58: Example (66) (IP boundaries and other
meaning differences)
Track 10.59: Exercise 3
Track 10.60: Exercise 4
Track 10.61: Exercise 5
Track 10.62: Exercise 7
Track 10.63: Exercise 8
Track 11.1: Exercise 1
Track 11.2: Exercise 2
Track 11.3: Exercise 3
Track 11.4: Exercise 4
Track 12.1: Exercise 1
Track 12.2: Exercise 1
Track 12.3: Exercise 1
Track 13.1: (aspirated, unaspirated, voiced and breathy
voiced stops)
Track 13.2: (retroflex consonants)
Track 13.3: ([v], [υ] and [w])
Track 13.4: Exercise 1
Track 13.5: Exercise 2
Track 13.6: Exercise 3
Track 13.7: Exercise 4
Track 13.8: Exercise 5
Track 13.9: Exercise 6
17

Track 13.10: Exercise 7 (RP)
Track 13.11: Exercise 7 (GA)
18

Prefaces to the First Edition
Preface for Teachers
Each year in the Department of English at Newcastle
University, I am given eleven 50-minute lecture slots in which
to introduce English phonetics and phonology to around a
hundred students in the first semester of their first year on a
variety of different undergraduate degree programmes,
including English language and literature, linguistics, English
language, modern languages, music, history and many others.
Also included in the student body are European exchange
undergraduates 
and 
students 
taking 
applied 
linguistics
postgraduate degrees in media technology and in linguistics for
teachers of English as a second language.
Given the range of degree types, this is a daunting task,
made even more difficult by the fact that a substantial minority
of the students do not have English as their first language. In a
typical year, the student cohort will include speakers of Arabic,
French, Spanish, German, Greek, Japanese, Korean, Mandarin
or Cantonese Chinese, and Thai. Many of the non-native
speakers will have been taught RP; others will have been
taught General American. Amongst the native speakers of
English, very few of the students will be speakers of RP, so
that the non-native speakers are more likely to speak RP than
the native speakers.
The vast majority of the student body will take their study of
English phonetics and phonology no further, and the one factor
which the majority of this diverse band of students shares is
19

that they have no previous knowledge of phonetics or
phonology; the course must therefore be ab initio.
One faces a dilemma in teaching such a course: on the one
hand, one wants to cater to the small minority who will go on
to study phonology at a more advanced level. On the other
hand, 
one 
wants 
to 
introduce 
the 
subject 
without
overwhelming the students with a mass of bewildering
descriptive detail and an avalanche of seemingly arcane
theoretical constructs. It is a moot point whether this dilemma
can be resolved. However, this textbook was written as an
attempt at a solution.
It is arguable that textbooks are harder to write than
monographs, and that the more elementary the textbook, the
harder it is to write: one can barely write a line without being
aware of one’s often questionable assumptions, and one has
always to resist the temptation to question them in the body of
the text. One continually has the sense of one’s peers looking
over 
one’s 
shoulder 
and 
guffawing 
at 
the 
absurd
oversimplifications which one is knowingly committing to print.
But it has to be done: students have to learn to walk before
they can learn to run; they also have to learn to crawl before
they can learn to walk.
Writing and using textbooks is an empirical matter: it is very
often immediately apparent when an exercise, chapter or book
is simply not working, for a given body of students. Almost all
of the textbooks which I have used on the first-year Newcastle
course described here have proved to be unsuitable for this
type of student cohort in one way or another; mostly, they
have contained far too much detail. I have therefore set out to
write a very short, very simple coursebook which deliberately
ignores a great many descriptive/theoretical complexities.
20

My aim has not been to introduce students to phonological
theory; rather, I have sought to introduce some of the bare
essentials of English phonetics and phonology in a manner that
is as theory-neutral as possible. This is fundamentally
problematic, of course, since there is no such thing as theory-
neutral description. I have therefore decided to adopt various
theoretical/descriptive views, such as the tongue-arch/cardinal
vowel approach to articulatory description, the phonemic
approach to segmental phonology, the trochaic approach to
English foot structure, and so on, on the purely pragmatic basis
of what I have found to be easiest to convey to the students.
I have ignored acoustic phonetics for the very simple reason
that our department lacks a phonetics lab, and I have not
included distinctive features, since the mere sight of arrays of
features marked with ‘+’ and ‘−’ symbols seems to render
large numbers of my first-year students dizzy (particularly
those majoring in English literature). I have also excluded
feature geometry, the mora, under-specification and a great
many other theoretical/descriptive notions, in an attempt to
pare the subject down to a bare minimum of these.
The first four chapters are deliberately very short indeed,
and contain only the most elementary introduction to
articulatory phonetics. My aim there is to offer the student a
gentle introduction to the course. I have spread the introduction
of the phonemic principle over two chapters, since, in my
experience, students find their first encounter with these ideas
something of a quantum leap. The chapters on word stress,
rhythm, connected speech phenomena and accent variation
contain a very stripped-down, minimal, account of those
subjects; I hope that there is enough there to act as a
foundation for those students who wish to study these matters
21

in more depth. In the chapter on syllable structure, I have been
a little more ambitious in introducing analytical complexity, on
the assumption that syllable structure is something that
beginning students seem to be able to get the hang of more
easily than, say, rhythm or intonation.
I believe that one of the most important duties of a university
teacher is to induce in the student a sense of critical awareness,
a grasp of argumentation and the role of evidence. On the
other hand, one has to be very wary of introducing students at
the most elementary stage to the idea of competing analyses:
they find it difficult enough to get the hang of one sort of
analysis, without being asked to assess the merits and demerits
of competing analyses (even at the post-elementary stage, most
undergraduates are very resistant to the idea of critically
comparing different analyses). I have tried to overcome this
dilemma by introducing competing analyses and assumptions at
one or two points, while consciously ignoring them elsewhere.
The exercises are meant to be discussed at weekly
seminar/tutorial 
meetings; 
my 
experience 
is 
that, 
if
phonetics/phonology students are not made to do exercises,
they easily come to believe that they have grasped the subject
when in fact they have not. It is my hope that students who
have completed this course would find it possible to tackle
more advanced textbook treatments of these topics, such as
those given by Giegerich (1992) and Spencer (1996). Whether
that hope is fulfilled is, of course, very much an empirical
matter.
Preface for Students
22

This is an elementary introduction to English phonetics and
phonology, designed for those who have no previous
knowledge whatsoever of the subject. It begins with a very
elementary introduction to articulatory phonetics, and then
proceeds to introduce the student to a very simplified account
of some of the main aspects of the phonological structure of
present-day English.
It is arguable that there are two main questions one might
ask in studying the English language: what is it about English
that makes it a language (as opposed to, say, a non-human
communication system), and what is it about English that
makes it English (as opposed to, say, French or Korean)? This
book attempts to provide the beginnings of an answer to both
of those questions, with respect to one aspect of English: its
phonology.
Thus, although the subject matter of this book is English,
there is reference to the phonology of other languages at
several points, often in contrastive exercises which are
designed to bring out one or more differences between English
and another language. These contrastive exercises are included
because native speakers of English, who often have little or no
detailed knowledge of other languages, tend to assume that the
phonology of English is the way it is as a matter of natural fact,
a matter of necessity. For many such speakers, it will seem
somehow natural, for instance, that the presence of the sound
[f] as opposed to [v] functions to signal a difference in meaning
(as in fan vs van). To the English speaker, [f] and [v] will
therefore seem easily distinguishable, and that too will appear
to be a natural fact. But the fact that these sounds have that
function in English is a conventional, not a necessary or natural
fact: English need not have been that way, and may not always
23

be that way. Just as one can gain a new perspective on one’s
own culture by learning about other cultures, so one can gain a
fresh perspective on one’s native language by learning a little
about other languages. One can also, in learning about other
cultures, gain some sense of what human cultures are like.
Similarly, one can begin to get a sense of what human language
phonologies are like by learning in what respects they resemble
each other. Those points of resemblance concern general
organizational properties of human language phonologies, such
as the phonemic principle and the principles of syllable
structure.
Reading a textbook on linguistic analysis is not like reading a
novel. It is vital that the student complete the exercises at the
end of each chapter before proceeding to the next chapter: they
are designed to get the student to apply the ideas introduced in
the chapter. The reader will not have properly grasped the
ideas contained in this, or any other, textbook on phonology by
simply sitting back in an armchair and reading the text, even if
the student is under the impression of having understood the
ideas. Vast numbers of students who have attempted to master
linguistic analysis without actually doing it have ended up with
disastrous exam results: no one ever became any good at
linguistic analysis without actually doing it.
Like most linguistics textbooks, this book is cumulative in
nature: what has been introduced in earlier chapters is
presupposed in later chapters. It is fatal, therefore, to let
several weeks go by without doing the reading and the
exercises, in the hope of catching up later: the result is very
likely to be that you will simply find yourself out of your
depth, even though this is an elementary textbook. It is simply
not possible to dip in and out of a linguistic analysis textbook,
24

no matter how basic, in the way that one might dip in and out
of a dictionary or an encyclopedia.
This book is designed to cater for students who, in all
probability, will not pursue their studies in English phonetics
and phonology any further. However, students who will be
proceeding to a more advanced level should be able to tackle
more advanced textbook treatments of these topics, such as
those given by Giegerich and by Spencer (see Suggested
Further Reading at the end of the book). Those students
should also find it easier to tackle one of the many
introductions to general phonological theory which are not
focused on English (again, see Suggested Further Reading). In
order to prepare such students for more advanced study, I
have introduced, at some points, an indication of some of the
difficulties with some of the assumptions made in this
textbook, or a brief discussion of competing analyses. Although
this textbook merely scratches the surface of the subject
matter, I hope that there is enough here to make the subject of
phonology seem intriguing to the student who intends to pursue
his or her studies.
It is my hope that this book will be of some use to teachers
of English as a foreign language, although it is not designed
specifically for such readers. I am always surprised to discover
how little in the way of knowledge of English phonetics and
phonology such teachers often have. I have no experience of
such teaching, and while I make no suggestions as to how the
notions introduced in this book might be put to use in the
TEFL classroom, I find it hard to believe that a knowledge of
the basics of English phonetics and phonology could fail to be
useful to the TEFL teacher in some way, even if only as
background knowledge which extends the teacher’s knowledge
25

of English. I also hope that some of the contrastive exercises
might help suggest ways in which one’s native language
phonology can interfere with one’s attempt to acquire English
as a second language.
Newcastle, February 1999
26

Preface to the Second Edition
The first edition of this book was written while I was teaching
in an English university. Since then, I have moved to the
English department at Montpellier University, in France. While
I always had non-native speakers of English in my classes at
Newcastle University, most of my students were native
speakers of English; now, the vast majority of my students are
not native speakers of English. Most are French, but there are
also Spanish, Portuguese, Greek, German, Dutch, Polish,
Russian and Bulgarian students, among others. The book has
changed as a result: it is more orientated towards learners of
English as a foreign language, but it is still useful for native
speakers, I believe.
The main changes to the text concern the later chapters:
chapters 8, 9 and 10 have been entirely rewritten, and there is
a new chapter (chapter 11) on the relationship between spelling
and pronunciation, known as grapho-phonemics. Teachers
whose students are native speakers of English may choose to
skip this chapter, but it could prove useful for students who
wish to go on to teach English as a foreign language. I have
expanded the appendix (renamed as chapter 13) to cover
additional varieties of English. There are now sound files which
accompany exercises, the treatment of intonation, and the
description of some of the varieties of English given here: these
are marked in the margins with a headphones symbol.
I have insisted on retaining practice at phonetic transcription,
for two reasons. Firstly, I believe that it reinforces the
27

distinction between phonetic transcription, based on listening to
speech sounds, and phonological analysis, in which phonemes
(as conceived of here) are not speech sounds, and cannot be
heard. Secondly, I hope that some readers of this book will go
on to engage in the empirical study of varieties of English,
which typically involves both listening carefully to, and
phonetically transcribing, recordings of speakers of various
accents, and also engaging with theoretical issues in the
analysis of those accents. The phonetic transcription exercises
are now based on audio recordings.
The book is not intended as an introduction to phonological
theory; some books of that sort are listed in the Suggested
Further Reading. Inevitably, I have had to draw on notions
proposed in various theoretical frameworks. Any proposed
distinction between theory and description is fraught with
difficulties: there can be no description without theoretical
assumptions, as the philosopher of science Karl Popper pointed
out. However, in my view, some kind of distinction between
theory and description must be upheld. My aims here are
primarily descriptive.
Any 
queries 
and/or 
corrections 
can 
be 
sent 
to:
philip.carr@univ-montp3.fr
Montpellier, December 2011
28

Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements, First
Edition
I am grateful to several cohorts of students in the Department
of English Literary and Linguistic Studies at Newcastle
University whose feedback has been valuable. I am also
indebted to Patrick Honeybone, Maria Maza, Irenie Rowley
and Charles Prescott, who acted as tutors to my students, and
whose comments on several drafts have proved most helpful.
Thanks too to my colleague Karen Corrigan, who commented
on an early draft. Many years ago, in a small mud house on an
island on the White Nile, I introduced James Dickins to the
elements of phonetic description. He has kindly reciprocated
by supplying me with the Arabic data on p. 40, for which I
thank him. I also owe a debt of gratitude to the seven
anonymous reviewers of my original proposal for their
comments, and to Steve Smith, Mary Riso and Beth Remmes
at Blackwell for their patience and encouragement. They may
well be surprised that it took so long to write such a short
book; I can, however, console myself with the fact that I do
not have to offer the (perhaps apocryphal) apology: ‘I am sorry
this book is so long; I did not have the time to write a shorter
one.’ Finally, many thanks to Blackwell’s reader, Andrew
Spencer, whose intelligent, informed and insightful comments
on the pre-final draft were immensely helpful. He is not, of
course, responsible for any remaining inadequacies in the text.
29

Acknowledgements, Second
Edition
I am grateful to Jacques Durand and Anne Przewozny, fellow
co-directors of the PAC project (La Phonologie de l’anglais
contemporain), and to Raphaël Dommange for permission to
use some of their PAC recordings.
Thanks to my ex-Masters student Cécile Montforte for
allowing me to use some of her PAC data from her dissertation
‘Accent change and language attitudes in Scotland: a socio-
linguistic investigation of Glasgow middle-class speakers’
(Université Montpellier II, 2011).
I am grateful to Francis Nolan, professor of phonetics at
Cambridge University and principal investigator of the IViE
project (Intonational Variation in English), for permission to
use, for educational purposes, two sound files from the IViE
corpus, collected as part of the ESRC project R000237145
‘English Intonation in the British Isles’.
Many thanks to my friend and colleague Nick Myers, of the
Université Paul Valéry here in Montpellier, to Inès Brulard and
to my Masters student Alison Gilbreath for taking the time and
trouble to record exercise material for me.
I thank two anonymous readers of the draft chapters for
their detailed comments.
I thank Danielle Descoteaux and Julia Kirk at Wiley-
Blackwell for their patience and encouragement. I also thank
Colleen Fitzgerald for permission to use the written passage
which she constructed for the recordings of Texan English, my
copy-editor Fiona Sewell for her help with the draft text and
Leah Morin for her help with the proofs.
30

Figure 1 The organs of speech
31

32

Figure 2 The International Phonetic Alphabet (Department of
Theoretical and Applied Linguistics, School of English,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki 54124,
Greece)
33

34

1
English Phonetics: Consonants
(i)
1.1 Airstream and
Articulation
Speech sounds are made by modifying an airstream. The
airstream we will be concerned with in this book involves the
passage of air from the lungs out through the oral and nasal
cavities (see figure 1). There are many points at which that
stream of air can be modified, and several ways in which it can
be modified (i.e. constricted in some way). The first point at
which the flow of air can be modified, as it passes from the
lungs, is in the larynx (you can feel the front of this, the
Adam’s apple, protruding slightly at the front of your throat;
see figure 1), in which are located the vocal folds (or vocal
cords). The vocal folds may lie open, in which case the
airstream passes through them unimpeded. Viewed from
above, the vocal folds, when they lie open, look like this:
Open vocal folds
35

The vocal folds may be brought together so that they are
closed, and no air may flow through them from the lungs:
Closed vocal folds
One way in which the outgoing stream of air may be
modified is by applying a certain level of constant muscular
pressure sufficient to close the vocal folds along their length,
but only just; the build-up of air pressure underneath this
closure is sufficient, given the degree of muscular pressure, to
force that closure open, but the air pressure then drops, and
the muscular pressure causes the folds to close again. The
sequence is then repeated, very rapidly, and results in what is
called vocal fold vibration. You should be able to feel this
vibration if you put your fingers to your larynx and produce the
sound which is written as <z> in the word hazy (although you
will probably also feel vibration elsewhere in your head).
Sounds which are produced with this vocal fold vibration are
said to be voiced sounds, whereas sounds produced without
such vibration are said to be voiceless.
36

To transcribe speech sounds, phoneticians use the
International Phonetic Alphabet (the IPA: see figure 2); the IPA
symbol for the sound written <z> in hazy is [z]. You should be
able to feel the presence of vibration in [z] if you put your
fingers to your larynx and produce [z], then [s] (as in miss),
then [z] again: [z] is voiced, whereas [s] is voiceless. This
distinction will constitute the first of three descriptive
parameters by means of which we will describe a given
consonantal speech sound: we will say, for any given
consonant, whether it is voiced or voiceless.
1.2 Place of Articulation
We will refer to the points at which the flow of air can be
modified as places of articulation. We have just identified the
vocal folds as a place of articulation; since the space between
the vocal cords is referred to as the glottis, we will refer to
sounds produced at this place of articulation as glottal sounds.
There are many other places of articulation; we will identify a
further seven.
Firstly, sounds in which the airflow is modified by forming a
constriction between the lower lip and the upper lip are
referred to as bilabial sounds. An example is the first sound in
pit.
A bilabial sound: the first sound in pit
37

Secondly, sounds in which there is a constriction between
the lower lip and the upper teeth are referred to as labio-
dental sounds. An example is the first sound in fit.
A labio-dental sound: the first sound in fit
Thirdly, sounds in which there is a constriction between the
tip of the tongue and the upper teeth are referred to as dental
sounds. An example is the first sound in thin.
A dental sound: the first sound in thin
38

For the remaining places of articulation, let us distinguish
between the tip, the blade of the tongue, the front of the
tongue and the back of the tongue (as in figure 1). Let us also
distinguish various points along the upper part of the mouth.
We will identify four different areas: the alveolar ridge (the
hard, bony ridge behind the teeth; see figure 1), the hard
palate (the hard, bony part of the roof of the mouth; see figure
1), the palato-alveolar (or post-alveolar) region1 (the area in
between the alveolar ridge and the hard palate), and the velum
(the soft part at the back of the roof of the mouth, also known
as the soft palate; see figure 1).
Sounds in which there is a constriction between the blade or
tip of the tongue and the alveolar ridge are called alveolar
sounds. An example is the first sound in sin.
An alveolar sound: the first sound in sin
39

Sounds in which there is a constriction between the blade of
the tongue and the palato-alveolar (or post-alveolar) region are
called palato-alveolar sounds. An example is the first sound in
ship.
A palato-alveolar sound: the first sound in ship
Sounds in which there is a constriction between the front of
the tongue and the hard palate are called palatal sounds. An
example is the first sound in yes (although this may be less
obvious to you; we will return to this sound below).
40

A palatal sound: the first sound in yes
Sounds in which there is a constriction between the back of
the tongue and the velum are called velar sounds. An example
is the first sound in cool.
A velar sound: the first sound in cool
41

1.3 Manner of Articulation:
Stops, Fricatives and
Approximants
We have now identified eight places of articulation: glottal,
bilabial, labio-dental, dental, alveolar, palato-alveolar, palatal
and velar. For any given sound we will say whether it is voiced
or voiceless, and what its place of articulation is. But to
distinguish between the full range of speech sounds, we will
require a third descriptive parameter: manner of articulation.
To identify the manner in which a sound is articulated, we will
identify three different degrees of constriction (complete
closure, close approximation and open approximation), and
thus three different categories of consonant: stops, fricatives
and approximants.
1.3.1 Stops
The articulators in question may form a stricture of complete
closure; this is what happens when one produces the first
sound in pit. Here the lower and upper lips completely block
the flow of air from the lungs; that closure may then be
released, as it is in pit, and may then produce a sudden outflow
of air. Sounds which are produced with complete closure are
referred to as stops (or plosives).
We may describe the first sound in pit as a voiceless bilabial
stop (transcribed as [p]) and we will henceforth identify all
consonants with three-term labels of this sort. The consonant
42

in abbey is also a bilabial stop, but differs from that in pit: it is
voiced. This consonant (transcribed as [b]) is a voiced bilabial
stop.
The first sound in tin is a voiceless alveolar stop; it is
transcribed as [t]. Its voiced counterpart is the consonant in
ado. This sound, the voiced alveolar stop, is transcribed as [d].
The first sound in cool is a voiceless velar stop; it is
transcribed as [k]. Its voiced counterpart, the voiced velar stop,
is transcribed as [g]; an example is the consonant in ago.
We have now identified bilabial, alveolar and velar stops;
stops may be made at many other places of articulation, but we
will ignore those, as they are not relevant to the study of
English. There is one further stop which we must mention,
however, as it is very common in the speech of most speakers
of English. This is the glottal stop (transcribed as [ʔ]). It is
made by forming a constriction of complete closure between
the vocal folds. This is the sound made instead of [t] in many
Scottish and Cockney pronunciations of, for example, the word
butter. We will see that it is present in the speech of almost
every speaker of English, no matter what the accent. There is
no question of describing the glottal stop as voiced or voiceless,
since it is articulated in the glottis itself.
1.3.2 Fricatives
Let us now distinguish between complete closure and another,
less extreme, degree of constriction: close approximation.
Sounds which are produced with this kind of constriction entail
a bringing together of the two articulators to the point where
the airflow is not quite fully blocked: enough of a gap remains
43

for air to escape, but the articulators are so close together that
friction is created as the air escapes. Sounds of this sort are
referred to as fricatives.
The first sound in fin is created by bringing the lower lip
close to the upper teeth in a constriction of close
approximation. This sound is a voiceless labio-dental fricative
(transcribed as [f]). Its voiced counterpart (the voiced labio-
dental fricative, transcribed as [v]) is the consonant in Eva.
The first sound in thin is created by bringing the tip of the
tongue into a constriction of close approximation with the
upper teeth. This sound is a voiceless dental fricative,
transcribed as [θ]. Its voiced counterpart, the voiced dental
fricative (transcribed as [ð]) is, for some speakers, the first
sound in the word that.2
The first sound in sin is created by bringing the tip or blade
of the tongue into a constriction of close approximation with
the alveolar ridge. This sound, transcribed as [s], is a voiceless
alveolar fricative. Its voiced counterpart, the voiced alveolar
fricative (transcribed as [z]) is the consonant in zoo.
The first sound in ship is created by bringing the blade of the
tongue into a constriction of close approximation with the
palato-alveolar region. This sound, transcribed as [ʃ], is a
voiceless palato-alveolar fricative. Its voiced counterpart,
transcribed as [ʒ], is the second consonant in seizure.
Fricatives may be articulated at any point of articulation, but
many of those sounds are irrelevant to the study of English.
However, we will mention three.
One is the voiceless velar fricative [x], found in the speech
44

of many Scots, in words such as loch. Another is the voiceless
fricative [ʍ], again found in the speech of many Scots, as in
words like whale (as opposed to wail) and which (as opposed
to witch); its place of articulation is labial-velar (explained in
1.3.3).
A third is the glottal fricative [h], as in the first sound in hit.
This sound is produced by bringing the vocal cords into a
constriction of close approximation, so that friction is
produced. As the vocal cords are not vibrating, we will take it
that this is a voiceless sound.
1.3.3 Approximants
The least radical degree of constriction occurs when the
articulators come fairly close together, but not sufficiently close
together to create friction. This kind of stricture is called open
approximation. Consonants produced in this way are called
approximants.
The first sound in yes is an approximant. It is produced by
bringing the front of the tongue close to the hard palate.
Although the sides of the tongue are in a constriction of
complete closure with the upper gums, the air escapes along a
central groove in which the front of the tongue is not close
enough to the hard palate to create friction. This sound,
transcribed 
as 
[j], 
is 
a 
voiced 
palatal 
approximant.
Approximants are normally voiced, so we will not discuss any
voiceless counterparts for these sounds.
The first sound in many English speakers’ pronunciation of
rip, rope, rat, etc. is an approximant. It is produced by bringing
the blade of the tongue into a constriction of open
45

approximation with the alveolar ridge. This approximant,
transcribed as [ɹ], is referred to as an alveolar approximant. As
with [j], the sides of the tongue form a constriction of complete
closure with the gums at the sides of the mouth, but the air
escapes along a central groove without creating friction. For
most speakers (and in varying degrees, depending on the
accent), the tongue body is somewhat retracted when [ɹ] is
uttered; it is therefore often referred to as a post-alveolar
approximant, but ‘alveolar approximant’ will suffice for our
purposes.3
We will be looking at more English approximants in chapter
2. For the moment, let us identify one further such sound, the
sound at the beginning of wet. In producing this sound, the lips
form a constriction of open approximation: there is no friction
produced. But its articulation is more complicated than that of
[j], the palatal approximant, since it also involves another
articulation, between the back of the tongue and the velum (i.e.
a velar articulation). We will therefore refer to it as a voiced
labial-velar approximant; it is transcribed as [w].
Notes
1 Many phonologists and phoneticians use the term ‘palato-
alveolar’, but the chart of symbols used by the International
Phonetics Association uses the term ‘post-alveolar’. It will
suffice for our purposes if the student takes the two terms to
be interchangeable. There are no rigid physiological divisions
between the alveolar ridge and the hard palate; the transition
from one to the other is a continuum. And the range of
articulations which can be made in between the two is
46

relatively varied, leading some phoneticians to distinguish
alveo-palatal from palato-alveolar articulations. We will
simplify by ignoring these details.
2 Many speakers of English do not have a voiced dental
fricative; rather, the sound lacks friction: it is a voiced dental
approximant.
3 The articulation of an [ɹ] kind of articulation in some
American and West Country accents is also referred to by
some as retroflex approximant. The term ‘retroflex’ means
that the blade and tip of the tongue are curled upwards and
backwards to some extent, so that the underside of a part of
the tongue forms the relevant articulation. Somewhat
inaccurately, we will use [ɹ] for these sounds.
Exercises
1 Give the appropriate three-term description for each of
the following sounds (e.g. [k]: voiceless velar stop):
[θ]   [b]   [f]   [ʃ]   [j]   [t]
2 Give the appropriate phonetic symbol for each of the
following sounds:
(a) a voiced palato-alveolar fricative
(b) a voiced alveolar stop
(c) a voiced velar stop
(d) a voiced dental fricative
(e) a voiced labio-dental fricative
3 What phonetic property distinguishes each of the
following pairs of sounds (e.g. [p] and [b]: voicing; [s] and
[ʃ]: place of articulation; [t] and [s]: manner of
47

articulation)?
(a) [k] and [g]
(b) [b] and [d]
(c) [d] and [z]
(d) [z] and [ʒ]
(e) [ʃ] and [ʒ]
(f) [d] and [g]
4 Listen to Track 1.1 at www.wiley.com/go/carrphonetics.
Which of the words on the recording begin with a
fricative? The words are listed below.
ship   psychology   veer   round   plot   philosophy   think
5 Listen to Track 1.2. Which of the words on the
recording end with a fricative? The words are listed below.
stack   whale   swim   epitaph   half   halve   hash   haze
6 Listen to Track 1.3. Which of the words on the
recording begin with a stop? The words are listed below.
philanderer   plasterer   parsimonious   ptarmigan   psyc
ghoulish   gruelling   guardian   thick   tickle   bin   drea
7 Describe the position and action of the articulators
during the production of the following sounds (e.g. [d]: the
blade of the tongue forms a constriction of complete
closure with the alveolar ridge; the vocal cords are
vibrating):
[v]   [θ]   [k]   [b]
48

2
English Phonetics: Consonants
(ii)
2.1 Central vs Lateral
In discussing the alveolar approximant [ɹ], we said that the air
escapes along a central groove (of the tongue, in this case; the
same kind of groove can be formed by the lips). This is true
for all of the fricatives and approximants described in chapter
1: they are all central fricatives and approximants. However, it
is possible to produce fricatives and approximants in which this
is not the case. For instance, in the first sound in lift, the centre
of the blade of the tongue forms a stricture of complete closure
with part of the alveolar ridge, but the articulation which
‘counts’ is that between the sides of the tongue and the
alveolar ridge. Since the sides of the tongue form a constriction
of open articulation with the alveolar ridge, and no friction is
created, we refer to this sound (transcribed as [l]) as a voiced
alveolar lateral approximant. Since English fricatives and
approximants are typically central, we will use the term ‘lateral’
for laterals, and omit the term ‘central’ in describing central
fricatives and approximants in English speech. The sounds [l]
and [ɹ] are, clearly, quite similar: both are approximants, both
49

are voiced, both are alveolar. The principal difference is that
the former is lateral and the latter central.1
2.2 Taps and Trills
We have said that, for a great many speakers of English, the
sound at the beginning of words such as rat, rope, reap, etc. is
a post-alveolar approximant: [ɹ]. The same is true of the sound
which occurs after stops in words such as prude, true, creep,
etc. However, some speakers utter, not an approximant, but a
sound which is very like a voiced alveolar stop of very short
duration. Many Scots utter this sound, rather than [ɹ], after
stops, as in the words just cited. During the articulation of this
sound, the blade of the tongue comes into a momentary
constriction of complete closure with the alveolar ridge. This
sound, transcribed as [ɾ], is referred to as a voiced alveolar tap
(or flap). This is also the sound that many American speakers
have instead of [t] or [d] in words such as Betty, witty, rider,
heady, etc.
Speakers of certain accents of English may utter neither an
[ɾ] nor an [ɹ] in words such as rat, rope, reap and prude, true,
creep, but a sound referred to as a voiced alveolar trill. Trills
are produced by holding one articulator (e.g. the blade of the
tongue) next to the other (e.g. the alveolar ridge) in a
constriction of complete closure, but without the same
muscular pressure as one finds in stops. The result is that air
pressure builds up behind the closure and forces it open; the air
pressure then reduces, and the muscular pressure again creates
a constriction of complete closure. This sequence may be
50

repeated in quick succession, producing, in the case of an
alveolar trill, a series of taps of the tongue against the alveolar
ridge. The alveolar trill is transcribed as [r], but is relatively
rare. Scots are often said to produce this sound; however, most
speakers of Scottish varieties of English typically produce, not
an alveolar trill, but an alveolar tap.
2.3 Secondary Articulation
We have said that the lateral approximant [l] is alveolar.
However, laterals may also be produced with an additional
articulation, such as one formed between the back of the
tongue and the velum, i.e. a velar articulation. When this
happens, we may distinguish between the alveolar articulation
as the primary articulation and the velar one as the
secondary articulation. Where a secondary articulation is
velar, this process is referred to as velarization: we say that
the lateral is velarized. A velarized lateral approximant is
transcribed using the velarization diacritic, thus: [ɫ]. This sound
is often referred to as ‘dark l’.2 Where a secondary articulation
is palatal (formed between the front of the tongue and the hard
palate), this process is referred to as palatalization; we say
that the lateral is palatalized. A palatalized lateral is transcribed
using the palatalization diacritic, thus: [lj]. The term ‘clear l’ is
often used to refer to [lj], or to [l] (neither palatalized nor
‘dark’). In subsequent chapters, we will consider the status of
‘dark l’ and ‘clear l’ in different accents of English.
51

2.4 Affricates
We have, thus far, distinguished three classes of consonant
according to degree of constriction: stops, fricatives and
approximants. Consider the first sound in chip: it is like a stop
in that there is complete closure between the blade of the
tongue and the palato-alveolar region. However, it is like a
fricative in that it clearly involves friction. That friction occurs
during the release phase of the closure, which we referred to in
1.3.1. Sounds produced with a constriction of complete closure
followed by a release phase in which friction occurs are called
affricates. We might say that one of the main differences
(place of articulation apart) between the first sound in tip and
the first sound in chip is that, during the release phase of the [t]
in tip, there is no friction of the sort one finds during the
release phase of the first sound in chip. We might therefore
think of affricates as stops with a slow, fricative, release phase.
The affricate in chip is a voiceless palato-alveolar affricate,
transcribed as [tʃ]. Its voiced counterpart is [dʒ], the first
sound in jury, joy, etc.3
These two affricates occur in the speech of most speakers of
English. In later chapters, we will examine some other
affricates which occur in the speech of speakers of certain
accents of English.
2.5 Aspiration
The first stop in pit, we said, is a voiceless bilabial stop. So too
52

is the first stop in spit. But the bilabial stop in pit differs
phonetically from the bilabial stop in spit: if you hold the palm
of your hand up close to your mouth when uttering pit, you
will feel a stronger puff of air on releasing the bilabial stop than
you will when you utter spit. That ‘stronger puff of air’
phenomenon is called aspiration: we say that the bilabial stop
in pit is an aspirated voiceless stop, whereas the stop in spit is
unaspirated. Aspirated voiceless stops are transcribed with the
aspiration diacritic ([ʰ]), so that the bilabial stop in pit is
transcribed as [pʰ]. Unaspirated stops are transcribed without
that diacritic, so that the bilabial stop in spit is transcribed as
[p].
2.6 Nasal Stops
We have been making an assumption in our discussion thus far,
concerning the position of the velum in the production of the
speech sounds we have described. We have assumed that, in
all of these sounds, the air from the lungs is escaping only
through the mouth (the oral cavity). This is true if the velum is
in the raised position, such that it prevents the flow of air out
through the nasal cavity (see figure 1). In all of the sounds
discussed thus far, the velum is indeed raised: we describe all
such sounds as oral sounds. But the velum may be lowered, to
allow escape of air through the nasal cavity (see figure 1).
Sounds produced with the velum lowered, and with air
escaping through the nasal cavity alone, are referred to as
nasal stops.4 These may occur at most places of articulation;
53

let us consider those which are relevant for the study of
English.
While nasal stops may be either voiced or voiceless, they are
typically voiced in most human languages; we will therefore
ignore voiceless nasal stops and use the term ‘nasal stop’ to
imply ‘voiced nasal stop’.
Bilabial nasal stops (transcribed [m]) entail, as one would
expect, complete closure between the lips, voicing, and escape
of the air through the nasal cavity. An example is the first
consonant in map.
Labio-dental nasal stops (transcribed [ɱ]) entail complete
closure between the lower lip and the upper teeth, voicing, and
escape of the air through the nasal cavity. An example is the
second consonant in pamphlet. In English, they occur before
labio-dental sounds, as in this case. The nasal stop articulation
in cases such as these reflects a process of assimilation.
Assimilation processes are processes in which one sound
becomes similar to an adjacent sound. In this case, the nasal is
assimilated to the following fricative, in the sense that it ‘takes
on’ the place of articulation of the fricative. Such processes
involve a principle of ease of articulation. In this case, if the
nasal in pamphlet is articulated at the same place as the
following fricative, this saves the speaker the articulatory effort
of moving from a bilabial to a labio-dental articulation. We will
return to such processes in chapter 6.
Dental nasal stops (transcribed as [n̪ ]) entail complete
closure between the tip of the tongue and the upper teeth,
voicing, and escape of the air through the nasal cavity. An
example is the second consonant in tenth. As in this case, they
occur before other dental sounds, and this too is a matter of
54

assimilation involving place of articulation.
Alveolar nasal stops (transcribed as [n]) entail complete
closure between the blade of the tongue and the alveolar ridge,
voicing, and escape of the air through the nasal cavity. An
example is the first sound in not.
Velar nasal stops (transcribed as [ŋ]) entail complete closure
between the back of the tongue and the velum, voicing, and
escape of the air through the nasal cavity. An example is the
last sound in sing or the nasal stop as it is often articulated
(especially in faster or more casual speech styles) in the word
incredible. Once again, the latter case involves assimilation.
Notes
1 The central approximant [ɹ] also differs from [l] in having
tongue body retraction and lip rounding. We will see shortly
that alveolar laterals may be produced with retraction too.
2 The term ‘dark l’ can also be used to refer to lateral
approximants in which the body/back of the tongue is
retracted and/or lowered. Accents of English vary with
respect to the exact articulatory nature of their ‘dark l’s: some
are velarized, while others have no velar articulation, but
have, instead, retraction and/or lowering of the back/body of
the tongue. Such retraction can lead to loss of alveolar
contact, and thus to [l]-vocalization, in which the articulation
becomes vowel-like.
3 Some authors transcribe [tʃ] as [č] and [dʒ] as [ǰ]. We
should, if we were to stick strictly to the conventions of the
International Phonetics Association, transcribe both affricates
55

with a ‘tie bar’ above the two symbols; we depart here from
the conventions of the IPA chart, which does not contain an
‘affricate’ category.
4 The term ‘nasalized’, as opposed to ‘nasal’, is used to
describe sounds in which air escapes through both cavities,
the oral and the nasal. The term ‘nasal’ is used to describe
sounds in which the air escapes through the nasal cavity
alone.
Exercises
1 Listen to Track 2.1 at www.wiley.com/go/carrphonetics.
For each of the words on the recording, identify (a) any
oral stops, (b) any fricatives, (c) any approximants, (d)
any affricates and (e) any nasals. For each sound that you
identify, say whether it is voiced or voiceless and what its
place of articulation is (e.g. the word stop: voiceless
alveolar stop [t] and voiceless bilabial stop [p]; voiceless
alveolar fricative [s]; no approximants, affricates or
nasals). The words are:
bring   licking   fever   thinking   assure   measure   heate
2 Listen to Track 2.2. Which of the words on the
recording begins with an affricate, and which (if any) with
a stop?
tune   chip   dune   June
Many speakers of English typically utter words like tune
56

and dune with an affricate at the beginning of the word.
This 
means 
that 
dune 
and 
June 
are 
typically
indistinguishable. None the less, when asked in a
phonetics class whether they utter words such as dune
with an affricate, such speakers often deny that they do.
These 
speakers 
typically 
have 
a 
more 
careful
pronunciation of words such as tune and dune, in which
there is a [j].
Notice, however, that there is no such more careful
pronunciation of words like chip and June: one never
hears these pronounced with [tj] and [dj]. In order to
explain the difference between dune and June, we need to
say that the speaker in some sense intends to utter [dj] in
dune, but that ease of articulation results in a palato-
alveolar affricated release of the stop closure, rather than a
transition from an alveolar closure to a stricture of open
approximation between the front of the tongue and the
hard palate. In the case of June and chip, the intended
articulation is a palato-alveolar affricate.
If you are a speaker of General American, you may well
never utter a [j] in words like tune and dune, in which
case you will utter a stop followed by a vowel. However,
you may well also have been told at school that the
‘correct’ pronunciation of such words has a [j] after the
stop. Your speech may well vary with respect to the
presence or absence of the [j]. If your speech does vary in
this way, how do you pronounce noon?
57

3 Listen to Track 2.3. Give a phonetic transcription of
each of the words on the recording, using a ‘V’ for the
vowels. The words are:
lull   pear   reap   throws   think   misjudges   churches   
You may well have noticed that the nasal stop in think is
velar, rather than alveolar. It requires considerable
conscious effort to utter that nasal stop as alveolar, and
when one does so, the resulting pronunciation sounds
quite unnatural. This appears to be the result of a process
of anticipatory assimilation: the tongue adopts the
articulatory position for the velar stop [k] during the
pronunciation of the nasal.
But what about the nasal-plus-velar stop sequence in
incorrect? Many speakers of English find it easier to utter
an alveolar, rather than a velar, nasal there, despite the
fact that cases like incorrect also contain a sequence of a
nasal stop followed by a velar stop. Do you have any
hunches as to why the two cases should be different?
58

3
English Phonetics: Vowels (i)
3.1 The Primary Cardinal
Vowels
Let us begin by assuming that all vowels are voiced and are
articulated with a constriction of open approximation. We will
also assume, for the moment, that all vowels are oral sounds
(i.e. that the velum is raised during their production). The
range of positions which the tongue can occupy within the oral
cavity while remaining in a constriction of open approximation
is quite large. Let us call the entire available space for such
articulations the vowel space. We will require a means of
plotting the point at which a given vowel is articulated in the
vowel space. In order to do this, we will appeal to an idealized
chart of that space, as follows (this chart is repeated in the IPA
chart in figure 2):
(1) The vowel space and the primary cardinal vowels
59

In this diagram, we represent the vowel space along two
dimensions. The first is the high/low dimension (also referred
to as the close/open dimension), depicting the height of the
body of the tongue during the articulation of a vowel (i.e.
depicting vowel height). This is represented as the vertical axis
in the diagram. The second is the front/back dimension,
depicting the extent to which the body of the tongue lies
towards the front of the vowel space. This is represented as
the horizontal axis in the diagram. We may identify three
arbitrary points along this dimension: front, central and back.
In using these two dimensions, we can say, for any given
vowel, how high in the vowel space it is articulated, and
whether it is a front, central or back vowel. To these two
descriptive parameters, we will add a third, which refers to lip
position: we will say, for a given vowel, whether, during its
articulation, the lips are rounded or not. We will refer to the
former sort of vowel as a rounded vowel and the latter as an
unrounded vowel.
It is convenient to identify several points along the perimeter
of the vowel space. Once we have done this, we can plot the
location of any given vowel in relation to those points. Vowels
articulated at those points are called the cardinal vowels. We
will now identify eight of them.
60

Let us begin with the vowel which is produced when the lips
are unrounded and the tongue is located as high as possible and
as front as possible, without causing friction, in the vowel
space. This is cardinal vowel no. 1, depicted at the top left-
hand corner of the diagram in (1) above. That vowel is
transcribed as [i]. Using our three descriptive parameters, we
will refer to this as a high front unrounded vowel. We will not
seek to exemplify cardinal vowels with words from English, or
any other language, since, typically, speakers do not utter
vowel sounds which are quite as peripheral in the vowel space
as the cardinal vowels. Rather, we will plot the place of
articulation of English vowels in relation to the cardinal
vowels, using the vowel space diagram as a map of the vowel
space. The vowel in many English speakers’ pronunciation of
the word peep, for instance, is quite close to cardinal vowel no.
1: it too is a high front rounded vowel, but it is not quite as
peripheral as cardinal vowel no. 1: it is typically slightly less
high and slightly less front in its articulation.
Let us now identify the cardinal vowel which lies at the
‘opposite end’ of the vowel space: the vowel which is
produced when the lips are unrounded and the body of the
tongue is as low as possible and as far back as possible,
without causing friction. This is cardinal vowel no. 5. Its
location is depicted at the bottom right-hand corner of the
diagram in (1) above. Transcribed as [ɑ], it is a low back
unrounded vowel.
We have now identified two ‘anchor’ points in the vowel
space; we may now proceed to identify further cardinal vowels
in relation to these. If the lips remain unrounded and the body
of the tongue remains as low as possible in the vowel space (as
for cardinal vowel no. 5), but the tongue is moved as far to the
61

front of that space as is possible without causing friction, then
cardinal vowel no. 4 is produced. It is transcribed as [a].
We have now identified two vowel heights: high and low.
You should be able to feel this difference in tongue height if
you utter cardinal vowel no. 1 followed by cardinal vowel no.
4: the jaw opens considerably and the body of the tongue
lowers considerably as one moves from the former to the
latter. There is a continuum of vowel heights between these
two heights; we will identify two arbitrary points along this
continuum: high-mid and low-mid. If the lips remain
unrounded and the body of the tongue remains as far front as
is possible, but the tongue height is lowered somewhat from
the cardinal vowel no. 1 position, one arrives at the front,
high-mid unrounded vowel known as cardinal vowel no. 2.
This is transcribed as [e].
In retaining the same lip position and the same degree of
frontness, one may lower the body of the tongue further still to
the low-mid position, and arrive at the front low-mid
unrounded vowel known as cardinal vowel no. 3. This is
transcribed as [ε].
If you articulate cardinal vowel no. 1, then cardinal vowels
nos. 2, 3 and 4, you should feel the body of the tongue
lowering progressively. These are all front unrounded vowels:
the difference between them lies in the height of the tongue.
Let us now consider the back cardinal vowels. If the body of
the tongue is as high as possible and as far back as possible
without causing friction, and the lips are, this time, rounded,
then cardinal vowel no. 8 is produced. This high back
rounded vowel is transcribed as [u].
If the lips remain rounded and the tongue remains as far
back as possible, but the tongue height is lowered to the high-
62

mid position, cardinal vowel no. 7 is produced. This high-
mid back rounded vowel is transcribed as [o].
In retaining the same degree of backness and the same lip
position, one may lower the height of the tongue still further, to
the low-mid position, and thus produce the low-mid back
rounded vowel known as cardinal vowel no. 6. This is
transcribed as [ɔ].
You should be able to feel the tongue lowering progressively
as you make the transition from cardinal vowel no. 8, through
cardinal vowel no. 7, to cardinal vowel no. 6; the tongue goes
through the same lowering process as it does for the transition
from cardinal vowel no. 1, through no. 2, to no. 3.
We have now identified the eight primary cardinal vowels.
With these reference points established, we may describe the
articulation of specific English vowels in relation to them. Let
us begin by looking at those referred to as the English short
vowels.
3.2 RP and GA Short Vowels
There is considerable variation in the vowel sounds uttered by
speakers of different accents of English, and we will be
considering that variation in later chapters. For the moment, we
will begin with two particular accents; we will later describe
others. We will, somewhat arbitrarily, begin with the accents
known as Received Pronunciation (RP) and General
American (GA). RP is the accent often referred to as the
‘prestige’ accent in British society and associated with the
speech of the graduates of the English public schools. It is thus
defined largely in terms of the social class of its speakers. We
63

do not select it as one of our starting points for that reason;
rather, we select it as it tends to be the accent which foreign
learners of British English are taught, and has thus been widely
described. GA tends to be defined in terms of the geographical
location, rather than the social class, of its speakers. The term
‘GA’ is an idealization over a group of accents whose speakers
inhabit a vast proportion of the United States: it excludes
Eastern accents such as the New York City accent, and
Southern accents (such as that spoken in Texas).
It has often been pointed out that terms such as ‘RP’ and
‘GA’ entail a great deal of idealization, in that they are used to
cover a variety of somewhat different, if converging, accents.
We accept this as inevitable: it will be true of any term we use
to describe an accent (e.g. ‘New York City’, ‘Cockney’,
‘Scouse’, ‘Geordie’, ‘South African’, etc.) and indeed it is true
of the term ‘accent’ itself. But we need some way of
expressing valid generalizations about the speech sounds which
members of different speech communities utter. For instance, it
is generally true that, while RP speakers pronounce put and
putt differently, many speakers with accents found in the North
of England do not. To refuse to speak of different accents
would be to throw the baby out with the bathwater, and to
deny ourselves the opportunity of expressing statements which
are informative, if subject to certain caveats.
We have said nothing, as yet, about the length of vowels. For
speakers of RP and GA, the vowels in peep and pip differ in
several respects, one of which is vowel length. If you are an
RP or a GA speaker, and you utter the two words, you will
probably agree that the vowel in the former is longer than that
in the latter. We will, accordingly, refer to the former as a long
vowel and the latter as a short vowel. Vowel length is a relative
64

matter: when we say that the vowel in pip is a short vowel, we
are not referring to its duration in milliseconds; rather, we are
saying that it is short in relation to other vowels, such as that in
peep. The vowel in pip is typically articulated with the body of
the tongue fairly front and fairly high, and with the lips
unrounded. We will transcribe that vowel as [ɪ]. While it is a
high front unrounded vowel, it is less high and less front than
the vowel in peep. Its location is depicted in (2) below.
Now consider the vowel in RP and GA speakers’
pronunciation of the vowel in the word put. This is, for many
speakers, a high back rounded vowel, articulated in the region
near to cardinal vowel no. 8. It is similar to the vowel in
school, but less high and less back. It is also shorter than that
in school. We will transcribe this short vowel as [ʊ]; its location
is depicted in (2) below.
For RP and GA speakers, there is a distinction between the
vowel in put and that in putt. Both are short vowels, but they
differ in several respects. Firstly, the latter vowel is unrounded.
Secondly, the vowel in putt is articulated with a fairly low
tongue height: typically, it is just below the low-mid position.
Thirdly, the vowel in putt is located at around the half-way
point on the front/back axis. We will refer to vowels located in
this region as central vowels. We will transcribe this vowel as
[ʌ]; its location is depicted in (2) below.
In both RP and GA, the vowels in aunt and ant differ. Both
vowels are unrounded, but the vowel in ant is shorter than that
in aunt, and the vowel in ant is a low front vowel, whereas that
in aunt is a low back vowel. The low front unrounded vowel in
65

ant is articulated higher and less front than cardinal vowel no.
4. We will transcribe this as [æ]; its location is depicted in (2)
below (although the GA vowel is higher than the RP vowel,
and sounds rather [ε]-like to British speakers).
The short vowel in RP and GA speakers’ pronunciation of
the word bet is a front unrounded vowel, whose height is
somewhere between cardinal vowels nos. 2 and 3. For most
RP and GA speakers, it is closer to cardinal vowel no. 3 than to
cardinal vowel no. 2 in height; it is also somewhat more
centralized than cardinal vowel no. 3. For convenience’ sake,
we will transcribe it as [ε]; its location is depicted in (2) below.
The short vowel in the RP speaker’s pronunciation of the
word pot is a back rounded vowel which is articulated with a
tongue height somewhere between low and lowmid (i.e.
between cardinal vowels nos. 5 and 6). It is transcribed as [ɒ];
its location is given in (2) below. This vowel is absent from the
GA system: GA speakers have the vowel [ɑ] in words such as
pot. [ɑ] is a short back rounded low vowel.
(2) RP and GA short vowels
We have used the words pit, pet, pat, pot, putt and put to
66

illustrate 
these 
vowels, 
since 
these 
words 
differ 
in
pronunciation only with respect to the vowel. In discussing
vowels, we will also adopt the lexical sets adopted by Wells
(1982; see Suggested Further Reading). These are key words
selected by Wells to bring out the similarities and differences
between RP and GA. We will therefore, at times, refer to the
vowel in words such as pit as the KIT vowel. The vowel in
words such as pet we will call the DRESS vowel; words such
as pat have the TRAP vowel; words such as pot have the LOT
vowel; words such as put have the FOOT vowel, and words
such as putt have the STRUT vowel.
There is one further vowel sound, indicated above, which
we must consider at this stage. It is the first vowel sound which
occurs in most speakers’ pronunciation of the word about.
This vowel is referred to as schwa; it is produced without lip
rounding, and with the body of the tongue lying in the most
central part of the vowel space, between high-mid and low-
mid, and between back and front. Schwa is transcribed as [ə].
This vowel is typically even shorter than the short vowels we
have just described, and it differs from those in that it may
never occur in a stressed syllable (in about, it occurs in the
unstressed first syllable; in elephant, it occurs in the unstressed
second syllable; in Belinda, it occurs in the unstressed initial
and final syllables). This vowel occurs in the speech of almost
every speaker of English; in later chapters, we will consider its
relation to English stressed vowels in more detail.
67

Exercises
1 Describe the position of the body of the tongue and the
lips in the production of the following vowels:
[i]   (cardinal vowel no. 1)
[u]  (cardinal vowel no. 8)
[ɑ]  (cardinal vowel no. 5)
2 Give an appropriate vowel symbol for the vowel in each
of the following words, as you would utter them. Say (a)
whether the vowel is rounded or not, (b) how back or
front it is, and (c) how low or high it is (do this in relation
to the cardinal vowels):
pit   apt   stock   bet   put   putt
Note. If you are discussing these exercises in a tutorial
group, you may well already have begun to notice
differences in the speech of the members of the group,
depending on the accents they speak. Clearly, there is little
point, if one has, say, a West Yorkshire or a New York
City accent, in transcribing these words as if one were an
RP or a GA speaker. What you should do is to try to work
out (preferably with the help of a tutor) what the quality
of each vowel is, and to adopt an appropriate phonetic
symbol for that vowel, which you can then use
consistently in your transcriptions. In due course, we will
be examining accent variation in more detail.
3 
Listen 
to 
Track 
3.1 
at
www.wiley.com/go/carrphonetics). 
Give 
a 
phonetic
68

transcription, with as much phonetic detail as possible, for
each of the words you hear:
elephant
   throb   suspicious   unbalanced   encourage
69

4
English Phonetics: Vowels (ii)
4.1 RP and GA Long Vowels
We noted that the RP/GA vowel in put ([ʊ]) is shorter than that
in school; we also said that it is less back and less high than
that in school. We will transcribe the vowel in school as [u:],
where the ‘ : ’ diacritic denotes vowel length. This is a high
back rounded vowel, articulated closer to cardinal vowel 8 than
[ʊ].
The RP/GA short vowel [ɪ], as in fit, which we described in
chapter 3, is a fairly high, fairly front, unrounded vowel. It
differs from the RP/GA vowel in feet, which is longer, more
front and higher. We will transcribe this as [i:]; it is a high front
unrounded vowel which is closer to cardinal vowel 1 than [ɪ].
It is worth noting that in RP and GA, when words such as to
and (s)he are uttered in isolation, they contain, respectively, the
vowels [u:] and [i:], so that to is pronounced in the same way
as two and too. But ‘function’ words like to and (s)he (which
are not nouns, adjectives or verbs) are often uttered without
stress, in which case they may be uttered with a schwa ([ə]),
or in a shortened form, as in to eat (pronounced either as [təi:t]
70

or as [tui:t]) and she wore (pronounced either [ʃəwɔ] or
[ʃiwɔ:]). The shortened form of [i:] is also found in various
suffixes, as in the suffix in witty: [wɪti] and in the suffix in
quickly: [kʰwɪkli]. It occurs too in the unstressed syllable of
words such as pretty: [pʰɹɪti].1
The RP vowel in port and caught is longer than that in pot
and cot; it is a low-mid back rounded vowel, articulated closer
to cardinal vowel 6 than is the [ɒ] in RP pot and cot. We will
transcribe it as [ɔ:]. This is also the vowel which GA speakers
utter in words like caught (although the GA vowel is somewhat
shorter than the RP vowel). Thus, although both GA and RP
speakers distinguish between pairs such as cot and caught, GA
has [ɑ] in cot whereas RP speakers have [ɒ]. In GA, words
such as horse and port, with an [ɹ] after the vowel, are
typically uttered as [hɔɹs] and (see below on /oʊ/ in RP and
GA).
The RP and GA short vowel [æ], as in ant, is, as we have
seen, a fairly low, rather front, unrounded vowel. It differs
from that in aunt, which is a low back unrounded vowel,
articulated in the region of cardinal vowel 5. The RP/GA vowel
in aunt is also longer than the RP/GA vowel in ant. We will
transcribe it as [ɑ:]. Thus, whereas RP has a three-way
distinction between [ɒ], [ɑ:] and [ɔ:], GA has only a two-way
distinction between [ɑ] and [ɔ:]. We will return to this
difference between the accents below.
RP and GA speakers utter a long vowel in words like bird,
heard, dearth, although GA speakers utter an [ɹ] in words such
71

as these, while RP speakers do not. The articulation for this
vowel is pretty much the same as that for schwa: it is central
on both the high/low and front/back dimensions, and is
unrounded. Unlike schwa, it appears in stressed syllables. We
will transcribe it as [ɜ:].
We may depict the approximate areas of articulation of these
vowels in the vowel space as follows:
(1) RP and GA long vowels
We will, following Wells (1982; see Suggested Further
Reading), refer to [i:] as the FLEECE vowel, [u:] as the
GOOSE vowel and [ɜ:] as the NURSE vowel. Wells uses three
key words for the [ɔ:] vowel: THOUGHT, FORCE and
NORTH; we will see why at a later stage. Similarly, Wells uses
three key words for the [ɑ:] vowel: START, BATH and PALM.
One of the reasons for this is that in words of the set BATH,
GA has [æ], whereas RP has [ɑ:], whereas in words of the sets
START and PALM, both GA and RP have [ɑ:].
4.2 RP and GA Diphthongs
72

In all of the RP and GA vowel sounds we have considered thus
far, the articulators remain more or less in the same position
throughout the articulation of the vowel. This means that the
vowel quality (the acoustic effect created during the articulation
of the vowel) remains more or less constant. That kind of
vowel is a monophthong. However, there are vowel sounds in
which this is not the case. This kind of vowel sound, called a
diphthong, entails some kind of change of position of the
articulators during its production, and thus a change in the
vowel quality produced. A diphthong is a vowel whose quality
changes within a syllable. A diphthong is not simply a
sequence of two vowels. For instance, in both the RP and the
GA pronunciations of the word seeing ([si:ɪŋ]), the vowel [i:] is
followed by the vowel [ɪ], but the resulting sequence is not a
diphthong, because the [i:] and the [ɪ] are not in the same
syllable: seeing has two syllables, the first of which ends in [i:]
and the second of which begins with [ɪ].
Let us begin with diphthongs which end in an [ɪ]-like quality.
In the RP and GA pronunciations of words such as sigh, rye,
bide, etc., the vowel begins with an [a]-like quality (in the
region of cardinal vowel 4) and ends in an [ɪ]-like quality. We
will transcribe this as [aɪ].
In the RP and GA pronunciations of say, ray, bayed, etc.,
the vowel begins with an [e]-like quality (in the region of
cardinal vowel 2) and ends in an [ɪ]-like quality. We will
transcribe this as [eɪ]. In words such as hair, the GA
pronunciation is a monophthongal [e], followed by an [ɹ].
In the RP and GA pronunciations of soy, Roy, buoyed, etc.,
the vowel begins with an [ɔ]-like quality (in the region of
73

cardinal vowel 6) and ends in an [ɪ]-like quality. We will
transcribe this as [ɔɪ].
We may represent these diphthongs in the vowel space diagram
as follows:
(2) RP and GA diphthongs ending in [ɪ]
Wells uses the key word FACE for the [eɪ] diphthong,
CHOICE for the [ɔɪ] vowel and PRICE for the [aɪ] vowel; we
will follow this practice when it proves useful.
There are two diphthongs in RP and GA which end in an
[ʊ]-like quality. The first of these begins with a low, rather
back, unrounded quality. It is found in the RP and GA
pronunciations of words such as how, now, loud. We will
transcribe this diphthong as [aʊ].
The second of these diphthongs begins, among GA speakers,
and among more conservative RP speakers, with an [o]-like
quality. It occurs in words such as sew, roe, toad. We will
transcribe this as [oʊ]. Among more modern RP speakers,
words such as these are pronounced with an [ɔʊ]-like quality.2
Words such as sport, uttered with the long vowel [ɔ:] but no [ɹ]
in RP, are uttered with an [o] followed by an [ɹ] in GA.
These two diphthongs may be represented within the vowel
74

space as follows:
(3) RP and GA diphthongs ending in [ʊ]
For these diphthongs, Wells uses the key word MOUTH for
the [aʊ] vowel and GOAT for the [oʊ] diphthong.
Many RP speakers utter a series of diphthongs which end in
an [ə]-like quality, i.e. schwa. Since schwa is pronounced in
the centre of the vowel space, these are often called centring
diphthongs. The first of these diphthongs begins with an [ɪ]-
like quality. It occurs in words such as here and pier. We will
transcribe this as [ɪə].
Another diphthong of this sort begins with an [ε]-like quality
(in the region of cardinal vowel 3). This occurs in the RP
pronunciation of words such as hair and pear. We will
transcribe this as [εə]. Some RP speakers pronounce words of
this sort with [ε:], a long vowel which is not a diphthong at all,
but is more like a long version of a vowel in the region of
cardinal vowel 3.
A third such diphthong begins with an [ʊ]-like quality, and
occurs in words such as tour and pure. We will transcribe this
as [ʊə]. Some RP speakers pronounce some of these words
75

(e.g. moor) as a long monophthong in the region of cardinal
vowel 6. If you encounter this, you may reasonably transcribe
it as [ɔ:].
These three diphthongs may be represented as follows:
(4) RP diphthongs ending in [ə] (centring diphthongs)
These are called centring diphthongs since schwa is located
at the centre of the vowel space. Wells uses the key words
NEAR for the [ɪə] vowel, CURE for the [ʊə] vowel, and
SQUARE for the [εə] vowel. These diphthongs are all absent
in GA. Their presence in RP results from the loss of [ɹ] after
vowels in the historical development of RP: the schwa is, as it
were, the only remaining trace of the [ɹ] which once existed in
the accents from which RP evolved, in the pronunciation of
words such as here, hair and pure, which are pronounced
[hi:ɹ], [heɹ] and [pʰu:ɹ] in GA. In RP, it is common to find a
monophthongal 
variant. 
For 
the 
SQUARE 
vowel 
in
contemporary RP, it is common to find a long monophthong:
[ε:]. For the CURE vowel, many words of that lexical set are
now pronounced by RP speakers with the long monophthong
[ɔ:], as in the word sure, pronounced [ʃɔ:].
76

Notes
1 Accents of English vary with respect to the final vowel in
words such as quickly, witty and pretty. Some have an [i]-
type vowel, while others have an [ɪ]-type vowel. The former
vowel is sometimes said to be ‘more tense’ than the latter,
and accents with [i] in these words are sometimes described
as having ‘HAPPY tensing’. The latter term is due to Wells
(1982; see Suggested Further Reading).
2 Among younger speakers of RP, these diphthongs are
frequently uttered with a fronted unrounded second element;
we could transcribe these pronunciations as [əı] and [aı],
where the second symbol denotes a relatively high central
unrounded vowel, as in coke: [kʰəık] and down: [daın]. The
effect is to make coke sound rather like cake, and down
rather like dine. There are many other such pairs; the
principal point about them is that the pairs are still distinct,
but less markedly so than in the past.
Exercises
1 Transcribe phonetically the vowel which you utter in
each of the following words:
caught   court   cot   blew   put   dearth   death   feel   fi
(See the note under chapter 3, exercise 2.)
2 For native speakers of English: the vowels in the
following words are normally diphthongs in RP. For each
word, phonetically transcribe the vowel as you would
77

normally say it, with the appropriate symbol. If it is a
diphthong in your speech, describe the initial and final lip
and tongue configurations. If it is not a diphthong, say
how back/front it is, how high/low and whether it is
rounded.
fear   fair   tour   late   sighed   side   join   toad   towed
(Again, see the note under chapter 3, exercise 2.)
3 Listen to Track 4.1 at www.wiley.com/go/carrphonetics.
Transcribe, with as much phonetic detail as possible, each
of the words you hear:
carted   concluded   divine   divinity   serene   serenity
78

5
The Phonemic Principle
5.1 Introduction: Linguistic
Knowledge
We have been dealing, thus far, with phonetics, that is (as we
have defined it), with the study of human speech sounds
(although we have dealt exclusively with English phonetics,
and in particular, exclusively articulatory phonetics, ignoring
important facts about the acoustic properties of the speech
sounds we have been discussing). We will, henceforth, be
dealing with phonology, as well as phonetics. Phonology, we
will claim, is to do with something more than properties of
human speech sounds per se. Phonology is the study of certain
sorts of mental organization. In particular, it is the study of
certain 
types 
of 
mental 
category, 
mentally 
stored
representations, and generalizations concerning those categories
and representations. On this view, phonology is not the study
of human speech sounds per se, although phonetics and
phonology are inextricably intertwined. The point of this
chapter is to demonstrate what the difference between the two
is, and to begin to introduce the reader to the phonology of
79

English. Let us begin by considering some general questions
concerning what it is to know a language.
Let us assume that when we say that someone knows a
language, in the sense of being a native speaker of that
language, he or she is in a certain mental state, or possesses a
certain sort of linguistic knowledge. Knowledge of a native
language is, apparently, largely unconscious knowledge. It
appears to contain semantic knowledge (to do with the
meanings of words, phrases and sentences) and syntactic
knowledge (to do with the syntactic categories of words, with
the structure of phrases and sentences and with the syntactic
relations between words, phrases and clauses). We know that
this is so, since speakers are able to make syntactic and
semantic judgements, based on that knowledge. For instance, a
native speaker of English can judge that Who did you see
Graham with? is an English sentence, and that Who did you
see Graham and? is not. The speaker knows, again intuitively,
that the difference between the two amounts to more than the
difference between the mere presence of the word and as
opposed to the presence of the word with. He or she also
knows intuitively (not necessarily fully consciously) in what
sense He told the man who he knew is ambiguous, and in what
sense the two interpretations of that sequence of words differs
in structure and meaning from He told the man how he knew,
over and above the superficial fact that one sequence contains
who and the other how. That knowledge is clearly unconscious
knowledge, since we require no instruction to be able to make
such judgements, and we can make them in the absence of any
conscious knowledge whatsoever of the syntax and semantics
80

of English (one could make such judgements even if one had
not the faintest idea of what a noun or a verb might be, or
what the syntactic categories of with, and, who and how might
be).
We will take the view in this book that a speaker’s (largely)
unconscious knowledge of his or her native language(s) must
also contain phonological knowledge. One of the reasons many
linguists take this view is that speakers can make judgements
which, it is claimed, are in some sense parallel to those made
with respect to syntactic states of affairs. For instance, a native
speaker of English can tell how many syllables there are in a
word without having the faintest idea, consciously, as to what a
syllable is. This shows that the native speaker has the ability to
recognize syllables, even if the recognition of syllables lies
below the level of consciousness. In a similar fashion, it is
claimed, a native speaker of English can tell that the sequence
of segments [blʌg], considered as an utterance of a word, is an
English sequence, whereas the sequence of segments [tʰlʌg] is
not, despite the fact that she or he may well never have heard
either sequence in her or his life. Let us postulate that, in
making such judgements, the native speaker of English gains
access to a kind of unconscious knowledge which constitutes
‘the phonology of English’.
Our task, in this book, will be to begin to consider, in an
elementary way, what form that knowledge takes. The
discipline of phonology, under this view, differs from that of
phonetics, since it is the study, not of speech sounds per se,
but of mental abilities and largely unconscious mental states.
Clearly, the phonologist must pay close attention to speech
sounds and their properties; they will constitute much of the
evidence the phonologist brings to bear on his or her
81

hypotheses 
about 
speakers’ 
unconscious 
phonological
knowledge, but they do not constitute his or her object of
inquiry as such.
5.2 Contrast vs Predictability:
The Phoneme
Let us begin by considering voiceless unaspirated and voiceless
aspirated stops in English and Korean. Speakers of most
accents of English habitually utter both aspirated and
unaspirated voiceless stops. The following English data exhibit
both of these.1
(1) Aspirated and unaspirated voiceless stops in English
(a)
[ˈpʰu:ɫ]
pool
(b)
[əˈpʰɪə]
appear
(c)
[ˈspɜ:t]
spurt
(d)
[dəˈspaɪt]
despite
(e)
[ˈtʰɒp]
top
(f)
82

[əˈtʰæk]
attack
(g)
[ˈstɒp]
stop
(h)
[dəˈstɹɔɪ]
destroy
(i)
[ˈkʰɪlɪŋ]
killing
(j)
[əˈkʰɹu:]
accrue
(k)
[ˈskoʊɫd]
scold
(l)
[dɪˈskʌvə]
discover
The diacritic which precedes certain symbols in these data
(the one which precedes the ‘p’ symbol in [ˈpʰu:ɫ] indicates the
beginning of a stressed syllable.
From these data, it appears that voiceless stops are aspirated
when they are at the beginning of a stressed syllable, as in pool
and appear, but unaspirated when preceded by a voiceless
alveolar fricative, as in spurt. That is, in these data, wherever
the unaspirated voiceless stops appear, the aspirated ones do
not, and vice versa. Compare the English data with the
following data from Korean:
83

(2) Aspirated and unaspirated voiceless stops in Korean
(a)
[pʰul]
‘grass’
(b)
[pul]
‘fire’
(c)
[tʰal]
‘mask’
(d)
[tal]
‘moon’
(e)
[kʰεda]
‘dig’
(f)
[kεda]
‘fold’
In these Korean data, aspirated and unaspirated voiceless
stops may occur in the same place (at the beginning of a
word). The range of places within a word which a given sound
may occur in is called its distribution. In the English data we
have looked at, the distribution of unaspirated and aspirated
stops is mutually exclusive: where you get one kind of stop,
you never get the other. This is called complementary
distribution.
Furthermore, if we take, say, the stops [t] and [tʰ] in the
English data, it is clear that they are phonetically similar: both
are stops, both are voiceless, both are alveolar. And yet, for
most speakers of English, the alveolar stops in, say, still and
84

till sound the same, despite the fact that the former is
unaspirated and the latter aspirated. For the English speaker,
these two phonetically distinct sounds ‘count as the same
thing’. We cannot say, without contradiction, that they are
simultaneously ‘the same sound’ and ‘not the same sound’.
What we will say is that, while they are phonetically distinct,
they are phonologically equivalent. That is, the two types of
stop correspond to, are interpreted as belonging to, a single
mental category. We will refer to such a category as a
phoneme. The English speaker interprets the six phonetic
segments [p], [pʰ], [t], [tʰ], [k] and [kʰ] in terms of only three
phonemes: /p/, /t/ and /k/. We may depict this as follows:
(3) English voiceless stop phonemes
The top line here represents the three voiceless stop
phonemes (mental categories) in terms of which the six types
of phonetic segment are perceived. The relationship between
phonemes and their associated phonetic segments is one of
realization, so that the phoneme /p/, for instance, is realized
as [p] after a voiceless alveolar fricative, and as [pʰ] elsewhere.
The most important point is that, on the data we have seen
thus far, aspiration or the lack of it is entirely predictable in
English: there is a generalization, expressible as a general rule,
as to the contexts in which voiceless stops will and will not be
aspirated. For most accents of English, this generalization is
one that is internalized by children when they acquire English
as their native language. The generalization forms part of what
native speakers know in knowing their native language, even if
85

that knowledge is largely unconscious knowledge. Realizations
of a phoneme which are entirely predictable from context are
called its allophones. We therefore say that [p] and [pʰ] are
allophones of the /p/ phoneme in most accents of English. We
are claiming that native speakers of English possess phonemes
(which are mental categories) and phonological generalizations
or rules as part of their (largely unconscious) knowledge of
their native language, and that native speakers perceive the
allophones they hear in terms of those categories and
generalizations.
Compare the English situation with the Korean one. It is
clear that the distribution of aspirated and unaspirated voiceless
stops in Korean is overlapping: there is at least one place (at
the beginning of words) in which either type of sound may
occur. This kind of distribution is referred to as parallel
distribution, where ‘parallel’ means ‘overlapping to some
degree’.
Furthermore, 
the 
distinction 
between 
aspirated 
and
unaspirated voiceless stops can make a crucial difference in
Korean: when the Korean speaker says [pʰul], it does not mean
the same thing as [pul]. The difference between the two
sounds is said to be semantically contrastive. Pairs of words
which differ with respect to only one sound are called minimal
pairs. Their existence is important, since they demonstrate that
the two sounds in question are both in parallel distribution and
semantically contrastive.
We therefore want to say that, unlike the English speaker,
the Korean perceives the six aspirated and unaspirated
voiceless stops [p], [pʰ], [t], [tʰ], [k] and [kʰ] in terms of six
different mental categories. That is, [p], for instance, is a
realization of the /p/ phoneme, whereas [pʰ] is a realization of a
86

distinct /pʰ/ phoneme. We may depict (part of)2 the Korean
system thus:
(4) Some Korean voiceless stop phonemes
The distinction between aspirated and unaspirated voiceless
stops is phonemic in Korean but allophonic in English. Both
English and Korean speakers habitually utter both aspirated
and unaspirated voiceless stops. On the phonetic level, the two
languages are therefore equivalent as far as bilabial, alveolar
and velar voiceless stops are concerned. But at the phonemic
level (the mental level), the two languages are quite distinct: the
Korean speaker has six mental categories where the English
speaker has only three. As far as voiceless stops are
concerned, Korean speakers have twice as many phonemic
contrasts as English speakers. The difficulty which the English
speaker encounters in learning to pronounce and perceive
Korean voiceless stops is therefore a mental one; it is a
phonological difficulty, not a purely articulatory one.
This is not to deny that there can be purely articulatory
difficulties in learning to speak another language (difficulties in
articulating new types of sound which one is not in the habit of
articulating). For instance, most speakers of Japanese who are
learning to speak English will have to learn to pronounce the
sound [l], which they are not in the habit of pronouncing.
When learners of a foreign language face this task, they often
utter a sound from their native language which is similar to the
target sound: in this case, the tap [ɾ] which, like [l], is voiced
and alveolar. Similarly, a speaker of French who is trying to
87

master the English sound [ð] will often utter the voiced alveolar
fricative [z] or the voiced dental stop [d̪ ], which she or he is
used to uttering in her or his native language. The former is
similar to the target sound in being a voiced fricative, while the
latter is similar in being a voiced dental sound. Such problems
with the pronunciation of foreign languages are widespread.
But they are distinct in kind from the kind of problem we have
just discussed.
We need not deny either that there may be difficulties in the
pronunciation of a foreign language which involve both purely
articulatory and phonological difficulties. For instance, the
English speaker who is learning Korean must learn to articulate
a third kind of stop which is distinct from voiced stops,
aspirated voiceless stops and unaspirated voiceless stops.
These are the voiceless stops of Korean which are articulated
with ‘glottal tension’: during their production, the vocal cords
do not vibrate, but nor are the vocal cords spread apart, as
they are for the voiceless aspirated stops; rather, the vocal
cords are constricted.
The English speaker must also learn to (in a sense) perceive
the distinction between all three sorts of stop in Korean; since
the glottally constricted voiceless stops are a new category of
sound, they may seem to the English speaker to sound like
stops he or she is more used to hearing (voiced stops, for
instance). And that is a phonological difficulty, added to the
purely articulatory one which the English speaker also has.
However, it is clear from the data we have looked at here that
there is a type of difficulty which is exclusively phonological,
and it is that kind of difficulty which justifies our making a
distinction between the kind of articulatory phonetics discussed
in the preceding chapters, which constitutes the study of the
88

articulation of speech sounds in and of themselves, and
phonology, the study of the system of mental categories in
terms of which we interpret those speech sounds.
In examining the phonological differences between Korean
and English voiceless stops, we have adopted what is known as
the phonemic principle, which consists of two sets of two
criteria, as follows:
(5) The phonemic principle
Two or more sounds are realizations of the same phoneme
if:
(a) they are in complementary distribution
and
(b) they are phonetically similar.
Two or more sounds are realizations of different
phonemes if:
(a) they are in parallel (overlapping) distribution
and
(b) they serve to signal a semantic contrast.
It is on the basis of the phonemic principle that we say that
phonetic differences involving aspiration are allophonic in
English but phonemic in Korean.
We have just seen a case where the Korean speaker has
more phonemic contrasts than the English speaker. Let us now
look at another set of data where the converse is the case.
Native speakers of some varieties of Scottish English habitually
utter the speech sounds we have represented as ‘[ɾ]’ and ‘[l]’,
i.e. the voiced alveolar tap and the voiced lateral alveolar
approximant (as in rip and lip). So do speakers of Korean.
Here are some examples of Scottish English and Korean words
89

which contain those sounds:
(6) [ɾ] and [l] in Scottish English and Korean
While speakers of Scottish English and Korean habitually
utter both sounds, we can predict that many native speakers of
Korean who are learning to speak this variety of Scottish
English would find the distinction between [l] and [ɾ], when
they speak Scottish English, rather difficult to get the hang of.
On the face of it, this is puzzling because, as we have just said,
Korean speakers have no difficulty in uttering the two sounds,
and may well have uttered many thousands of them, long
before beginning to learn Scottish English. So wherein does the
problem reside? One possibility that can be immediately
discounted is the suggestion that Korean speakers are
encountering some kind of physical, articulatory difficulty: it is
clearly not the case, as we have seen, that either of the sounds
is new to them.
The difficulty is of a mental nature, and if one examines the
table of data in (6) above, it is clear that, in Scottish English,
the two sounds may occur in the same places within a word,
e.g. at the beginning of words, or between vowels.
Furthermore, two words may differ solely with respect to the
segments [ɾ] and [l]: there are minimal pairs involving the two
sounds ([ɾæm] vs [læm], for instance). In this variety of
Scottish English, [ɾ] and [l] are in parallel distribution and can
90

function to signal a semantic contrast. It is important to bear in
mind that, when we say that a phonetic difference is
contrastive, we refer to a semantic contrast, and not to a
phonetic difference between the sounds.
In Korean, the distinction between [ɾ] and [l] can never be
contrastive, since [ɾ] and [l] may never occur in the same
place. They are in complementary distribution: where one
occurs, the other never does, and vice versa. Specifically, [ɾ] in
Korean occurs between vowels but nowhere else, whereas [l]
never occurs between vowels, but may occur elsewhere.
Because of this, it is impossible to find minimal pairs involving
these two sounds in Korean. The two sounds are also
phonetically similar: both are voiced and both entail a closure
made between the centre of the tongue blade and the alveolar
ridge. Therefore the two sounds are realizations of the same
phoneme in Korean.
In this variety of Scottish English, there is a phonemic /ɾ/ vs
/l/ contrast. In Korean, on the other hand, there is no such
phonemic contrast: whereas this variety of Scottish English has
/ɾ/ vs /l/, Korean has only one phoneme: /l/, which has two
allophones, [ɾ] and [l]. Put another way, the difference
between the sounds [ɾ] and [l] is phonemic in Scottish English,
whereas the difference between [ɾ] and [l] is allophonic in
Korean. Speakers of this variety of English perceive [ɾ] and [l]
in terms of two distinct mental categories, whereas Korean
speakers perceive them in terms of a single mental category. In
Korean, the phoneme /l/ is realized as [ɾ] between vowels, and
is realized as [l] elsewhere.
We may depict this phonological difference between this
91

variety of Scottish English and Korean as follows:
(7) The phonemic status of [ɾ] and [l] in Scottish English
and Korean
We have now shown where the Korean speakers’ difficulty
resides: at the level of their (largely) unconscious knowledge of
their language. As far as these segments are concerned, Korean
and this variety of Scottish English do not differ at the
allophonic level: both have [ɾ] and [l]. But they do differ at the
phonemic level: the Scottish English speaker has a mental
distinction which the Korean speaker lacks; the Korean
speakers’ problem is thus mental (specifically, perceptual) in
nature, not articulatory.
We have said that it is entirely predictable which allophone of
the Korean /l/ phoneme will occur in a given context. We may
say that there is a phonological generalization governing the
occurrence of the allophones, which the native speakers of
Korean have unconsciously grasped, and which forms part of
their linguistic knowledge. We may express that generalization
in terms of a phonological rule, as follows:
(8) /l/ realization in Korean
/l/ is realized as [ɾ] between vowels.
As we will see, the linguistic knowledge of native speakers
contains many such generalizations. As far as [ɾ] and [l] are
concerned, the phonological knowledge of the Korean speaker
and that of the Scottish English speaker differ in two respects:
92

(a) the Scottish English speaker has a phonological distinction
which the Korean speaker lacks, and (b) the Korean speaker
possesses a phonological generalization which the Scottish
English speaker lacks. Phonological knowledge therefore
consists of, among other things, phonological categories and
phonological generalizations.
In several varieties of English, the /l/ phoneme also has
allophones: ‘clear l’ ([l]) and ‘dark l’ ([ɫ]).3 The following data
show the typical distribution of these two sounds in those
varieties:
(9) English ‘clear l’ and ‘dark l’
(a)
[kʰlεvə]
clever
(b)
[bεɫz]
bells
(c)
[pʰleɪn]
plain
(d)
[tɹeɪɫ]
trail
(e)
[lʊk]
look
(f)
[pʰʊɫ]
pull
(g)
[lɔ:]
93

law
(h)
[bɔ:ɫz]
balls
(i)
[laɪ]
lie
(j)
[pʰaɪɫ]
pile
One way of stating the distribution of the allophones is to say
that ‘clear l’ occurs immediately before vowels, whereas ‘dark
l’ occurs immediately after vowels. We may state the
relationship between the /l/ phoneme and its clear and dark
allophones in terms of the following rule (which we will later
express in terms of syllable structure):
(10) /l/ realization in English
/l/ is realized as [ɫ] immediately after a vowel.
We may depict the realizations of Korean /l/ and /l/ in certain
varieties of English as follows:
(11) /l/ realizations in Korean and English
5.3 Phonemes, Allophones
and Contexts
94

We have said that the allophones of a phoneme are predictable
realizations of that phoneme. We can predict which allophone
will occur, given a specific context. The sorts of context we
have cited are, in some cases, rather general. For instance, in
the Korean data we considered, we saw that aspirated and
unaspirated voiceless stops may both occur at the beginning of
a word. We also saw, in the Korean data that we looked at,
that Korean /l/ is realized as [ɾ] between vowels. ‘At the
beginning of a word’ and ‘between vowels’ are quite general
contexts. So is ‘at the end of a word’, or ‘before a consonant’,
or ‘after a vowel’.
In other cases, the contexts we need to refer to are more
specific. For instance, in the English data we looked at, we saw
that the unaspirated voiceless stops occurred after a voiceless
alveolar fricative. In many cases, there appears to be some
kind of phonetic connection between the context in which an
allophone occurs and the nature of the allophone itself. Let us
consider an example.
In many accents of English, the /ɹ/ phoneme has two
realizations: [ɹ] and [ɹ̥ ] (in which the subscript diacritic denotes
voicelessness). The following data exemplify this:4
(12) Voiced and voiceless allophones of /ɹ/ in English
(a)
[tʰɹ̥ aɪ]
try
(b)
[əɹeɪ]
array
(c)
[pʰɹ̥ u:v]
prove
95

(d)
[gɹoʊ]
grow
(e)
[kʰɹ̥ eɪv]
crave
(f)
[bɹeɪk]
break
(g)
[fɹ̥ i:]
free
(h)
[dɹɪŋk]
drink
(i)
[θɹ̥ i:]
three
(j)
[bæɹoʊ]
barrow
It is clear that the voiced and voiceless alveolar approximants
are in complementary distribution: the voiceless one appears
only after voiceless consonants, and the voiced one appears
elsewhere. The question is whether we should say that there is
a voiced alveolar approximant phoneme which is realized as a
voiceless allophone after voiceless consonants, or that there is
a voiceless alveolar approximant phoneme which is realized as
a voiced approximant after voiced consonants and between
vowels. We choose the former claim, since it is more
phonetically natural: approximants are normally voiced.
96

Additionally, we can make phonetic sense of the claim that a
voiced phoneme has a voiceless realization when it follows
voiceless consonants: the realization is assimilating to the
preceding segment (it is becoming more like an adjacent
segment).
Let us consider another case of this sort. In many accents of
English, there are stops which are articulated in front of the
velar place of articulation, close to the hard palate. The
following data exemplify this ([c] and [ɟ] represent a voiceless
and a voiced palatal stop, respectively):
(13) Velar and palatal stops in English
(a)
[kʰu:ɫ]
cool
(b)
[cʰi:p]
keep
(c)
[kʰoʊɫ]
coal
(d)
[cʰi:n]
keen
(e)
[kʰɒp]
cop
(f)
[cʰɪt]
kit
(g)
[kʰɒ:t]
97

cart
(h)
[scɪp]
skip
(i)
[gu:ɫ]
ghoul
(j)
[ɟɪə]
gear
(k)
[goʊɫ]
goal
(l)
[ɟiɫ]
gill
Once again, the two segment types are in complementary
distribution: the advanced, palatal articulations occur before
high front vowels, and the velar ones occur elsewhere. We
postulate a /k/ phoneme which is ‘fundamentally’ velar in its
place of articulation, but which has a fronted or advanced
realization before high front vowels. This makes phonetic
sense: high front vowels are palatal articulations (the
articulators are the front of the tongue and the hard palate), so
we can say that the velar phoneme is assimilating to the
following vowel when it is a high front vowel.
We are adopting the view that phonemes often have a kind
of ‘default’ or ‘basic’ phonetic realization, and that it is this
realization which will occur in the absence of specifiable
contexts which ‘shift’ the realization from its default one.
98

5.4 Summing Up
In this chapter, we have begun to distinguish between
phonetics, defined as the study of speech sounds per se, and
phonology, the study of the system of mental representation,
categories and generalizations to which those sounds are
related. Native speakers of a language tend to take its
phonological system for granted. Speakers of English, for
instance, think it perfectly obvious that [ɹ] and [l] are quite
distinct, despite the fact that they are, phonetically, very
similar. Equally, speakers of English cannot easily see that [p]
and [pʰ] are different, despite the fact that they are. This
chapter has sought to show that what underlies these
perceptions is the phonological system of the native language,
as distinct from, if intimately related to, the set of speech
sounds uttered by native speakers of the language. What
sounds one takes to be ‘the same’ or ‘different’ depend to a
large extent on the system of mental categories which
constitutes one’s native language phonology. But it is clear that
phonetics and phonology are intimately connected.
The extent to which our mentally stored system of language-
specific phonological categories governs our perception of a
stream of speech sounds was well expressed by the linguist
Edward Sapir, who worked with North American Indian
languages in the early twentieth century:
the unschooled recorder of language, provided he has a good
ear and a genuine instinct for language, is often at a great
advantage as compared with the minute phonetician, who is
apt to be swamped by his mass of observations. I have
already employed my experience in teaching Indians to write
their own language for its testing value in another
99

connection. It yields equally valuable evidence here. I found
that it was difficult or impossible to teach an Indian to make
phonetic distinctions that did not correspond to ‘points in the
pattern of his language’, however these differences might
strike our objective ear, but that subtle, barely audible,
phonetic differences, if only they hit the ‘points in the
pattern’, were easily and voluntarily expressed in writing. In
watching my Nootka interpreter write his language, I often
had the curious feeling that he was transcribing an ideal flow
of phonetic elements which he heard, inadequately from a
purely objective standpoint, as the intention of the actual
rumble of speech.5
One can begin to appreciate the extent to which one’s native
language phonemic categories affect one’s perception when
one considers that any normal 6-month-old child, no matter
what language he or she is beginning to acquire, can distinguish
aspirated and unaspirated voiceless stops. Clearly, then, the
aspirated/unaspirated difference is one that could in principle
act as the basis for a phonemic distinction, and it clearly does
act that way in many human languages. But a child who
acquires a language (such as most varieties of English) in which
the aspirated/unaspirated distinction is allophonic rather than
phonemic will come to ignore that distinction at a certain level
of awareness. Acquiring the phonology of one’s native
language can therefore result in a kind of loss of perceptual
discrimination, but only at one level of awareness: when a
speaker of, say, South African English utters unaspirated stops
instead of aspirated stops, this will often be noticed by a
speaker of, say, RP, even if the RP speaker notices only that
there is something different about the speech of the South
African English speaker. Indeed, such differences can be quite
100

striking to the speaker of a language in which unaspirated stops
never occur word-initially before a stressed vowel. Such
speakers, on being suddenly confronted by English spoken
with, say, a Greek accent (on arrival, say, at a Greek airport)
will typically think that a word such as Gatwick (one of the
London airports) is being pronounced as [gadwig]. In cases
such as this, the English speaker not only perceives the fact
that the stops in question are unaspirated, but also assigns them
to the category of English voiced stops, because voiced stops
in English are unaspirated, and word-initial and word-final
voiced stops in English are barely voiced at all.
Both the native speaker and the adult learner of English can
begin to develop an awareness of her or his own phonological
system, and of the immense influence this has on one’s
perception of speech sounds, by comparing and contrasting
languages which are phonetically identical (or nearly identical),
but phonologically distinct, with respect to some set of sounds.
The examples given in this chapter are designed to begin to
induce this kind of awareness, as are the exercises which
follow.
Notes
1 These data do not show the full range of places in which
aspirated and unaspirated voiceless stops occur in most
English accents. What we will have to say about their
phonological status is therefore very much oversimplified.
But the data will suffice to illustrate a valid point.
2 Korean has a third phonemic category of stops, which we
discuss below.
101

3 There are also devoiced allophones of /l/; we ignore these
here.
4 We indicate these devoiced sounds here, but henceforth we
will not transcribe them using the ‘voiceless’ diacritic in cases
where the devoicing phenomenon is irrelevant to the point
being made.
5 Edward Sapir (1921), Language, New York: Harcourt
Brace, p. 56.
Exercises
1 [d] and [ð] in English and Spanish
(a) English
  1.
[dεn]
den
  2.
[ðεn]
then
  3.
[doʊz]
doze
  4.
[ðoʊz]
those
  5.
[dεə]
dare
  6.
[ðεə]
102

their
  7.
[ʌdə]
udder
  8.
[ʌðə]
other
  9.
[aɪdə]
Eider
10.
[aɪðə]
either
In many (not all) accents of English, [d] and [ð] are
realizations of different phonemes, as these data show.
They are in parallel distribution (both occur at the
beginnings of words and between vowels). They also
function contrastively: there are minimal pairs involving
the two sounds. We are therefore justified in postulating a
/d/ vs /ð/ phonemic distinction for most accents of
English.
(b) Spanish
Now consider the following Spanish data. (The voiced
stop in question is in fact dental in Spanish. We overlook
this fact here.) Is the distinction between [d] and [ð]
phonemic or allophonic in Spanish? Justify your answer
with evidence and argumentation.
  1.
[dɐr]
‘to give’
  2.
103

[nɐðɐ]
‘nothing’
  3.
[dεβεr]
‘to have to’
  4.
[boðeɣɐ]
‘wine cellar’
  5.
[diɐs]
‘days’
  6.
[ɐblɐðo]
‘spoken’
  7.
[bɐndɐ]
‘ribbon’
  8.
[pɾɐðo]
‘meadow’
  9.
[ɐndɐr]
‘to go’
10.
[poðεr]
‘to be able’
2 Voiced stops in English and Korean
In Korean, /p/, /t/ and /k/ have allophones which are
unreleased at the end of a word (as can be seen in the data
below) or before another consonant. The /p/, /t/ and /k/
phonemes also have voiced stop allophones: [b], [d] and
104

[g]. Unlike English, Korean does not have voiced stop
phonemes: [b], [d] and [g] are always allophones of /p/, /t/
and /k/ in Korean. Examine the following data and say
what contexts the voiced stop allophones occur in:
3 Glottal stops in English and Standard Arabic
The phonetic segment [ʔ] (glottal stop) occurs in the
speech of most speakers of English, but there is no glottal
stop phoneme (/ʔ/) in English, since [ʔ] never functions
contrastively with any other segment. For instance,
[kʰεʔəɫ] and [kʰεtəɫ] (kettle) are not pronunciations of
different words, but different pronunciations of the same
word. Below are some data from Standard Arabic. Is
there a glottal stop phoneme in this language? Explain the
reasoning behind your answer:
(a)
[faʔl]
‘good fortune’
(b)
[fatl]
‘twisting/twining’
(c)
[faʔɾ]
‘rats’
105

(d)
[fa:ɾ]
‘it boiled’
(e)
[baʔs]
‘strength’
(f)
[ba:s]
‘he kissed’
(g)
[buʔs]
‘misery’
(h)
[bu:s]
‘bus’
4 Further phonetic transcription practice
Listen to Track 5.1 at www.wiley.com/go/carrphonetics.
Transcribe, with as much phonetic detail as possible, the
words you hear on the recording, paying attention to
details such as presence vs absence of aspiration, clear vs
dark l, and devoiced allophones of /l/ and /ɹ/.
started   playing   price   could   kill   clear   creep
106

6
English Phonemes
6.1 English Consonant
Phonemes
We have distinguished phonemes from phonetic segments, and
have begun to formulate hypotheses about which phonemes
might exist as part of the native speaker’s phonological
knowledge. Specifically, we have said that many English
speakers have the consonant phonemes /l/, /ɹ/, /p/, /t/ and /k/,
among others. We will shortly postulate a full system of
consonant phonemes which English speakers have. But we
must first be a little more precise about what we mean by
‘English speakers’. Clearly, there are different varieties of
English, which we will be considering in more detail later, and
we will need some means of differentiating between them. Let
us begin by considering a distinction which is often appealed to
by linguists: that between accent and dialect. It is often said
that differences in accent concern solely phonetic and
phonological variation, whereas dialect differences involve
more than this: they also include differences in vocabulary and
syntax. This is a rather simplistic way of putting the distinction,
and it is a distinction which is fraught with difficulties, but it
will suffice for the present discussion.
107

We may exemplify the difference between accent and dialect
as follows. Perhaps the most widely spoken (and written)
English dialect is the ‘prestige’ dialect known as Standard
English, which has its origins in the South East of England; this
dialect is used widely, in Britain, in national radio and
television, in the press, and indeed in most printed publications.
It is possible to speak Standard English with a New Zealand
accent, a Tyneside accent, a New York City accent, or indeed
any accent of English. When this happens, we may say
(simplifying somewhat) that the speaker is using the vocabulary
and syntax of Standard English, while retaining the phonetics
and phonology which constitutes the native accent.
Let us exemplify the difference between dialect and accent in
a little more detail, as follows. Take the Standard English
sentence You will not be able to put the children on the floor.
Uttered by a speaker with a Standard Scottish English (SSE)
accent, the outcome would be:
(1) [jəɫnɒʔbiebɫtəpʰʉʔðətʃɪɫdɹənənðəflo:ɹ]
Now compare this with the same Standard English sentence
uttered by a speaker of RP. The RP speaker might well utter:
(2) [jəɫnɒʔbieɪbɫtəpʰʊʔðətʃɪɫdɹənənðəflɔ:]
Both speakers are speaking Standard English (the syntax is
the same, as is the vocabulary, if one excludes the phonological
form of the morphemes in that vocabulary), but their accents
differ: the SSE speaker’s vowel sounds are not always identical
to those of the RP speaker, and the SSE speaker utters an [ɹ]
in floor, which the RP speaker does not.
Now let us imagine that the same SSE speaker wants to
convey the same proposition, but speaking, this time, in a
dialect other than Standard English: that of Lowland Scots.
108

The result might be:
(3) [jʌɫno:kɪmpʰɪʔðəbe:ɹɪnzonðəfɫe:ʌɹ]
(This might be written as You’ll no can put the bairns on the
floor.)
In (3), the syntax and vocabulary differ from that of
Standard English; we may say that these are dialectal
differences, and distinct in kind from the differences in accent
which we noted between (1) and (2) above.
We will return to the matter of accent variation in a later
chapter; for the moment, let us look at the consonant phoneme
system shared by most varieties of English, which typically
looks like this:
(4) English consonant phonemes
/p/
as in pie, pit, rip
/b/
as in buy, bit, rib
/t/
as in tie, tip, writ
/d/
as in die, dip, rid
/k/
as in cool, kit, rick
/g/
as in ghoul, git, rig
[tʃ]
as in chew, chit, rich
[dʒ]
109

as in Jew, gin, ridge
/θ/
as in thigh, thin, with
/ð/
as in then, that, scythe
/f/
as in fie, fit, riff
/v/
as in Venn, vat, leave
/s/
as in sigh, sit, lease
/z/
as in zoo, zip, please
/h/
as in high, hip
/ʃ/
as in shy, ship, leash, mesher
/ʒ/
as in measure
/w/
as in wet, win
/l/
as in lie, lip, real
/ɹ/
as in rye, rip
/ε/
as in year
/m/
110

as in my, meat, rim
/n/
as in nigh, neat, sin
/ŋ/
as in sing, ring
The evidence comes partly in the form of the sorts of
minimal 
pair 
cited 
in 
(4), 
such 
as 
measure/mesher
([mεʒə]/[mεʃə]) and sigh/shy ([saɪ]/[ʃaɪ]), but we have by no
means presented all of the evidence here. Let us look briefly at
some of the evidence for the three nasal stop phonemes
postulated here:
(5) Evidence for English nasal stop phonemes
(a)
[mi:t]
meat
(b)
[ni:t]
neat
(c)
[moʊɫ]
mole
(d)
[noʊɫ]
knoll
(e)
[sɪn]
sin
(f)
[sɪŋ]
sing
111

(g)
[dɪm]
dim
(h)
[dɪn]
din
(i)
[wɪn]
win
(j)
[wɪŋ]
wing
It is clear that [m] and [n] are in parallel distribution: each
may occur word-initially or word-finally. The distinction is also
contrastive: it forms the basis for minimal pairs such as
meat/neat. It is also clear that [n] and [ŋ] are in parallel
distribution: while [ŋ] does not appear in word-initial position,
both may occur in word-final position. The distinction is also
contrastive, as is shown by the existence of minimal pairs such
as win/wing. The distinction between [m] and [ŋ] is contrastive
too, as pairs such as whim/wing show. We therefore have clear
evidence for a three-way phonemic distinction between /m/, /n/
and /ŋ/. We will consider this analysis in more detail below.
The main point to be made at the moment is that we postulate
the existence of phonemes on the basis of evidence and
argumentation; if phonemes are mental categories, they cannot
be directly observed.
112

6.2 The Phonological Form of
Morphemes
We have said that, in knowing a language, a speaker possesses
largely unconscious linguistic knowledge, which subsumes
semantic, syntactic and phonological knowledge. And we have
said that the phonological units or categories we have called
phonemes are part of that phonological knowledge. As we
progress in this book, we will investigate the question of what
other sorts of phonological knowledge speakers possess,
besides phonemes alone. Let us begin this investigation by
considering the internal structure of words. You will agree that
the English word cats may be broken down into two
component parts. Let us call those component parts
morphemes. Then we may say that this word consists of a
root morpheme and a plural morpheme (which, in this case, is
a suffix). Let us say that words of this sort are
morphologically complex: they consist of more than one
morpheme. Let us say that a morpheme takes the form of a
triple: a syntax, a semantics and a phonology. Take the
morpheme cat: it has a syntax (it is a noun), a semantics (it
means ‘cat’) and a phonology, which takes the form /kæt/; we
will refer to this as the phonological form of the morpheme.
The phonological form of a morpheme may, clearly, consist of
more than one phoneme. Just as phonemes are mental objects,
so the phonological form of this morpheme is a mental object:
/kæt/ is a mental representation in the mind of a speaker,
whereas the sequence [kʰæt] is a phonetic sequence.
Let us now consider the adjectives impossible, imbalanced,
113

infelicitous, intangible, indirect, insane, incorrect 
and
inglorious. All consist of at least a prefix morpheme and a root
morpheme (some of these words have a prefix, a root and a
suffix). Many speakers have the following pronunciations of
these words:
(6)
(a)
[ɪmpʰɒsɪbɫ]
impossible
(b)
[ɪmbælənst]
imbalanced
(c)
[iɱfəlɪsɪtəs]
infelicitous
(d)
[ɪntʰændʒɪbɫ]
intangible
(e)
[ɪndɪɹεkt]
indirect
(f)
[ɪnseɪn]
insane
(g)
[ɪŋkəɹεkt]
incorrect
(h)
[ɪŋglɔ:ɹiəs]
inglorious
It is part of the native speaker’s unconscious linguistic
114

knowledge of English that these words all have the same
prefix. That prefix is one of the morphemes of English, and,
like all morphemes in the language, has a syntax (it is a prefix),
a semantics (it has a specific meaning) and a phonology. But
what is the phonological form of that morpheme? We know
from the data that the suffix may be realized as [ɪm], [ɪɱ], [ɪn]
or [ɪŋ]. It is clear, then, that the first phoneme in the prefix is /
ɪ/ and the second phoneme is a nasal, but which nasal
phoneme? We claimed above that English has three nasal
phonemes: /m/, /n/ and /ŋ/. So the phonological form of this
prefix might be [ɪm], [ɪn] or [ɪŋ]. Let us consider [ɪŋ]. We
could say that the /ŋ/ phoneme is realized as [n] before /t/, /d/
and /s/, and as [m] before [p] and [b]. This seems to make
sense: we can say that, when the prefix is added to a root, the
place of articulation of the nasal becomes identical to that of
the first consonant in the root. Thus, it is alveolar when
followed by an alveolar consonant (such as /t/, /d/ and /s/),
labio-dental when followed by a labio-dental consonant (such
as /f/), and bilabial when followed by a bilabial consonant
(such as /p/ or /b/). This is the process of assimilation we
referred to in chapter 2, in which one segment becomes similar,
in some respect, to another when the two are adjacent. Here,
the assimilation is in place of articulation. Further evidence that
nasals in English undergo place of articulation assimilation is
not hard to come by. Consider the following data, which are
representative of the speech of many speakers of English:
(7) Nasal assimilation in English
(a)
[ʌŋkʰlɪə]
unclear
(b)
115

[ʌŋgɒdli]
ungodly
(c)
[ʌɱfεə]
unfair
(d)
[ʌɱvælju:d]
unvalued
(e)
[ʌntʰɹu:]
untrue
(f)
[ʌndʌn]
undone
(g)
[ʌmbεəɹəbəɫ]
unbearable
(h)
[ʌmbaɪəst]
unbiased
While the [ɪŋ] solution is plausible, it faces a difficulty: we
might equally say that the phonological form of the morpheme
is [ɪn], or [ɪm], and that, in either case, the nasal assimilates to
a following consonant. On the evidence presented thus far,
there is no non-arbitrary way of choosing between the three
alternatives: each is as plausible as the others. The following
data, however, allow us to make a non-arbitrary choice:
(8)
(a)
[ɪæktɪv]
inactive
116

(b)
[ɪnɐpɹətɪv]
inoperative
(c)
[ɪnεfəbɫ]
ineffable
(d)
[ɪnədvaɪzəbɫ]
inadvisable
(e)
[ɪnɔ:dɪbɫ]
inaudible
(f)
[ɪneɪliənəbɫ]
inalienable
In each case, there is no consonant at the beginning of the
root to which the nasal could assimilate: each root begins with
a vowel. From the fact that vowel-initial roots are realized with
the [ɪn] form, we can therefore conclude that the phonology of
the prefix takes the form [ɪn], and that the nasal does not
change its place of articulation if the root-initial segment is a
vowel or an alveolar consonant. Note that this is generally true
of alveolar nasals in English, as the following data, involving
the prefix seen in (7), suggest:
(9)
(a)
[ʌneɪdəd]
unaided
(b)
[ʌnətʰɹæktɪv]
unattractive
117

(c)
[ʌnivεntfəɫ]
uneventful
(d)
[ʌnɔ:θədɒks]
unorthodox
We might, of course, have said that the morpheme in
question has four different phonological forms: /ɪm/, /ɪɱ/, /ɪn/
and /ɪŋ/, and that words such as impossible, infelicitous,
indirect and incorrect are each stored mentally with the
appropriate prefix. There are two problems with this approach.
Firstly, there is no independent evidence that there is an /ɱ/
phoneme in English ([ɱ] never functions contrastively with
any other nasal). Secondly, even if there were no [ɪɱ] forms,
we would be committed to claiming, under the ‘several
phonological forms’ approach, that it is mere coincidence that
the /ɪm/ form is attached only to roots beginning with a bilabial
consonant, the /ɪŋ/ form only to roots beginning with a velar
consonant, and the /ɪn/ form only to roots beginning with
alveolar consonants and vowels. But that is surely an
implausible claim. So, for this sort of case at least, the idea that
we should postulate more than one phonological form for a
morpheme is deeply unattractive and implausible. Given the
data we have seen thus far, it appears much more plausible to
say that any given morpheme has a single phonological form.
And if that is the case, then it is the phonologist’s task to
hypothesize as to what that form might be. In doing so, she or
he will be guided by evidence and argumentation: the facts of
the matter, since they are mental in nature, and thus not
directly observable, will not be available for immediate
118

inspection via the five senses.
In adopting this ‘one phonological form per morpheme’
approach, we are allowing that, while any given morpheme has
only one phonological form, that phonological form may
‘correspond’ in some sense to a variety of different phonetic
forms. In the case we have just looked at, the prefix has the
phonological form [ɪn], but that in turn corresponds to four
different phonetic forms: [ɪm], [ɪɱ], [ɪn] and [ɪŋ]. Phonologists
refer to such phonetic forms as alternants: we say that there is
an alternation between the four forms. Which alternant of a
given morpheme occurs in a given word is entirely predictable;
there is a generalization which captures that predictability, and
we are able to express it in the form of a phonological rule, just
as we did with [ɾ] and [l] in Korean. In our English case, the
rule in question concerns nasals in general; it might be put
informally as:
(10) The rule of nasal assimilation in English
If the phonological form of a prefix ends in a nasal
then that nasal will assimilate to the place of
articulation of a following consonant.
We could have formulated this generalization as a formalized
rule, or as some kind of constraint on the phonological form of
morphemes in English. We will not go into the types of
formalism required to express such generalizations, or inquire
whether they are best expressed as rules or as constraints. The
most important point is that native speakers appear to be in
possession of generalizations of this sort, and that these appear
to constitute a part of their largely unconscious phonological
knowledge.
The data we have just considered also exemplify an
important phenomenon: that of phonemic overlapping. On
119

the basis of the data in (5), we postulated the following nasal
stop phonemes, with the realizations shown:
(11)
However, we have allowed that the /n/ phoneme may also be
realized as [m] if it precedes a bilabial consonant, or [ŋ] if it
precedes a velar consonant. This means that a given
occurrence of [m], for instance, may be either a realization of
/m/, as in map, or a realization of /n/, as in improbable. That
is, the /m/ and /n/ phonemes overlap in their realizations. We
may depict this as follows:
(12)
The question arises: how can the speaker of English tell
whether a given [m] is a realization of /m/ or of /n/? The
answer is that the phonological context allows the speaker to
tell: an [m] which does not precede a bilabial consonant will be
a realization of the /m/ phoneme. The phonemic contrast
between /m/ and /n/ is said to be neutralized before a bilabial
consonant. Neutralization is the suspension of phonemic
contrasts in one or more specifiable contexts.
6.3 English Vowel Phonemes
120

Accents of English vary considerably in their vowel phoneme
systems and in the range of allophones that those phonemes
have. We begin by depicting a set of postulated vowel
phonemes for RP and GA. The RP and GA phonetic vowel
qualities we presented and discussed in chapters 3 and 4 are
typically contrastive for most speakers of those accents, and
we may therefore postulate the following (stressed) vowel
phonemes for RP and GA:
(13a)
RP vowel phonemes
Wells (1982; see Suggested Further Reading) lexical sets
/ʌ/
as in putt
STRUT
/ʊ/
as in put
FOOT
/u:/
as in pool, shoe
GOOSE
/ɪ/
as in pit
KIT
/i:/
as in peat, lea
FLEECE
/ε/
as in pet
DRESS
/eɪ/
121

as in pate, lay
FACE
/ɒ/
as in pot
LOT
/oʊ/
as in pole, low
GOAT
/ɔ:/
as in port, law
NORTH, FORCE, THOUGHT
/æ/
as in pat
TRAP
/ɒ:/
as in part, Shah
START, BATH, PALM
/ɜ:/
as in pert, furry
NURSE
/ɔɪ/
as in coin, boy
CHOICE
/aɪ/
as in pile, buy
PRICE
/aʊ/
as in pout, cow
MOUTH
122

/ɪə/
as in fierce, leer
NEAR
/εə/
as in scarce, lair
SQUARE
/ʊə/
as in gourd, lure
CURE
(13b)
GA vowel phonemes
Wells (1982) lexical sets
/ʌ/ as in putt
STRUT
/ʊ/ as in put
FOOT, CURE
/u:/ as in pool, shoe
GOOSE
/ɪ/ as in pit
KIT
/i:/ as in peat, lea
FLEECE, NEAR
/ε/ as in pet
DRESS, SQUARE
/eɪ/ as in pate, lay
FACE
/oʊ/ as in pole, low
GOAT
123

/ɔ:/ as in law, short
NORTH, FORCE, THOUGHT
/æ/ as in pat
TRAP, BATH
/ɒ/ as in part, Shah, pot, caught
START, PALM, LOT
/ɜ/ as in pert, furry
NURSE
/ɔɪ/ as in coin, boy
CHOICE
/aɪ/ as in pile, buy
PRICE
/aʊ/ as in pout, cow
MOUTH
Again, what the set of RP or GA vowel phonemes might be
is a matter for argumentation based on evidence and general
theoretical considerations. For instance, we might have
suggested that the second vowel in words like pew is a
diphthong ([iu:]) and that, since pew forms a minimal pair with
pie, pea, etc., then /iu:/ is an RP vowel phoneme. We will
return, in due course, to this kind of question. We should also
note that there is a further vowel phoneme which is not listed
here: /ə/ (schwa), which differs from all the other phonemes
listed above, since it does not occur in stressed position (as we
noted in chapter 3). We will also return, in due course, to /ə/
and its relation to the phonetic segment [ə].
Like consonant phonemes, vowel phonemes may have
allophones. For instance, speakers of many accents of English
have two realizations of the vowel phoneme /i:/: [i:] and [i:ə].
124

The latter typically occurs before a velarized lateral (‘dark l’),
as the following data show:
(14) Allophones of /i:/
(a)
[fi:t]
feet
(b)
[fi:əɫ]
feel
(c)
[di:p]
deep
(d)
[di:əɫ]
deal
(e)
[pʰi:k]
peak
(f)
[pʰi:əɫ]
peel
(g)
[si:m]
seem
(h)
[si:əɫ]
seal
We postulate /i:/ rather than /i:ə/ as the form of the phoneme,
since we assume that the realization of the phoneme when it
precedes a dark l is influenced by the dark l. The schwa
articulation, which is retracted from the high front [i:] position,
125

is a matter of the vowel articulation assimilating to the tongue
body retraction in the dark l. In doing so, we appeal to the idea
of phonetic motivation: our analysis is phonetically motivated
in the sense that we can provide an articulatory reason for the
/i:/ → [i:ə] process, whereas we would be unable to provide
any such motivation for a process in which /i:ə/ → [i:] word-
finally and before any consonant other than [ɫ].
We are also assuming, as we did in chapter 5, that the
phoneme /l/ has two allophones, [l] and [ɫ]. We said there that
there is an /l/ realization rule: /l/ is realized as [l] immediately
before vowels, and as [ɫ] immediately after vowels.
These two claims appear to commit us to the idea that the
rule governing the occurrence of [ɫ] must, in some sense,
‘precede’ the rule governing the phoneme /i:/, since we are
claiming that [ɫ] only ever arises as a result of the application of
the /l/ rule, and that [i:ə] only ever arises when an [ɫ] follows.
We may depict this claim about the interaction of the two rules
as follows:
(15)
/fi:l/
/l/ rule
fi:ɫ
/i:/ rule
fi:əɫ
This kind of depiction is referred to as a derivation: the
phonetic realization of the phonological form /fi:l/ is derived
from that phonological form by means of the ordered
126

application of rules. This way of looking at the relationship
between phonological forms and their phonetic realization
therefore commits us to the idea of rule ordering, and thus to
a rule-based, derivational view of phonological organization.
While we will not pursue this conception of phonological
organization in any depth, it is as well to acknowledge that we
are implicitly assuming such a conception.
Another example of vowel allophones in English concerns
vowel length. In many languages, vowel length is phonemic.
For instance, in Limbu (spoken in Nepal), [sapma] means ‘to
write’, but [sa:pma] means ‘to flatter’. Similarly, in Malayalam
(spoken in Southern India), [ciri] means ‘smile’ but [ci:ri]
means ‘shrieked’. But in other languages, vowel length is
allophonic. In Scottish Standard English (SSE), for instance,
some (not all) of the vowel phonemes have long and short
allophones:
(16) Long and short vowels in Scottish Standard English
The long allophones of the phonemes /i/, /u/ and /ai/ occur in
the following contexts: at the end of a word or before one of
the following voiced consonants: /v/, /ð/, /z/ and /ɹ/. Vowel
length is therefore allophonic, rather than phonemic, in SSE.
We considered the case of the neutralization of the contrast
127

between the consonant phonemes /m/ and /n/ before bilabial
consonants. 
Neutralization 
of 
contrast 
between 
vowel
phonemes is also possible. An example comes from the
contrast between /æ/, /ε/ and /eɪ/ in GA: these three phonemes
are all realized as [ε] before the /ɹ/ phoneme. Listen to the
sentence 
Marry 
Merry 
Mary 
on 
Track 
6.1 
at
www.wiley.com/go/carrphonetics. The GA speaker utters [ε] in
each of the three words: they are homophones in GA. The
other speakers are speaking SSE and RP respectively: each has
distinct realizations for each of the three phonemes: the Marry
Merry Mary neutralization does not occur in SSE or RP.
Exercises
1 Phonemic contrasts in GA, SSE and RP
The following data sets are from General American (GA),
Scottish Standard English (SSE) and RP (Received
Pronunciation). On the basis of presence of minimal pairs
in one variety vs absence of such pairs in another variety,
identify any phonemic contrasts which are present in GA,
but not in SSE, and vice versa. Then identify any
phonemic contrasts which are present in RP, but not in
GA, and vice versa. Finally, identify any phonemic
contrasts which are present in SSE, but not RP, and vice
versa. Assume that the data given here are fully
representative of the varieties in question.
128

2 Nasal stops in English and Spanish
Recall that data such as the following led to our decision
to postulate three nasal stop phonemes in English (/m/, /n/
and /ŋ/):
English
(a)
[mi:t]
meat
(b)
[ni:t]
neat
(c)
[moʊɫ]
mole
(d)
[noʊɫ]
knoll
(e)
129

[sɪn]
sin
(f)
[sɪŋ]
sing
(g)
[dɪm]
dim
(h)
[dɪn]
din
(i)
[wɪn]
win
(j)
[wɪŋ]
wing
Now examine the same three nasal stops ([m], [n], [ŋ]) in
the following data from Spanish. (We ignore the fact that
Spanish has a dental, rather than an alveolar, nasal stop.
These data are representative of Castilian Spanish, the
prestige accent spoken in Spain: many varieties of Spanish
lack the /θ/ and /ð/ phonemes. This fact does not affect
the point made in the exercise.) Assume that the data are
fully representative:
Spanish
(a)
[muðo]
‘mute’
(b)
[nuðo]
130

‘knot’
(c)
[metɐ]
‘goal’
(d)
[netɐ]
‘pure’ (feminine)
(e)
[ɔmbɾe]
‘man’
(f)
[sεmblɐɾ]
‘to seem’
(g)
[ɐndɐɾ]
‘to go’
(h)
[ɐnte]
‘in the face of’
(i)
[ɐŋgulo]
‘angle’
(j)
[lεŋgwɐ]
‘language’
Note. [ŋ] does not appear word-initially, word-finally or
between vowels.
(i)
What evidence is there for postulating distinct /m/ and /n/
phonemes in Spanish?
(ii)
131

Are there any grounds for postulating an /ŋ/ phoneme in
Spanish? What evidence is there for your answer?
Now look at the following Spanish data:
(k)
[feliθ]
‘happy’
(l)
[lɱfeliθ]
‘unhappy’
(m)
[posible]
‘possible’
(n)
[imposible]
‘impossible’
(o)
[dispεnsable]
‘dispensible’
(p)
[indispεnsable]
‘indispensible’
(q)
[konθebible]
‘conceivable’
(r)
[iŋkonθebible]
‘inconceivable’
(s)
[ɐkɔstɔmbɾɐðo]
‘accustomed’
(t)
[inɐkɔstɔmbɾɐðo]
132

‘unaccustomed’
(iii)
Is there any phonemic overlapping of the Spanish nasal
stop phonemes? Explain.
3 Further phonetic transcription practice
Listen to Track 6.2. Transcribe, with as much phonetic
detail as possible, the words you hear on the recording.
The words are:
unkind   unbroken   unaided   reed   reel
133

7
English Syllable Structure
7.1 Introduction
We have said morphemes are a kind of mental representation
which have three properties: a syntactic category, a meaning
and a phonological form. We have allowed, thus far, that the
phonological form of a morpheme is present in the speaker’s
mentally constituted grammar, and that this phonological form
consists in either a single phonological segment or a sequence
of such segments. But this is only part of the story: there is
more to the phonological form of a morpheme than that. There
is 
evidence 
that 
those 
segments 
are 
organized 
into
phonological constituents, rather in the way that words are
organized into syntactic constituents (such as phrases and
sentences). One of those constituents is the syllable. The
evidence for the existence of the syllable comes largely in the
form of phonological generalizations which cannot be
adequately expressed without reference to the notion ‘syllable’.
The aim of this chapter is to examine the structure of the
syllable in English, and exemplify some of the sorts of
phonological generalization which are best expressed in terms
of that structure.
134

7.2 Constituency in Syllable
Structure
The two main constituents within a syllable are the onset and
the rhyme. In the word bile, for instance, the first segment,
/b/, constitutes the onset of the syllable and the last two
segments, /aɪ/ and /l/, taken together, constitute the rhyme. The
onset is defined as any and all consonants occurring before the
vowel. What evidence is there for this division between onset
and rhyme? The device of alliteration depends on identity of
onsets, independently of the content of the rhyme, as in little
and light, poor and packed, and so on. This constitutes
evidence for the onset/rhyme division, and thus evidence that
the rhyme is a well-founded syllabic constituent. Since that is
so, then the onset as a constituent is equally well-founded
(since the two are defined in contradistinction to each other).
Slips of the tongue also show that the onset is a real unit in
speech production. One type of slip of the tongue is the
spoonerism, named after an academic called Spooner, who is
said to have uttered sentences such as ‘You have missed my
history lecture’ as ‘You have hissed my mystery lecture’, with
an inversion of the onsets of ‘missed’ and ‘history’.
The rhyme may be further subdivided into the constituents
nucleus and coda. Thus, in the word bile, the diphthong /aɪ/
constitutes the nucleus, and the consonant /l/ constitutes the
coda. We may represent the constituency of the single-syllable
morpheme bile as follows, where Greek ‘σ’ (sigma) stands for
‘syllable’, ‘O’ stands for ‘onset’, ‘R’ stands for ‘rhyme’, ‘N’
stands for ‘nucleus’, and ‘C’ stands for ‘coda’:
135

(1) bile:
A syllable such as this, which contains one or more
consonants in coda position, is called a closed syllable,
whereas a syllable which does not contain any consonants in
coda position is referred to as an open syllable; as in the word
buy:
(2) buy:
While a syllable must have a nucleus, it is possible to have a
well-formed syllable which does not contain any element other
than a nucleus. The segment occupying the nucleus of the
syllable is normally a vowel. An example of a word in English
consisting of only one syllable, which in turn contains only a
nucleus, is eye: /aɪ/. But the nucleus of a syllable in English
may be preceded or followed by other segments, as we have
seen, and those segments are typically consonants. In the word
136

aisle, for instance, the nucleus is followed by a consonant in
coda position: /aɪl/. In the word buy, the nucleus is preceded by
a consonant in onset position: /baɪ/, and in the word bile, the
nucleus is both preceded and followed by consonants: /baɪl/.
Morphemes like bile, which contain only one syllable, are
said to be monosyllabic. In some languages, all morphemes
are monosyllabic. But in English, morphemes may contain
more than one syllable: they may be polysyllabic. Examples
are rider, beetle, amount, desire (which are bisyllabic),
elephant, 
veranda, 
kangaroo 
(which 
are 
trisyllabic),
independent, America (which have four syllables) and so on.
In some languages, all syllables must contain an onset
consonant but, as we have seen, in English (and this is true of
many other languages), this is not the case. For reasons to be
explained 
later 
(connected 
with 
the 
notion 
of
‘resyllabification’), we will represent such syllables with an
empty onset, as follows:
(3) it:
In many languages, such as Hawaiian, onsets may contain a
single consonant only, but in many others, English included,
onsets may contain two segments (as in bring, trap, clip, etc.);
137

we will refer to these as branching onsets, and represent them
as follows:
(4) clip:
Just as onsets may be branching, so codas may branch, as in
the word hunt:
(5) hunt:
The distinction between, on the one hand, short vowels and,
on the other, long vowels and diphthongs can be represented
by taking the latter class of vowels to occupy a branching
nucleus, with the former class occupying a non-branching
nucleus. To represent the fact that long vowels and diphthongs
are longer than short vowels, we say that segments are
attached to a series of timing slots, referred to as the skeletal
tier. The idea is that one can represent the difference between
short vowels on the one hand, and long vowels (including
138

English diphthongs) on the other, by taking the former to be
connected to a single skeletal slot and the latter to be connected
to two skeletal slots. Thus, bit has a short vowel as its nucleus
and is therefore represented with a non-branching nucleus,
whereas bee and buy have branching nuclei:
(6) bit:
(7) bee:
(8) buy:
139

What is intended by the representations in (7) and (8) is that
long vowels are constituted as a single vowel quality which is
attached to two skeletal slots, whereas long diphthongs, as in
buy, have two different vowel qualities. The point is that nuclei
with long vowels and with diphthongs are parallel with respect
to the number of timing slots within the nucleus. We will
henceforth adopt the skeletal tier in our representations of
syllabic structure.
The skeletal tier enables us to say that affricates, which, as
we have seen, have a closure element and a fricative release
element, as in [tʃ] and [dʒ], are complex segments, since they
behave like single segments (they occupy a single unit of
timing) while having an internal structure which resembles two
segments:
(9) chip:
140

7.3 The Sonority Hierarchy,
Maximal Onset and Syllable
Weight
You will agree, if you are a native speaker of English, that
/bliŋk/ is a well-formed syllable (and happens to constitute the
phonological form of an English word), as are the following:
/blʊŋk/, /blεŋk/, /blɐŋk/ and /blæŋk/ (most of which happen
not to constitute the phonological form of English words). That
is, your native speaker knowledge of English allows you to
judge that these are syllabically well-formed, even though there
are no words in English which have those phonological forms.
That unconscious knowledge also allows you to judge that the
following are ill-formed: /ibɪŋk/, /ibɪkŋ/, /tlɪnk/ and /blaɪmp/.
The question is: what form does this unconscious knowledge
take? What is it that we know, unconsciously, which allows us
to make these judgements? Let us now seek to answer that
question.
141

It is widely believed that there are both universal and
language-specific constraints on the form that syllables may
take, that is, constraints on the syllabification of sequences of
segments. Among the universal constraints, we may mention
two. Firstly, it is claimed that sequences of segments are
syllabified in accordance with a sonority scale, which takes
the following form:
(10) Sonority scale
Low vowels
High vowels
Approximants
Nasals
Voiced fricatives
Voiceless fricatives
Voiced stops
Voiceless stops
The idea is that, as one proceeds from the bottom to the top
of the scale, the class of segments becomes more sonorous, or
more vowel-like. Sonority is an acoustic effect: the more
sonorous a sound, the more it resonates. Vowels have greater
resonance than consonants, and voiced consonants have
greater resonance than voiceless ones. If you listen to a singer
holding a note for any length of time, the sound in question will
most probably be a vowel. There are two articulatory reasons
why it is easier to hold a vowel sound for longer than a
consonant sound, and both are relevant to the production of
sonority. The first is degree of constriction, as discussed in
chapter 1, whereby stops are said to involve a greater degree of
stricture than fricatives, which in turn involve greater
constriction than approximants and vowels. Similarly, the more
142

open a vowel articulation, the less stricture there is in the oral
cavity. The acoustic effect of these sorts of articulation is that
the lesser the degree of constriction, the greater the degree of
sonority. The second articulatory factor is voicing: voiceless
segments are less vowel-like, less sonorant, than voiced
segments: vowels are typically voiced, and voicing creates
greater sonority.
Applied to syllable structure, the idea is that the most
sonorous element in a syllable will be located within the
nucleus, and that the further one gets from the nucleus, the less
sonorous are the segments. Thus, in blink, the /b/ is less
sonorous than the /l/, which is, in turn, less sonorous than the
vowel: as one approaches the nucleus, so sonority increases.
As one leaves the nucleus, we may note that the /ŋ/ is less
sonorous than the vowel, and the /k/ less sonorous in turn than
the preceding /ŋ/.
The ‘degree of sonority’ idea is very convincing, even if it
runs into some difficulties. For instance, [s] + consonant onset
clusters in English undermine the predictions made by the
sonority hierarchy, since, in cases such as sprint, the sonority
scale principle makes the right predictions except with respect
to the initial [s]. However, this merely serves further to
underline the peculiarity of English sC (s + consonant) onset
clusters: only [s]-initial onsets violate the sonority hierarchy,
and the only three-way branching onsets in English are those
which begin with an [s].
Another universal principle of syllabification concerns the
syllabification of polysyllabic words, and is referred to as the
principle of Maximal Onset. We have considered only
monosyllabic words thus far; let us therefore consider the
143

syllabification of the English word appraise, whose segmental
form is, let us say, /əpɹeɪz/. It is clear that the word is
bisyllabic; the question is where the boundary between the
syllables lies. We know that /p/ may occur in coda position in
English, as in cap, cup, etc. We also know that /pɹ/ is a well-
formed onset, as in prize, preen, etc., and we know that /ɹ/
may occur alone in onset position, as in rice, raze, etc.
Furthermore, we know that /pɹ/ is not a well-formed coda
cluster: it violates the predictions of the sonority hierarchy.
Thus, /u:pɹ/, /sɪpɹ/ etc. are ill-formed. We must therefore
decide whether the syllabification of appraise is /ə.pɹeɪz/ or /
əp.ɹeɪz/ (where the full stop indicates the syllable boundary).
The principle of Maximal Onset says that, in cases like this,
where the language-specific phonotactics will allow for two or
more syllabifications across a syllable boundary, it is the
syllabification which maximizes the material in the following
onset which is preferred. In this case, that is the former
syllabification.
The principle of Maximal Onset is intimately connected with
a universal fact about syllable structure: that syllables with an
onset consonant are in some sense more basic than those
without, and that presence of onset consonants is in some
sense more basic than presence of coda consonants. It appears
that the most ‘basic’ syllable structure in human languages is
CV syllable structure, with a single onset consonant followed
by a vowel. There are several types of evidence for this claim.
Firstly, CV-type syllables appear to be the syllable types that
human children first utter when they begin to speak (e.g. [ba],
[ma]) regardless of what language their parents speak. At that
stage in the development of the child’s syllable structure,
144

syllables in the adult language with branching onsets will be
uttered as CV structures. So too will syllables with coda
consonants: the coda consonants will simply be absent at that
stage. This strongly suggests that onset consonants are in some
way more basic, in articulatory, and perhaps perceptual, terms
than coda consonants.
Secondly, in many cases of aphasia, where post-stroke
patients have suffered damage to their speech, CV syllable
structures also appear to be the sort that first begins to appear
as the patient recovers his or her speech, even if his or her
native language has branching onsets and coda consonants.
Thirdly, languages which have both onset and coda
consonants typically allow for a wider range of consonants to
occur in onset position than in coda position.
Fourthly, coda consonants are much more likely to undergo
loss of articulation in the course of the historical development
of languages than onset consonants. This is what has happened
with /l/ in coda position in some varieties of English, where the
realization of /l/ has become vocalized ([w], which is vowel-
like, rather than consonantal) in coda position, but not in onset
position, so that [l] occurs in words like let and play, where the
/l/ is in an onset, but [w] occurs in words like feel and felt,
where the /l/ occurs in coda position (except in cases where
words such as feel are followed by a word or suffix beginning
with an empty onset, in which case the /l/ occupies that
position and is realized as [l]; see 7.7 below on
resyllabification). This kind of weakening of articulation can
lead to complete elision (non-pronunciation) of a consonant.
This is what has happened with [ɹ] in coda position in many
accents of English. In those accents, words like car and card
145

have lost the coda [ɹ], while retaining it in onsets, as in words
like run and bring.
Such cases of articulatory weakening, often leading to
complete loss of articulation, of coda consonants abound in the
world’s languages. They suggest that coda consonants are
somehow less salient in perception than onset consonants, and
studies in the way that human beings retrieve phonological
forms from mental storage suggest greater prominence for
onset consonants than for coda consonants: if one is searching
for a word in one’s lexical memory, one is more likely to
search on the basis of onset consonants than of coda
consonants.
Fifthly, there are no known languages which have VC-type
syllables but lack CV-type syllables, whereas the reverse is not
the case. This strongly suggests that CV syllables are more
basic than VC, or indeed any other, syllable type.
This generalization about CV syllable structure probably has
a basis in both articulation and perception. If you try to
produce a word with an empty onset in isolation (e.g. the word
eye), you will find it hard to do without uttering some kind of
consonantal articulation (typically, a glottal stop) before you
utter the vowel. Preference for filled, rather than empty, onsets
is probably rooted in the nature of our articulatory apparatus
and also tied to greater perceptual salience of onset consonants.
Given the principle of Maximal Onset, it is clear that, in a
syllable such as the first syllable in appraise, the rhyme
contains a short vowel (dominated, of course, by a single
skeletal slot) and does not contain a coda, thus:
(11) appraise:
146

Syllables such as the first syllable in appraise, in which there
is no branching within the rhyme, either at the level of the
rhyme node itself, or within the nucleus, are called light
syllables. And syllables which have branching anywhere within
the rhyme constituent are called heavy syllables. This
distinction in syllable weight is said by some to be important
in understanding the nature of word stress in English.
There are two generalizations about word stress in English
which some phonologists make. The first is that any stressed
syllable in English is very likely to be a heavy syllable. The
second is that monosyllabic words may not end in one of the
short vowel phonemes (/ʊ/, /ɪ/, /æ/, /ε/, /ɑ/ or /ʌ/), since a
nucleus containing only one of those vowels, with no coda
consonant, is light, and if a monosyllabic word is to be
stressed, there is no choice as to which syllable it will be
stressed on.
7.4 Language-Specific
Phonotactics
147

Let us now consider some language-specific constraints on the
sequences of segments which may be combined in syllable
structure, known as language-specific phonotactic constraints
(phonotactics, for short).
We have allowed that, in English syllables, onsets, nuclei,
rhymes and codas may branch. But we have not said whether
there is any limit on the number of branches they may have.
Only one sort of English onset exceeds binary (two-way)
branching: /s/ + consonant + {/j/, /w/ or /ɹ/} onsets, as in spew,
square and scream. Note that the range of segments which
may form the third element in such sequences is even more
restricted than those in binary branching onsets.
As we have seen, onsets may branch in English, but if they
do, there are phonotactic constraints on the form they may
take. Ignoring the /s/ + consonant cases, we may say that the
first segment must be a stop or a fricative and the second must
be /ɹ/, /l/, /j/ or /w/. Thus /pɹ/, /pl/, /pj/, /bɹ/, /bl/, /bj/, /tɹ/, /tw/,
/dɹ/, /dw/, /kɹ/, /kl/, /kw/, /θɹ/, /θw/, /fɹ/, /fl/, /fj/, /sl/, /sj/ and
/sw/ are all permissible. This list reflects other onset
phonotactics. For instance, /t/, /d/ and /θ/ may not be followed
by /l/, and none of the voiced fricatives may occur in branching
onsets.
Among the phonotactic constraints on rhymes in English, we
may note the following. Firstly, /h/ does not occur in rhymes in
English. Secondly, in many accents of English, /ɹ/ does not
occur in rhymes either; so that words like farm and car
arguably have phonological forms such as /fɑ:m/ and /kɑ:/,
without an /ɹ/. Accents which lack /ɹ/ in rhymes are referred to
as non-rhotic accents; they include Australian English, New
Zealand English, RP, South African English, most of the
148

accents of the North of England, and the Southern and Eastern
accents of the United States. These accents were rhotic at one
stage; [ɹ] has been lost in rhymes in those accents. Rhotic
accents, which have not undergone this historical change,
include GA, the accents of English spoken in Scotland, and
some accents spoken in the South West of England. We will
discuss such accents in more detail later.
The overall shape of syllables in a language often acts as a
major factor in adult second language acquisition. For instance,
simplifying somewhat, Japanese syllable structure does not
allow for branching onsets. This often has the effect that, when
native speakers of Japanese utter English words with complex
onsets, such as screw, they will tend to insert a vowel after
each of the first three consonants, thus rendering the word
trisyllabic: [sɯkɯɾɯ]. This process of vowel insertion is
known as vowel epenthesis, and such vowels are known as
epenthetic vowels. Similarly, and again simplifying somewhat,
Japanese syllable structure does not allow for word-final coda
consonants, so that English loanwords, such as cake, which
end in a coda consonant in English, tend to be uttered as
bisyllabic words ending in a vowel: [keki].
Similar cases abound. For instance, Spanish, unlike English,
does not have words beginning with an s + consonant onset.
However, Spanish does have words such as España which, in
some cases, correspond to English words with an s +
consonant onset (in this case, the word Spain). One of the
effects of this is that Spanish speakers tend to insert an [ε]
before English words beginning with s + consonant clusters, as
in [εspeɪn] (Spain). Similarly, English loanwords in Spanish are
pronounced with such an epenthetic [ε], as in [εsmokin]
149

(‘smoking jacket’).
7.5 Syllabic Consonants and
Phonotactics
It is possible for consonants to form the nucleus of a syllable in
the speech of English speakers, particularly as the rate of
speech increases. These consonants are called syllabic
consonants. Three alternative pronunciations of the word
bottle, for many speakers, are [bɑtəɫ], [bɑtɫ̩] or [bɑʔɫ̩]. In the
latter two pronunciations, the final unstressed vowel (schwa)
has been lost, but the word still has two syllables, with the
lateral becoming syllabified. Syllabic consonants are transcribed
by means of the ‘syllabic’ diacritic, placed under the
appropriate consonant symbol.
Syllabic nasals are common in many varieties of English. An
example is the word button, which has two syllables. For many
speakers of English, it may be pronounced [bʌtən] or [bʌʔn̩ ],
where the second pronunciation has a syllabic nasal. The
second vowel in the first pronunciation is an unstressed vowel
(schwa) which may be ‘lost’, particularly in faster or more
casual speech. A similar example is the word happen, which,
for many speakers, has (at least) the two pronunciations
[hæpən] and [hæʔm̩ ]. Here, the nasal [n] assimilates to the
‘intended’ bilabial articulation [p], which in turn is articulated
as a glottal stop. Other examples involving nasals are [ɹεʔŋ] vs
[ɹεkən] (reckon), and [kn̩ u:] vs [kənu:] (canoe).
A similar example involving the approximant [ɹ] is the word
150

parade, which often has the alternative pronunciations [pəɹeɪd]
and [pɹ̩ eɪd]. It is typically nasals, laterals and [ɹ] which undergo
syllabification in English, although fricatives may also be
syllabified, as in some pronunciations of, for instance, support,
which may be [səpʰɔ:t] or [s̩ pʰɔ:t] (as distinct from sport:
[spɔ:t], with one, not two, syllables).
In English (but not in some other languages), for every case
in which a syllabic consonant may occur, there will be an
alternative pronunciation of the word with a vowel preceding
or following the syllabified consonant.
All of these words have phonological representations
containing a vowel in the nucleus of each syllable, as in canoe:
(12) canoe:
It is striking that, although English speakers frequently utter
words such as canoe with a syllabic nasal, as in [kn̩ u:], when
faced with non-English words such as gnu, they will tend to
insert an epenthetic vowel, uttering the word as [gənu], making
it conform to English syllable structure, in which /gn̩ / is not a
permissible English syllable. The important point to be made
here is that constraints on English syllable structure are defined
151

in terms of permissible phonological sequences, rather than
phonetic ones.
We have said that English does not allow for phonological
syllabic consonants, but many other languages do. The
Polynesian language Maori, and many Bantu languages, for
instance, allow for phonologically syllabic nasals. Examples are
Bantu names such as Mbabande, Ndola and Nkomo, each of
which begins, phonologically, with a syllabic nasal, as in
[ŋkomo], which has three syllables. Native speakers of English
will tend to utter such words with an epenthetic vowel placed
adjacent to the relevant nasal, as in [nɪkomo] or [ɪŋkomo], thus
making the phonetic sequence conform to the English
phonological pattern. All of these cases provide evidence for
the phonological vs phonetic distinction we have drawn, and
show 
how 
profound 
an 
influence 
our 
phonological
representations can have on our perception and production of
non-native words.
7.6 Syllable-Based
Generalizations
We said in 7.1 that some of the evidence for the existence of
the syllable as a phonological constituent comes from the fact
that there are significant phonological generalizations which
cannot be adequately expressed without appeal to syllable
structure. One such generalization concerns the distribution of
velarized laterals (‘dark l’s) in many accents of English. For
many speakers, the following sort of distribution between
152

velarized and non-velarized /l/ may be found:
(13) Velarized and non-velarized /l/
One might attempt to state the distribution of [l] and [ɫ] as
follows: [ɫ] occurs when immediately followed by another
consonant, or at the end of a word (i.e. when immediately
followed by a word boundary). But one of the objections to
this formulation is that it is not clear what, if anything, a
following consonant and a word boundary might have in
common. A simpler statement of the distribution, which does
not entail appeal to this peculiar disjunction of environments, is
to say that [ɫ] occurs in the rhyme of a syllable, and [l] in the
onset. Indeed, we might take that syllable-based account of the
distribution to help us diagnose the syllabic status of the second
/l/ in lily: we might say that, because the second /l/ is not
velarized in the speech of many speakers, this confirms our
claim that it occupies onset position in the second syllable of
lily, rather than coda position in the first syllable.
Let us consider another example, from London English, of
the syllable-based nature of some phonological generalizations.
The vowels [ɒʊ] and [ʌʊ] are said by some phonologists to be
in complementary distribution in the speech of many speakers
of London English. The following table exemplifies this:
(14) [ɒʊ] and [ʌʊ] in London English
The claim is that the [ʌʊ] phoneme is realized as [ɒʊ] when
it is followed by an /l/ which is in the same syllable as the [ʌʊ]
153

(i.e. when followed by a tautosyllabic /l/), and as [ʌʊ]
elsewhere. Thus, in the words in the left-hand column, we
have [ɒʊ]. In the right-hand column, the vowel in load clearly
lacks a following tautosyllabic /l/; as for cola and tombola, we
would want to argue, from the principle of Maximal Onset, that
the /l/s there occupy onset position in the following syllable,
and thus that the [ʌʊ] there also lacks a following tautosyllabic
/l/.
7.7 Morphological Structure,
Syllable Structure and
Resyllabification
The case just cited is a little more complex than we have, thus
far, suggested. Consider the following further data, from the
same accent:
(15)
What is the phonological status of the diphthong in roller?
On the one hand, we have said that the [ɒʊ] allophone appears
before a tautosyllabic /l/. On the other hand, it would appear
that Maximal Onset would have us syllabify the /l/ into the
onset position of the second syllable. But if the /l/ is indeed in
that position, then we ought to get the [ʌʊ] allophone. Why,
then, do we not get that allophone? Let us consider two
possible responses.
154

One response is to say that speakers of this accent originally
had a straightforward phonological rule, of the sort we have
given, for the realization of the [ʌʊ] phoneme, but that, as the
accent has evolved, a phonemic split has emerged: the two
vowels were in complementary distribution, but have come to
occur in overlapping, parallel distribution. Evidence which is
cited in support of this view is the emergence of minimal pairs,
such as holey vs holy. Here, it is argued, we have clear
evidence that a phonemic split has occurred.
We might make the following objection to the analysis just
cited: it is failing to take note of an important generalization
concerning the members of minimal pairs such as holy and
holey, namely that those containing the [ʌʊ] vowel consist of
only one morpheme (they are morphologically simple),
whereas those containing [ɒʊ] consist of more than one
morpheme (they are morphologically complex). Furthermore,
in each case, the relevant vowel occurs before an /l/ which, in
the morphologically complex cases, is morpheme-final.
One way of expressing this sensitivity of the phonological
rule to morphological structure is to say that the rule applies
prior to the affixation of the suffix in cases like holey, as
follows:
(16) root: /hʌʊl/
155

(17) Application of [ʌʊ] rule
[ʌʊ] → [ɒʊ] before tautosyllabic /l/
(18) Affixation
(19) Resyllabification
156

This analysis requires appeal to a further notion: that of
resyllabification. The idea is that, while the /l/ is initially
syllabified into coda position, it is resyllabified, after affixation,
and according to the Maximal Onset principle, into the empty
onset in the suffix (the idea of resyllabification into an empty
onset position being part of the motivation for postulating
empty onsets).
There is an important point to be made with respect to cases
such as this. It is that there may be cases where a phonetic
distinction acts as the basis for minimal pairs (in this case, pairs
like holy/holey) where, nonetheless, we do not wish to
postulate a phonemic distinction between the two segments. In
such cases, the members of those pairs will almost always
differ in their morphological structure (in this case, holy is
morphologically simple, while holey is morphologically
complex), and that difference will affect the application of
generalizations which govern the allophones of phonemes.
Notice that, in the case of many non-London accents, the
reverse 
ordering 
of 
phonological 
generalizations 
and
resyllabification applies in the case of the generalizations which
yield the [i:] and [i:ə] allophones of the /i:/ phoneme and the
157

clear and dark allophones of the /l/ phoneme. We saw that, in
many accents, in words like peel and feel, the allophone of /i:/
is [i:ə], and the /l/ allophone is [ɫ], as in [fi:əɫ] (feel). In cases
like feeling, the /l/ is resyllabified into the empty onset of the
suffix -ɪŋ, thus: [fi:lɪŋ]. We want to say that the rule (as defined
on p. 64) which governs the allophones of the /l/ phoneme, and
the rule which governs the allophones of the /i:/ phoneme,
apply after resyllabification.
We will take the view that, while the phonemic principle, in
distinguishing 
between 
contrastive 
and 
non-contrastive
distinctions, embodies an important insight into the nature of
phonological organization, its conception of phonological
contrast is at times overly restrictive, since it is defined without
reference to the influence of morphological and syntactic
factors on phonological organization. We will therefore, at
times, allow our analyses to, as it were, override the phonemic
principle. In doing so, we are not abandoning the notions which
find a place in that principle; rather, we are allowing that
morphological factors may influence phonological processes.
7.8 Summing Up
We have adopted here an account of the syllable as a
phonological constituent. We have said that the sub-parts of
syllables have differing degrees of perceptual salience, so that
the nucleus is more salient than the other parts of the syllable.
This is perhaps why, in many languages, coda consonants so
often diminish in degree of stricture, to the point of ‘fading
away’ altogether. This is what has happened to the realizations
158

of the /ɹ/ phoneme in many accents of English, for instance: at
one stage in their history, /ɹ/ was realized in coda position. It is
also what happened to many case endings (suffixes which
consisted of a vowel and one or more coda consonants) in the
history of English nouns (English nouns used to have case
endings such as -um, -am, -ans, -uns, all of which have
disappeared over time).
The loss of case endings in English nouns involved another
factor, however: not only are nuclei more salient perceptually
than coda consonants, but, in languages like English, some
nuclei in a word (stressed nuclei) are more salient than others.
It is to the subject of word stress in English that we now turn.
Exercises
1 For each of the following words, say how it is
syllabified, and why alternative syllabifications are
disallowed (e.g. the word /kwɒntɪti/ (quantity) is
syllabified as /kwɒn.tɪ.ti/; the syllabification /kwɒ.ntɪ.ti/
violates English phonotactics, since /nt/ is not a
permissible branching onset; the syllabification /kwɒnt.ɪ.ti/
is ruled out by the principle of Maximal Onset):
(a)
/ɹəvaɪz/
(revise)
(b)
/pɹədɪkʃən/
(prediction)
(c)
159

/ɹεzɪdεnʃəl/
(residential)
(d)
/εmpəɹə/
(emperor)
(e)
/dʒæpəni:z/
(Japanese)
(f)
/kɒndʌkt/
(conduct)
2 
Of 
the 
following 
monosyllabic 
phonological
representations, say which are English, and which are
non-English, representations for monosyllabic words. For
each non-English form, say why it is not possible:
(a) /pnɪt/
(b) /psɪt/
(c) /pɹɒt/
(d) /plεt/
(e) /pɪh/
(f) /ɹpæt/
3 Examine the following data from the Cockney variety of
London English:
(a)
[lɔɪʔ]
light
(b)
[laɪdi]
lady
160

(c)
[fi:lɪn]
feeling
(d)
[fiɪw]
feel
(e)
[gɜ:w]
girl
(f)
[bɒʔu]
bottle (bisyllabic)
(g)
[filʌ]
filler
(h)
[fiɪwʔʌ]
filter
(i)
[waɪ]
way
(j)
[weɪʔ]
wet
The sound [w] may be a realization of the /w/ phoneme,
as in (i) and (j). However, it may also be an allophone of
the /l/ phoneme, as in (d), (e) and (h). In (f), /l/ becomes a
syllabic ‘[w]’, namely [u]. That is, there is phonemic
overlapping between /l/ and /w/. In which contexts does
the [w] allophone of /l/ occur? Your answer should be
expressed in terms of syllable structure.
161

4 Further transcription practice
Listen to Track 7.1 at www.wiley.com/go/carrphonetics.
Transcribe, with as much detail as possible, the words you
hear on the recording, indicating syllable boundaries (with
a full stop) and any syllabic consonants (e.g. battle:
[bæ.ʔɫ̩], for some speakers):
hunting   kettle   derived   university   wrecking   suppose
162

8
Rhythm and Word Stress in
English
8.1 The Rhythm of English
Human beings speak rhythmically: they engage in the act of
speaking by putting regular beats in the speech signal. You can
hear those beats in an English utterance such as The man went
to the bar. Here, the beats are on man, went and bar. In most
varieties of English, we do not necessarily place a beat on
every single syllable. In this utterance, no beat falls on the
preposition to, or on the two occurrences of the. This is
because English, unlike certain other languages, is stress-timed:
the rhythmic beats fall only on stressed syllables. In our
example, only man, went and pub are stressed, so the beats fall
only on those. English is unlike many other languages in this
respect. Take the phrase Chicken MacNuggets, the name for a
product sold by a well-known fast-food company. This is
pronounced [ˌtʃɪkənməkˈnʌɡəts]. There are two stressed
syllables in this sequence. (The second is more prominent than
the first: we’ll come back to that.) The sequences [ˈtʃɪkənmək]
and [ˈnʌɡəts] form rhythmic units in the utterance. Those units
163

are called metrical feet. A metrical foot in English consists of a
stressed syllable followed by zero or more unstressed syllables.
In our example, the first metrical foot contains a stressed
syllable and two unstressed syllables: [ˌtʃɪkənmək]. The second
metrical foot contains a stressed syllable and one unstressed
syllable: [ˈnʌɡəts]. Notice that divisions between the metrical
feet need not coincide with word boundaries: the word
boundary falls between the words Chicken and the word
MacNuggets. But the rhythmic boundary falls between
[ˌtʃɪkənmək] and [ˈnʌɡəts]. We call these metrical feet
trochaic. This is an adjective derived from the noun trochee. A
trochee is essentially a stressed–unstressed sequence, such as
[ˈnʌɡəts]. We will examine these trochaic metrical feet in more
detail in chapter 9. For the moment, we need only note that
word stress patterns are part and parcel of the rhythmic
structure of English.
8.2 English Word Stress: Is It
Entirely Random?
We have already noted that the native speaker’s perceptual
capacities allow him or her to say how many syllables a word
has, in the absence of any conscious knowledge of what a
syllable might be, or how it might be defined. Similarly, English
speakers can tell which syllable in a word receives most stress,
in the absence of any conscious knowledge of exactly what
‘stress’ might be. While the native speaker may not know
consciously what stress is, it seems clear that, the more
164

stressed a syllable is, the more salient it is, perceptually. For
instance, most native speakers of English will agree that, in the
word photography, it is the antepenultimate (third last) syllable
(the one before the penultimate, or second last, one) which is
most stressed. Equally, most speakers will know that, in
kangaroo, it is the last of its three syllables which receives most
stress, and so on. It is equally striking that the native speaker
can judge that, while the final syllable in kangaroo receives
more stress than either of the others, the antepenultimate (third
from last) syllable in turn receives more stress than the
penultimate (second from last) syllable. The final syllable and
the penultimate syllable of photography are unstressed, as is
the syllable before the ante-penultimate syllable. They are
therefore less salient than the antepenultimate syllable, which
has primary stress. The penultimate syllable of kangaroo is
unstressed and is the least salient syllable in that word. Let us
say that the syllable in a word which receives most stress has
primary stress, and that syllables such as the ante-penultimate
syllable in kangaroo have secondary stress; while syllables
which have neither primary nor secondary stress are unstressed
syllables. We could therefore say that any given word will have
a stress pattern: in the case of kangaroo, a final syllable with
primary stress, preceded by a penultimate unstressed syllable,
preceded by an antepenultimate syllable with secondary stress.
We can informally represent primary stress by placing a
superscript diacritic (ˈ) immediately before the start of the
appropriate syllable, and secondary stress by using the
subscript diacritic (ˌ), leaving any unstressed syllables without a
diacritic, as follows: [ˌkæŋgəˈɹu:]. This notation is used in
pronouncing dictionaries.
165

It seems clear that knowledge of the stress patterns of words
does not normally require instruction, and children acquiring
their native language are not normally given explicit instruction
by their parents as to where the stresses in a word are placed.
Having noted that, let us consider the following question: how
does the speaker know what the stress pattern of a given word
is? It seems reasonable to suggest that the child who is
acquiring English simply has to memorize the stress pattern of
each word as it is learned. After all, for any given word, the
speaker has to memorize the sequence of phonemes which
make up the phonemic form of the word. Whether one is a
child acquiring English or an adult learning English, one might
just as well memorize the stress pattern while one is at it. One
might object that this means that an average speaker has a vast
number of stress patterns to memorize (as many stress patterns
as there are words in her or his vocabulary), but we know that
human beings are very good at storing large amounts of
information of this sort in memory. Again, we can point to the
vast number of phonological forms which the speaker clearly
must have in mental storage; it is, surely, not too tasking to an
organism which has that kind of storage capacity to store the
stress patterns of those words along with the sequence of
phonemes which partly make up its phonological form.
But this is not to say that there are no unconsciously stored
generalizations governing stress patterns in English. We know
that, for some languages, such as Modern Greek, the stress
pattern of most words is entirely arbitrary. We also know that
some languages have fixed stress: the stress always falls on a
given syllable (in French, for instance, it always falls on the
final syllable of the word, and in Polish on the second last
syllable of the word). Let us consider some evidence in favour
166

of the idea that the native speaker of English has unconsciously
formed generalizations concerning word stress patterns in
English. Take the following two sets of bisyllabic English
words (words with two syllables), all of them morphologically
simple (i.e. containing only one morpheme: no prefixes, no
suffixes):
(1)
The words in the first column have primary stress on the
penultimate syllable, those in the second column have primary
stress on the final syllable. On the face of it, it looks as if
bisyllabic words in English may have the primary stress on
either the final or the penultimate syllable. Perhaps it’s all
entirely arbitrary: perhaps there are no rules. Consider,
however, the following French words as uttered by speakers of
French and by speakers of English with a noticeably English
pronunciation of French (you may ignore any unfamiliar
phonetic symbols in the French transcriptions: it’s the stress
patterns that matter here):
(2)
The word stress rule in French could not be simpler: stress
167

the final syllable of the word. So why do so many speakers of
English have this strong tendency to stress the penultimate
syllable in so many French words when they try to speak
French? It’s not as if the French rule is hard to grasp. And,
after all, English speakers have countless words in their
language in which bisyllabic words are stressed on the final
syllable: it’s not as if they are not in the habit of placing
primary stress on the final syllable of bisyllabic words in their
own language. So what is ‘typically English’ about such stress
patterns in French bisyllabic words?
Consider too the following trisyllabic French words and a
typical English mis-stressing of them:
(3)
Why should there be a tendency among English speakers to
mis-stress such trisyllabic words on the antepenultimate
syllable? What is it that makes such a mis-stressing ‘typically
English’?
Finally, consider the following trisyllabic nouns in English:
(4)
The words in the first column have primary stress on the
antepenultimate syllable, those in the second column on the
penultimate syllable, and those in the third column on the final
syllable. Given that the words do not differ as to syntactic
168

category (they are all nouns) and do not differ in terms of total
number of syllables, it looks as though there is no
generalization concerning primary word stress in English
trisyllabic nouns: it all looks entirely arbitrary, as if there were
no rules. Consider, however, the following non-English
trisyllabic nouns:
(5)
Gigondas          moussaka          Zaventem          tavola
The first of these words is French (it is the name of a town,
and a wine, in the Southern Rhône Valley), and is stressed, like
all French words, on the final syllable. The second is Greek,
and is stressed by Greek speakers on the final syllable. The
third is Dutch (it is the name of a town in Belgium, and the
name of Brussels airport); it is stressed, in Dutch, on the
antepenultimate syllable. The fourth is the Italian word for
‘table’ and is stressed, in Italian, on the antepenultimate
syllable.
What is striking about English speakers who know little or no
French, Greek, Dutch or Italian, and have never heard the
words before, is that they show a very strong tendency, on first
encountering them, to mispronounce these words by stressing
them on the penultimate syllable, as follows: [dʒɪˈgɒndəs], [mu
ˈsɒ:kə], [zəˈvεntəm], [təˈvəʊlə]. If the English speaker has no
word stress generalizations, this tendency is deeply puzzling,
since that would mean that, given a word one has never
encountered before (especially a foreign word), one should
display no tendency to prefer placing the stress on any
particular syllable. One might expect a given individual to utter
each word variably on different occasions, with each of the
three possible stress patterns. And even if a given speaker
alighted, arbitrarily, on a given stress pattern and stuck to it
169

thereafter, one would expect variation from speaker to speaker.
But this does not seem to happen: the pronunciation in which
the second syllable is stressed is the one which they tend to opt
for. You will probably agree, especially if you know any
French, Dutch or Italian and have heard English speakers
mispronouncing words in those languages, that this kind of
pronunciation is ‘typically English’. But, once again, what is
‘typically English’ about it? We can only answer such questions
if there are word stress generalizations, or at least word stress
tendencies, in English, and if we know what they are. We will
now look at the form those generalizations take.
8.3 English Word Stress:
Some General Principles
A first general principle (Principle 1: The End-Based Principle)
is that the placement of primary stresses in English words is
calculated by counting from the end of the word: the primary
stress in a word will tend to fall on either the final syllable of
the word, the penultimate (second last) syllable or the
antepenultimate (third last) syllable (though it can fall earlier
than that). This reflects the fact that most varieties of English
have word stress patterns which are essentially trochaic. Recall
that the adjective trochaic is derived from the noun trochee,
and that a trochee is a stressed syllable (whether primary
stressed or secondary stressed) followed by zero or more
unstressed syllables. We will say that stressed monosyllabic
words (such as box), words with penultimate stress (such as
170

spider and departure) and words with antepenultimate stress
(such as cinema and America) all exhibit trochaic stress
patterns. The rhythm of most varieties of English is trochaic:
there is a tendency to place the rhythmic beat on the stressed
syllables of trochaic feet.
A second general principle (Principle 2: The Rhythmic
Principle) is that, while it is possible for English words to end
with as many as four unstressed syllables (as in un
ˈgentlemanliness), English words cannot begin with more than
one unstressed syllable. Principle 2 is directly related to
Principle 1: the reason why we do not begin words with
sequences of two or more unstressed syllables is that, if we
place a secondary stress within such sequences, we can create
a trochaic foot, which is desirable from the point of view of the
rhythmic structure of English. When we derive Japanese from
Japan, the primary stress shifts from the final syllable of Japan
onto the final syllable of Japanese (we will examine such stress
shifts shortly). But, having shifted the primary stress, we
cannot leave the word Japanese with a sequence of two
unstressed syllables preceding the primary stressed syllable: we
must place a secondary stress on one of the two preceding
syllables: ˌJapaˈnese.
When this happens, a third general principle (Principle 3:
The Derivational Principle) comes into play: there is a
tendency to place the secondary stress on the syllable which
had primary stress in the deriving word (the word which we
are deriving the more complex word from). For instance, the
word characterization exhibits a shift of primary stress from its
171

deriving word ˈcharacterize (which itself is derived from
ˈcharacter). Since Principle 2 dictates that we cannot leave the
word characterization with a series of four unstressed syllables
prior to the syllable with primary stress, we must place a
secondary stress somewhere in that sequence of syllables. The
Derivational Principle says that we ought to place it on the
syllable which had primary stress in the deriving word:
ˌcharacteriˈzation.
However, Principle 3 may be overruled by a fourth general
principle (Principle 4: The Stress Clash Avoidance Principle),
which states that one should try to avoid having two adjacent
stressed syllables. In the case of ˌcharacteriˈzation, both
principles are adhered to. But note that, in the case of ˌJapa
ˈnese, this is not the case: the primary stress in the deriving
word Jaˈpan falls on the final syllable. Principle 3 dictates that
we place the secondary stress on that syllable, but Principle 4
dictates that we do not, since this would result in a stress clash,
with two adjacent stressed syllables: Jaˌpaˈnese. Cases like this
demonstrate that, where the Derivational Principle and the
Stress Clash Avoidance Principle come into conflict, and we
have an option as to which syllable to place the secondary
stress on, it is the Stress Clash Avoidance Principle 4 which
predominates: in a word like ˌJapaˈnese, we place the
secondary stress on the antepenultimate syllable in order to
satisfy the Stress Clash Avoidance constraint. The Stress Clash
Avoidance Principle is a strong general tendency in English.
But there are words in English which violate that principle,
such as the verb ˌreˈrun, and the nouns ˌchamˈpagne and ˌDun
172

ˈdee. We will look at these in more depth in the following
chapter. As far as the Derivational Principle is concerned, there
are words such as Burmese and Chinese, which are derived
from ˈBurma and ˈChina. In such cases, we have no choice
but to place the secondary stress on the penultimate syllable:
ˌBurˈmese, ˌChiˈnese. But where we have a choice between
two or more syllables, as in ˌJapaˈnese and ˌPortuˈguese, we
both avoid a stress clash and also create a sequence of two
trochaic feet within the word. So Principle 4, the Stress Clash
Avoidance Principle, often works together with Principle 2, the
Rhythmic Principle, to create extra trochaic feet at the
beginnings of words. Why, despite the avoidance of sequences
of unstressed syllables at the beginning of a word, is it
nonetheless possible to have as many as four unstressed
syllables at the end of a word, as in gentlemanliness? Because
they end with certain kinds of suffix. We will consider such
suffixes shortly. For the moment, let us look further at words
stress in morphologically simple words.
8.4 Word Stress Assignment
in Morphologically Simple
Words
English is a Germanic language which has borrowed a huge
amount of vocabulary from Latinate languages, notably French
and Latin, many of them with Latinate suffixes and prefixes.
The effect of this has been to make the word stress patterns
173

more complex than they would otherwise have been, and non-
native speakers will testify to the difficulty they often
experience in trying to master the stress patterns of English
words. Nonetheless, there is considerable regularity in English
word stress patterns. Let us begin by considering words which
clearly do not have prefixes or suffixes, in present-day English
(though some of these had prefixes historically). We will
distinguish words of a lexical category from words of a non-
lexical category. Words of a lexical category are nouns, verbs,
adjectives and adverbs. Words of a non-lexical category include
prepositions, determiners (such as the, this, his), pronouns
(such as he, her) and the conjunction and. Words of a non-
lexical category, often referred to as function words, are not
normally stressed. Among the words of a lexical category,
primary stress placement may vary, depending on the syntactic
category of the word.
Monosyllabic words of a lexical category (such as box, run,
big), are unproblematic: there is only one syllable for the
primary stress to fall on. Let us therefore move on to
morphologically simple bisyllabic words, and then proceed to
morphologically simple polysyllabic words (words with three or
more syllables).
8.4.1 Morphologically Simple
Bisyllabic Words
8.4.1.1 Bisyllabic Nouns
The basic pattern here is the native Germanic trochaic pattern,
174

that is, with primary stress on the penultimate syllable, as in
Arab, bigot, carpet, district, effort, female, gremlin, harbour,
lemon, market, native, person, rabbit, senate, turnip, vampire,
woman. However, there is a substantial class of exceptions to
this basic pattern, in which bisyllabic nouns have final stress.
Among these are nouns which have been borrowed from other
languages and are written with a double vowel letter, as in
balloon, bazaar, canteen, harpoon, marquee, papoose,
raccoon, shampoo, taboo, veneer. Another set of bisyllabic
nouns stressed on the final syllable have been borrowed from
French; they contain the French endings -ee, -ette, -ade, -elle,
-esse, -asse, -eur, -euse, as in grandee, gazette, parade,
gazelle, finesse, crevasse, liqueur, masseuse. Since word stress
in French always falls on the final syllable, words such as these
have mostly retained the French stress pattern. Other French
bisyllabic loanwords which have retained final stress include
hotel: [həʊˈtʰεɫ]. Had this word been fully nativized, it would
be pronounced [ˈhəʊtəɫ], with the native Germanic trochaic
stress pattern. We assume here that words such as gazette,
parade, 
etc. 
are 
mostly 
morphologically 
simple 
in
contemporary English.1
8.4.1.2 Bisyllabic Adjectives
The basic Germanic pattern is again trochaic, i.e. with stress on
the penult, as in angry, brilliant, central, crazy, dozy, fragile,
frigid, happy, honest, lazy, modest, narrow, orange, purple,
175

sudden, timid, urgent, yellow. The trochaic pattern can also be
found in morphologically simple bisyllabic adjectives ending in
-ic, as in cosmic, frantic, Nordic, static.2 However, there are
bisyllabic adjectives with final stress, such as complete,
immense, intense, precise, select. These contain historical
prefixes which are Latinate in origin: they come from Latin or
French. Most of these historical prefixes no longer count as
productive prefixes in contemporary English (they cannot be
freely combined with roots to form new words). Large
numbers of these words are now morphologically simple, for
the vast majority of speakers of English speakers. In addition
to these, bisyllabic adjectives which contain what were,
historically, French suffixes, such as bizarre and grotesque,
have final stress. As with nouns like gazette and parade, we
assume here that adjectives such as bizarre and grotesque are
morphologically simple.
8.4.1.3 Bisyllabic Adverbs
Once again, the basic Germanic pattern is trochaic. Many
bisyllabic adverbs end in -ly, as in slowly and quickly. We will
deal with those in 8.5. Other adverbs which do not end in -ly
include rather and very. These also have a trochaic stress
pattern.
8.4.1.4 Bisyllabic Verbs
The basic trochaic tendency in most varieties of English is
much less evident in bisyllabic verbs: there are many with final
176

primary stress, as we have seen: compact, detract, deny,
export, impose, object, permit, produce, record, subsume,
transgress. As with adjectives, many of these historically had
prefixes in the languages they were borrowed from: French or
Latin (e.g. com-pact, de-tract, ex-port, im-pose, ob-ject, re-
cord, sub-sume). The tendency to avoid stressing the historical
prefix is strong: it is striking that such bisyllabic verbs differ so
often from their bisyllabic noun counterparts, as in the verb–
noun pairs conˈtract (verb) but ˈcontract (noun), diˈgest (verb)
but ˈdigest (noun), proˈduce (verb) but ˈproduce (noun), ex
ˈport (verb) but ˈexport (noun), comˈpound (verb) but
ˈcompound (noun), etc., where the verb takes final stress but
the noun takes the normal trochaic penultimate stress. (But
there are exceptions to this pattern, as in conˈcern where the
noun and verb both take the verb pattern, and ˈpreface, where
the noun and verb both take the noun pattern.)
It is also worth noting that bisyllabic verbs ending in -ate will
take primary stress on the -ate, as in create, deflate, locate,
migrate, placate, sedate. These have to be distinguished from -
ate words with three or more syllables (see below). Note that,
in GA, some of these words take penultimate stress, such as
frustrate and locate.
There are, however, bisyllabic verbs with the basic trochaic
stress pattern, such as argue, canter, dither, enter, equal, falter,
gather, govern, hurry, manage, market, marry, narrow, rattle,
sully, travel.
177

8.4.2 Morphologically Simple
Polysyllabic Words
8.4.2.1 Polysyllabic Nouns
The basic Germanic pattern is trochaic. For words of more
than two syllables, this means having primary stress on the
antepenultimate syllable, as in academy, America, antelope,
camera, cinema, custody, deficit, elephant, emperor, harmony,
library, melody, paradise, quantity, strategy. However, there
is a substantial class of exceptions to this basic pattern, in
which polysyllabic nouns have final stress. Among these are
nouns which have final syllables which are written with a
double vowel letter, as in kangaroo. Another set of polysyllabic
nouns stressed on the final syllable have been borrowed from
French; they contain the French endings -ette, -ade, -elle, -
esque, -eur, as in cigarette, lemonade, bagatelle, picturesque,
connoisseur. Words such as these are mostly morphologically
simple in contemporary English. That is, they do not really
have a suffix: while there is a morpheme cigar, a cigarette is
not a small cigar, for instance.3
There is a set of nouns which have consonant clusters after
the penultimate vowel, and these have penultimate primary
stress, as in advantage, apartment, consensus, disaster,
objective. There is also a set of nouns which have three or
more syllables and which end in -ics. These too tend to have
178

penultimate stress, as in acoustics, electrics, linguistics,
logistics, mathematics, statistics.
Finally, there is a set of loanwords ending in a vowel which
depart from the basic antepenultimate pattern, and take
penultimate stress, such as banana, bikini, chapatti, chorizo,
karate, martini, moussaka, mosquito, potato, samosa, tomato,
volcano.
8.4.2.2 Polysyllabic Adjectives
Again, the basic pattern is trochaic, with antepenultimate
stress, as in general, intelligent, juvenile, taciturn. However,
there is a set of adjectives with a consonant cluster after the
penultimate vowel, and these take penultimate stress, as in
dependent, disastrous, indulgent, clandestine, momentous,
objective, tremendous. These include words which have an
‘rC’ cluster in rhotic accents, and which used to have an ‘rC’
cluster in non-rhotic accents, as in enormous, maternal.
Polysyllabic adjectives ending in -ate have antepenultimate
primary stress, as in deliberate, elaborate, fortunate,
inadequate, legitimate. These are therefore unlike bisyllabic
verbs ending in -ate, which have primary stress on the -ate
(but American speakers have penultimate primary stress in
some of these words, as we have seen).
8.4.2.3 Polysyllabic Verbs
As with bisyllabic verbs, polysyllabic verbs often flout the basic
179

trochaic English word stress pattern: there are many verbs with
three or more syllables which have final primary stress, as in
entertain, intervene, intersect. As with bisyllabic verbs, many
of these have etymological prefixes which are Latinate in origin
(such as enter- and inter-).
Unlike bisyllabic verbs ending in -ate, polysyllabic verbs
ending in -ate follow the basic antepenultimate primary stress
pattern, as co-ordinate, deliberate, elaborate, investigate,
originate. These verbs thus have the same stress pattern as
polysyllabic adjectives ending in -ate.
We have now identified four factors which may play a part
in word stress assignment in morphologically simple words in
English. Firstly, the syntactic category of the word may play a
role: we saw, for instance, that many verbs depart from the
basic trochaic pattern. Secondly, we saw that the presence of
historical (etymological) prefixes of a Latinate origin can affect
the stress pattern of a word: we saw that Latinate affixes such
as ex-, pro-, inter-, although they are mostly no longer
productive prefixes in present-day English, typically fail to take
primary stress. Thirdly, we saw that spelling plays a role in
word stress. For instance, words such as shampoo, papoose
and kangaroo all exhibit primary stress on a final syllable
containing a double vowel letter. Connected with this is a
fourth factor, i.e. the presence of loanwords in English: words
such a shampoo and hotel have retained the stress pattern of
the language they were borrowed from. Note too that both
loanwords and the existence of Latinate affixes are at work in
180

the stress patterns of words such as gazelle, grotesque,
cigarette, picturesque and connoisseur.
We may now return to the stress patterns we considered in
8.2. Recall that we noted that English speakers tend to mis-
stress bisyllabic French words such as manger (‘to eat’) and
bâteau (‘boat’) by placing the stress on the penultimate
syllable. We can now see the reason for this: it is because that
is the basic pattern for bisyllabic words in English. We also
noted that English speakers tend to place primary words stress
on the antepenultimate syllable of polysyllabic French words
such as fermeture (‘closure’) and bâtiment (‘building’). The
reason is that this is the basic pattern for English polysyllabic
words. That is what is typically English about those mis-
stressings. In the pronunciation of polysyllabic words such as
Gigondas and Zaventem, the spelling plays a role: the existence
of two consonant letters in the spelling of the penultimate
syllable of the word in English often shifts the stress away
from the basic antepenultimate stress pattern to a penultimate
stress pattern. Finally, polysyllabic words such as moussaka
and tavola fall within the class of loanwords ending in a vowel
which exceptionally take penultimate primary stress.
Let us now consider word stress in morphologically complex
words.
8.5 Word Stress Assignment
and Morphological Structure
181

English has both suffixes (as in sorted, with the -ed suffix) and
prefixes (as in indirect, with the prefix in-). Let us begin with
suffixes. These may be subdivided into inflectional and
derivational suffixes. The addition of an inflectional suffix is
often said to produce ‘a different form’ of the word one would
have if the suffix had not been added. For instance, when the
suffix -ing is added to the verb obscure, the resulting word,
obscuring (as in He’s obscuring the issue), is said to be a form
of that verb; when the plural suffix is added to the noun
tractor, the resulting word tractors is a form of that noun. But
when a derivational suffix is added to a word, it is said to
produce not a different form of the same word, but another
word. Thus, when the suffix -ly is added to an adjective, say
bold, the result, the adverb boldly, is a distinct word. Similarly,
when the suffix -ness is added to an adjective, as in boldness,
the result is a distinct word. Other examples of derivational
suffixes in English are -ity (as in personal/personality), -ee (as
in divorce/divorcee), -al (as in person/personal), -ian (as in
Wagner/Wagnerian), -ic (as in atom/atomic), -ish (as in
green/greenish), -y (as in sleep/sleepy), etc. Inflectional
suffixes are not stressed, and have no effect on word stress in
English words, as can be seen from pairs such as ˈrefuge/
ˈrefuges (plural suffix), ˈcomment/ˈcommented (past tense
suffix), 
deˈvelop/ˈdeveloping, 
(progressive 
suffix), 
and
ˈvarnish/ˈvarnishes (present tense suffix).
Among the English derivational suffixes, some have no effect
on stress when added to a word, while others do affect the
182

stress pattern. These two classes of suffix are referred to as the
stress-neutral and stress-shifting suffixes, respectively. The
stress-shifting suffixes are all of Latinate descent, i.e. from
French or Latin. But not all Latinate suffixes are stress-shifting.
Let us begin by considering stress-neutral suffixes.
8.5.1 Stress-Neutral Suffixes
English is a Germanic language; all native Germanic suffixes
are stress-neutral. These include the adverbial suffix -ly, as in
the words ˈbrightly, ˈdeeply, ˈdimly, ˈmadly, ˈquickly, ˈslowly,
ˈtruly, etc. We can see here that the stress does not shift when
the suffix is added to the monosyllabic adjective from which
the adverb is derived ((ˈbright, ˈdeep, ˈdim, etc.). The stress
pattern of these adverbs is therefore the basic trochaic pattern
for English bisyllabic words: stress on the penultimate syllable.
Polysyllabic adverbs ending in -ly include ˈcheerily, ˈhappily,
inˈcredibly, reˈmarkably, treˈmendously, ˈwearily. Again, the
primary stress remains where it was in the adjective which the
adverb is derived from: ˈcheery, ˈhappy, inˈcredible, re
ˈmarkable, treˈmendous, ˈweary. In all of these cases, the
resulting adverb is a polysyllabic word with the basic trochaic
pattern for polysyllabic words, i.e. antepenultimate stress.
However, the primary stress will fall earlier than the
antepenultimate syllable if the deriving adjective has primary
stress on its antepenultimate syllable or earlier, as in
ˈcomfortably, derived from ˈcomfortable which has three
syllables in RP, but four in GA. Note that adjectives such as
comfortable and idle, which have a syllabic /l/, as in [ˈaɪdɫ̩],
183

will lose a syllable when -ly is added: idly is pronounced
[ˈaɪdli].
The native Germanic adjectival suffixes such as -er, -est, -
ish, -ful, -less, -y also have no effect on stress, so when they
are added to monosyllabic roots, the result is a trochaic stress
pattern, as in ˈgreen/ˈgreener, ˈgreen/ˈgreenest, ˈgreen/
ˈgreenish, ˈhope/ˈhopeful, ˈmind/ˈmindless, 
ˈslime/ˈslimy.
When these stress-neutral suffixes are added to bisyllabic
words with the basic trochaic stress pattern, the result is an
antepenultimate stress pattern, as in ˈheavy/ˈheavier, ˈheaviest,
ˈheavyish, 
ˈpenny/ˈpenniless, 
ˈpity/ˈpitiful, 
ˈsummer/
ˈsummery. Once again, in cases where a syllabic consonant is
possible in the deriving word (e.g. bubble: [bʌbɫ̩]), a syllable is
lost when -y is added, as in ˈbubble/ˈbubbly, ˈcrumble/
ˈcrumbly, ˈpurple/ˈpurply, ˈwinter/ˈwintry, ˈwriggle/ˈwriggly.
The result is therefore a bisyllabic adjective with penultimate
stress.
In addition to the -er suffix which marks the comparative
form of adjectives (as in greener), there is a stress-neutral
native Germanic -er suffix which can be used to form nouns
from verbs, as in ˈadvertise/ˈadvertiser, ˈlove/ˈlover, ˈmake/
ˈmaker, preˈtend/preˈtender, ˈpublish/ˈpublisher, ˈsing/ˈsinger.
We can see from these examples that the addition of this -er
suffix has no effect on stress.
Other native Germanic suffixes, used to form nouns, are -
ess, -hood, -ism, -ist, -ness, and -ship, as in ˈpriest/ˈpriestess,
184

ˈshepherd/ˈshepherdess, ˈchild/ˈchildhood, ˈadult/ˈadulthood,4
ˈMarx/ˈMarxism, 
ˈThatcher/ˈThatcherism, 
ˈMarx/ˈMarxist,
ˈUnion/ˈUnionist, ˈcapital/ˈcapitalist, ˈkind/ˈkindness, ˈgentle/
ˈgentleness, ˈfriend/ˈfriendship, aˈpprentice/aˈpprenticeship.
Once again, the addition of the suffix does not shift the stress.
There are Latinate suffixes which fail to shift stress. Among
these are the adjective-forming bisyllabic suffix -able,
pronounced [əbɫ̩], as in deˈbatable, deˈpendable, ˈdoable, per
ˈsuadable, ˈsellable. We can see that, when -able is added to
the morphemes deˈbate, deˈpend, ˈdo, perˈsuade, ˈsell the
stress does not shift. The result, in these cases, is an adjective
with antepenultimate primary stress. If -able is added to a
word which does not have primary stress on the final syllable,
such as ˈargue, ˈmanage, ˈmarket or ˈperish the result is a
word with primary stress placed prior to the ante-penultimate
syllable: ˈarguably, ˈmanageable, ˈmarketable, ˈperishable.
8.5.2 Stress-Shifting Suffixes
Among the stress-shifting derivational suffixes, we may
distinguish between those on which the primary stress falls,
and those which shift the stress within the base form to which
the suffix is attached. Let us begin with suffixes on which the
primary stress falls.
The suffixes -ee, -eer and -ese all take primary stress, as in
emˈploy/ˌemploˈyee 
ˈmountain/ˌmountaiˈneer 
and 
com
ˈputer/comˌputeˈrese). Notice that, in polysyllabic words
185

containing one of these suffixes, we cannot leave the derived
word with a sequence of unstressed syllables at the beginning:
a secondary stress must occur. This is the Rhythmic Principle
introduced in 8.3. The Derivational Principle and the Stress
Clash Avoidance Principle may also play a role here. Take the
pair computer/computerese: the -ese suffix takes primary
stress, but the Rhythmic Principle says that we cannot leave
the resulting word with a sequence of unstressed syllables at
the beginning of the word. The Derivational Principle says to
put that secondary stress on the syllable which had primary
stress in the deriving word, in this case on the syllable which is
the final syllable of the verb compute. Thus the stress pattern
comˈputeˌrese. There is no violation here of the Stress Clash
Avoidance Principle, since the secondary and primary stresses
do not fall on adjacent syllables. Recall, however, that in a
word such as Japanese, there is a clash between the
Derivational Principle and the Stress Clash Avoidance
Principle. Once we have placed primary stress on the -ese
suffix, the Rhythmic Principle insists on a secondary stress.
The Derivational Principle says that this secondary stress
should fall on the syllable containing the primary stress in the
deriving word Jaˈpan. But if we were to place the secondary
stress there, this would violate the Stress Clash Avoidance
Principle. As we have seen, when there is a conflict between
those two principles, it is the Stress Clash Avoidance Principle
which predominates. Thus the stress pattern ˌJapaˈnese. The
same situation arises for words such as ˌemploˈyee in which
the secondary stress does not fall where the primary stress falls
on the word emˈploy.
186

We have argued that many words borrowed from French
which have an -ette ending in the spelling, such as etiquette
and gazette, are not really morphologically complex: it is hard
to argue that they contain the morphemes etiq- and gaz-.
However, we allowed that there are some -ette words which
are clearly morphologically complex, as in the word
kitchenette. Our grounds for doing so were that there is clearly
a morpheme kitchen in a word like this, and a kitchenette is
indeed a small kitchen. Given that we have allowed this, we
can say that, at least in some words, there is an -ette suffix
which takes primary stress, and is thus parallel to -ee, -eer and
-ese. We saw that, where -ette has a clear meaning, it can
mean either ‘little’ (as in kitchenette and sermonette) or
‘female’ (as in the word ladette). There are some -ette words
in which it is not entirely clear whether there is a proper -ette
suffix or not. While it might seem reasonable to say that an
usherette is a female usher, it is not clear that a maisonette is a
small maison (the French word for ‘house’), although it’s
certainly a small house.
Examples of stress-shifting suffixes which do not themselves
take primary stress are -ity and -ic, as in ˈpersonal/ˌperso
ˈnality, 
ˌindiˈvidual/ˌindividuˈality, 
ˈatom/aˈtomic,
ˈmonarch/moˈnarchic. In each case, the primary stress falls on
the syllable immediately preceding the stress-shifting suffix.
Further examples of suffixes which shift stress are -ous (as in
adˈvantage/ˌadvanˈtageous) and -ious (as in ˈinjure/in
187

ˈjurious). Again, the primary stress falls on the syllable
immediately preceding the stress-shifting suffix.
You may already have noted that, when the stress in a word
shifts as a result of the addition of a stress-shifting suffix, this
can have the effect of changing the pronunciation of the vowel
in the affected syllable. Thus, in personal, the final syllable, in
the -al suffix, has a schwa vowel ([ə]) while, in personality,
the antepenultimate syllable, again in the -al suffix, has an [æ]
vowel, since that syllable bears primary stress in personality.
Consonantal changes in the base form may also occur when
suffixes are added. For instance, when -ity is added to the
adjective opaque, the resulting form opacity has an [s], rather
than a [k], at the end of the base.5 Such changes are not
limited to stress-shifting suffixes. For instance, when the suffix
-y is added to president, the resulting form, presidency, has an
[s], rather than a [t], at the end of the base. Clearly, the more
variation there is, in terms of both stress pattern and consonant
and vowel realization, between base form and affixed form, the
less evident it will be that the base and affixed forms are
actually related: while the relationship between, say, bold and
boldness (with no stress, vowel or consonant changes) is
transparent, that between, say, opaque and opacity is much
less so. It is for this reason that many people prefer to add
affixes of the -ness sort (which tend to be native to the
Germanic family of languages to which English belongs, unlike
the -ity sort, which have their roots in the Latinate languages)
to base forms.
A striking property of unstressed syllables in English is that
188

they often contain the schwa vowel, transcribed as [ə], which
is ‘less distinct’ perceptually than most other vowels. It is a
common feature of related words such as photograph and
photography that, when the stress shifts from the first to the
second syllable by virtue of the addition of the -y suffix, the
vowel in that syllable changes from being a ‘full’ vowel to
being a ‘reduced’ schwa. We will look at this kind of
phenomenon in a little more detail in the following chapter.
8.5.3 Word Stress Patterns and
Prefixes
Let us now turn to the stressing of prefixes. We will take the
view that most separable monosyllabic prefixes bear secondary
stress. By ‘separable’, we mean that, if the prefix is removed,
we are left with an existing English word, as in the verbs ˌre-
ˈallocate, ˌre-ˈfabricate, ˌre-ˈrun, ˌreˈskill, ˌreˈspray. Other
monosyllabic prefixes include:
189

It is striking that some of these can be used as independent
words, as in ‘I’m having dinner with my ex tonight’ and ‘Are
you with the pros or the antis?’
Bisyllabic prefixes can form a trochaic foot, and so, in
accordance with the Rhythmic Principle, will have the
penultimate syllable of the prefix bearing secondary stress, as
in ˌantiaˌbortion, ˌantibacˌterial, ˌantiˌcatholic, ˌantiˈchoice,
ˌanticliˈmactic, ˌanti-inˈflammatory, etc. While these all have
secondary stress, there are some cases where there is primary
stress on bisyllabic prefixes, as in anti-hero and antimatter. It
is perhaps wise to consider these latter cases as compounds
(words made from two or more words), to which we turn
shortly. Equally, while mega- can have secondary stress, as in
ˌmegaˈlithic, there are clear cases where it has primary stress,
as in ˈmegabyte ˈmegadeath and ˈmegaphone. These too may
be used as independent words, as in ‘The antis are out in
force’ or ‘That film was absolutely mega!’ Other bisyllabic
190

prefixes are extra-, as in extra-marital, extra-terrestrial, and
super-, as in super-abundant, super-human.
Prefixes such as those just listed are of Latinate origin: they
occur in words which have been borrowed directly from Latin,
or from words borrowed from French, which is derived
historically from Latin. As we have seen, there are a good
many bisyllabic noun–verb pairs in which the verb is stressed
on the final syllable, whereas the noun is stressed on the
Latinate prefix. Examples are ˌdisˈcharge (verb) vs ˈdischarge
(noun), ˌexˈport (verb) vs ˈexport (noun), ˌreˈsearch (verb) vs
ˈresearch (noun). It is not clear that such words are still
morphologically complex in contemporary English: for
example, one cannot separate the ex- of export and arrive at a
verb port. But these words certainly have elements which are,
etymologically, prefixes. There are exceptions to the
generalization that the verbs in such pairs are stressed on the
final syllable, and the nouns on the etymological prefix: some
pairs, such as debate, rebuke and supply, have the verbal
pattern, while others, such as combat, invoice and preface,
have the noun pattern. However, the differential verb-vs-noun
stress pattern still seems to be productive in contemporary
English. This can be seen from neologisms. Take the verb in
ˈvite: it conforms to the pattern. The noun invitation has
existed for some time, but a more informal term has been
coined: an ˈinvite. Interestingly, when the new noun was
derived from the existing verb, the stress shifted to conform
with the noun pattern, suggesting that speakers have access to
the noun-vs-verb stress patterns.
191

8.6 Compound Words
Compound words are, put simply, words which can be
analysed as consisting of two (or more) words, rather than as
containing a base and an affix. For instance, while mole-hill is
a compound, boldness is not (the form -ness is a suffix, not a
word). We will focus on two-part compounds here. The
Compound Stress Rule in English says, of two-part
compounds: of the two elements, the first is the most
prominent. Two-word compounds thus have the opposite
pattern to two-word phrases, such as the noun phrase black
bird (a bird which is black), the adjective phrase very tall, verb
phrases such as kissed Mary, adverb phrases such as very
slowly and prepositional phrases such as into London. These
all exhibit the English Phrasal Stress Rule (which we will return
to in chapter 9): in all of these, it is the second element which
is most prominent. Examples of compounds which have the
regular compound stress pattern, with the first element the
most prominent, are: atom-bomb, backdrop, blackbird, car-
park, classroom, comeback, corkscrew, darkroom, dragonfly,
filing cabinet, flower-bed, flowerpot, grammar school,
handshake, high-school, make-up, place-name, social life, sex
life, snowstorm, steamboat, textbook, woodpecker.
How can we tell whether a given two-word sequence is a
compound or a phrase? When the two parts are written as one
word (e.g. flowerpot) or with a hyphen (e.g. atom-bomb), it is
easy to see that one is dealing with a compound. But if the two
192

parts are written as separate words (e.g. grammar school), it is
less easy. (There is also variation in how compounds are
written: one may find, for example, the written forms textbook,
text-book and text book.) In many cases, compounds have a
different kind of semantics (meaning) from phrases. Take the
phrases black bird, dark room and green house. Compare their
meanings with the compounds blackbird, darkroom and
greenhouse. While all (male) blackbirds are black birds, not all
black birds (phrase) are blackbirds (compound): ravens,
jackdaws and cormorants are black birds (phrase), but they are
not blackbirds (compound). While all darkrooms are rooms
which are normally dark, not all dark rooms are darkrooms
(places for developing photographs): if I close the shutters and
switch off the lights in my study, it becomes a dark room
(phrase), but not a darkroom (compound). A green house
(phrase) is a house which is painted green, but a greenhouse
(compound) is not a house, and may be painted white. It
seems likely that, in the history of English, compounds started
off as phrases: a (male) blackbird is indeed black, a darkroom
is indeed normally dark, and a greenhouse is a house-shaped
structure where one grows green things. But such phrases have
made the transition to becoming single words.
8.6.1 Exceptions to the Compound
Stress Rule
(a) 
two-part 
place-names, 
such 
as 
Botany 
Bay,
Buckingham Palace, East Anglia, Los Angeles, Mount
193

Everest, New York, Niagara Falls, San Francisco. These
include street names, e.g. Blackberry Way, Fifth Avenue,
London Road, Mornington Crescent, Mulholland Drive,
Penny Lane, Peyton Place, Trafalgar Square. The only
exception to this are large numbers of street names ending
in the word street: in my home town of Edinburgh,
London Road (where Road is most prominent) is not far
from London Street (where London is most prominent).
There are sets of compounds which systematically violate
the Compound Stress Rule. We now list these.
(b) compounds with a participial second element, ending
in -ed, -en or -ing. The -ed compounds are more common
than the latter. Many of these are based on parts of the
body, and some of these are more metaphorical than
others. Examples are: ˌbare-ˈfaced, ˌbig-ˈeared, ˌbig-
ˈheaded, ˌbroken-ˈhearted, ˌcack-ˈhanded, ˌdim-ˈwitted,
ˌdouble-ˈjointed, ˌempty-ˈheaded, ˌeven-ˈhanded, ˌeven-
ˈtempered, ˌfaint-ˈhearted, ˌfair-ˈhaired, ˌfar-ˈsighted,
ˌflat-ˈchested, ˌflat-ˈfooted, ˌfleet-ˈfooted, ˌfoul-ˈmouthed,
ˌgood-ˈnatured, 
ˌhard-ˈnosed, 
ˌhigh-ˈpitched, 
ˌhot-
ˈheaded, ˌill-diˈsposed, ˌill-ˈtempered, ˌkind-ˈhearted,
ˌleft-ˈhanded, 
ˌlevel-ˈheaded, 
ˌlily-ˈlivered, 
ˌlimp-
ˈwristed, ˌlong-ˈhaired, ˌlong-ˈlegged, ˌlong-ˈwinded,
ˌnarrow-ˈshouldered, ˌold-ˈfashioned, ˌone-ˈeyed, ˌone-
ˈlegged, 
ˌpig-ˈheaded, 
ˌred-ˈhanded, 
ˌred-ˈheaded,
ˌsqueaky-ˈvoiced, ˌstrong-ˈminded, ˌstrong-ˈwilled, ˌthin-
194

ˈlipped, ˌweak-ˈkneed, ˌweak-ˈwilled, ˌwrong-ˈfooted,
ˌwrong-ˈheaded, ˌclean-ˈshaven, ˌlong-ˈproven, ˌsoft-
ˈspoken, ˌclear-ˈthinking, ˌfar-ˈreaching, ˌgood-ˈlooking.
(c) compounds in which the first part expresses what the
object is made from. Examples are: apple pie, brick wall,
cotton socks, ham sandwich, iron filings, paper napkin,
pork pie, olive oil. Notice that these are distinct from
similar compounds in which the first part does not express
what the object is made from, as in paper clip, which is
not made from paper, cotton reel, which is not made from
cotton, and olive tree, which is not made of olives. Note
that, in American English, the first element can be the
most prominent in such compounds.
(d) compounds in which some kind of concrete or abstract
positioning is involved. Examples are: April showers,
Christmas break, evening meal, middle-class, second-
rate, winter holiday.
(e) compounds which are two-part colour words.
Examples are: dark-green, deep-yellow, light-green, pale-
blue.
(f) compounds derived from phrasal verbs. Examples are
compound nouns derived from phrasal verbs: chucker-out
(from chuck out), hanger-on (from hang on), passer-by
(from pass by), washing-up (from wash up); and
compound adjectives derived from phrasal verbs: finished-
off (from finish-off), knocked-out, pared-down (from pare
195

down), rolled-up (from roll up), tired-out, wiped-out,
wrapped-up (from wrap up).
8.7 Summing Up
We have covered a fair amount of detail in this chapter. It may
prove helpful to the reader to have the main points summarized
here, ignoring many details and exceptions: if the reader can
grasp the take-home message for each of the points covered in
this chapter, the details can then be mastered by consulting
each section of the chapter.
• English word stress is not random.
• English rhythm is trochaic, as in woman and battery.
• Primary stress is calculated from the end of the word,
not the beginning.
• English words cannot begin with more than one
unstressed syllable.
• When one English word is derived from another, and the
primary stress shifts as a result of the derivation, there is a
tendency to place the secondary stress on the syllable that
had primary stress in the deriving word, as in ˌcharacteri
ˈzation.
• There is a tendency to avoid placing primary and
secondary stresses next to each other, as in ˌJapaˈnese.
• While English nouns, adjectives and adverbs mainly
follow the basic trochaic pattern, there are many verbs
which do not.
• English suffixes may be divided into those which affect
196

the primary stress (such as -ese and -ity) and those which
do not (such as -ness).
• Among the suffixes which affect primary stress, some
take the primary stress (such as -ese), while others do not
(such as -ity).
• Separable prefixes normally take secondary stress, as in
ˌpre-ˈpay.
• The basic pattern for two-part compounds is: the first
element is the most prominent, as in darkroom.
Notes
1 To the extent that any such endings may be productive, and
thus may result in neologisms, then the resulting words will
indeed be morphologically complex. For instance, the fairly
recently coined word ladette (in Britain, a female lad: a
young woman who behaves in a loud, foul-mouthed, heavy-
drinking, sexually promiscuous manner) is morphologically
complex (here -ette means ‘female’, rather than ‘little’).
2 It might be argued that words such as cosmic are
morphologically complex, given the existence of the word
cosmos. We take the view that cosm- does not constitute a
morpheme in contemporary English, and that words such as
cosmos and cosmic are therefore morphologically simple.
3 There is, however, a case for saying that words such as
kitchenette are morphologically complex, since kitchen is
clearly a morpheme, and a kitchenette is indeed a small
197

kitchen.
4 Note that adult is typically stressed on the final syllable in
American English.
5 The word opacity also exhibits an alternation, between [eɪ]
and [æ], in the stressed vowel of the base. This is one of a
set of vowel alternations which we do not examine here.
6 The expression bouquet garni (a bunch or sachet of herbs
used in cooking) is pronounced with primary stress on the
penultimate, rather than the final, syllable of bouquet. This is
a result of the process of iambic reversal, described later in
our discussion of metrical structure.
Exercises
1 Listen to Track 8.1 at www.wiley.com/go/carrphonetics.
For each of the bisyllabic words on the recording, say
which ones have the default trochaic stress pattern for
primary stress. For those which deviate from that pattern,
explain why. The words are:
(a) famine
(b) Maltese
(c) migrate
(d) trainee
(e) winter
(f) explain
(g) silly
198

(h) compact (noun)
(i) compact (verb/adj.)
(j) export (noun)
(k) export (verb)
(l) stumble
(m) fancy
(n) differ
(o) taboo
(p) gazette
(q) arcade
(r) burlesque
2 Listen to Track 8.2. For each of the sets of polysyllabic
words on the recording, say which have the default
Germanic trochaic pattern. For those which deviate from
the default pattern, explain why. The sets are as follows:
(a) factory
America
family
academy
stimulus
(b) develop
inherit
complicit
explicit
inherit
(c) kangaroo
employee
engineer
seventeen
mountaineer
199

(d) interrogate
investigate
accommodate
demonstrate
co-ordinate
(e) mathematics
physics
periodic
linguistics
alcoholic
(f) autumnal
sentimental
orchestral
horizontal
universal
(g) hostility
austerity
modernity
humility
ambiguity
(h) banana
bikini
karate
martini
piano
(i) adventure
amalgam
consensus
November
advantage
(j) momentary
200

secretary
literary
laboratory
military
3 Listen to Track 8.3. Each of the nouns on the recording
(all of them loanwords into English) has a stress pattern
which deviates from the default Germanic pattern. In each
case, say in what sense that stress pattern is exceptional
with respect to the rules of word stress assignment in
English. Primary and secondary stresses are marked as
follows: [ˌhəʊˈtεɫ] (hotel, with primary stress on the final
syllable and secondary stress on the penult). Where the
GA and RP pronunciations differ, this is indicated, as in
[ˌhəʊˈtεɫ]/[ˌhoʊˈtεɫ], which gives the RP pronunciation
followed by the GA pronunciation.
(a)
hotel
([ˌhəʊˈtεɫ]/[ˌhoʊˈtεɫ], not [ˈhəʊtεɫ]/[ˈhoʊtεɫ])
(b)
bouquet
([ˌbʊˈkʰeɪ], not [ˈbu:keɪ])6
(c)
bamboo
([ˌbæmˈbu:], not [ˈbæmbu:])
(d)
champagne
([ˌʃæmˈpʰeɪn], not [ˈʃæmpeɪn])
(e)
bikini
201

([bɪˈkʰi:ni], not [ˈbɪkʰini])
(f)
martini
([mɒ:ˈtʰi:ni]/[mɒɹˈtʰi:ni], not [ˈmɒ:tini]/[ˈmɒɹtini])
(g)
chorizo
([tʃəˈɹi:zoʊ], not [ˈtʃɑɹɪzoʊ])
4 For non-native speakers: listen to Track 8.4 and repeat
each utterance. For native speakers and non-native
speakers alike: indicate primary stresses and secondary
stresses on the transcriptions of those utterances, given
below. For example:
Mary finds Bill’s book uninterpretable. ˈmeəɹi ˈfaɪndz
ˈbɪɫz ˈbʊk ˌʌnɪnˈtɜ:pɹətəbɫ̩
(a)
Mathematics is incredibly difficult. mæθəmætɪks ɪz
ɪŋkɹεdɪbli dɪfɪkəɫt
(b)
My car was made in America. maɪ kɒ: wəs meɪd ɪn
əmεɹɪkə
(c)
His computer is Japanese. hɪz kəmpju:təɹɪz dʒæpəni:z
(d)
Academic conversation is dull. ækədemɪk kɒnvəseɪʃn̩
ɪz dʌɫ
(e)
The police will interrogate the detainees. ðə pəli:s wɪɫ
ɪntεɹəgeɪt ðə diteɪni:z
(f)
They don’t produce many exports. ðeɪ dəʊnt pɹədju:s
202

mεni εkspɔ:ts
(g)
They don’t export much produce. ðeɪ dəʊnt ɪkspɔ:t
mʌtʃ pɹɒdju:s
(h)
I found the film rather sentimental. aɪ faʊnd ðə fɪɫm
ɹɒ:ðə sεntɪmεntɫ̩
5 For non-native speakers: listen to Track 8.5 and repeat
the words you hear. For native speakers and non-native
speakers alike: explain the word stress patterns of the
following groups of English bisyllabic words, as heard on
the recording.
(a) happen
woman
fancy
echo
father
(b) deny
inspect
comply
expand
inflect
(c) trainee
bamboo
bazaar
taboo
shampoo
(d) create
migrate
203

locate
frustrate
narrate
(e) produce (verb)
export (verb)
discharge (verb)
object (noun)
contract (noun)
(f) produce (noun)
export (noun)
discharge (verb)
object (noun)
contract (noun)
6 Listen to Track 8.6. Explain where the metrical foot
boundaries fall in the following sentences, as heard on the
recording. (Draw vertical lines where the foot boundaries
fall.)
(a) Leave me alone!
(b) Leave me a slice!
(c) She left in a hurry.
(d) She lives in America.
(e) Put it in the refrigerator!
(f) John’s a modern metrosexual.
(g) Clinton opposes militaristic solutions.
(h) Aude is a flexitarian.
204

9
Rhythm, Reversal and
Reduction
9.1 More on the Trochaic
Metrical Foot
We said, in chapter 8, that the rhythm of English is trochaic:
the basic rhythmic pattern consists of a stressed syllable
followed by zero or more unstressed syllables. For instance, in
the phrase made in a factory, the metrical structure is
[ˈmeɪdɪnəˈfæktəɹi]. The two trochaic feet here are [ˈmeɪdɪnə]
and [ˈfæktəɹi]. We assumed too that syllables with secondary
stress also form trochaic metrical feet, as in the word
academic: [ˌækəˈdεmɪk]. The two trochaic metrical feet here
are [ˌækə] and [ˈdεmɪk]: the secondary stress in [ˌækə] forms
a trochaic metrical foot with the following unstressed syllable,
and the primary stress in [ˈdεmɪk] forms a trochaic metrical
foot with the following unstressed syllable.
But what is the evidence for the metrical foot? And what
evidence is there for our claim that all feet in English are
trochaic? We will now address these questions.
205

9.1.1 Evidence for the Trochaic
Metrical Foot (a): Rhyming
Although we have identified a constituent within the syllable
widely known as the rhyme, the term is a misnomer: this
constituent is not the unit on which rhyming in English is
based. While it is true that bad rhymes with mad, and that both
contain the rhyme [æd], we must not be misled into thinking
that two words rhyme only if they have identical rhyme
constituents in the syllable, in this case [æd]. Consider the
words witty and city: they rhyme because they both have a
trochaic metrical foot of the same sort: [ˈwɪti] and [ˈsɪti].
Clearly, onset consonants play no role in rhyming, but metrical
structure does, and the rhyme constituent does not. The reason
why entity does not rhyme with either witty or city is that the
metrical foot structure of entity is [ˈεntɪti]: the word entity does
not contain a metrical foot of the shape [ˈɪti]. Rhyming in
English is based on identity of stressed vowels in two or more
trochaic metrical feet, and identity of all subsequent phonetic
segments.1 The word entity does not have the same stressed
vowel as the words witty and city.
Similarly, the phrase phone ya (phone you), which is
pronounced [ˈfəʊnje] in RP and [ˈfoʊnje] in GA, rhymes with
pneumonia: [nju:ˈməʊnje] in RP and [nu:ˈmoʊnje] in GA. In
this case, the rhyme is based on trochaic metrical feet which do
not map directly onto word boundaries: [ˈfəʊnje] contains two
words, while [ˈməʊnje] is part of a word.
206

9.1.2 Evidence for the Trochaic
Metrical Foot (b): Expletive
Insertion
Expletives such as bloody and f*cking are frequently used in
informal spoken English by many speakers. Each consists of a
standard Germanic bisyllabic trochaic metrical foot: [ˈblʌdi]
and [ˈfʌkɪŋ] (also pronounced with a final [n] by many
speakers of English, which may be syllabic: [ˈfʌkn̩ ]).
The patterns of use of words such as these in syntactic
structure is, contrary to popular belief, quite complex. We will
ignore that syntactic complexity and focus here on the fact that
they can be inserted into the internal structure of words, as in
abso-bloody-lutely, where bloody is inserted into the word
absolutely. This word is an adverb derived from the adjective
absolute, which has the basic antepenulti-mate word stress
pattern of polysyllabic words in English: [ˈæbsəlu:t]. There is,
however, an emphatic pronunciation with final primary stress
and a secondary stress on the antepenult: [ˌæbsəˈlu:t]. It is in
this emphatic form that the expletive can be inserted into, as in:
A: Do you like Amy Winehouse?
B: Abso-bloody- lutely!
If you are a native speaker of English (and some non-native
speakers will see this too), you will agree that it is not possible
to reply ab-bloody-solutely, or absolute-bloody-ly. But why
not? The answer lies in the existence of the trochaic metrical
foot. The expletives are bisyllabic trochaic metrical feet. The
words into which they can be inserted will contain trochaic
207

metrical feet. In inserting expletives, one must respect the
trochaic metrical structure of the word one is inserting an
expletive into: abso-bloody-lutely contains a sequence of three
trochaic bisyllabic metrical feet. It respects the trochaic
bisyllabic metrical foot structure of absolute, inserting another
such foot in between those two.
9.1.3 Evidence for the Trochaic
Metrical Foot (c): Neologisms
Many neologisms are based on the trochaic metrical foot. Here
are some examples: alcoholic, workaholic, shopaholic,
sexaholic, chocaholic. All of these neologisms are based on
analogy with one or more previously existing words. If we
assume that work-aholic, shopaholic, sexaholic, chocaholic
are all based on an analogy with the word alcoholic, then we
must ask what the basis of the analogy might be. In this case, it
cannot be the morphological structure of the word alcoholic,
which contains the root alcohol and the suffix -ic (which, as
we have seen, shifts the stress from the word alcohol,
pronounced [ˈæɫkəhɒɫ]). If the morphology were the basis for
the analogy, then the neologisms would be workic, shopic,
sexic and chocic.
The analogy in these cases is based on the metrical structure
of the word alcoholic ([ˌælkəˈhɒlɪk]), which contains two
bisyllabic trochaic metrical feet: [ˌælkə] and [ˈhɒlɪk]. The
reason why the forms work, shop, sex and choc have to be
208

written with an <a> is that this letter represents a schwa vowel
([ə]) which is present in the first trochaic metrical foot of
alcoholic, on which the analogy is based. Native speakers of
English produce such neologisms because they have a (perhaps
not entirely conscious) sense of the metrical structure of their
native language.
Consider contemporary neologisms such as flexitarian (a
vegetarian who is prepared to be flexible, and eat meat from
time to time) and pescitarian (someone who doesn’t eat meat,
but who does eat fish, or seafood in general). These words
have been formed by analogy with the word vegetarian,
pronounced [ˌvεdʒəˈteəɹiən] in RP. The two trochaic metrical
feet in this word are [ˌvεdʒə] and [ˈteəɹiən]. It is this metrical
structure that drives the analogical process which results in
flexitarian and pescitarian: [ˌflεksɪˈteəɹiən] and [ˌpεksɪ
ˈteəɹiən].2
Consider 
too 
the 
recent 
neologism 
metrosexual 
(a
metropolitan heterosexual man who is overly concerned with
his physical apearance). In this case, the trochaic metrical foot
plays a role: the word heterosexual is pronounced [ˌhεtɹəʊ
ˈsεkʃəɫ]. The rhyming process, based on the trochaic metrical
foot, is again at work here: speakers know that the hetero
morpheme may be bisyllabic ([ˌhεtɹəʊ]), as is the morpheme
sexual ([ˈsεkʃəɫ]).3
The recent brand name safetergent (a cleaning product) is
based on the word detergent: [dɪˈtʰɜ:dʒənt] (RP), [dɪˈtʰɜɹdʒənt]
(GA). The foot structure of this word has an initial
extrametrical unstressed syllable, leaving [ˈtʰɜ:dʒənt] (RP)/
209

[ˈtʰɜɹdʒənt] (GA) as the trochaic metrical foot. We can then
add the morpheme safe ([seɪf]) to this metrical foot to produce
safetergent: [ˌseɪfˈtʰɜ:dʒənt] (RP)/ [ˌseɪfˈtʰɜɹdʒənt] (GA).
Similarly, the words kissagram ([ˈkɪsəgɹæm]: someone who
delivers a telegram-type message with a kiss) and stripagram
([ˈstɹɪpəgɹæm]: someone who delivers such a message and
strips) are formed by analogy with the word telegram, whose
metrical structure conforms to the basic trochaic structure for
words of more than two syllables in English in that it has
antepenultimate primary stress: [ˈtʰεləgɹæm]. Although the
morphological structure of telegram is tele + gram, the
neologisms are not kissgram and stripgram. The reason for this
is that the neologisms are modelled on the metrical structure of
telegram. The English trochaic metrical foot clearly plays a role
in all of the neologisms we have considered here.
9.2 Representing Metrical
Structure
We have represented primary stress with a superscript diacritic,
as in [ˈdεmɪk], and secondary stress with a subscript diacritic,
as in [ˌækə] in the word academic. These conventions will
suffice if we confine our interest to the level of the word. But
they will not suffice if we wish to represent the way levels of
stress and relative perceptual salience operate when words are
combined into phrases. Take the phrase kangaroo court, for
210

instance. When kangaroo appears in the phrase kangaroo
court, the secondary and primary stresses in that word switch
round. The single syllable of the word court has more stress
than any of the stressed syllables in kangaroo, but in the word
kangaroo, the [kʰæŋgə] foot is less salient than the [ɹu:] foot.
So we are dealing here with three different levels of salience.
That is not easy to represent using only the two diacritics we
have used for word stress. We need a further mode of
representation.
We represented syllable structure in terms of branching tree
structures. Many phonologists also represent foot structure in
terms of branching trees. We will represent any syllable which
has any degree of stress with an ‘S’, indicating that it is strong
with respect to weak unstressed syllables, which we label with
a ‘W’. A stressed syllable and any unstressed syllables with
which it forms a foot may then be represented as follows:4
(1)
The bottom-most level of representation in this diagram is
the level of the segment. The next level up is the syllable. At
that level, the S labels represent strong (stressed) syllables and
the W labels represent unstressed syllables. It is important to
bear in mind that stress levels are relational: rather than a
stressed syllable being definable in absolute terms, one syllable
211

is more or less stressed in relation to another.
The next level of representation up from the syllable (the
lines above the S and W labels in this diagram) is that of the
foot. Each word in (1) consists of a single foot, the first word
consisting of a binary-branching foot and the second word
consisting of a tertiary-branching (three-way-branching) foot.
Monosyllabic lexical words contain, by definition, a single
stressed syllable. We will take it that they contain a single, non-
branching foot. We will therefore represent such words as
having a single S-labelled syllable (indicating that it is stressed),
dominated by a non-branching foot node, thus:
(2)
This diagram represents two claims. The first is that the
syllable in question is stressed (labelled S). The second is that,
because it is stressed, it constitutes a foot which happens not to
have a branching structure, since there are no unstressed
syllables following it.
Monosyllabic non-lexical function words, such as pronouns
(e.g. he, she, me, it), prepositions (e.g. in, on, at), articles (a,
the) and conjunctions (e.g. and, but, if) are typically
unstressed. We will therefore represent them with a W-labelled
syllable, but no foot structure above that level (since a foot by
212

definition must contain a stressed syllable), thus:
(3)
The relational nature of stress levels can be seen clearly in
words which have both a primary stressed syllable and a
secondary stressed syllable, such as woodpecker. It is clear that
the antepenultimate syllable in this word has more stress than
the penultimate (it is strong with respect to the penult). It is
equally clear that the final syllable has less stress than the
penultimate: it is unstressed, and thus weak. We may therefore
represent the foot structure of the word as consisting of two
feet, the first of which is stronger than the second, as follows:5
(4)
Note that the S/W notation is used to represent the relative
strength both of syllables within a foot and of sequences of
feet: the notation shows that the first syllable is strong with
respect to the second, and also shows, at a higher level, that
213

the first foot is strong with respect to the second.
In words such as colonnade and kangaroo, on the other
hand, it is the second of the two feet which is the stronger,
since it has a secondary stressed syllable followed by an
unstressed syllable followed by a primary stressed syllable:
(5)
Words such as champagne, which have a primary stressed
and a secondary stressed syllable, but no unstressed syllables,
contain two feet, each of which contains only a strong syllable.
However, one of those feet is strong with respect to the other,
thus:
(6)
In this word, the second of the two feet is the stronger,
whereas, in a word such as the noun export, it is the first of the
214

two feet which is the stronger:
(7)
Recall that monosyllabic function words are typically
unstressed (and are thus simply labelled with a W).
Monosyllabic words of a lexical category may form branching
feet with such words, as in the phrase hit it. Thus a phrase
such as hit it contains exactly the same foot structure as a
single word such as witty:
(8)
Thus, the constituent we have called the foot does not map
directly onto the word: there may be more than one foot within
a word, and a foot may extend beyond the span of a single
word. Furthermore, a word may not be exhaustively divisible
into feet. For example, words such as America contain a foot
consisting of the stressed antepunultimate syllable and the two
unstressed syllables which follow it; the word-initial, unstressed
215

syllable is a ‘stray’ unstressed syllable, which is part of the
word, but is not integrated into the foot structure formed by
the three syllables which follow it (rather in the same way that
an /s/ preceding an onset consonant may be part of a word
without being integrated into syllable structure):
(9)
The word-initial, ‘stray’ (extrametrical) unstressed syllable
here is parallel to the monosyllabic function words discussed
above: at the level of the word, it is not integrated into foot
structure. On this way of analysing English foot structure,
words which begin with an unstressed syllable, such as
America, about and maroon, do not consist of a single foot
which begins with a W syllable, since we are denying that there
are W-S feet in English. It is only at the level of larger units
such as the phrase that such unstressed syllables may be
integrated into foot structure,6 as in the verb phrase saw
America:
(10)
216

We saw that words like champagne and export are bisyllabic
and contain two feet. These are fundamentally different from
words such as maroon, which are also bisyllabic but beging
with a ‘stray’ unstressed syllable and contain only one foot,
which consists of the stressed syllable:
(11)
9.3 Phonological
Generalizations and Foot
Stucture
One of the reasons for postulating the foot as a phonological
constituent is that, just as some phonological generalizations
are sensitive to syllable structure, so some phonological
217

generalizations are sensistive to foot structure. Take the
generalization, or rule, of Flapping, in many dialects of
American English. Under this generalization, /t/ and /d/ are
realized as an alveolar tap (also known as a flap) between
vowels, as in Betty and bedding ([bεɾi]] and [bεɾiŋ]). But the
rule does not apply if a foot boundary occurs adjacent to the /t/
or /d/. Thus, the generalization does not cover cases such as
attacker, or a tacker, since, in those cases, a foot boundary
intervenes between the first vowel and the /t/, thus:
(12)
If a foot consists, as we have said, in a stressed vowel
followed by any immediately following unstressed syllables,
then a word such as attacker contains a single foot (which
begins with the stressed syllable) preceded by a ‘stray’
unstressed syllable, as in the word-initial syllable of America.
Thus the word-initial syllable is not a part of the foot in which
the /t/ appears, whereas in a word such as Betty, it is:
(13)
218

Note that Flapping also occurs in feet which are formed
across word boundaries, as in hit it ([hɪɾɪt]):
(14)
That is, Flapping is not sensistive to word boundaries or to
the morphological structure; rather, it is foot structure which
matters in the application of Flapping: Flapping only applies
foot-internally.
Another example of a generalization which is often said to be
sensitive to foot structure is the rule of Aspiration. We have
already noted that we must acknowledge that there are degrees
of aspiration of voiceless stops in English. However, aspiration
is at its strongest when the voiceless stop in question is in foot-
initial position, as in party and appearance, whose foot
structures are given in (15):
(15)
Aspiration applies foot-initially (although there may be some
degree of aspiration in other positions).
219

9.4 The Rhythm of English
Again: Stress Timing and
Eurhythmy
We saw, in chapter 8, that the rhythm of English is stress-
timed. What this means is that the regular recurring beats
found in the speech of English speakers (the rhythm of English
speech) fall on stressed syllables. That is, stressed syllables in
English occur at more or less equal intervals. Languages like
English are often said to be distinct from languages like French
in this respect in that, in languages like French, each syllable is
said to occur at a more or less equal interval (languages of that
sort are often, therefore, said to be syllable-timed).
One of the consequences of this kind of rhythm is that
English feet may consist of a stressed syllable followed by a
sequence of unstressed syllables, as in the phrase heard in the
park, in which the stressed syllable in heard is followed by two
unstressed syllables, or the phrase heard it in the park, where
heard is followed by three, or the phrase heard it in the
announcement, where it is followed by four.
Having said that English allows for really quite extensive
sequences of unstressed syllables, it has to be said that the
‘ideal’ or optimal rhythmic structure is one in which strong and
weak syllables alternate, in an S-W-S-W pattern. It appears to
be the case that such sequences of ‘alternating opposites’ are
optimal in a perceptual sense: they seem to make the speech
signal more easily decoded. Such optimal rhythmic structures
220

are often referred to as eurhythmic stuctures. It follows from
this that the optimal, most eurhythmic, foot structure is a
simple S-W structure, with only one unstressed syllable to the
right of the stressed syllable. Foot structures with more than
one W syllable are therefore less eurhythmic, less optimal, than
those with only one, and the greater the number of unstressed
syllables, the less eurhythmic or optimal the foot.
This preference for eurhythmy extends to sequences of feet:
sequences of S and W feet are also more eurhythmic than
other sequences. For instance, in the sentence I want a cup of
coffee, there is an S-W-S sequence of three feet in the verb
phrase, each of which is itself an S-W sequence of syllables; it
is eurhythmic both at the level of sequences of syllables and at
the level of sequences of feet:
(16)
In many cases, however, a given combination of words may
potentially create a phrase which is less than eurhythmic, and
indeed may potentially result in adjacent S-labelled feet. This
results from the fact that, in most English phrases, it is the final
word which is most stressed, as in the phrase black bird,
discussed earlier. This Phrasal Stress Rule seems to hold for
221

most types of phrase in English, as in slowly ate (verb phrase),
very yellow (adjective phrase), into London (prepositional
phrase) and very slowly (adverb phrase). It also seems to apply
at the level of the sentence, as we can see from the example
just given: the predicate verb phrase is more salient than the
preceding subject noun phrase. Where the Phrasal Stress Rule
brings about adjacent S-labelled feet, it appears that ‘evasive
action’ can be taken. Let us consider some examples.
Take the words academic, Tennessee and champagne.
Clearly, academic has primary stress on the penultimate
syllable and secondary stress on the first syllable; the other
syllables are unstressed. The foot structure of the word is as
follows:
(17)
Tennessee also contains two feet, the second stronger than
the first. However, the second foot consists simply of a
stressed syllable, with no unstressed syllables following it:
(18)
222

Champagne also has two feet, as we have already seen, the
first of which consists of a syllable with secondary stress and
the second of which consists of a syllable with primary stress:
(19)
In each of these three cases, the word consists of two feet,
the second of which is strong with respect to the first.
However, when these words appear in phrases where the
stronger of the two feet is immediately followed by the stressed
syllable of another foot, and where that syllable must be more
heavily stressed than the preceding one, a kind of ‘stress clash’
results, in which, rather than a eurhythmic sequence of S and
W feet, an S-S sequence of feet occurs. In situations such as
this, a rule of rhythm reversal applies. Consider some such
phrases, 
e.g. 
academic 
banter, 
champagne 
breakfast,
223

Tennessee Williams. Note that, in each case, the rule for
phrasal stress assignment means that the second of the two
words must have greater stress than the first. Note too that the
primary and secondary stresses in the words academic,
champagne and Tennessee have reversed. That is, the
offending structure (exemplified in (20) below) is altered to the
more eurhythmic structure exemplified in (21).
(20)
(21)
This process of rhythm reversal is quite regular in English.
224

Other examples are easily found; consider Piccadilly vs
Piccadilly Circus, Heathrow vs Heathrow Airport, Dundee vs
Dundee marmalade, thirty four vs thirty four books, good-
looking vs good-looking tutor, and so on. As we have seen, in
English phrases, it is the head, rather than a preceding modifier,
which bears the most stress. Rhythm reversal occurs whenever
a word containing a weak–strong sequence of feet is combined,
to form a phrase or compound, with a word whose first
syllable is the first syllable of a foot (i.e. is stressed). That is,
rhythm reversal operates, within the context of phrases and
compounds, on feet, not syllables, reversing weak–strong
sequences of feet, rather than weak–strong sequences of
syllables. Another way of putting this is to say that the reversal
process reverses a sequence of a secondary stressed syllable
and a primary stressed syllable when it is followed by a
primary stressed syllable within a phrase.
Reversal does not operate on a sequence consisting of an
unstressed syllable and the first syllable of a foot, as in maroon
sweater. The word maroon contains a single foot, which
consists only of a stressed syllable with no following unstressed
syllables; that foot is preceded by a ‘stray’ unstressed syllable
(just like the unstressed syllable in America, shown above),
thus:
(22)
225

While maroon sweater contains an S-S sequence of
syllables, it does not contain an S-S sequence of feet, and it
does not therefore undergo rhythm reversal. The pervasive
effects of the Rhythm Reversal Rule are said to constitute
evidence for the existence of the foot as a consistuent in the
phonology of English. Furthermore, the fact that words like
maroon do not undergo reversal can be taken as evidence for
our claims (a) that English feet always begin with a stressed
syllable, and (b) that English words are not necessarily
exhaustively divisible into feet. In other words, a word like
maroon is not to be analysed as consisting of a foot with a W-S
sequence of syllables.
The claim that rhythm reversal operates at the level of
sequences of feet, rather than at the level of sequences of
syllables, is supported by the fact that it operates in phrases
such as good-looking tutor, which, prior to reversal, has the
following structure:
(23)
226

If reversal operated at the level of sequences of S and W
syllables (rather than feet), it would not affect the sequence
looking and tutor, which have an alternating S-WS-W
structure. It is at the level of the foot that the S-W sequencing
is violated.
The most striking aspect of reversal is that it demonstrates
the interaction of syntax and phonology. The conditions under
which reversal operates are partly determined by a syntactic
fact about English: the fact that modifiers typically precede
heads in English phrases. This, combined with the fact that it is
the head which receives more stress than the modifier, brings
about the reversal phenomenon.
Reversal also interacts with morphological structure: it
operates within words which contain a suffix which itself takes
stress. Take the word New York. It consists of two feet, the
second stronger than the first:
(24)
227

The suffix -ese is one of those English suffixes which takes
stress. It consists of a single non-branching foot, and when it is
added to New York, the resulting word New Yorkese consists of
three feet in a W-S-S sequence:
(25)
This structure meets the conditions for reversal, which then
applies to yield the S-W-S sequence of feet in New Yorkese.
It is true, of course, that one can, in fact, utter phrases such
as academic banter with primary stress on the penultimate
syllable of academic. When one does this, one is usually
contrasting some aspect of the phrase with some other
possibility. One might be stressing, for instance, that one means
228

academic banter and not some other kind of banter, such as
adolescent banter. The most important fact about this
phenomenon, often referred to as contrastive sentence stress or
contrastive intonation (see chapter 10 for details), is that it is a
discourse phenomenon: one could not make sense of such a
stressing if it were not accompanied by an appropriate
discourse setting in which one’s interlocutor stands a chance of
understanding what other possibilities one is contrasting the
rhythm-reversed adjective academic with. The following
exchange is an example:
(26)
A:
I do enjoy academic banter, you know. (rhythm reversal)
B:
What kind of banter?
A:
ˌAcaˈdemic banter. (contrastive stress; no rhythm reversal)
The stress pattern here is nonetheless distinct from that given
in (20) above, since the stressed syllable of banter is less
stressed than the primary stressed syllable of academic.7 What
examples such as these suggest is that reversal is a metrical
phenomenon which interacts with morphology and syntax, and
can be described independently of discourse context, whereas
contrastive intonation is a phenomenon which cannot be
described independently of discourse context. This suggests
that it is possible, and perhaps necessary, to distinguish those
phenomena which can be analysed independently of context of
229

utterance from those which cannot.
Notes
1 There are also imperfect rhymes, where the phonetic
segments following the stressed syllable are similar but not
identical. The imperfect rhyme between the words manner
([ˈmænə]) and banger ([ˈbæŋə]) are examples of this: the
place of articulation of the nasals is not the same, so banner
would rhyme better with manner. But it’s not that bad a
rhyme, after all: both [n] and [ŋ] are nasals, so they sound
very similar.
2 There are other factors at play here, including the
availability of the morpheme flexi (as in flexitime, itself
formed by analogy with overtime; flexi itself comes from the
adjective flexible, in which the prefix is flex). The term
pescitarian depends on the availability of knowledge of the
Latin word for ‘fish’.
3 In this case, the morphology and the metrical structure
coincide.
4 The metrical trees we present here are abbreviated, for
reasons of lack of space. Because metrical structure is
determined by syllable structure, we ought, strictly speaking,
to show metrical trees built upon syllable structure trees, as
follows:
230

The abbreviated trees used in this chapter do not actually
show that it is the structure of the rhyme, and not the entire
syllable, which is crucial in determining metrical structure.
However, they will suffice for our purposes.
   The abbreviated trees used in this chapter do not actually
show that it is the structure of the rhyme, and not the entire
syllable, which is crucial in determining metrical structure.
However, they will suffice for our purposes.
5 We label the non-branching foot with an ‘S’, consistent
with our treatment of monosyllabic words of a lexical
category.
6 The possibility of non-alignment of foot structure and word
structure in English is often exploited by songwriters, who
structure their songs on the basis of syntax (words and
phrases), rhythm (metrical structure) and various types of
repetition, such as alliteration, rhyming and repetition of
metrical and phonemic structures. It is for this reason that it
is possible to construct a repetition involving manners
231

([ˈmænəz]), grammar ([ˈgɹæmə]), and the word damn
followed by the first, stray, unstressed syllable of about
(yielding a foot whose form is [ˈdæmə]). Here, a repetition
exploits syllable and foot structure while cutting across word
and phrase structure. The sort of repetition known as
‘rhyming’ can therefore extend beyond the syllabic
constituent we have called the rhyme, into foot structure.
The rhyming of continental and rental in the song ‘Diamonds
are a girl’s best friend’ is a further example.
7 It is often suggested that this follows from the fact that
‘banter’ is somehow ‘given’ in the discourse context.
Exercises
1 Draw metrical trees for each of the following words.
Begin by drawing the foot structure. Where a word
contains more than one foot, draw a superordinate S-W or
W-S branching structure, showing which of the two feet is
stronger.
(a) pretty
(b) collided
(c) sentiment
(d) bat
(e) nightingale
(f) kangaroo
(g) rabbi
(h) contract
232

2 Listen to Track 9.1 at www.wiley.com/go/carrphonetics
and draw metrical trees for the following phrases, as heard
on the recording:
(a) sacked a worker
(b) delighted agents
(c) very pretty
(d) Piccadilly Circus (Show the tree for this last
phrase both before and after rhythm reversal has
applied)
3 Listen to Track 9.2 and explain the metrical structure of
the following expressions, as heard on the recording:
(a) an ill-advised decision
(b) a well-decorated bedroom
(c) West Hampton Wanderers
(d) a broken-hearted man
(e) fifteen dollars
(f) fifty pounds
(g) dark-green trousers
(h) champagne cocktail
4 Further phonetic transcription practice
Transcribe, with as much phonetic detail as possible, the
following words as they are uttered on Track 9.3,
indicating syllable boundaries, primary stress and (where
applicable) secondary stress:
233

(a) rudimentary
(b) unfriendliness
(c) deconstructible
(d) opportunity
(e) Chinese
234

10
English Intonation
10.1 Tonic Syllables, Tones
and Intonation Phrases
Although we often say that some speakers speak in a
monotonous manner, the fact is that human beings do not utter
speech which is monotone in nature: we all inflect our speech,
creating intonational contours. But what is intonation, exactly?
It is the use of pitch variation in discourse. What is pitch? We
have seen that pitch is the auditory impression created by
variations in the rate of vibration of the vocal folds. Intonation
is the use of pitch contours over stretches of speech which
often consist of more than one word. An example is the
utterance Mary went to the doctor. There are three syllables
with primary word stress in this utterance: the penultimate
syllable of Mary, the single syllable of went and the
penultimate syllable of doctor. But there is additional pitch
movement on the primary-stressed syllable of doctor. That
stressed syllable is perceptually more prominent than the
others, and will tend to be longer in duration, and louder, than
the other stressed syllables in the utterance. That syllable is
said to be the tonic syllable. The word ‘tonic’ denotes the fact
235

that this syllable is where the tone falls. The tone is the extra
pitch movement placed on that syllable. In our example, the
tone is a falling tone: the rate of vibration of the vocal folds
decreases as the syllable is uttered, resulting in a transition
from a higher to a lower pitch. We will represent these as
follows:
(1) ˈMary ˈwent to the ↘doctor. (Track 10.1 at
www.wiley.com/go/carrphonetics)
As we saw in chapter 8 on word stress, the diacritics on
ˈMary and ˈwent indicate that the following syllables are
stressed. The underlining on ↘doctor indicates that it is the
tonic syllable (and thus, by definition, stressed), and the
preceding ‘↘’ diacritic indicates a falling tone. This kind of tone
is typical of declarative utterances, in which the speaker is
making a statement, as opposed to, say, posing a yes/no
question. Other tones are possible in English. In yes/no
questions (questions which may solicit the responses ‘Yes’ or
‘No’), it is common to find a rising tone in the tonic syllable,
as in the question Is Mary pregnant? We will represent rising
tones as follows:
(2) Is ˈMary ↗pregnant? (Track 10.2)
Here, the penultimate syllables of Mary and pregnant are
stressed, the tonic falls on the stressed syllable of pregnant,
and the tone is a rise.
A third tone is the rise-fall tone, in which the pitch rises and
then falls, as in the following exchange:
236

(3)
Wife:
Have you been ˈseeing ↗Mary?
Husband:
↗↘No! (Track 10.3)
The use of rise-fall tones conveys certainty, exclamation,
strong conviction or strength of feeling on the part of the
speaker. In this case, the husband is saying that he has
certainly not been seeing Mary: the intonation conveys a
complete denial of the implied accusation.
A fourth tone is the fall-rise tone, as in the following
exchange:
(4)
Wife:
Have you been ˈseeing ↗Mary?
Husband:
↗↘No! (Track 10.4)
Here, the pitch falls then rises in the second utterance. Use
of such a tone conveys hesitation, lack of certainty,
prevarication or reservation on the part of the speaker. In this
example, the husband is being less than clear and
straightforward in his response: he is denying that he’s been
seeing Mary, or trying to suggest that what he’s been doing
does not really amount to ‘seeing Mary’ in the romantic sense.
A stretch of discourse which contains a tonic syllable is
called an intonation phrase (IP), otherwise known as an
intonation group, intonation unit or tone group. These are also
237

referred to as breath groups, since they constitute units of
speech in which we expel air from the lungs. When we stop
speaking to draw breath, we often do so at the end of a tone
group: it is common for speakers to pause at the end of such
units.
It is common to identify three main features of intonation:
• the chunking up of stretches of speech into IPs,
• the placing of the tonic on one of the stressed syllables
of that chunk and
• the assignment of a specific tone on the tonic syllable
These are, to some extent, independent variables: what
syllable we choose to put the tonic on can be independent of
where the IP boundaries go, and what tone we place on the
tonic syllable can be independent of where we choose to place
the tonic.
In examples (1) to (4), the tonic falls on what is known as
the last lexical item (LLI). Recall from our discussion of word
stress that words can be classified into two broad groupings:
words of a lexical category (typically nouns, verbs, adjectives
and adverbs) and words of a functional, or grammatical,
category (such as articles, conjunctions, prepositions and
pronouns). The last lexical item in a syntactic unit is thus the
last noun, verb, adjective or adverb. For example, in (1), the
LLI is the noun doctor, and in (2) it is the adjective pregnant.
The following examples contain, in (5), an LLI which is a verb,
and in (6), an LLI which is an adverb:
(5) My ˈhusband ↘cheats. (Track 10.5)
(6) His ˈlover ˈwalks ↘gracefully. (Track 10.6)
The LLI may not be the last item in an IP, as in:
238

(7) ˈBill ↘gave it to her. (Track 10.7)
Here, the last item is a pronoun, which is not a lexical item,
and thus does not take the tonic. The second-last item is a
preposition, and thus also fails to take the tonic. The third-last
item is a pronoun, so that too fails to take the tonic. The tonic
falls on gave, since it is the LLI, but not the last item. In cases
like this, any syllables which follow the tonic syllable are said
to constitute the tail of the IP: after the fall here, the pitch just
trails off at a low level into the remaining syllables after the
tonic.
10.2 Departures from the LLI
Rule
The LLI rule is the default rule for the placement of the tonic.
By ‘default’, we mean the point where the tonic is placed if no
special circumstances prevail. Defaults in linguistics are rather
like the default settings on your computer: they are the settings
that are used unless one deliberately changes the set-up for
some special purpose. It is common in English to shift the tonic
away from the default position, for various purposes. We now
examine some of those.
10.2.1 Contrastive Intonation
(8)
Speaker A:
ˈMary ˈgave ˈJohn a ↘camera.
239

Speaker B:
No, she didn’t give it to him; he gave it to her. (Track 10.8) (=
↘No | ↘she ˈdidn’t ˈgive it to ↘him | ↘he ˈgave it to ↘her)
Here, the italics show that, in addition to No, four pronouns
receive the tonics (the vertical lines indicate the boundary
between the IPs): it wasn’t Mary that gave John a camera: it
was John that gave Mary a camera. The referent of the word
camera here is given, once speaker A has spoken. Consider the
following possible intonational patterns for the sentence John is
taking the train to London:
(9) ˈJohn is ˈtaking the ˈtrain to ↘London. (Track 10.9)
(10) ˈJohn is ˈtaking the ↘train to ˈLondon. (Track 10.10)
(11) ↘John is ˈtaking the ˈtrain to ˈLondon. (Track 10.11)
In (9), we have the default pattern for tonic placement, with
the tonic on the stressed syllable of the LLI. In (10), we have
contrastive intonation: the train is being contrasted with some
other mode of transport, such as the plane. In (11), the speaker
is stressing the fact that it is John, not someone else, who is
taking the train to London.
This use of tonic placement relates to what is called focus.
In (9), we have broad focus, associated with statements in
which everything is news. These are statements which are said
to come ‘out of the blue’: all of the information is announced
as new information, so everything in the utterance is brought
into focus.
In (10), the person being addressed already knows that John
is going to London: what is news is the information concerning
240

his mode of transport. This is called narrow focus.
In (11), the addressee knows that someone is taking the train
to London, and is being informed that the person in question is
John. This too is a case of narrow focus. Narrow focus relates
to the given/new distinction. Given information is shared
(mutual) knowledge, known to both the speaker and the
hearer. New information is not previously known to the
speaker and the hearer.
The tonic can be moved onto almost any syllable for
contrastive purposes, including affixes. Here is a statement by
the British prime minister David Cameron in 2010:
(12) It’s not ↘unemˈployment that will be creˈated. | It’s
↘emˈployment.
Normally, employment and unemployment have primary
stress on the penultimate syllable, as in We’re ˈtrying to creˈate
em↘ployment. Here, the prime minister is contrasting
employment with unemployment. We see from this example
that, given a context in which we wish to highlight a given
word in order to contrast it with another, the tonic may be
placed on something other than the LLI (unemployment in the
first IP), and that even affixes may receive the tonic (the un-
prefix in unemployment).
10.2.2 Given Information
Another situation in which the LLI rule is flouted concerns the
notions of given and new information. Consider the following
exchange:
241

(13)
A:
We need tomatoes. (We ˈneed to↘matoes)
B:
We’ve got tomatoes! (We’ve ↘ got ˈmatoes) (Track 10.12)
The word tomatoes is given in the first statement: it has
already been mentioned, so the information it conveys is given
(shared by the participants in the exchange). The tonic is
therefore shifted away from the LLI (tomatoes) onto the word
got. Now consider the following:
(14) In ↘ most ˈcases, | we aˈpply the ↘rule, | but in
↘some cases, | we ↘don’t. (Track 10.13)
Here, the LLI in the first IP (cases) is given by the context
of utterance: if we utter (14), the person we are speaking to
already knows what the rule is about, and what kinds of cases
are being spoken about.
Synonyms can count as conveying given information:
(15)
A:
She’s ˈborrowed ˈJane’s ↘frock.
B:
↘No, | it’s ↘Mary’s ˈdress (Track 10.14)
Here, the word dress isn’t given, but its meaning is, via the
uttering of the synonym frock.
Presuppositions can be conveyed via tonic placement:
(16)
A:
242

Have you ˈspoken to ↗John?
B:
I don’t ↘speak to ˈracists (Track 10.15)
B is presupposing that ‘John is a racist’ is given information.
So the tonic shifts from the LLI (racist) to the preceding lexical
item. Speaker A can impose the presupposition that John is a
racist, even if that is open to question.
Notice here that the verb speak is given, but nonetheless
takes the tonic: contrastive intonation can lead to the tonic
being placed on given information. Here is another example:
(17)
A:
He’s ˈgoing to ↘Paris.
B:
He’s not ˈgoing to ↘Paris. | He’s ˈgoing to ↘London. (Track
10.16)
Given information can be shared by millions of people (e.g.
the fact that Barack Obama was elected president of the
United States) or by as few as two people (e.g. husband and
wife).
10.2.3 Final Temporal Adverbials
It is common to find that LLIs which are in syntactic units
which have an adverbial function, and which convey
information relating to time, fail to take the tonic, as in:
243

(18) ˈJohn’s ˈgoing to ↘London on ˈSaturday. (Track
10.17)
Here, Saturday is the LLI, but since the prepositional phrase
on Saturday is a final temporal adverbial, the LLI within that
adverbial expression fails to take the tonic. If we were to place
the tonic on Saturday, that would constitute a case of
contrastive intonation:
(19) ˈJohn’s ˈgoing to ˈLondon on ↘Saturday (Track
10.18) (as opposed to some other day of the week).
When final adverbial expressions are fronted, they tend to
form a separate IP:
(20) On ↘Saturday, | ˈJohn’s ˈgoing to ↘London. (Track
10.19)
10.2.4 ‘Event’ Sentences
These are rather curious. They are short statements which
contain intransitive verbs, but the tonic fails to fall on the
intransitive verb rather than the LLI:
(21)
(a)
The ↘kettle’s ˈboiling.
(b)
The ↘baby’s ˈcrying.
(c)
244

Your ↘house is on ˈfire.
(d)
The ↘sun’s ˈcome ˈout. (Track 10.20)
One would have expected the tonics to fall on the LLIs
boiling, crying and fire, and on the particle out (see above on
LLIs, and below on intransitive phrasal verbs, where we expect
the tonic to fall on the particle).
It has been observed that the subjects in such sentences do
not denote human agents, but why that should affect the tonic
placement is far from clear. There seems to be pragmatic
foregrounding (selecting out) of the subject in such cases.
10.2.5 Non-Lexical Items which
Often Take the Tonic
The negative equivalents of the non-lexical items someone,
something, somewhere, somebody (no one, nothing, nowhere,
nobody) often take the tonic:
(22)
(a)
I ˈsaw ↘no one.
(b)
I’ve ˈdone ↘nothing.
(c)
We’re ˈgetting ↘nowhere.
245

(d)
This ˈinterests ↘nobody. (Track 10.21)
One can place the tonic on the non-lexical items someone,
something, somewhere and somebody, but only if the
intonation is contrastive, as in:
(23)
A:
I ˈsaw the ˈneighbour in the ↘pine grove this ˈmorning.
B:
You ↘couldn’t have. | He’s in ↘Paris ˈright ˈnow.
A:
Well I ˈsaw ↘someone. (Track 10.22)
(That is, not the neighbour, but some other person).
Non-native speakers should be aware that pro-forms such as
one and do so are not lexical items: they convey given
information, and thus do not normally take the tonic, as in:
(24)
10.2.6 Cleft Sentences
Cleft sentences take the following form:
(25) It’s Scotsmen that wear kilts.
246

It was Bill that did it.
Clefting is a way of highlighting, or bringing into focus, a
syntactic constituent. One could say:
(26) I ˈlove ↘John.
But in the cleft version, the contrast between John and
anyone else is more emphasized:
(27) It’s ↘John that I ˈlove. (Track 10.24)
Although love is the LLI, the tonic falls on the highlighted
item. Here, the material after the highlighted material forms the
tail of the IP: the hearer knows that the speaker loves
someone, so that knowledge is given, and no further tonic is
required.
10.2.7 Deictic Expressions
The word deictic means ‘involved in pointing out’, either by
literally pointing at something with one’s finger while speaking,
or bringing something to someone’s attention without
physically pointing. Deictic expressions in English include the
demonstrative words this, that, these and those. These count
as function words, so they do not take the tonic when the LLI
rule applies, as in the following questions:
(28)
(a)
Could you ↗give me that?
(b)
247

Can I have ↗five of those? (Track 10.25)
In such utterances, it is clear from the context of utterance
what that and those are being used to refer to (in the first
example, a parent might be asking a child to hand her a knife;
in the second example, a shopper might be asking a shopkeeper
to give her five oranges).
If the thing being referred to is explicitly mentioned, the LLI
rule will assign the tonic to the noun in question, as in:
(29)
(a)
Could you ˈgive me that ↗knife?
(b)
Can I have ˈfive of those ↗oranges? (Track 10.26)
The tonic can fall on deictic expressions when they are being
used contrastively, as in:
(30)
(a)
Could you ˈgive me ↗that ˈknife?
(as opposed to some other knife)
(b)
Can I have ˈfive of ↗those ˈoranges? (Track 10.27)
(as opposed to some other varieties of orange)
10.3 IPs and Syntactic Units
248

10.3.1 Syntactic Units which
Normally Form a Separate IP
There are syntactic units which normally form separate IPs,
such as relatively short main clauses, as in (1) to (3) in section
10.1: here, we can see that the intonation tracks the syntax.
This is unsurprising, since both clauses and IPs convey
coherent chunks of information. We will now examine a range
of other syntactic units which normally form independent IPs.
10.3.1.1 Parentheticals
Parenthetical information is extra, optional information offered
by the speaker. If parentheticals are omitted from a syntactic
structure, the structure in question remains grammatically well-
formed. Let us look at some types of parenthetical.
Non-restrictive relative clauses
(31) The ˈguys in the ↘car, | who were ↘hungry, | ˈate
some ↘sandwiches. (Track 10.28)
Here, the IP boundaries correspond to the commas in the
written form of the sentence. The tonics fall on the LLIs in
each IP: car, hungry and sandwiches. The meaning conveyed
is that all of the guys in the car were hungry (thus the
expression ‘non-restrictive relative clause’: the range of
referents is not restricted).
(Restrictive relative clauses
Note that these do not normally count as parentheticals, and
thus do not normally form a separate IP, as in:
(32) The ˈguys in the ˈcar who were ↘hungry | ˈate some
249

↘sandwiches. (Track 10.28)
In the second example, there are only two IPs, as opposed to
three in the first. The subject noun phrase is sufficiently long to
form a separate IP, but the restrictive relative clause within that
noun phrase does not form a separate IP. The difference in
meaning between (31) and (32) is that, in (32) it is not
necessarily the case that all of the guys in the car were hungry:
the meaning is restricted only to the hungry guys in the car.)
Noun phrases in apposition
Noun phrases are said to be in apposition when they are co-
referential, that is, when they are being used to refer to the
same person or entity, as in:
(33) ˈBarak O↘bama, | a ˈDemocrat poli↘tician, | is
in↘telligent. (Track 10.29)
Other parentheticals
(34) ↘↗Mary, | you’re not ˈgoing to be↘↗lieve this, | but
ˈJane is ↗↘pregnant! (Track 10.30)
Note that parentheticals are uttered on a lower pitch range
than the preceding and following IPs: if you listen carefully to
Tracks 10.28, 10.29 and 10.30, you should be able to hear
this.
10.3.1.2 Co-Ordinated Constituents
(35)
(a)
ˈMary ˈmoved to ↘Paris | but ˈJohn ˈstayed in ↘London.
(Sentence co-ordination)
250

(b)
ˈJohn ˈwent to the ↘pub | and ˈordered a ↘ beer. (Verb phrase
co-ordination)
(c)
She’s ˈvery ↘ tall | and ˈvery ↘ pretty. (Adjective phrase co-
ordination)
(d)
His ˈvery ↘well | and ˈvery ↘quickly. (Adverb phrase co-
ordination)
(e)
It’s ˈeither ˈin the ↘fridge | or ˈon the ↘table. (Prepositional
phrase co-ordination)
(f)
He ˈbought the ˈhouse on the ↘hill | and the ˈwoods in the
↘valley. (Noun phrase co-ordination) (Track 10.31)
However, when the constituents are short, separate IPs are
not always required:
(36)
(a)
She’s ˈtall and ↘lanky. (Adjective phrase co-ordination)
(b)
He ˈstopped and ↘stared. (Verb phrase co-ordination)
(c)
He ˈbought ˈmilk and ↘cheese. (Noun phrase co-ordination)
251

(Track 10.32)
This is especially noticeable when co-ordinated elements
have been lexicalized (formed into lexical items), taken to be
used to refer to single entities, such as:
(37)
(a)
ˈfish’n’ ↘chips
(b)
ˈbeer and ↘skittles
(c)
ˈstrawberries and ↘cream (Track 10.33)
Other co-ordinated items that are used to refer to what is
perceived as a single entity or unit are British pub names:
(38)
(a)
The ˈDog and ↘Duck
(b)
The ˈFox and ↘Hounds
and names of couples:
   
(c)
ˈBill and ↘Mary        ˈJane and ↘Clive (Track 10.34)
(The couples here are considered to be ‘an item’.)
10.3.1.3 Items on Lists
Normally, each item on the list constitutes a separate tone
252

group
(39) He bought ↗eggs, | ↗milk, | to↗matoes | and ↘ham.
(Track 10.35)
Non-final items on a list often take a rising tone: this signals
that the list is not yet complete.
10.3.1.4 Subordinate Clauses
When a sentence contains a subordinate clause, the clause
boundary often corresponds to an IP boundary:
(40)
(a)
I’ll ˈbuy the ˈfish’n’ ↘chips | when I ˈgo to the ↘shops.
(b)
I ˈtold the ˈnew reˈcruit to the ↘company | that he was ↘fired.
(Track 10.36)
If the material preceding the subordinate clause is relatively
short, the subordinate clause need not form a separate IP:
(41) I ˈthink she’s been ↘sacked. (Track 10.37)
10.3.1.5 Sentence Adverbials
Adverb phrases necessarily have an adverbial function. But
other phrases, notably prepositional phrases, can have an
adverbial function.
It is common to distinguish verb phrase adverbials from
sentence adverbials, as in (42a) and (b) respectively:
(42)
(a)
253

John went to the interview hopefully.
(b)
John went to the interview, hopefully.
In (42a), John was hopeful. In (42b), the speaker is hopeful.
Notice that (42b) can be rephrased with the sentence
adverbial in initial position:
   
(c)
Hopefully, John went to the interview.
In either case, sentence adverbials form a separate IP, and
they have the fall-rise tone:
(43)
(a)
↘↗Hopefully, | ˈJohn ˈwent to the ↘interview.
(b)
ˈJohn ˈwent to the ↘interview, | ↘↗hopefully. (Track 10.38)
10.3.1.6 Pseudo-Clefts
These take the syntactic form What he needs is a bath. It is
common for these to form two separate IPs:
(44) What he ↘↗needs | is a ↘bath. (Track 10.39)
10.3.1.7 The is . . . is that Construction
(45)
(a)
The ˈthing ↘↗is | is that she’s ↘pregnant.
254

(b)
The alˈternative ↘↗is | is that we’ll have to beˈcome more in
ˈvolved in ↘Europe.
(c)
My conˈcern ↘↗is | is that it’s ˈgot ˈtoo ↘big | too ↘quickly.
(d)
The ˈfact of the ˈmatter ↘↗is | is that the ˈway it is ↘run | is
too ↘complex.
(e)
The ˈgood ˈnews ↘↗is | is that they’re ˈlending to ˈsmall
↘businesses. (Track 10.40)
This construction is very widespread in spoken English, both
informal and formal (most of these examples are taken from
formal interviews with British politicians on BBC TV).
Although it is possible not to have an IP boundary after the
first is, that is the norm.
10.3.2 Syntactic Units which Do Not
Normally Form Separate IPs
10.3.2.1 Reporting Clauses
These abound in novels, but also in everyday speech
(46) I’m ↘tired, he said. (Track 10.41)
255

Here, the falling tone on the tonic syllable keeps trailing off
into the reporting clause (he said)
It is possible, however, to form a separate IP around a
reporting clause. Compare (47a) and (b):
(47)
(a)
He’s re↘tired, I think.
(b)
He’s re↘tired, | I ↘think. (Track 10.42)
Utterance (47b) conveys less certainty than (47a).
10.3.2.2 Subject Noun Phrases
(48) The ˈold ˈman ˈkicked the ↘dog. (Track 10.43)
But, as we saw in earlier, the longer a subject noun phrase,
the more likely it is that a separate IP will be possible.
10.3.2.3 Restrictive Relative Clauses within
Subject Noun Phrases
As we have seen, these do not normally form a separate IP, as
in example (32), repeated here (the long subject NP forms a
separate IP, but not the relative clause):
(32) The ˈguys in the ˈcar who were ↘hungry | ˈate some
↘sandwiches.
256

10.3.3 Syntactic Units which May,
or May Not, Form Separate IPs,
Depending on the Sense Conveyed
10.3.3.1 Tag Questions
Reverse polarity tag questions
By reverse polarity we mean that the first part is in the
positive, and the tag question in the negative, or vice versa, as
in:
(49)
(a)
You’re going to do this, aren’t you?
(b)
You’re not going to do this, are you? (Track 10.44)
The intonation of reverse polarity tag questions works as
follows: if we form a separate IP on the tag question, and place
a falling tone on it, the tag invites agreement:
(50)
(a)
You’re ˈgoing to ↘do this, | ↘aren’t you?
(b)
You’re not ˈgoing to ↘do this, | ↘are you? (Track 10.44)
If there is a rising tone on the tag, it need not form a separate
IP:
(51)
257

(a)
She’s ˈcoming to the ↗party, isn’t she?
(b)
She’s not ˈgetting ↗married, is she? (Track 10.45)
Here, the tag question forms part of the tail of the IP. But
the tag question can form a separate IP:
(52)
(a)
She’s ˈcoming to the ↗party, | ↗isn’t she?
(b)
She’s not ˈgetting ↗married, | ↗is she? (Track 10.46)
The differences in conveyed meaning are subtle: in (51a),
the speaker is not entirely certain whether she’s coming to the
party. In (51b), the speaker may be expressing surprise, or
even astonishment, whereas in (52a) and (52b), the speaker is
a lot less sure, and is posing more of a query than in (51a) and
(51b).
10.4 Tonic Placement, IP
Boundaries and Syntax
10.4.1 Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs in English have two parts: the first part, which
looks like a normal verb, and the second part, which looks like
258

a preposition, and is often called a particle. They can be
transitive (which means that they are followed by a direct
object, as in He chatted up the waitress, where the waitress is
the direct object) or intransitive (which means that no direct
object is required, as in He backed down). Learners of English
as a foreign language are well-advised to learn the intonation of
such verbs, since there are so many of them, and they occur
with high frequency in spoken English.
10.4.1.1 Transitive Phrasal Verbs
If the direct object noun phrase is phrasal, the tonic falls on the
head noun in the noun phrase (the head noun is the noun in a
noun phrase which is semantically the most prominent):
(53)
(a)
He ˈchatted ˈup the ↘waitress.
(b)
He ˈchatted the ↘waitress ˈup.
If the direct object noun phrase is a pronoun, the tonic falls
on the particle (which is normally shifted so that it follows the
direct object):
(c) He ˈchatted her ↘up. (Track 10.47)
10.4.1.2 Intransitive Phrasal Verbs
These take the tonic on the particle:
(54) He ˈbacked ↘down. (Track 10.48)
259

However, many short sentences with intransitive phrasal
verbs are ‘event sentences’ (see 10.2.4 above), in which case
the tonic is retracted:
(55)
(a)
The ↘plane ˈblew up.
(b)
The ↘car ˈbroke down. (Track 10.49)
10.4.2 Degree Adverbials
The most central example of a degree adverbial is the word
very. It functions to modify adjectives in adjective phrases, and
adverbs in adverb phrases, as in:
(56)
(a)
He’s very ↘tall. (Adjective phrase)
(b)
He ˈtalks very ↘slowly. (Adverb phrase) (Track 10.50)
Other degree adverbials include so, incredibly, the mild
swearword bloody and the stronger ‘f-word’, as in:
(57)
(a)
He’s so ↘stupid.
(b)
He’s inˈcredibly ↘arrogant.
260

(c)
He’s ˈbloody ↘good.
(d)
He’s ˈf*cking ↘good. (Track 10.50)
But the tonic can be placed on the degree adverbial, for
emphasis, as in:
(58)
(a)
He’s ↗↘so ˈstupid
(b)
He’s in↗↘credibly ˈarrogant!
(c)
He’s ↗↘bloody ˈ
(d)
He’s ↗↘f*cking ˈgood! (Track 10.51)
There is a use of so in colloquial English which acts as a
verb phrase adverbial, and takes the tonic, with an exclamatory
tone, as in:
(59)
261

10.5 Tones and Syntax
10.5.1 WH Questions
These normally have a falling tone:
(60) Where are you ↘going? (Track 10.53)
But not when used echoically:
(61)
A:
I’m ˈmoving to ↘London.
B:
↗Where are you moving to? (Track 10.54)
Speaker B here has either not properly heard what A said, or
is expressing incredulity. B’s WH question is said to be echoic
in that it echoes part or all of what A has just said. Notice that
the tone keeps on trailing upwards in the tail of the IP, just as it
trails downwards when a tonic syllable before the tail has a
falling tone.
262

10.5.2 Declaratives as Questions
We can use syntax to form yes/no question, in which the first
auxiliary verb in the main clause is inverted around the subject
noun phrase, as in:
(62) (a) Have they ˈfound your ↗mobile?
The corresponding declarative statement would have a falling
tone:
(b) They’ve ˈfound your ↘mobile.
But we can retain the declarative syntactic structure and still
ask a question by placing a rising, rather than a falling, tone on
the LLI:
(c) They’ve ˈfound your ↗mobile? (Track 10.55)
Declarative structures can be uttered with a fall-rise:
(63)
In using a fall-rise, B is expressing surprise that the mobile
has been found, or that it is the mobile, as opposed to some
other lost object, that has been found.
10.6 Tonic Placement and
Discourse Context
263

10.6.1 Vocatives
Vocative expressions are used for addressing one’s interlocutor,
as in the following extracts from telephone messages left by a
speaker calling a friend called Nick:
(64)
(a)
Nick, it’s me.
(b)
It’s me, Nick.
Here the speaker assumes that the addressee (Nick) can
identify the voice of the person calling, or that Nick is
expecting a call from that person.
Initial vocatives form a separate IP:
(c) ↘Nick, | it’s ↘me.
Final vocatives do not:
(d) It’s ↘me, Nick. (Track 10.56)
If an IP is formed around the final Nick, as in (65):
(65) It’s ↘me, | ↘Nick. (Track 10.57)
then the word Nick is not interpreted as a vocative; rather, it
is interpreted as the name of the caller.
10.6.2 Other Meaning Differences
Conveyed by IP Boundaries
As we’ve seen, the placement of IP boundaries, and/or the
264

kind of tone we select, can convey differences in meaning.
Consider:
(66)
(a)
He didn’t marry her because she was French.
(= He ˈdidn’t ˈmarry her because she was ↘French)
This means that he did marry her, but not because she was
French.
    
(b)
He didn’t marry her, because she was French. (Track 10.58)
(= He ˈdidn’t ↘marry her | because she was ↘French)
This means that he didn’t marry her, the reason being that
she was French.
10.7 Summing Up
We have seen that there are three main structural aspects of
English intonation: the dividing up of utterances into
intonational phrases which are chunks of information, the
placing of a tonic on one of the stressed syllables in each
chunk, and the kind of tone we use in that tonic syllable.
Intonation in English, we have seen, is connected to syntactic
structure, the lexical vs functional distinction, the meaning
expressed by the syntactic units in question, and aspects of
discourse linked to the context of utterance and phenomena
such as conveyed meaning and the speaker’s attitude towards
what she or he is saying. Perhaps the most striking aspect of
265

English intonation is the extent to which it is dynamic, in the
sense that speakers of English frequently move the tonic away
from the default LLI position, for a wide variety of purposes.
For non-native speakers of English, some degree of mastery of
this will result in a much more native-like speech style.
Exercises
1 In each of the following utterances, identify the last
lexical item.
(a) John went to the pub.
(b) Mary put her finger on it.
(c) My father says he can’t understand that.
(d) He talks rather slowly.
(e) I want that pink one.
2 Which of the following questions can have a rising tone?
(a) Is Bush mad?
(b) What do you want?
(c) Have you eaten?
(d) How does this work?
(e) Isn’t it time for lunch?
3 Listen to Track 10.59. Where do the tonics fall in the
following utterances in that sound file? Explain why.
(a) She chatted up the waiter.
(b) She chatted him up.
(c) She broke down.
(d) We’ve split up.
266

(e) I’ve put him off.
4 Listen to Track 10.60. Identify the IP boundaries in the
following utterances in that sound file and say where the
tonics fall. Explain why.
(a) Mary, you’re fired.
(b) You’re fired, Mary.
(c) He’s mad, she said.
(d) It’s an evil empire, said the president of the
United States.
5 Listen to Track 10.61. Identify the IP boundaries in the
following utterances in that file and say where the tonics
fall. Explain why.
(a) Mary, a good friend of mine, is pregnant.
(b) The guys in the car, who were hungry, ate some
sandwiches.
(c) The guys in the car who were hungry ate some
sandwiches.
(d) Bill, you won’t believe this, you’ve passed your
exam.
(e) His new book, Making Friends, is sure to be a
bestseller.
6 What is the default tonic placement in the following
utterances?
(a) He went to London on Thursday.
(b) I haven’t seen her recently.
(c) He left for Paris in a hurry.
(d) She left her bedroom in a mess.
(e) He speaks quickly.
267

7 What are the intonation group possibilities in the
following utterances? Discuss different tone possibilities in
the tag questions. Listen to Track 10.62 and describe the
intonational structure you hear, including IP boundaries
and tones.
(a) You’re not pregnant, are you?
(b) You like lasagne, don’t you?
(c) You do play golf, don’t you?
(d) We can sort this out, can’t we?
(e) We’ll never sort this out, will we?
8 Where do the tone group boundaries fall in the following
utterances, and where do the tonics fall? If there are
alternative intonational structures, say what you think they
are. Listen to Track 10.63 and describe the intonational
structure you hear, including IP boundaries and tones.
(a) ‘You can’t go’, said Bill Smith, a good friend of
mine.
(b) ‘Obama can’t win in Texas’, claims Hillary
Clinton, a woman whose husband Bill, ex-president,
is from the South of the USA.
(c) ‘Is Amy Winehouse in rehab?’, asked Jonathon
Ross on the Thursday after she sang out of tune at a
concert in London.
(d) ‘Dickens I can’t stand’, confessed the young
recruit to a university lectureship in Victorian
literature.
(e) ‘What does George Bush, a devout Christian,
have to say about the treatment of prisoners in Abu
Ghraib?’, asked the chair of the committee.
268

269

11
Graphophonemics: Spelling–
Pronunciation Relations
11.1 Introduction
The relationship between spelling and pronunciation in English
is complex: it can seem completely arbitrary. The complexities
have historical sources: they result from changes introduced by
scribes after the Norman Conquest, the adopting of many
loanwords with foreign spellings, and, above all, changes in the
phonological system of English as the language evolved from
Old English, through Middle English, into Early Modern
English and present-day English. Despite the complexities,
there are some basic regularities which are worth learning,
especially for non-native speakers of English.
We begin by distinguishing between letters and graphemes.
There are twenty-six letters in the Roman alphabet, but there
are more than twenty-six visual symbols (graphemes) for
representing 
English 
phonemes 
and 
allophones, 
since
combinations of letters can be used to represent a given
phoneme or allophone. Examples are <ph>, which corresponds
to the /f/ phoneme, as in the word photograph, <th>, which
corresponds to both the /θ/ and /ð/ phonemes, as in the words
think and this, and <oa>, which corresponds to the RP and GA
270

phonemes /oʊ/ and the SSE (Standard Scottish English)
phoneme /o/, as in the word boat. We will refer to such
graphemes as digraphs, since they contain two letters. We will
refer to graphemes with three letters, such as <sch>, in words
such as schmaltzy (‘overly sentimental’), as trigraphs. The
distinction between letters and graphemes can be seen in the
different writing conventions of English and French. For
instance, in writing the initial for my first name in English, the
convention is to use the first letter: ‘P. Carr’. The French
convention is to select the first grapheme: ‘Ph. Carr’. The term
graphophonemics is the name given to the study of the
relationship between graphemes and phonemes (and some of
their allophones). We will begin by examining vowel graphemes
in English, and then proceed to consonant graphemes.
11.2 Vowel Graphemes and
Their Phonemic Values
11.2.1 Vowel Monographs
Let us begin with the five vowel graphemes <a>, <e>, <i>,
<o>, <u>. We will distinguish between two different phonemic
values for these graphemes: their checked values and their free
values. The terms checked and free derive, historically, from
facts about syllable structure. Take the word bite: in Middle
English, this word was bisyllabic: /bi:tə/, in which the first
syllable is /bi:/, and the second syllable is /tə/. These are both
271

open syllables: they contain no coda consonants. What we are
referring to as free values derive, historically, from open
syllables. The word bit, in Middle English, was pronounced
/bit/, a monosyllabic word with a closed syllable, containing the
coda consonant /t/. What we are referring to as checked values
derive from closed syllables: a closed syllable is a checked
syllable. Notice that, in contemporary English, the word bite
has lost the final schwa, and is now monosyllabic: /baɪt/. But it
retains a free value: /aɪ/, the historical descendant of the long
/i:/ vowel. The word bit retains a checked value: /ɪ/, the
historical descendant of the short /i/ vowel.
In the kinds of monosyllabic words we will consider here,
four of these graphemes have a checked and a free value, and
<u> has two checked and free values, as follows (examples
from RP):
(1)
While the final <e> remains in the spelling of the words in
the first column of examples, the schwa which it once
corresponded to was elided over time, as we have noted. We
will refer to this grapheme as mute e. In stressed monosyllabic
words, if there is a mute e, the preceding vowel grapheme
corresponds to the free value. Note that the names of these
graphemes have the free value: we call them /eɪ/, /i:/, /aɪ/, /oʊ/,
/ju:/.
In a stressed monosyllabic word without a mute e, the
272

preceding vowel grapheme corresponds to the checked value.
This is true when there is more than one consonant grapheme
at the end of the written word, as in:
(2)
apt, act
bell, text
Bill, width
accost, knots
butt, tuft
These free/checked values figure in alternations in
pronunciation when certain affixes are added to bisyllabic
words, as in the following examples, from RP:
(3)
In stressed monosyllabic words, there are additional values
for these vowel graphemes in non-rhotic accents such as RP,
where the historical loss of [ɹ] in coda position has resulted in
changes to the preceding vowel:
(4) ‘Pre-r’ checked and free values in RP
273

In contemporary RP, the /(j)ɔ:/ pronunciation of words like
sure seems to be slowly replacing the previous /(j)ʊə/
pronunciation, so that shore and sure are homophones. Many
words like mare are now pronounced /ε:/, rather than /εə/.
Monophthongal versions of /aɪə/ have a long [a:] in RP: there is
variability here among RP speakers.
As we have seen, GA is rhotic, so the free and checked
values in ‘pre-r’ position differ somewhat from the RP values
(we include the /ɹ/ for clarity):
(5) ‘Pre-r’ checked and free values in GA
The same pattern of checked and free values can be found
in words with more than one syllable with the final
syllastressed (examples from RP):
(6)
274

The same is true for ‘pre-r’ vowel graphemes in words with
more than one syllable, stressed on the final syllable :
(7)
We have seen several examples of words with a stressed
final syllable and a single consonant grapheme with no mute e,
such as mad, pet, hid, not, cut, forgot, forbid, uncut’: the
vowel grapheme in the stressed syllable corresponds to the
checked value of the grapheme. If we add inflectional suffixes
to such words, and thus add a syllable, we must double the
consonant grapheme to convey the checked value: madden,
petting, hidden, knotting, cutting, forgotten, forbidden. This is
one sense in which the spelling of English words can actually
be helpful as a guide to pronunciation: without the doubled
consonant grapheme, the stressed vowel grapheme would have
the free value, as in the following pairs:
(8)
The words above are morphologically complex: they contain
more than one morpheme. But even in words which are
morphologically simple and have a prefinal stressed syllable,
275

we find the same pattern. The word hammer, for instance,
does not contain a suffix, but the double consonant grapheme
encodes the checked value for <a>, namely /æ/. The word
laser is also morphologically simple, but the single consonant
grapheme encodes the free (long/tense) value for <a>, namely
/eɹ/ (in RP and GA). Unfortunately, there are irregular
spellings. Take the word panel, which has the checked /æ/
value: we would expect it to be pronounced with /eɹ/, or to be
written pannel, just like flannel and channel. These irregular
spellings do not help the foreign learner, who often learns the
spelling of a word before learning the pronunciation. But the
regularities we have just described nonetheless cover a huge
number of English words, and are therefore worth learning
about.
A 
further 
regularity 
concerns 
stressed 
vowels 
in
antepenultimate syllables (or earlier in the word than that)
when they are followed by a single consonant grapheme: these
typically have the checked value, as in the following words (RP
pronunciations):
(9)
The <u> grapheme behaves differently: a stressed vowel in
penultimate position (or earlier), when followed by a single
consonant grapheme, has the free value for <u>, as in:
(10)
frugal
/ˈfɹu:gəl/
276

imprudent
/ɪmˈpɹu:dənt/
accumulate
/əˈkju:mjəleɪt/
In addition to the <a>, <e>, <i>, <o>, <u> monographs, the
<y> grapheme can represent vowels, as follows:
(11)
Grapheme
Phonemes/Allophones
Examples
<y>
/ɪ/, /aɪ/, [i]
myth, rhyme, happy
In stressed syllables, <y> has the same values as <i>. The
checked value /ɪ/ occurs where we would expect it to: words
like myth, consisting of a single stressed syllable, do not have a
mute e, whereas words such as rhyme have a mute e, and thus
have the free value /aɪ/. We have seen that, in ‘pre-r’ position,
when followed by a mute e, RP <i> has /aɪə/, as in tire, which
can be uttered as long [a:]. The same is true for <y> in this
position: tyre corresponds to /taɪə/, which can also be
pronounced [ta:].
For word-final unstressed <y>, we have treated the short [i]
vowel here as a positional variant (allophone) of the /i:/
phoneme in RP and GA, where it occurs in words such as
happy, and in the many adverbs ending in <ly>, such as lovely.
Stressed word-final <y> corresponds to /aɪ/, as in dry and fly.
277

11.2.2 Vowel Digraphs
The vowel digraphs present problems for foreign learners,
since they often correspond to more than one phonemic value,
for reasons connected to the history of English. This is
especially true for RP, since it is non-rhotic, which complicates
matters. Let us list some of the most frequent vowel digraphs
and discuss their phonemic values.
11.2.2.1 <ai>
In SSE, <ai> corresponds to the phoneme /e/, as in pain
(/pen/) and fair (/feɹ/). But, in RP, since it is non-rhotic, there
is a separate ‘pre-r’ value: pain is /peɪn/, while fair is /fεə/ or
/fε:/. In this respect, SSE is less complex than RP for many
learners of English. In GA, there is a complication: pain is
/peɪn/, as in RP, but ‘pre-r’ words such as fair, while having
the /eɪ/ phoneme, undergo the ‘Marry Merry Mary’
neutralization, in which the /æ/ vs /ε/ vs /eɪ/ oppositions are
neutralized to [ε] in ‘pre-r’ position: Marry Merry Mary is
pronounced as [ˈmεɹi] [ˈmεɹi] [ˈmεɹi], and fair is pronounced
[fεɹ]. This can cause confusion for speakers of varieties of
British English when listening to Americans. For instance,
when my son, while attending primary school in the United
States for a semester, told me the name of a new American
schoolfriend, I thought that the boy was called Ferl, since my
son pronounced the name the way a GA speaker would: [fεɹɫ].
In fact, the boy’s name was Farrel’: schwa is often elided after
/ɹ/ in GA, and the ‘Marry Merry Mary’ rule applies to the
278

stressed vowel. As the playwright George Bernard Shaw once
said, Britain and America are two countries divided by a
common language!
11.2.2.2 <au>
In RP, this can correspond either to /ɔ:/, as in fraud, or to the
LOT vowel /ɒ/, as in Austria. Many speakers of GA lack the /
ɒ/ phoneme, and have /ɑ/ instead, so that Austria has the value
/ɑ/ in its stressed syllable (though there is variability here).
11.2.2.3 <ee>
In SSE, this corresponds to the /i/ phoneme, as in see (/si/) and
peer (/piɹ/). In RP, words like see have the /i:/ phoneme, while,
in ‘pre-r’ position, there is a centring diphthong, as in peer
(/piə/). In GA, <ee> corresponds to /i:/, but there is often
neutralization of the opposition between /i:/ and /ɪ/ in ‘pre-r’
position, so that stir it and steer it can be homophonous. When
this opposition is neutralized, the resulting vowel can sound like
[ɪ] or [i]: [stɪɹɪt] or [stiɹɹɪt].
11.2.2.4 <oo>
For historical reasons, this digraph has three main phonemic
values in RP and GA: /u:/, as in soon, /ʊ/, as in good, and /ʌ/,
as in blood. In ‘pre-r’ position in RP, the centring diphthong /
ʊə/ occurs, as in poor, but this is increasingly giving way to the
long monophthong /ɔ:/, so that sure and shore are
279

homophones. In GA, the FOOT vowel can be unrounded, and
the symbol often used to represent that resulting high, back
unrounded vowel is [ɯ], as in sure: [ʃɯɹ].
11.2.2.5 <ou>
This digraph can correspond to either /aʊ/, as in how, or to /
əʊ/ (GA /oʊ/), as in know. This poses problems for learners of
English, since there is no rule governing the occurrence of one
or the other. Worse still, there are forms such as bow, in which
the verb to bow has /aʊ/, while the noun bow has /əʊ/.
In <ought> sequences, RP has /ɔ:/, as in thought, while
many GA speakers have /ɒ/ in such words.
Word-final <ough> is complex: it can correspond to /u:/, as in
through, /əʊ/ (GA /oʊ/), as in though, /ʌf/, as in tough, /ɒf/, as
in trough, and /aʊ/, as in plough.
Finally, <ou> in words with <ouble> and <ouple>
corresponds to /ʌ/, as in double and couple.
11.2.2.6 <ea>
This is one of the most difficult of the vowel digraphs for
students learning English as a foreign language. It can
correspond to /i:/ in RP (and GA), as in the word sea, or /ε/, as
in head. There are several ‘pre-r’ values in RP: /ɪə/, as in fear,
/εə/ (or, more often in contemporary RP, /ε:/), as in bear, /ɜ:/,
as in dearth, and /ɒ:/, as in hearth.
In GA, the ‘pre-r’ values include /ɜ/, as in dearth (/dɜɹθ/),
280

and /ɑ/, as in hearth. GA also has phonetic [ε], as in bear,
because of the ‘Marry Merry Mary’ neutralization rule.
11.3 Consonant Graphemes
and Their Phonemic Values
11.3.1 Consonant Monographs
There are consonant monographs in English which have a
single phonemic value. These are:
(12)
Grapheme
Phoneme
Example
<p>
/p/
pit
<k>
/k/
kit
<b>
/b/
bit
<d>
/d/
din
<j>
/dʒ/
281

joy
<f>
/f/
fun
<v>
/v/
van
<z>
/z/
zip
<l>
/l/
lip
<m>
/m/
mind
<w>
/w/
wet
There are also monographs with more than one phonemic
(or phonetic) value:
(13)
Grapheme
Phonemes/Allophones
Examples
<y>
/j/
year
<n>
/n/, [m], [ɱ], [ŋ]
ip, input, inform, ink
282

<s>
/s/, /z/, /ʃ/, /ʒ/
sip, rose, compulsion, confuse
<g>
/g/, /dʒ/
got, gin
<x>
/ks/, /gz/, /kʃ/, /gʒ/
sex, exact, luxury, luxurious
For the grapheme <y>, we are treating words such as year
as beginning with a consonant: the palatal approximant /j/. The
sounds [j] and [w] are often referred to as semi-consonants,
since they are vowel-like in their articulation, but they occupy a
consonantal position in syllables, namely the onset position.
As far as the grapheme <n> is concerned, we have seen that
the phoneme /n/ undergoes nasal assimilation: if followed by a
bilabial consonant, the realization is bilabial, as in input; if
followed by a labio-dental consonant, its realization is labio-
dental, as in inform; and if followed by a velar consonant, its
realization is velar, as in ink. These bilabial, labio-dental and
velar realizations are all allophones of the /n/ phoneme.
The <s> grapheme corresponds to four phonemes for
historical reasons: the palato-alveolar pronunciations /ʃ/ and /ʒ/
came about because the following consonant was a palatal
approximant (known informally as a yod): the sequence [s] +
[j] led to an assimilation process known as coalescence, in
which a sequence of an alveolar and a palatal results in a
palato-alveolar articulation. The same process can be seen in
connected speech: a word-final /s/, when followed by a yod,
can lead to assimilation. This can be heard in a song by the
283

Rolling Stones, entitled ‘Miss You’, pronounced [ˈmɪʃə] by
Mick Jagger. Similarly, a word-final /z/ followed by a word-
initial /ε/ can yield a [ʒ], as in He’s yours, pronounced [hi
ˈʒɜ:z]. Words such as rose, the past tense of rise, initially had a
voiceless [s], often with a word-final schwa: [ro:sə]. It is
common 
for 
voiceless 
segments 
to 
become 
voiced
intervocalically (between vowels): since vowels are typically
voiced, an assimilation process takes place which results in the
intervocalic sound undergoing voicing. Thus [ro:zə], which
later lost the word-final schwa. Much later, the /o:/
diphthongized in RP, resulting in the present-day [ɪəʊz]
pronunciation.
The <g> grapheme corresponds to the /g/ phoneme, but also
corresponds to the /dʒ/ phoneme, again for historical reasons
relating to assimilation: since the vowel in words such as gin,
gibberish and gist is a high front vowel, the historical /g/
underwent palatalization, and became palato-alveolar. In words
such as gibe and Giles, the vowel was the high-front /i:/ in
Middle English, and thus induced the same palatalization
process. Unfortunately, not all /g/ + high-front vowel
sequences underwent this process, so that words such as give
and gig, while containing a high front vowel, have retained the
velar pronunciation /g/. Some words, such as the proper name
Gill, can be pronounced either way, with the female name Gill
being pronounced with a [dʒ], and the male name Gill being
pronounced with a [g]. Similarly, the word gill, when meaning
a part of a fish, is pronounced with a velar stop, whereas the
unit of measurement known as a gill is pronounced with the
palato-alveolar value.
284

The <x> grapheme corresponds to sequences of two
phonemes. If we take the /ks/ sequence to be the ‘basic’ value,
we can see that the same historical processes of voicing and
palatalization have taken place to yield the other three values.
The /gz/ sequences in words like exact have arisen from
intervocalic voicing assimilation. In words like luxury, the
sequence /ksj/ gave rise to coalescence of the /sj/ sequence,
resulting in /kʃ/. In words like luxurious, both coalescence and
inter-vocalic voicing have resulted in the /kʒ/ sequence. Stress
also plays a role here: if the preceding vowel is stressed, as in
sex and luxury, we have a voiceless value; if the following
vowel is stressed, as in exact and luxurious, we have a voiced
value.
11.3.2 Consonant Digraphs and
Trigraphs
There are consonant digraphs and trigraphs with a single
phonemic value:
(14)
Grapheme
Phoneme
Example
<ck>
/k/
clock
<ph>
/f/
photo
285

<sh>
/ʃ/
ship
<rh>
/ɹ/
rhubarb
<dg>
/dʒ/
edge
<d¡>
/dʒ/
adjunct
<ng>
/ŋ/
sing
<tch>
/tʃ/
itch
In addition to the consonant monographs with more than one
value, there are consonant digraphs and trigraphs with more
than one value. These are:
(15)
Grapheme
Phonemes
Examples
<gu>
/g/, /gw/
guard, anguish
<qu>
/k/, /kw/
unique, queen
286

<ch>
/tʃ/, /k/, /ʃ/
chair, chaos, chic
<gh>
/g/, /f/, zero
ghoul, tough, thigh
<th>
/θ/, /ð/
think, this
<sch>
/sk/, /ʃ/
school, schmaltzy
<sc>
/s/, /ʃ/, /sk/
scene, conscious, scour
<gg>
/g/, /dʒ/
egg, exaggerate
<cc>
/k/, /ks/
account, accent
<ss>
/s/, /ʃ/
kiss, mission
The <gu> digraph mostly corresponds to the /g/ phoneme, as
in guide and vague, but can correspond to the /gw/ sequence.
This can be found only in the middle of words, where there is
no morpheme boundary, as in anguish, language and penguin,
but not in, for instance, vaguely.
The <qu> digraph in words like queen was introduced by
287

French scribes after the Norman Conquest: words like this had
previously been written with a <cw> sequence. Words such as
unique have been borrowed from French with their French
spellings.
The <ch> digraph replaced the <c> monograph in words like
church, which had previously been pronounced with a /k/, and
is now pronounced with a /tʃ/. The value /k/ can be found in
many words of Greek origin, such as chaos, chemist and
psychology. The /ʃ/ value is found in fairly recent loanwords
from French, such as chic, champagne and brochure. We have
not listed the value /x/ (the voiceless velar fricative), since it
does not occur in most varieties of English. It does, however,
occur in Scottish English, in words such as loch (/lɔx/), as
opposed to lock (/lɔk/). While some non-Scottish speakers
pronounce words such as loch with a [x], most produce a [k]
when attempting Scottish words such as the place-name
Auchtermuchty, German words such as Bach or Spanish words
such as rioja.
The <gh> digraph used to represent the voiceless velar
fricative /x/, which can be heard in Spanish words like ajo
(‘garlic’) or German words like Buch (‘book’). The voiceless
velar fricative no longer exists in RP or GA: it was elided in
many words, like thigh, daughter and thought, which is why
we have represented its value as zero. The voiceless velar
fricative can still be heard among older speakers of Scots, who
pronounce daughter as [dɔxtɪɾ] and thought as [θɔxt].
Most words spelled with <th> correspond to /θ/, since <th>
288

words which contain /ð/ are words of a non-lexical category
(function words), such as the, this, that, these, those and then.
While these are high-frequency words, there are very few of
them, which is typical of function words.
Words spelled with the <sch> trigraph, such as schmaltzy,
schmuck and schmooze are often of Yiddish origin. Yiddish is a
Germanic language (with vocabulary from Hebrew, Aramaic
and Slavic languages) spoken by Ashkenazi Jews. The Yiddish
words which have found their way into English mostly come
from New York’s Jewish community. Some of these words,
such as schlep (‘to carry around a heavy object’ or ‘to travel
somewhere slowly’), are not known throughout the United
States, and used not to be used in British English, but schlep is
beginning to appear in British newspapers. Other <sch> words
are loanwords from German, such as schnapps (a German
drink) and schnitzel (meat fried in breadcrumbs). Words such
as school were borrowed from Latin, in which the <sch>
sequence corresponded to /sk/, and has retained that sequence
in English for over a thousand years.
Many words spelled with <sc> were borrowed from French.
They initially had /sk/ sequences in Latin, but the /k/ had been
elided in the French pronunciation by the time they were
borrowed.
The sequences <gg> and <cc> correspond to the same
values as <g> and <c>. Doubled graphemes in English do not
correspond to long consonant phonemes (often called
geminates), unlike in Italian, where spellings such as mamma
and pizza correspond to the pronunciations /ˈmam:a/ and /
289

ˈpit:sa/, where the colon indicates length. Some sequences of
identical consonant graphemes correspond to sequences of two
identical consonant phonemes across a morpheme boundary,
as in unnerve, which has the form /ˌʌn + ˈnɜ:v/, realized as
[ˌʌnˈnɜ:v]. A sequence of two identical phonemes in English is
not the same thing as a single, long (geminate) phoneme: there
is no such phoneme as /n:/ in English. The fact that English
speakers do not pronounce Italian loanwords such as pizza
with a geminate consonant reflects the fact that English has no
geminate consonant phonemes.
The <ss> sequence has /s/ as its ‘basic’ value, as in kiss and
massive, but the kinds of palatalization process we discussed
above have yielded /ʃ/ in words which have had a yod
historically, like mission and assure.
11.3.3 Unpronounced Consonant
Graphemes
Some word-initial consonants have been elided as English has
evolved. These include /k/ and /g/ in branching onsets with /n/,
so that the following digraphs no longer correspond to
sequences of onset phonemes:
(16)
Grapheme
Phoneme
Example
<kn>
/n/
know
290

<gn>
/n/
gnome
Other words were borrowed from Greek, whose phonotactic
constraints allow onset sequences such as /ps/ and /pt/. Since
English phonotactics do not allow such sequences in onsets,
the following correspondences have arisen:
(17)
Grapheme
Phoneme
Example
<ps>
/s/
psyche
<pt>
/t/
Ptolemy
Other graphemic sequences which reflect historical process
of elision include the following:
(18)
Grapheme
Phoneme
Example
<wr>
/ɹ/
write
<wh>
/w/, /h/
whine, whole
Old English had an onset sequence /hw/ in words like whole.
In RP and GA, the /h/ has since elided, while the spelling still
291

indicates a cluster of two phonemes. In SSE, and in some
varieties of American English, the /hw/ sequence has become
[ʍ], a voiceless fricative which has both a bilabial and a velar
articulation, rather like the sound one makes when blowing out
a candle. Pairs such as which and witch are minimal pairs in
SSE: /ʍɪtʃ/ vs /wɪtʃ/, whereas they are homophones in RP and
GA.
There are also word-final digraphs which correspond to a
single phoneme, since the word-final consonant has elided
during the evolution of the language:
(19)
Grapheme
Phoneme
Example
<mn>
/m/
hymn
<mb>
/m/
comb
<gn>
/n/
sign
<gm>
/m/
paradigm
In morphologically related words, the root-final consonant is
no longer word-final, and has therefore often been retained, as
in the following:
(20)
Spelling
292

Pronunciation
hymnal
[ˈhɪmnəɫ]
signatory
[ˈsɪgnətɹi]
paradigmatic
[ˌpæɹədɪgˈmætɪk]
In word-medial position, <t> is often not pronounced in the
following sequences: <st> followed by a vowel grapheme, as in
christen, and <stl>, as in castle.
11.3.4 Graphophonemics and
Contrastive Phonemics
Some learners of English as a foreign language encounter
problems which relate both to the English graphophonemic
correspondences and to the difference between the phoneme
system of their native language and that of English, especially
RP English. An example concerns mid vowels. It is common to
find languages with a core monoph-thong system like the
following:
(21)
/i/
/u/
/e/
/o/
/ε/
/ɔ/
/ɐ/
By core monophthong system is meant a system ignoring,
293

for instance, nasalized monophthongs such as the French
phonemes /ε̃/, /ɑ̃/ and /ɔ̃/, or front rounded vowels, such as the
French phonemes /y/, /ø/ and /œ/, all of which are said by
linguists to be ‘marked’, i.e. relatively uncommon in the
world’s languages.
In the above diagram, there are two high vowels (/i/ and /u/),
two high-mid vowels (/e/ and /o/), two low-mid vowels (/ε/ and
/ɔ/), plus a single low vowel which is neither fully front nor
fully back, which is why we have chosen the /ɐ/
representation. Examples of languages with such a system are
the Romance languages French, Spanish and Italian. If one
speaks a language with this kind of core system, the vowel
phoneme system of RP is quite a challenge. To begin with, it
has two high back rounded vowels (/u:/ and /ʊ/), rather than
one, which is the norm in the world’s languages. Its also has
two ‘a’-type vowels (/æ/ and /ɑ:/), or even three, if we
consider that the vowel /ʌ/ is rather like an ‘a’ sound, and thus
often pronounced with an [ɐ] in languages which lack an /æ/–/
ʌ/–/ɑ:/ contrast. The back mid vowels of RP are especially
difficult, since RP has three ‘o’-type phonemes: /əʊ/ (which
used to be monophthongal /o:/ in Middle English), long/tense /
ɔ:/ and short/lax /ɑ/. For speakers whose native language has
only two ‘o’-type phonemes, a phonological difficulty arises:
how to expand the two perceptual categories into three.
The phoneme system of our native language, which we have
in our heads, is a system of perceptual categories, via which
we decode speech. It is difficult to perceive a three-way
contrast in a foreign language if it corresponds to a two-way
contrast in our native language. For instance, English has a
two-way contrast between alveolar and palato-alveolar
fricatives: /s/–/ʃ/ and /z/–/ʒ/. If an English speaker tries to learn
294

Polish, a difficulty arises with the fricatives, since Polish has a
three- way contrast between alveolar, palato-alveolar and pre-
palatal fricatives, transcribed as /s/, /ʃ/ and /ś/. Because we
English speakers are so accustomed to perceiving only two
categories of voiceless fricative in this region of the oral cavity,
we have difficulty with both perceiving and producing the
three-way Polish contrast.
For speakers of many languages who are learning English,
the same difficulty applies to the RP contrast between /əʊ/, /ɔ:/
and /ɑ/. Standard Scottish English would be easier for such
speakers, since its core monophthong system is very similar to
the one depicted above: only one ‘u’-type sound, a two-way
/e/–/ε/ distinction, a twoway /o/–/ɔ/ distinction and only one ‘a’
phoneme (though SSE does have the /ʌ/ phoneme). The
phonological difficulty with ‘o’ sounds is compounded by the
vagaries of English spelling since, as we have seen, there are
various ways of spelling the three different ‘o’ sounds. We
have seen that the <o> grapheme can correspond to either /əʊ/,
/ɔ:/ or /ɑ/. However, there is some light at the end of the tunnel
for non-native speakers learning RP: we have cited
graphophonemic regularities above which determine, to a large
extent, which values we find. In addition, the sequences
<aught>, <ought> and <aw> systematically correspond to the
RP long vowel /ɔ:/, as in caught, sought and lawn, and not to
RP /əʊ/. This is a point worth bearing in mind for learners of
English, since there are RP minimal pairs such as loan and
lawn, which have, respectively, /əʊ/ and /ɔ:/. An anecdote
might serve to highlight the problem: when we first bought a
house in France, a French colleague asked me a question about
it. I thought the question was ‘Do you have a loan?’, to which
295

I answered ‘Yes, of course: we’re not wealthy enough to have
paid cash for the house.’ What he meant was ‘Do you have a
lawn?’, but he produced /əʊ/ for the <aw> sequence in lawn,
rather than the /ɔ:/ pronunciation.
To 
conclude 
on 
English 
spelling-to-pronunciation
correspondences: the regularities we have given above show
that these are not completely chaotic. There are, though, many
exceptions to the ‘rules’ we have provided, and those make
English graphophonemics rather more messy than it might
otherwise have been. We have seen, for instance, that words
such as panel really ought to be written pannel, as in channel,
with a double consonant grapheme, and my own name, Philip,
ought to be written Phillip, to indicate the checked value ([ɪ])
of the pre-final stressed vowel. However, it is best, perhaps, to
emphasize the regularities, rather than make a very long list of
exceptions: one cannot, after all, have irregular forms unless
there are regular forms.
Exercises
1 
Listen 
to 
Track 
11.1 
at
www.wiley.com/go/carrphonetics, 
made 
by 
an 
RP
speaker. For each of the words on the recording (listed
below), say whether the vowel corresponds to the free or
the checked value of the vowel grapheme. Explain why.
Provide the symbol, in slanted brackets, for each vowel
phoneme.
296

(a) dam
(b) dame
(c) den
(d) dene
(e) Tim
(f) time
(g) dot
(h) dote
(i) dun
(j) dune
2 Listen to Track 11.2, made by an RP speaker. For the
stressed syllable in each of the words on the recording,
say whether the vowel grapheme corresponds to the free
or checked value and explain how the spelling encodes
those values.
(a) taper
(b) tapper
(c) Peter
(d) petter
(e) pining
(f) pinning
(g) doting
(h) dotting
(i) astuter
(j) a stutter
297

3 Listen to Track 11.3, made by an RP speaker. For the
stressed syllable in each of the following words, say
whether the vowel grapheme corresponds to the free or
checked value and explain how this relates to the way the
word is spelled.
(a) sanity
(b) episode
(c) citadel
(d) opera
4 Listen to Track 11.4, made by an RP speaker. Which
value does the <gh> digraph correspond to in each of the
following words?
(a) rough
(b) through
(c) ghastly
298

12
Variation in English Accents
12.1 Introduction
In this chapter, we will consider some general aspects of accent
variation. In chapter 13, a brief overview is given of several
accents of English: London English, Tyneside English,
Standard Scottish English (SSE), New York City English,
Texan English, Australian English and Indian English, followed
by an outline of the sorts of phenomena which give rise to
divergence of accents over time.
Three of the accents we have referred to in this book (GA,
RP and SSE) are viewed socially as ‘standard’ accents. The
notion ‘standard’ is a social one: no linguist would claim that
there is any coherent notion of inherent phonetic or
phonological superiority, since such a notion simply does not
make any phonetic or phonological sense. There can be no
doubt that many people judge some accents to be superior to
others, or take some accents to be standard accents and others
to be non-standard accents. But those judgements are founded
on non-linguistic factors, to do with social attitudes in the
societies in question. From a strictly linguistic point of view,
such judgements are, quite clearly, entirely arbitrary. For
example, RP, the standard accent in England, is non-rhotic, and
the non-rhoticity of RP is therefore judged by some (perhaps
299

many) English people to be more prestigious than the rhotic
accents found in many of the Western parts of England. But
the standard accents SSE and GA are rhotic, and in the United
States, it is the rhotic accents which are often judged to be
more prestigious than the non-rhotic American accents (the
judgement cannot arise in Scotland, where all native accents
are rhotic).
Clearly, it is social attitudes which determine such
judgements about accents, rather than the phonetic and
phonological properties of the accents themselves. It is
common to find social judgements to the effect that some
accents are ‘uglier’ or ‘harsher’ than others. These judgements
too are entirely arbitrary as far as phonetics and phonology are
concerned. For instance, if the word say, pronounced as [saɪ]
in London English, is judged ‘ugly’ by an RP speaker, then the
RP speaker’s own pronunciation of the word sigh, as [saɪ],
ought also to strike the RP speaker as ‘ugly’. Cases such as
this show that it simply cannot be any phonetic properties of
the sounds [saɪ] in and of themselves which induce the
aesthetic judgement. Rather, such judgements also derive from
and reflect social attitudes about what might, rather broadly, be
called ‘ways of life’. In Britain, most non-standard accents
which are judged ‘ugly’ or ‘uncivilized’ are spoken in industrial
or post-industrial urban areas; examples often cited are the
working-class accents of London, Birmingham Liverpool,
Belfast, Glasgow and Tyneside. Similar sorts of judgement are
made in the United States, with respect to, for example, the
broad New York City accent often referred to as ‘the Brooklyn
accent’ (though it is not confined to the Brooklyn district of
New York City).
Non-standard rural accents are, by contrast, often judged
300

‘quaint’, rather than ‘ugly’; examples are accents from the
Highlands of Scotland, from the West Country in England, or
from the US Southern states. It is highly likely that these
aesthetic judgements arise from the conscious or unconscious
association of accents with the real or imagined ways of life of
those who speak them. We will therefore stand back from such
social attitudes and attempt to examine accent variation from
the point of view of the phonetician and the phonologist.1
12.2 Systemic vs Realizational
Differences between Accents
Let us begin by considering one of the differences between
many accents in the North of England and many of those
spoken in the South of England. In the latter accents, there is a
phonological contrast between /ʊ/ and /ʌ/, which can be
observed in pairs such as book/buck, rook/ruck, put/putt and
many others. That distinction is missing in many Northern
English accents,2 which have /ʊ/ in each member of the pair.
That is, many Northern English accents simply lack the /ʌ/
phoneme, and thus the /ʊ/ vs /ʌ/ distinction: for them, pairs
such as put and putt are homophones, not minimal pairs. We
will refer to this sort of difference as a systemic difference3
between two accents: the set of phonological contrasts
(specifically, in this case, the vowel contrasts) of the speakers
differ.
Systemic differences are widely attested. In many Scottish
English and Scots accents, for instance, there is no equivalent
301

of the /æ/ vs /ɑ:/ distinction, of the sort found in RP minimal
pairs such as ant/aunt, palm/Pam, etc. In Scottish English,
each member of such pairs contains the same vowel phoneme,
/ɐ/, which is realized as [ɐ]. Again, pairs which count as
minimal pairs in non-Scottish accents are homophonous in
Scottish English. Similarly, as we have seen, while RP has a
three-way distinction between [ɒ], [ɑ:] and [ɔ:], many speakers
of GA have only a two-way distinction between [ɔ:] and /ɑ/.
This systemic difference means that there is a difference in the
sets of words which are distinguished by means of these
phonemes, as follows:
(1)
Words of the type
RP
GA
palm
/ɑ:/
/ɑ/
caught
/ɔ:/
/ɔ:/ or /ɑ/
cot
/ɒ/
/ɑ/
coffee
/ɒ/
/ɔ:/
Systemic differences are not restricted to vowel systems. An
example of a systemic difference in consonant systems is the
contrast, found in many Scottish accents, between /ʍ/ and /w/,
which is found in minimal pairs such as whales vs Wales, whin
302

vs win, what vs watt, etc. That contrast is absent in most non-
Scottish accents, which have a /w/ phoneme, but not a /ʍ/
phoneme. In those accents, the above pairs are homophones,
rather than minimal pairs.
There are differences between accents which do not amount
to a difference in the systems of phonological contrasts.
Consider our discussion of dark and non-dark /l/ in chapter 7:
we said there (7.6) that there is an allophonic rule in RP, to the
effect that /l/ is realized as a velarized (‘dark’) lateral when it
occurs in rhymes, but is realized as a non-velarized (‘non-
dark’) lateral when it occurs in onsets. In many accents of the
South of Scotland, in Australian English, in GA and in some
accents of the North of England, /l/ is realized as a dark lateral
in all positions, so that /lʌl/ (lull), for instance, is realized as
[ɫʌɫ], rather than [lʌɫ]. In Tyneside English, on the other hand,
/l/ is consistently realized as a clear lateral in all positions, so
that /lʌl/ (lull)4 is realized as [ljʊlj]. There is no question of
postulating, in these sorts of case, a difference in the
underlying system of contrasts: all three accents have a
contrast between /l/ and other consonant phonemes, such as
/r/, but there is variation in the way that /l/ is realized. While
there are languages in which the distinction between clear and
dark laterals is contrastive, there can be no question of
postulating such a phonological contrast in any of these accents
of English: in the Southern Scottish and Australian cases, there
are only dark laterals; in the Tyneside case, there are only clear
laterals; and in RP and GA, while there are dark and non-dark
laterals, the distinction is purely allophonic: the distinction lies
at the level of realizations of a single phoneme. We will
therefore refer to these sorts of difference as realizational
differences.
303

Realizational differences involving vowels are very common.
For instance, one of the differences between SSE and most
non-Scottish accents is the presence of allophonic vowel length
in SSE. This is absent in most non-Scottish accents, but this
difference is a purely realizational matter. Take the contrast
between /i/ and /u/ in SSE (as in beet, boot): a parallel contrast
is also present in most non-Scottish accents, including RP. In
RP, the equivalent phonemes, /i:/ and /u:/, are, in all contexts,
typically realized as [i:] and [u:] respectively, as in geese and
goose. In SSE, however, /i/ is realized as either short [i] (as in
feet) or long [i:] (as in freeze), and /u/ is realized either as short
[ʉ] (as in foot) or long [ʉ] (as in lose), depending on the
phonological context: the long realization occurs word-finally
and before the voiced segments [ɹ], [z], [v], [ð] and [ʒ]; the
short realization occurs elsewhere.
Realizational differences can become systemic differences
over time. For instance, at a stage in the history of RP when it
was still a rhotic accent, the /i:/ phoneme was realized as [i:ə]
before /ɹ/ in coda position, in much the same way as /i:/ is
currently realized as [i:ə] before /l/ in coda position. At that
stage in the history of RP, pairs such as feared/feed and
beard/bead differed in two respects: one had [ɹ], while the
other did not, and one had [i:], while the other had [i:ə]. With
the gradual loss of the [ɹ] articulation in coda position, pairs
like this became minimal pairs: [bi:əd] (beard) vs [bi:d] (bead).
It is reasonable to say that, at that stage, a new /i:ə/ phoneme
(the ancestor of present-day /ɪə/) emerged. This process is
known as a phonemic split: a distinction which was once
allophonic becomes phonemic. In terms of differences between
304

accents, we want to say that, at a point when both RP and,
say, SSE were rhotic, they both had the /i:/ phoneme, but there
was a realizational difference, in that RP, but not SSE, had an
[i:ə] allophone of the /i:/ phoneme. Now, however, there is a
systemic difference: RP has an /i:/ vs /ɪə/ contrast which SSE
lacks.
Another example of a phonemic split which occurred in the
history of RP and many other varieties of English is the
FOOT/STRUT split, mentioned above. The STRUT phoneme
evolved historically from the FOOT phoneme: at one stage in
the history of English, all realizations of the FOOT vowel were
rounded. But unrounded realizations began to appear, and
these eventually took on phonemic status, resulting in the
emergence of the STRUT vowel, pronounced [ʌ] in RP and
many other varieties of English. Many accents in the North of
England failed to undergo the FOOT/STRUT split, so that
words like strut are pronounced with an [ʊ]. The difference
between these North of England accents and RP is therefore a
systemic difference: RP possesses a phonemic distinction
which is absent in those Northern varieties. As a result of this,
pairs of words which are minimal pairs in RP, such as put
([pʰʊt]) and putt ([pʰʌt]), are homophones in the Northern
varieties: both put and putt are pronounced [pʰʊt].
How can one tell, for a given difference, whether it is
systemic or realizational? Let us examine a particular case, that
of London English. By ‘London English’ (henceforth, LE), we
do not mean the accent spoken by all natives of London;
rather, we refer, albeit in a necessarily oversimplified way, to
the speech of working-class natives of London.5 It has been
widely noted that speakers of LE often (but variably) utter
305

words such as lay, pay, say with an [aɪ] diphthong, and we
know that, in RP, these have an [eɪ] diphthong. Is this a
systemic or a realizational difference?
The answer is that we cannot tell on the basis of this
evidence alone. In order to establish whether there is a
systemic difference between the accents, we must consider the
system of contrasts in each accent. Specifically, we must ask:
is there a phonetic [eɪ]/[aɪ] distinction in either accent, and if
so, is it contrastive? We have already established that, in RP,
there is such a distinction, and that it is contrastive (cf. the
minimal pairs bay vs buy, Tay vs tie, say vs sigh, etc.). What
we must then establish is whether these pairs are also minimal
pairs in LE: if they were to turn out to be homophones in LE,
then we could, all things being equal, reasonably conclude that
there is a systemic difference here, in just the same way that
we concluded, on the basis of evidence from minimal pairs and
homophones, that RP has an /ʊ/ vs /ʌ/ contrast, which many
Northern English accents (with /ʊ/ alone) lack.
What we find is that these are indeed minimal pairs in LE:
while bay, Tay, say, etc. have an [aɪ] diphthong in LE, buy, tie,
sigh, etc. have an [ɔɪ] diphthong. In the absence of any further
evidence to the contrary, we may conclude that there is no
systemic difference here: the contrast which we found in RP is
maintained in LE.
But the matter does not end there, since we also know that
RP has a contrast between /aɪ/ and /ɔɪ/, as in buy, tie, sigh vs
boy, toy, soy. What we must now ask is whether this contrast
is also sustained in LE, or whether these RP minimal pairs are
homophones in LE. The answer is that the contrast is sustained
306

in LE: while buy, tie, sigh etc. have [ɔɪ], boy, toy, soy, etc.
have [oɪ].
We have now noted a related set of non-systemic (non-
contrastive), purely realizational differences between RP and
LE, which we might conceive of in terms of the articulatory
and perceptual ‘space’ in which the realizations of a phoneme
are located. We may depict this in terms of the vowel space
diagram. Consider the phonetic realizations of the RP vowel
phonemes /eɪ/, /aɪ/ and /ɔɪ/. Let us imagine that speakers of RP
typically have diphthongal realizations of those phonemes
whose starting points fall within the following sorts of
articulatory ‘zones’ in the vowel space:
(2)
The speaker might well vary in her or his realizations of
these phonemes. However, so long as the articulation of a
particular vowel does not encroach upon the space of any of
the others, bay will still be distinguishable from buy, and buy
from boy. If, in the course of the historical development of the
accent, the articulations of /eɪ/ and /aɪ/ were to become so
close as to be perceptually indistinguishable, such that pairs like
307

bay vs buy were both uttered as [baɪ], then the contrast would
be lost. That phenomenon, which is widely attested in the
histories of human languages, is referred to as a phonemic
merger: where once a phonemic contrast was present, it came
to be collapsed.6
Clearly, no merger has occurred in the LE cases cited above:
while the realization of /eɪ/ has indeed ‘shifted’ to [aɪ], the
realization of [aɪ] has, in turn, shifted, to [ɔɪ], and the contrast
is thus maintained. Similarly, while the realization of /aɪ/ has
shifted to [ɔɪ], the realization of /ɔɪ/ has, in turn shifted, to [oɪ],
and again the contrast has thus been maintained.7 This kind of
phenomenon, which is fairly widespread, is often referred to as
a vowel shift. A parallel shift is evident in Australian English,
where the /i:/ phoneme has diphthongized to [ɪɪ], thus
encroaching, to some extent, on the space of /eɪ/. The /eɪ/
phoneme has in turn shifted to [ɐɪ], with a fairly low, central,
unrounded starting point, thus encroaching on the perceptual
space of /aɪ/. In turn, /aɪ/ has shifted to [ɔɪ], thus encroaching
on the space of /ɔɪ/. However, the /ɔɪ/ phoneme appears not to
have taken ‘evasive action’, so [ɔɪ] and [ɔɪ] are contrastive.
The point to be borne in mind is that vowel shifts are purely
realizational: they do not involve a change in the number of
phonological contrasts.
We asked whether the realization of /aɪ/ as [ɔɪ] resulted in
the destruction of a contrast which is present in RP. We might
equally ask whether the realization of the /ɔɪ/ phoneme as [oɪ]
in LE results in the destruction of a contrast found in RP; the
answer is that, although RP speakers may well utter both [ɔɪ]
and [oɪ], the phonetic difference between the two, while
perceptible, is never contrastive: one cannot cite minimal pairs
involving the two. So there is no phonemic contrast which
308

would be collapsed by uttering /ɔɪ/ as [oɪ] (the RP speaker is
free to do so, without risk of conflating a contrast). For the LE
speaker, while the realization of /eɪ/ has encroached upon the
‘space’ of /aɪ/, and the realization of the latter has encroached
upon the space of /ɔɪ/, the realization of the latter has not
encroached upon the space of any other phoneme.
12.3 Perceptual and
Articulatory Space
The simplest system of vowel phonemes8 found in the world’s
languages is the three-vowel /i/, /u/, /a/ system, typically
depicted within the vowel space as:
(3)
The realizations of the vowel phonemes in a system like this
can vary considerably; it will matter little in terms of the
hearer’s identification of a given vowel phoneme if /i/ is
realized as an [e]-type vowel, so long as it is relatively front,
unrounded and relatively high. Nor will it matter if /u/ is
309

realized as an [o]-type vowel, so long as it is relatively high,
relatively back and rounded. Similarly, it will not matter
whether realizations of /a/ are front (like [a]), back (like [ɑ]),
or central (like [ɐ]), so long as they are relatively low and
unrounded. That is, each vowel phoneme has quite a large
perceptual and articulatory space.
A slightly larger vowel system, frequently encountered in the
world’s languages, has mid vowels: /i/ /u/
(4)
In a system like this, the vowel space is a little more
crowded: it will matter whether a realization of /i/ is [e]-like, or
if a realization of /u/ is [o]-like. But it will not matter if a
realization of /e/ is [ε]-like, so long as it is not [a]-like. Nor will
it matter if a realization of /o/ is [ɔ]-like.
In a slightly larger system, there are contrasts between high-
mid and low-mid vowels:
(5)
310

In this kind of system, there is even less articulatory and
perceptual space for each vowel phoneme: it will matter if the
realizations of /e / are [ε]-like, for instance.
Many English accents have relatively large vowel phoneme
systems, often containing, for instance, as many as three or
four ‘a’-type phonemes, as in RP’s front /æ/, central /ʌ/ and
back /ɑ:/. This means that shifts in realization can easily result
in one phoneme encroaching upon the space of another. And
this notion of articulatory and perceptual ‘space’ has a bearing
on the question of which pairs of vowel phonemes we should
consider when attempting to establish whether a given vowel
difference is systemic or not. One way of answering this
question is to say that one should consider vowel phonemes
which are in some sense ‘adjacent’ in articulatory and/or
perceptual terms. This is what we did when we considered the
[eɪ] vs [aɪ] distinction: they are adjacent in that the starting
points of both diphthongs are front, non-high and unrounded.
We might equally have considered the [ε] vs [eɪ] distinction,
since [e], the starting point for the latter, is close to [ε] in
articulatory terms. Indeed, one finds that the /ε/ phoneme is
often realized as an [eɪ] diphthong in LE (thus, well can be
311

pronounced as [weɪw]). This, however, does not cause merger
of the /ε/ vs /eɪ/ contrast since, as we have seen, /eɪ/ is realized
as [aɪ].
The main difficulty one encounters in considering adjacent
vowel sounds is that a given vowel can be adjacent to many
(perhaps most) of the other vowel sounds found in a particular
accent. As we have just seen, [eɪ] is adjacent to both [aɪ] and
[ε]. It is also adjacent to [ɜ:], since the starting point for [eɪ] is
front, mid and unrounded, and [ɜ:] is central, mid and
unrounded. As it happens, [ɜ:] has not shifted in LE, but it has
in other accents. In the Liverpool accent, for instance, it has
fronted to [ε:], so that work and bird, which are pronounced
[wɜ:k] and [bɜ:d] in RP, are pronounced [wε:x] and [bε:d] in
Liverpool. This means that the realization of [ɜ:] has
encroached upon the articulatory and perceptual space of the
adjacent vowel phoneme /ε/. However, the phonemic
distinction between [ɜ:] and /ε/ is maintained in Liverpool,
since the former is long with respect to the latter, as in bird vs
bed ([bε:d] vs [bεd]) and thus distinguishable from it. For
many Tyneside speakers, [ɜ:] has been retracted and rounded
in some words, thus encroaching on the space of [ɔ:]. Thus
work is pronounced [wɔ:k] by many speakers. This has
resulted in a loss of the [ɜ:] vs [ɔ:] contrast in a particular set of
words, so that pairs such as walk/work and bird/bored are
homophones rather than minimal pairs.
It appears that vowel articulations are especially susceptible
to this ‘shifting around’ phenomenon and it is because of this
that the majority of differences between accents are
differences in the articulation of vowels, rather than of
consonants. This is perhaps because of the nature of vowel
312

articulations, which all have a stricture of open approximation.
Furthermore, the more open the vowel, the more open the
approximation, and the less contact there is between the tongue
and the other parts of the oral cavity. It seems clear that, for
any given phonetic segment, we are unlikely to hit on exactly
the same articulation each and every time we attempt it. Not
every [d] we utter will have exactly the same part of the tongue
closing against exactly the same part of the alveolar ridge for
exactly the same length of time with exactly the same amount
of vocal cord vibration beginning and ending at exactly the
same time. So variation is inherent in speech.
But it appears to be even more inherent in vowel
articulations than it is in, say, stops, since it is much harder to
feel where one’s tongue is in one’s mouth when one produces
a vowel than when one produces, say, a stop. One can feel the
lips close together for the articulation of a bilabial stop, and one
can feel the tongue against the alveolar ridge when one
produces an alveolar stop, so that the articulatory difference
between the two is easily discerned by the speaker. But when
one produces, say an [e:] as opposed to an [ε], it is much
harder to feel what one’s tongue is doing. One can therefore
easily ‘overshoot’ or ‘undershoot’ and end up with articulations
which encroach upon the space of another, adjacent, vowel
phoneme. Vowel articulations, in short, form a continuum;
there are no abrupt, discrete divisions between them.
Parallel to this articulatory continuum, there is a perceptual
one. Recall that our ‘cardinal vowels’ are merely reference
points, based on an arbitrary carving up of the available vowel
space and the available parameters of tongue height, front-
ness/backness and roundedness, all of which are a matter of
degree, rather than a matter of absolutes. Once an [e]-type
313

sound begins to lower, at what point does it become an [ε]-
type sound? Once an [æ]-type sound begins to raise, at what
point does it become an [ε]-type sound? The answer is that it
is impossible to say with any certainty. Little wonder, then, that
when some American English speakers say bad, speakers of
many accents of British English think that they are saying bed:
their [æ]-type sound has raised to what is perceived as an [ε]-
type sound. We perceive vowels the way we perceive colours.
If we are presented with an example of a classic example of
green, we have no difficulty in identifying it as green. The
same is true for a classic example of blue. But once we are
presented with a colour that is half-way between the two, we
often cannot tell whether we think it is greenish-blue or bluish-
green. In such in-between cases, one person will judge, say an
item of clothing as green, while another will judge it to be blue.
So it is with vowels: we find it hard to categorize a vowel half-
way between [e] and [ε]. If a vowel that was once close to
prototypical [ε] begins to be produced closer to [e], hearers
may categorize it as an instance of an [e], and thus may, in
turn, begin to articulate it as an [e].
The most important point is that our perception of acoustic
events is heavily dependent on the mentally represented system
of phonological contrasts which we have in our native accent.
It is also vital that, for a phonemic distinction to exist, it must
be based on a phonetic distinction which is perceptible to
human beings. Those phonetic differences can be minute, but
they must be perceivable. If a language does not have a large
vowel phoneme inventory, the realizations of each vowel
phoneme are much more ‘free to roam’ in the available
articulatory and perceptual space.
There are consonantal continua too, but there is a little more
314

in the way of discrete divisions among consonants than among
vowels. A bilabial articulation, for example, is radically distinct
from an alveolar one, since the tongue is not implicated at all in
the former, and the lips need not be involved in the latter. But
even then, we have seen, particularly among consonantal
articulations which are more vowel-like, that a gradual
transition from alveolar to labial is indeed possible, as we have
seen with [w] realizations of /l/. Once a secondary velar
articulation is present in the pronunciation of an alveolar lateral,
it can become the primary articulation, the original alveolar
stricture can be lost altogether, and a new bilabial stricture can
emerge.
12.4 Differences in the Lexical
Distribution of Phonemes
There is a further kind of variation between accents in which
the phonological representation of words is concerned, but
which is not systemic variation. For instance, in many accents
of the North of England, there is some kind of /æ/ vs /ɑ:/
distinction, parallel to that found in RP. The actual vowel
quality of the ‘long a’ often differs from that of RP. Many
West Yorkshire speakers have a much more front articulation
for ‘long a’ than RP speakers; very often the difference is
between a short [a] and a long [a:], with the vowel qualities
being the same, and the two vowels differentiated only with
respect to length. Nonetheless, the phonemic distinction is
there, and functions as the basis of minimal pairs such as
ant/aunt and Sam/psalm. We can say that West Yorkshire’s /a/
315

vs /a:/ distinction is parallel to, or equivalent to, RP’s /æ/ vs /ɑ:/
distinction.
But speakers of such Northern English accents (and indeed
of GA) often utter a short vowel in words which would be
uttered with a long vowel by the RP speaker, words of the
lexical set BATH. Examples, for many Northern speakers, are
bath, class and glass, all ending with a voiceless fricative.
Other members of the set have a nasal-plus-consonant
sequence, such as France and dance. What we want to say
about this sort of difference is not that the Northern English
speaker lacks the ‘long a’ vs ‘short a’ phonemic distinction (in
the way that Scottish speakers do) but that the phonological
form of those particular words contains the short, rather than
the long, phoneme. We can illustrate this as follows:
(6) Systemic difference vs lexical distribution difference
 
Phonemic
Phonological forms
 
‘long/short a’?
of ant, aunt, bath
RP speaker:
Yes
/ænt/, /ɑ:nt/, /bɑ:θ/
Northern speaker:
Yes
/ant/, /a:nt/, /baθ/
Scottish speaker:
No
/ɐnt/, /ɐnt/, /bɐθ/
316

Such differences are very susceptible to variation between
different accents in the range of words which have one
phoneme rather than the other in their phonological
representations. They are therefore less general in nature, and
more idiosyncratic, than systemic and realizational differences;
however, such differences can cause major problems for
mutual intelligibility between speakers of different dialects.
We have now begun to note some differences between
accents and dialects, in a way which allows us more insight
into the nature of those differences than merely noting different
pronunciations, and which shows the extent to which
theoretical considerations play a part in our analyses. While it is
informative to note that many speakers in the North of England
pronounce words like bus as [bʊs] and that LE speakers
pronounce words like say as [saɪ], or to note that some
speakers utter an [ɹ] in some contexts rather than others, what
we have done here is to say a little more than just that: we
have sought to gain some insight into the nature of the
phonological knowledge possessed by speakers of different
accents.
Notes
1 This is not to deny that social attitudes to accents affect
accent variation itself. Clearly, if we are investigating the way
people speak, and if the way people speak is influenced by
social attitudes to accents, then we are obliged to recognize
those factors as part of the general picture.
2 Many, but not all. Some Northern accents have a
distinction between /ʊ/ and /ʌ/, in which the realization of /ʌ/
317

is an unrounded version of [ʊ], which we might reasonably
transcribe as [ɨ].
3 An alternative term would be ‘contrastive difference’.
4 Many Tyneside speakers lack the /ʊ/ vs /ʌ/ distinction.
5 The term ‘working-class’ is vague, and enormously difficult
to define. We will, nonetheless, assume that it is meaningful
and does serve to identify what are real, if complex,
differences in social class (whatever problems may reside in
the vague notion ‘social class’ itself). The term ‘London’ is
equally vague; nonetheless, it also serves a useful function,
since it too allows us to identify a genuine, if hard-to-define,
geographical, and perhaps cultural, entity.
6 Clearly, if there is variation between one realization and the
other, and this is not noted by linguists, then a contrast that
might have been wrongly taken to have been merged could
re-emerge. Additionally, a contrast may merge in some
phonetic environments, but not in others, leaving some
minimal pairs intact while collapsing others. See 12.4 below
on lexical incidence.
7 We are assuming here that LE and RP have a common
source, and that LE has innovated historically in its
realizations of these phonemes in particular in a way which
RP has not. This assumption happens to be justified in this
case, but it must not be assumed that all cases are like this.
There are cases in which it is RP which has innovated. Such
is the case with the /ʌ/ vs /ʊ/ contrast, which is a Southern
innovation: many Northern accents have not undergone that
innovation.
8 By ‘vowel system’ here, we mean ‘system of
monophthongs’, ignoring diphthongs. Generally speaking,
monophthongs are ‘more basic’ than diphthongs, but
318

diphthongs are common, and the most common in the
world’s languages are the [ai]-type and [au]-type diphthongs.
Exercises
1 
Listen 
to 
Tracks 
12.1, 
12.2 
and 
12.3 
at
www.wiley.com/go/carrphonetics. For each sound file,
answer the following questions:
(a) Is the speaker rhotic or non-rhotic? (Cf. chapter
7.) What evidence do you have for your answer?
(b) Does the speaker have a rounded or an
unrounded vowel in words of the sort LOT?
(c) What is the pronunciation of words spelled <wh>
and <W>?
(d) Does the speaker exhibit the phenomenon of
Flapping? (Cf. chapter 9.) One of these speakers is an
RP speaker, another is a GA speaker and the other is
an SSE speaker. Which is which? Relate your
responses to your answers to the questions above.
2 Where there are differences between the speakers with
respect to the phenomena in (1a–d), say, for each
difference, whether it is a systemic or a realizational
difference, and explain why.
319

13
An Outline of Some Accents of
English
13.1 Some British Accents
13.1.1 London English (Track 13.4
at www.wiley.com/go/carrphonetics
and exercise 1)
13.1.1.1 Defining the London English Accent
By ‘London English’ we mean the vernacular, working-class
London accent spoken in the boroughs of the East End of
London. There are more and less broad varieties of this accent,
ranging from Cockney at one end of the spectrum to accents
which are closer to RP in some respects at the other end.
13.1.1.2 London English Vowels
320

Let us postulate that the vowel system of LE is exactly parallel
to that of RP, but with many major realizational differences,
mostly of a ‘vowel shift’ nature, as discussed earlier in chapter
12.
Realizations of /ʌ/, /æ/, /ε/, /eɪ/, /aɪ/ and /ɔɪ/
In LE, the /ʌ/ phoneme is often realized as a short [a]-type
sound. This then encroaches upon the /æ/ phoneme, which is
often realized closer to [ε]. That in turn encroaches on the /ε/
phoneme, which in turn is often realized as a diphthong close
to [eɪ], and that realization in turn encroaches on the perceptual
space of /eɪ/. As we have seen, the /eɪ/, /aɪ/ and /ɔɪ/ phonemes
also participate in this vowel shift, which we may depict as
follows:
Realizations of /aʊ/, /ʌ/, /æ/ and /ɑ:/
Additionally, in the Cockney version of LE, the /aʊ/
phoneme is often realized as a long [a:], as in sound ([sa:nd])1
and pout ([pa:t]). Since this vowel is distinct from the
realizations of both /ʌ/ (as in putt: [pat]) and /æ/ (as in pat:
[pεt]), the distinction between the three phonemes is
preserved. Note too that, since the realization of /ɑ:/ in LE has
not shifted, there is a clear difference in vowel quality between
it and the [a:] realization of /aʊ/.
Realizations of /ɔ:/ and /oʊ/
/ɔ:/ is typically realized as [ɔɐ] in open syllables (as in war:
[wɔɐ]) and [oʊ] elsewhere (as in short: [ʃoʊʔ]). This means
that one of the realizations of this phoneme encroaches upon
321

the space of the /oʊ/ phoneme, leading to the possibility of
phonemic overlapping. That phoneme in turn does not typically
have an [oʊ] realization; rather, it tends to be realized as [ɒʊ]
before a tautosyllabic /l/, and [ʌʊ] elsewhere.
Phonemic overlapping: /i:/ vs /ɪ/
The /ɪ/ phoneme is often realized as [ɪi] before a
tautosyllabic /l/, as in fill: [fɪiw].
Similarly, the /i:/ phoneme is often realized as [ɪi] before a
tautosyllabic /l/, as in fill: [fɪiw]. Thus pairs such as these are
homophones in LE, but are minimal pairs in RP. Rather than
concluding that LE has undergone a phonemic merger, and
therefore that this difference is systemic in nature, we will say
that it is a matter of phonemic overlapping between the two
phonemes, since, in other contexts, /i:/ retains its [i:]
realization, and /ɪ/ retains its [ɪ] realization, as in beat and bit:
[bi:ʔ] and [biʔ]. Note that, when the /l/ at the end of feel and
fill is syllabified into a following onset, as in feeling and filling,
the /l/ is no longer in the same syllable as the preceding vowel,
which is realized in its normal way, thus: [fi:lɪn] and [fɪ:lɪn].
Lowering of word-final schwa
Words such as cinema and letter have a word-final schwa in
RP. In LE, this vowel is often lowered to a central [ɐ] sound:
letter is often pronounced [ˈlεʔɐ].
13.1.1.3 London English Consonants
LE differs from RP both in terms of the realization of
consonant phonemes and, arguably, in terms of the consonant
phoneme system.
322

Voiceless stop phonemes
The voiceless stop phonemes /p/, /t/, /k/ are often realized,
before a primary stressed vowel, with heavy aspiration, and in
the case of /t/ at least, often with affrication, cup of tea:
[kʰaʔpətsʰɪi]. Note too glottal realizations of these stops, as [ʔ],
in a wider range of contexts than in RP. One such context is
intervocalically (between vowels), noticeably when the first
vowel is stressed, as in matter: [ˈmεʔɐ]. Since the first vowel is
stressed in such words, the glottaling is foot-internal.
/θ/ vs /f/ and /ð/ vs /v/ in Cockney
It has often been noted that RP minimal pairs such as
thin/fin are homophones for many Cockney speakers, both
being [fɪn]. This is referred to informally as ‘TH-Fronting’ by
Wells (1982; see Suggested Further Reading). Whether /θ/ may
be said to be absent in Cockney depends very much on
whether [θ] is uttered in any contexts by Cockney speakers. If
one found that [f], rather than [θ], invariably turns up in all
other contexts (e.g. between vowels, as in Cathy, and word-
finally, as in moth), then one could reasonably conclude that
Cockney speakers simply lack the contrast, and that there is a
systemic difference here between Cockney and RP. But many
speakers are variable with respect to this phenomenon, so we
cannot conclude that they lack the /θ/ phoneme. As far as the
/v/ vs /ð/ distinction is concerned, it is rather difficult to find
many minimal pairs involving the two (that vs vat and live/lithe
are examples). However, it has been noted that words such as
feather and with, which have, respectively, intervocalic and
word-final /ð/ in RP, are often uttered with [v] in Cockney. It is
not clear, however, that word-initial /ð/, as in the, that, there,
323

their, this, etc., is uttered with [v] in Cockney; if such words
are uttered with [ð], then we must say that there is a purely
realizational difference here, with Cockney /ð/ realized as [v]
intervocalically and word-finally.
/l/ vocalization
The /l/ phoneme is often realized as a voiced alveolar
approximant, but it may be overlaid by secondary articulations,
such as the velarization we find in the rhyme position of the
syllable in RP, and in both the onset and rhyme positions in
accents such as Scottish English, GA and Australian English.
When the secondary articulation becomes dominant, the
alveolar articulation may be lost, resulting in a vowel-like
articulation. When lip rounding is added to this articulation, the
resulting realization sounds very much like a [w] sound, when
in coda position in the syllable. This can be seen in Cockney
pronunciations such as girl ([gεw]), Bethnal ([ˈbεfnəw]) and
healthy ([ˈεwfi]). This is known as ‘l vocalization’ because the
/l/ is realized as a vowel-type sound. Cockney l-vocalization
seems to be spreading to other towns in the UK.
Absence of /h/ in Cockney?
It has been widely noted that RP minimal pairs such as
hair/air are homophones in Cockney and perhaps generally in
LE. Since Cockney appears to lack even word-internal [h], as
in behold, this looks very much like a systemic difference.
Further evidence that /h/ is simply absent in Cockney comes
from two sources.
Firstly, we know that [æn] (or [ən]) is the phonetic form of
the indefinite article which occurs before vowel-initial words in
English, as in an ear, an oar, etc., whereas [æ] (or [ə]) is the
324

form which occurs before consonant-initial words, as in a boat,
a house, etc. Cockneys select [æn] (or [ən]) before words such
as house, hair, etc., which might be taken to suggest that such
words are phonologically vowel-initial in Cockney.
Secondly, evidence from the phenomenon of hyper-
correction is rather telling. When speakers hyper-correct, they
‘correct’ words (try to make them approximate to what is
considered the ‘proper’ pronunciation found in a prestige
accent) which do not require correction. For instance, many
speakers who would normally utter [ɪn] rather than [ɪŋ] for the
suffix -ing may be nonetheless aware that [ɪŋ], rather than [ɪn],
is the ‘correct’ pronunciation. Such speakers will often
‘correct’ words such as kicking from [kʰɪkɪn] to [kʰɪkɪŋ], but
may also mistakenly ‘correct’ words such as badminton to
[bædmɪŋtən]. The significance of this phenomenon is that the
speaker has [ɪn] as his or her phonological form for the -ing
morpheme, and overgeneralizes the ‘correction’ of his or her
realizations to cases which do not even contain the -ing suffix.
Similarly, speakers of French, who lack an /h/ phoneme, will
hyper-correct their English, resulting in pronunciations such as
[hεə] for both hair and air. The problem for the French
speaker is that, in the absence of an /h/ phoneme, she or he is
not to know which of her or his /h/-less mental representations
should have an /h/ added and which not. Cockney speakers
have been observed to behave in just the same way as French
speakers, hyper-correcting air to [hεə], ear to [hɪə] and so on.
This strongly suggests that Cockney speakers, like French
speakers, simply do not have an /h/ phoneme. However, this
phenomenon is perhaps in decline in London English,
325

suggesting that awareness of the /h/ phoneme has always been
present among LE speakers.
13.1.2 Tyneside English (Track 13.5
and exercise 2)
13.1.2.1 Defining the Tyneside English Accent
By ‘the Tyneside English accent’ (otherwise known as ‘the
Geordie accent’), we mean the accent spoken by the natives of
the urban areas to the north and south of the last few miles of
the River Tyne before it meets the North Sea, including,
principally, Newcastle upon Tyne to the north of the river and
Gateshead to the south.
13.1.2.2 Tyneside English Vowels
/ʊ/ vs /ʌ/
Most Tyneside speakers are typically Northern in having no /
ʊ/ vs /ʌ/ distinction: they have the former phoneme, but not
the latter.2 Accents which have this contrast have undergone
what is referred to as the FOOT/STRUT split, a historical
change in which the /ʊ/ phoneme developed unrounded
realizations which eventually gained phonemic status, so that
pairs such as putt (/pʌt/) and put (/pʊt/) are minimal pairs. In
North of England accents such as Geordie, these are typically
homophones, both being pronounced [pʰʊt].
/e/ and /o/
326

The Tyneside equivalents of RP /eɪ/ and /oʊ/ are /e/ and /o/.
The Tyneside /e/ phoneme is realized, in the speech of many
Tyneside speakers, as a long monophthong: [e:]. This
realization varies with a diphthongal realization ending in
schwa: [e:ə]. The Tyneside /o/ phoneme may also be realized
as a long monophthong by many speakers: [o:]. For some
speakers the realization is a long monophthong which is a
fronted [o:], of the [ø:] sort.
/ɔ:/, /ɜ:/ and non-rhoticity
Tyneside is non-rhotic and this has, of course, affected the
development of the vowel system. Some Tyneside speakers
lack a contrast between /ɔ:/ and /ɜ:/ in certain words, so that
pairs such as work and walk are homophones: [wɔ:k]. Speakers
with a ‘broader’ Tyneside accent maintain the distinction
between /ɔ:/ and /ɜ:/ in words like walk and talk, so that /ɔ:/ is
realized as [ɐ:] and /ɜ:/ realized as [ɔ:]: [wɐ:k] (walk) vs [wɔ:k]
(work).
Schwa and non-rhoticity
Among the centring diphthongs, the Tyneside /ɪə/ phoneme
is typically realized as [ɪʌ] or [ɪɐ]. The same kind of effect
occurs in realizations of /ʊə/, as in poor: [pʰʊɐ]. The Tyneside
/εə/ phoneme is typically realized as a long monophthong: [ε:].
Related to the Tyneside pronunciations of the centring
diphthongs /ɪə/ and /ʊə/, in Tyneside, the schwa phoneme (/ə/)
in word-final position can be rather [ʌ]- or [ɐ]-like (i.e. a low
central unrounded vowel), but this depends on the history of
the word. Where schwa was followed by an /r/ historically, it
tends to be [ʌ] or [ɐ], as in dresser.
Low unrounded vowels
327

The Tyneside /æ/ phoneme is typically realized as [ɐ], but
often realized as a long [ɐ:] when it is followed by a voiced
word-final consonant, as in lad ([ljɐ:d]), but not in lass ([ljæs]).
/ɑ:/
Although Tyneside speakers, like many Northern speakers,
often have /æ/ rather than /ɑ:/ in some words (e.g. bath), this
reflects neither a systemic nor a realizational difference
between Tyneside and RP. It is a lexical-distributional
difference: a matter of which of the two phonemes appears in a
given word. The words in question are words belonging to
what Wells (1982) refers to as the lexical set BATH; these
include words such as bath and class, where the vowel is
followed by a voiceless fricative, and words such as grant and
France, where the vowel is followed by a nasal-plus-consonant
cluster.
/aɪ/ realizations
Although 
subject 
to 
variation 
(both 
lexical 
and
sociolinguistic), /aɪ/ is often realized as [aɪ] or [eɪ] word-finally
and before voiced fricatives, but realized with a more central
starting point, as [ʌɪ], elsewhere. The effect is similar to that of
the Scottish vowel length generalization on /aɪ/ in Standard
Scottish English.
13.1.2.3 Tyneside English Consonants
/h/ and /l/ in Tyneside
Although almost every accent of English allows for non-
realization of /h/ in unstressed words of a functional category
(he, him, etc.), only some allow for non-realization of /h/ in the
stressed syllables of words of a lexical category. These accents
328

can be found in many parts of England, but not in Tyneside:
/h/ is almost always realized in stressed syllables in Tyneside.
Tyneside /l/ is realized as a ‘clear l’ in all positions,
transcribed [lj]. The term ‘clear l’, in this context, denotes an
alveolar lateral approximant with a secondary palatal
articulation, in which the front of the tongue forms an
articulation with the hard palate.
Glottal stop and glottalization of /p/, /t/ and /k/
The voiceless stops /p/, /t/ and /k/ often undergo
glottalization between vowels, particularly when the first vowel
has primary or secondary stress, as in clipper, fitter, hacker.
The resulting realization can be transcribed as [ʔp], [ʔt], [ʔk].
The articulations in the oral cavity occur simultaneously with
the glottal closure. The [ʔt] realization of /t/ varies with [ʔɾ]: a
glottalized tap. The term ‘glottal reinforcement’ is sometimes
used to denote this kind of articulation. Sonorants may
intervene between the vowels and the stop, as in grumpy,
auntie, hankie.
In the words cited here, we could define the context for this
glottalization as foot-internal (i.e. between a primary or
secondary stressed vowel and an unstressed vowel), so that
/p/, /t/ and /k/ are aspirated at the beginning of a stressed
syllable but glottalized if they occur foot-internally.
Speakers of Tyneside English also exhibit glottaling, in which
voiceless stops, especially /t/, are realized as the glottal stop
[ʔ]. This is distinct from what we have called glottalization,
since the articulation here is a glottal stop with no additional
closure in the oral cavity. Glottaling is found in many accents
of English, including RP, but it is perceptually more salient if it
occurs intervocalically after a stressed vowel, as in words such
329

as butter, which in Tyneside English can be pronounced with
glottalization ([ˈbʊtʔɐ]) or with glottaling ([ˈbʊʔɐ]). Glottaling
in this position is socially stigmatized in Britain, but it is
perfectly common in Geordie, London English, working-class
Scottish English and many other accents of English in the
British Isles. RP speakers who claim that glottaling is ‘lazy’,
‘unclear’ or ‘slovenly’ are, amusingly, unaware that they
themselves utter glottal stops on a vast scale, but often in
phonological contexts in which they are less salient
perceptually, as in the case of word-final glottal stops in
unstressed function words followed by a word-initial
consonant, in sentences like I didn’t know that she was here,
where the final /t/ of that is very likely to be uttered as a glottal
stop, even by RP speakers. Ironically, it is precisely because
the intervocalic, foot-internal glottal stop in pronunciations of
words such as butter is so clear (i.e. clearly audible) that it is
the object of complaints by those who say it is unclear.
The ‘r’ realizations of /t/
Tyneside, like many North of England accents, has a
realization of /t/ which is either an [ɹ]-type or an [ɾ]-type
articulation. The phenomenon is known informally as ‘T-to-R’.
It is not entirely clear whether there is a stateable phonological
context in which this occurs, or whether there is simply a stock
of words, or even phrases, in which it typically occurs. The
phenomenon is probably sociolinguistically variable. The
realization is reminiscent of Flapping in GA, in that it seems to
occur inter-vocalically, but the Tyneside phenomenon is
lexically much more sporadic. Typical cases seem to involve a
word-final /t/ preceded by a short vowel and followed by a
word beginning with a vowel, as in got a light, get off, put it
330

down, but he does, shut up. It can, however, occur word-
internally, as in better, and after long vowels, as in I thought he
did. The ‘r’ realization also seems to vary with the glottal and
glottalized realizations, so that a given pronunciation of, say,
get off can have [t], [ʔ], [ʔt], [ʔɾ] [ɾ] or [ɹ] as the realization of
the /t/ in get.
13.1.3 Standard Scottish English
(Track 13.6 and exercise 3)
13.1.3.1 Defining the Standard Scottish English
Accent
Standard Scottish English (SSE) is the standard accent which
many Scots speak when speaking the Standard English dialect.
It is characteristic of university-educated, middle-class Scottish
speakers. It is distinct from what is referred to as Scots, which
is derived from the Northumbrian dialect of Old English. Scots
is associated with working-class speakers in Scotland;
representations of it can be found in the novel Trainspotting,
written by Irvine Welsh, and in the film of that name. Many
Scottish speakers can speak Standard English without any trace
of Scots, but they can also mix Scots words, such as bairn
(child), lug (ear) and kirk (church), into their Standard English.
331

13.1.3.2 SSE Vowels
The Scottish Vowel Length Rule
A major characteristic of SSE is that there is little evidence
of phonemic vowel length: pairs such as /u:/ vs /ʊ/, /ɑ:/ vs /æ/
and /ɔ:/ vs /ɒ/ do not form part of the vowel phoneme system.
But there is considerable evidence for allophonic vowel length.
As we have seen (p. 142), some of the vowel phonemes have
long 
allophones 
morpheme-finally 
or 
before 
voiced
continuants, yielding long/short allophonic differences such as
[ɫif]/[ɫi:v] (leaf/leave) and [hʉf]/[mʉ:v] (hoof/move). This
phenomenon is known as the Scottish Vowel Length Rule
(SVLR), a major realizational difference between SSE and RP.
Which set of vowels undergoes the SVLR is a matter of
debate; but /i/, /u/ and /ai/ seem to undergo it for nearly all SSE
speakers. The two realizations of /ai/ are [ɐe], as in eye and
wise, and [ʌi], as in right and ice. While /ai/ has these two
allophones in exactly the same contexts as the long and short
allophones of /i/ and /u/, the difference between the ‘short’
([ʌi]) and ‘long’ ([ɐe]) allophones seems to be a matter of
vowel quality, rather than quantity.
The /ʊ/ vs /u:/ and /ʊ/ vs /ʌ/ distinctions
One of the major systemic differences between RP and SSE
is that SSE does not have the pool/pull (or /u:/ vs /ʊ/) type of
distinction. Since SSE does not have phonemically long
vowels, there is no /u:/ or /ʊ/; instead, there is a single
phoneme: /u/. This is realized as long [ʉ:] in the SVLR
contexts, and realized as short [ʉ] elsewhere. In Scottish
accents other than SSE, the realization of this vowel can be
even more fronted than the high central [ʉ], sometimes
332

approaching a French-type [y] sound (a high front rounded
vowel).
SSE, unlike many North of England accents, does have the
put/putt (/ʊ/ vs /ʌ/ in RP) type of distinction. The words put,
putt, pool and pull are therefore realized as [pʰʉt] (put), [pʰʌt]
(putt) and [pʰʉɫ] (pull/pool), with words like poor realized as
[pʰʉ:ɹ], with a long vowel, triggered by the SVLR.
Absence of the /ɔ:/ vs /ɒ/ contrast
Another major systemic difference between RP and SSE lies
in the fact that the /ɔ:/ vs /ɒ/ contrast is missing in SSE, which
has instead a single phoneme: /ɔ/. This means that, for many
SSE speakers, RP minimal pairs such as cot/caught and
not/nought are homophones. The picture is complicated by the
fact that many SSE speakers have borrowed the /ɔ:/ vs /ɒ/
contrast from Anglo-English and thus have /ɔ:/ in words such
as nought and caught, but /ɔ/ in words such as not and cot.
RP has the /ɔ:/ phoneme in what Wells (1982) refers to as
the lexical sets THOUGHT, NORTH and FORCE, but the
phoneme /ɒ/ in words of the lexical set LOT. We have seen
that SSE speakers whose speech has not been influenced by
RP do not have this /ɔ:/ vs /ɒ/ contrast, so that caught (which
belongs to the set THOUGHT) and cot (which belongs to the
set LOT) are homophones. Another difference between RP
and SSE with respect to these lexical sets is that SSE has the
/o/ vowel in words of the set FORCE, but the /ɔ/ vowel in
words of the set NORTH. As a result, in SSE there are pairs
such as horse (which belongs to the set NORTH) and hoarse
(which belongs to the set FORCE) which are minimal pairs:
333

horse is pronounced [hɔɹs], while hoarse is pronounced [hoɹ;
in RP, these are homophones, both being pronounced [hɔ:s].
Absence of the /æ/ vs /ɑ:/ distinction
Another striking systemic difference between RP and SSE
lies in the fact that SSE does not have the /æ/ vs /ɑ:/
distinction. Instead, it has a single ‘a’ phoneme, realized as a
low unrounded central vowel, [ɐ], so that pairs such as ant and
aunt are homophones in SSE: [ɐnt]. These are, of course,
distinct in RP: ant is pronounced [ænt] in RP, while aunt is
pronounced [ɒ:nt]. Some educated SSE speakers have
borrowed this contrast from RP, but are often variable in
whether they produce it or not.
The /eɪ/ and /oʊ/-type phonemes
The SSE equivalent of the RP /eɪ/ phoneme is /e/, said by
some to be realized as long monophthongal [e:] in the SVLR
contexts, and as short [e] elsewhere, as in [bet] (bait) and
[be:ɹ] (bare).
The SSE equivalent of the RP /oʊ/ phoneme is /o/, said by
some to be realized as long monophthongal [o:] in the SVLR
contexts, and short [o] elsewhere, as in [bot] (boat) and [bo:ɹ]
(boar/bore).
The diphthongs
As we have seen, the SSE /ai/ diphthong undergoes the
SVLR, being realized as [ɐeɪ] in the vowel length contexts and
[ʌi] elsewhere. The SSE /au/ diphthong is realized as [ʌʉ], as
in mouth: [mʌʉθ].
/ə/, /ʌ/ and /e/
Many words which, in RP, have word-final schwa and did
334

not historically end in an /ɹ/, such as cinema, comma, America,
are uttered with an [ʌ]-type vowel in SSE. Where RP word-
final schwa was historically followed by an /ɹ/, SSE retains the
/ɹ/ and has either a schwa or an /ɪ/, as in better and seller.
The short [i] vowel found, in RP and many other accents, at
the ends of words such as very, happy, lucky is usually an [e]
in SSE. This vowel used to be [ɪ] in RP, but has undergone
what Wells (1982) refers to as happY Tensing, in which the [ɪ]
has been raised, or tensed, to become [i]. Many varieties of
English exhibit happY Tensing, but not SSE.
13.1.3.3 SSE Consonants
Rhoticity
SSE is rhotic; the SSE /ɹ/ phoneme is realized in all syllabic
positions, including the coda position, so that words like far
and farm are always pronounced with an ‘r’. The phoneme is
typically realized as [ɹ], sometimes as [ɾ], and very rarely as
[r]. Some speakers exhibit an allophonic distinction between
the [ɹ] and [ɾ] realizations, with the tap being realized in
branching onsets, in words such as bring, trip and creep. Note
that, when we speak of a rhotic accent, we are not referring to
the kind of ‘r’ sound a speaker has: we are denoting an accent
in which the ‘r’, whatever its phonetic form might be, is
realized in coda position.
The /ʍ/ vs /w/ distinction
The /ʍ/ vs /w/ distinction, as in witch/which, weals/wheels
and watt/what, as the spelling suggests, is a distinction which
has been largely lost in RP, but is still present in SSE and some
335

American accents. The /ʍ/ phoneme is realized as a voiceless
bilabial fricative, with a secondary velar articulation.
The /h/ vs /x/ vs /k/ distinctions
A major systemic difference between RP and SSE lies in the
fact that SSE has retained the phonemic distinction between /k/
and /x/. The /x/ phoneme is realized as a voiceless velar
fricative ([x]) in rhymes, after low vowels and back vowels, as
in loch (lake). It occurs in many Scottish place-names, such as
Auchertmuchty and Lochalsh. A fronted allophone ([ç]) may
occur after high front vowels, but this tends to be restricted to
certain words from Scots which have been incorporated into
the speech of SSE speakers; an example is dreich, pronounced
[dɹiç] or [dɾiç], a word used to refer to cold, grey and wet
weather. As with /ʍ/, the /x/ phoneme has been lost in RP; RP
speakers often utter [k] instead in words like loch. Unlike
speakers of some accents in England, SSE speakers do not
elide the /h/ phoneme before stressed vowels.
‘Dark l’
The SSE /l/ phoneme is realized as a ‘dark l’, i.e. [ɫ], in all
contexts. Recall that ‘dark l’ is an informal term for an alveolar
lateral 
approximant 
with 
a 
secondary 
articulation 
of
velarization. Recall too that the ‘dark l’ realization only occurs
in the rhyme of the syllable in RP, so that the realizations of
the two /l/ phonemes in a word such as lull are distinct in RP:
[lʌɫ]. In SSE, this word is pronounced [ɫʌɫ].
13.2 Two American Accents
336

13.2.1 New York City English
13.2.1.1 Defining the New York City English
Accent
The New York City English accent is fairly sharply defined in
geographical terms, being largely confined to the boroughs of
New York City (henceforth: New York). There is, however,
considerable socially determined variation within New York,
and this variation has been the subject of a good deal of
sociolinguistic study. The New York accent is widely
recognized in the United States and, like many urban accents,
evokes mainly negative reactions. One of the questions
addressed in the sociolinguistic studies conducted in New York
is that of rhoticity. It seems clear that the accent has made the
historical transition from rhotic to non-rhotic, since it has (most
of) the set of centring diphthongs ending in schwa which are
characteristic of nonrhotic accents. However, there is
considerable sociolinguistic variation with respect to rhoticity,
and it appears that [ɹ] in coda position is staging a comeback.
Recall that the standard accent in the United States, General
American, is rhotic, and that rhoticity is regarded as more
prestigious than non-rhoticity.
13.2.1.2 New York City Vowels
The [ɜɪ] vowel
The [ɜɪ] realization of the /ɜ:/ phoneme, as in [hɜɪd] (herd),
is widely regarded as characteristic of New York speech, and is
often said to characterize ‘the Brooklyn accent’ (although, as
337

we noted earlier, it is by no means restricted to Brooklyn).
However, it is highly stigmatized and is probably dying out.
This realization occurs before a coda consonant, so that it does
not occur in non-rhotic pronunciations of purr. Some speakers
also have an [ɜɪ] realization of the /ɔɪ/ phoneme, also before a
coda consonant, so that some minimal pairs have become
homophones, as in voice and verse.
Allophones of the /æ/ phoneme
There are variable [ε:ə] and [æ:] realizations of /æ/ in certain
environments, namely before a voiceless fricative, voiced stop
or nasal when they occur in a word-final coda (although /ŋ/
behaves variably), as in hash, past, bad, stabs, man and damp,
but not in pal, with a final /l/, or hat, with a final voiceless
stop. These diphthongal or long realizations are sometimes
referred to as ‘tense’ realizations of the phoneme. It is not clear
why these specific consonants in that position should trigger
this tensing process.3 There is considerable sociolinguistic
variation in the exact phonetic form of the allophones, and, for
some speakers, the [ε:ə] realization merges with realizations of
the /εə/ phoneme, collapsing minimal pairs such as bad/bared.
Realizations of /ɔ/
New York speakers often have [ɔə] and [oə] realizations of
the /ɔ/ phoneme, as in [pʰɔə] (paw/pour/pore), and, with an
even higher starting point, [ʊə], thus creating the possibility of
partial merger with the /ʊə/ phoneme.
13.2.1.3 New York City Consonants
Rhoticity and non-rhoticity
338

The discussion above shows that New York speech has
undergone the transition from rhoticity to non-rhoticity, and is
reverting, for many speakers, to rhoticity. This phenomenon
may well be resulting in greater occurrence of intrusive [ɹ],
since a speaker who has been non-rhotic but is attempting to
be rhotic may well insert intrusive [ɹ]s as part of a general
strategy to utter [ɹ] where it may otherwise be absent.
Realizations of /θ/ and /ð/
The phonemes /θ/ and /ð/ are often realized as either
affricates ([t̪θ] and [d̪ ð]) or dental stops: [t̪] and [d̪ ]; the
variation is sociolinguistically determined. Note that, for
speakers who have dental stops, the phonemic distinction
between alveolar and dental stops is maintained, as in [t̪ʰɪn]
(thin) vs [tʰɪn] (tin). To many speakers of other varieties of
English, the distinction may well be difficult to notice.
Realizations of /t/
New York speech, like General American, has Flapping of /t/
in intervocalic environments (where the first vowel is stressed),
but it also has glottal stop realizations of /t/ in coda position on
a greater scale than in GA. The /t/ phoneme is often heavily
aspirated, to the point, at times, of being affricated, in syllable-
initial position, as in [tsɪn] (tin).
13.2.2 Texan English (Track 13.7
and exercise 4)
13.2.2.1 Defining the Texan Accent
339

Texas is a vast state, said to be larger than France. It is
therefore unsurprising that there is much variability within
Texan English. Many educated Texans speak both a Texan
variety of English and General American, depending on the
context of utterance. Texan English is rhotic in many parts of
the state, but, as one approaches the eastern border with
Louisiana, variable non-rhoticity can be found. Whether
varieties of Texan English can be considered Southern varieties
of US English depends on what one considers to constitute the
linguistic American South: some dialect maps exclude Texas
from the South, while others include eastern parts of the state.
Many of the pronunciation features one encounters in Texas
can be found in neighbouring states, but there are some
pronunciation features that are said to be specifically Texan.
13.2.2.2 Texan Vowels
The /aɪ/ phoneme of the lexical set PRICE is often
monophthongized in Texan speech. The phenomenon, referred
to informally by Wells (1982) as PRICE smoothing, results in a
long monophthong, as in price pronounced [pʰɹa:s]. PRICE
smoothing can be heard in neighbouring states.
Monophthongization can also be heard in the Texan
realization of the /ɔɪ/ phoneme in words of the lexical set
CHOICE, so that words such as oil are pronounced [ɔ:l],
though the phoneme is sometimes pronounced with a schwa
off-glide, as in [ɔɔl].
In addition to monophthongization, in Texas and in many
Southern states, there is diphthongization of the phonemes /ɪ/, /
ε/ and /æ/, in words of the lexical sets KIT, DRESS and
TRAP. The diphthongs in question have a schwa off-glide, so
340

that kit is pronounced [kʰɪət], dress is pronounced [dɹεəs] and
trap is pronounced [təɹæəp]. One can, at times, hear
pronunciations of words of the TRAP set with what is either a
triphthong or a bisyllabic pronunciation, as in [bæjənd] for
band. If such pronunciations have two syllables, then we might
argue that they contain an [æj] diphthong followed by a schwa
in the second syllable.
The /ε/ phoneme in words of the lexical set DRESS also
undergoes diphthongization to [ei] before the phonemes /ʃ/, /ʒ/
and /ŋ/, so that the word special, pronounced [speiʃəl], sounds
just like the word spatial.
The phonemic distinction between the /ε/ of the lexical set
DRESS and the /ɪ/ of the lexical set KIT is neutralized before
coda /n/ in the speech of many Texans, so that pairs such as
Ken and kin are both pronounced as [kʰɪn]. Neutralization is,
as we have seen, defined as the suspension of a phonemic
contrast in specific phono-logical environments (here, before
coda /n/): it is not the case that speakers who exhibit this
neutralization have lost the /ε/ vs /ɪ/ contrast altogether.
So, the /ε/ phoneme has a wide variety of realizations among
speakers of Texan English, from [εə], to [ei], to [ɑ].
The /aʊ/ diphthong in words of the set MOTH often has a
higher starting point, in Texas and in neighbouring states, so
that the word mouth is pronounced [mεʊθ].
The phoneme in words of the lexical set LOT often has a
diphthongal realization in Texan English, so that the word dog
is pronounced [doʊg], often written informally as dawg. Given
this and the MOUTH vowel, a compound such as cow dogs
341

(dogs for herding cows) can be pronounced as [kʰεʊdoʊgz].
The /u:/ vs /ʊ/ distinction is often neutralized before coda /l/
in Texan English, so that pull and pool are both pronounced
[pʰʊl].
13.2.2.3 Texan Consonants
The consonants of Texan English are broadly parallel to those
of General American, featuring ‘dark l’ in all contexts, Flapping
and rhoticity. However, as one approaches the border with
Louisiana, variable non-rhoticity can be observed, since the
Southern accents to the east of Texas are largely non-rhotic.
We saw that SSE speakers have retained the /w/ vs /ʍ/
distinction in pairs such as witch/which and Wales/whales. This
can also be attested among some speakers of Texan English.
13.3 Two Southern
Hemisphere Accents
13.3.1 Australian English (Track
13.8 and exercise 5)
13.3.1.1 Defining the Australian English Accent
Descriptions of Australian English often distinguish between
342

three socially defined varieties: Cultivated, General and Broad
Australian. We do not examine the differences between these,
which mostly concern vowel articulations. We will, however,
give a brief overview of General Australian, which is spoken
throughout Australia. General Australian English pronunciation
has its origins in the speech of early nineteenth-century
working-class speakers from the South East of England, and is
therefore similar to present-day London English in some
respects.
13.3.1.2 General Australian Vowels
The main characterizing properties of General Australian are to
be found in vowel articulations. The vowel system of General
Australian is parallel to that of RP, but with many major
realizational differences, mostly of a ‘vowel shift’ nature, as we
noted earlier in chapter 12.
The /i:/, /eɪ/, /aɪ/, /ɔɪ/ vowel shift
We described this vowel shift in chapter 12. It can be
depicted as follows:
The /u:/, /oʊ/, /aʊ/ vowel shift
Like the high front unrounded phoneme /i:/, the high back
rounded vowel phoneme /u:/ has diphthongized, often resulting
in a diphthong with a high front unrounded starting point and a
high back unrounded finishing point; we will transcribe this as
[ɪɯ]. This realization potentially encroaches on the space of
the [əʊ]-type realizations of /oʊ/, which have shifted to [ɐʉ],
with a low central unrounded starting point and a high central
343

rounded end point, thus entering the space of /aʊ/, whose
realization has shifted to [æo], in which the starting point is
more front than that of [ɐʉ], and the end point lower and
further back. This set of shifts can be depicted as follows:
The /ʌ/, /æ/, /ε/, /ɪ/ vowel shift
A vowel shift has also affected the short vowels /ʌ/, /æ/, /ε/
and /ɪ/, with /ʌ/ being realized as a low front articulation in the
[a] area, close to the space of the /æ/ phoneme, which is
realized as [ε]-like. In turn, /ε/ is realized as [e]-like, and thus
close to the space of /ɪ/, which is rather [i]-like. This
articulation is, of course, distinct from that of /i:/, which, as we
have seen, is diphthongal. We may depict this set of vowel
shifts as follows:
The /ɑ:/ vs /ʌ/ distinction
The General Australian realization of /ɑ:/, like that of /ʌ/, is
also fronted, but the distinction between the two is not merged,
since there is a length difference between them, as in [Pʰat]
(putt) vs [Pʰa:t] (part).
13.3.1.3 General Australian Consonants
We have already noted that General Australian, like SSE, has
‘dark l’ in all positions; the precise nature of the ‘darkness’
may entail, in both cases, retraction and lowering of the tongue
344

body, rather than velarization as such.
General Australian is non-rhotic. It also has a process rather
similar to that of Flapping in North American English: a /t/ will
often be realized as a voiced articulation between vowels.
13.3.2 Indian English (Track 13.9
and exercise 6)
13.3.2.1 Defining Indian English
There are many languages spoken on the Indian subcontinent.
They are divided into two language families. The languages of
the North belong to the Indo-European language family. This is
a vast family of historically related languages. In the nineteenth
century, linguists were able to show that Sanskrit, an ancient
language of the North of India, was ultimately related to
Ancient Greek and to Latin. From this discovery, it was
possible to show that the languages of the North of India were
related to many of the languages spoken in Europe, such as the
Romance languages (including French, Spanish, Portuguese
and Italian) and the Germanic languages (including English,
German, Dutch and Swedish). The Indo-European languages
of the North of India include Hindi, Marathi, Gujerati and
Punjabi. It is hard to believe, when listening to those languages,
that they are historically related to English, but they are; it is
has to be borne in mind that the time-span over which these
languages have evolved is vast. The languages spoken in the
South of India belong to an entirely distinct language family,
known as the Dravidian language family. These include Tamil,
345

Malayalam, Kannada, Telugu and Toda. The languages of
India, whether Indo-European or Dravidian, are not mutually
comprehensible. English has therefore taken on the status of a
lingua franca in India: a language which can be used as a form
of communication between people whose native languages are
not mutually comprehensible. Many educated Indians have
English as a second language, and thus use English as a lingua
franca.
13.3.2.2 Indian English Vowels
The vowels of the sets FACE and GOAT, which are
diphthongs in RP and GA, are typically realized as the
monophthongs [e] and [o] in Indian English, so that FACE is
[fes] and GOAT is [got].
Many, but not all, speakers of Indian English are rhotic, and
this has consequences for the vowel system: as we have seen,
there are no centring diphthongs of the sort /ɪə/, /εə/, /ʊə/ in
rhotic accents of English. The /ɜ:/ vowel in words of the lexical
set NURSE is often not present in either rhotic or non-rhotic
varieties of Indian English. Even among non-rhotic speakers of
Indian English, a vowel of the sort [ʌ], of the lexical set
STRUT, can be found in words of the NURSE set, so that
words such as merlot (an English word of French origin,
denoting a grape used to produce a red wine of that name),
pronounced [ˈmɜ:ləʊ] in RP, is pronounced [ˈmΛlo].
The RP distinction between the long vowel /ɔ:/ (of the lexical
sets THOUGHT, NORTH and FORCE) and the short vowel /
ɔ:/ (of the lexical set LOT) is often absent in varieties of Indian
English. RP minimal pairs such as awful ([ˈɔ:fəɫ]) and offal
([ˈɒfəɫ]) are therefore homophones in the speech of many
346

speakers of Indian English, both being pronounced [ˈɔfəɫ], with
a short [ɔ], as in the word-play utterance ‘There’s an awful lot
of offal being thrown away in British kitchens.’
Indian English has happY Tensing, so that the word happy is
pronounced [hæpi], as in RP.
13.3.2.3 Indian English Consonants
Some of the Indo-European languages of the North of India
have a four-way phonemic contrast between voiceless
unaspirated stops, voiceless aspirated stops, voiced stops and
breathy voiced stops. We have already encountered voiceless
unaspirated stops in English words such as spit, stick and skin.
We have also encountered aspirated voiceless stops in English
words such as the [pʰ] in pit; the initial stops in the words tip
and king are also aspirated. Voiced stops occur in words such
as labour, ladder and wriggle. We have not yet encountered
breathy voiced stops. In voiced sounds, the vocal cords are
vibrating close together. In breathy voiced stops, the vocal
cords are further apart, but still vibrate because of increased
airflow through the glottis. The bilabial, alveolar and velar
breathy voiced stops are transcribed as [b̤ ], [d̤ ] and [ɡ̤ ]. They
occur in Hindi words which feature in Indian cookery, such as
bhindi (okra), dhania (coriander seeds) and ghee (clarified
butter). Examples of minimal pairs featuring this four-way
contrast are [bal] (‘hair’) vs [pal] (‘take care of’) vs [p̤ al]
(‘knife blade’) vs [b̤ al] (‘forehead’). You can hear these, and
minimal pairs at other places of articulation, on Track 13.1.
347

It is common for speakers of Indian English to produce
words such as pit, tip and king with unaspirated voiceless stops
in initial position. On the face of it, this is puzzling, since many
speakers of Indian English have a series of aspirated voiceless
stops in their native Indian language: why not just use the
aspirated voiceless stops of one’s native language when uttering
words like pit, tip and king? Some insight into this
phenomenon may be gained if we consider that many of the
native Indian languages lack dental fricatives; speakers of
Indian English therefore engage in ‘TH-stopping’, in which
they produce aspirated voiceless dental [t̪̪] for /θ/ and the
breathy voiced dental stop [d̪ ] for /ð/. Perhaps it is because a
member of the aspirated voiceless stop series ([tʰ]) is being
used for /θ/ that the unaspirated series is used in words which
would otherwise have an aspirated voiceless stop in RP.
Many of the native languages of India have a series of
retroflex stops. Retroflex sounds are produced with the tip and
blade of the tongue curled backwards, so that the underside of
the tongue forms an articulation with the alveolar ridge. Stops
formed this way include the voiceless retroflex stop [ʈ] and the
voiced retroflex stop [ʈ]. Speakers of Indian English often
realize /t/ and /d/ in this retroflex manner; this can often be
heard in the pronunciation of waiters in Indian restaurants, who
will often produce words such as chapati (an Indian flatbread)
with a retroflex [ʈ], and poppadum (a thin, crispy Indian bread)
with a retroflex [ɖ]. You can hear this on Track 13.2.
The /l/ phoneme is not realized as a ‘dark’ (velarized) lateral
in most Indian English. The /r/ phoneme is often realized as an
alveolar tap, so that the word rap is pronounced as [ɾap]. The
phonemes /v/ and /w/ are not always consistently distinguished
348

by speakers of Indian English. Many of the native languages of
India have an approximant which is intermediate between the
approximant [w] and the fricative [v]. The sound they have is
a labio-dental approximant, in which the lower lip forms a
stricture of open approximation with the upper teeth. This
sound is transcribed as [υ]. It is like a [w] in that it is an
approximant, and it is like a [v] in that it is labio-dental. You
can hear the contrast between [v], [υ] and [w] (illustrated from
the African language Isoko) on Track 13.3. Speakers of Indian
English, because they lack a /v/ vs /w/ distinction, will often
produce [w] for [v], or a [υ] for [v].
Many of the native languages of India are not stress-timed,
so Indian English is often spoken without the stress timing that
is typical of so many varieties of English. Linked to this is the
fact that the word stress often falls on the wrong syllable in
Indian English.
13.4 An Overview of Some
Common Phenomena Found
in Accent Variation
It is clear from our brief description of the above varieties of
spoken English that the speech of any speech community, and
indeed of a given speaker within a community, is typically
variable. It is such variation that can eventually lead to
divergence between the speech of different communities over
time. Several different factors are involved in such variation. A
349

host of sociolinguistic factors is relevant. These may include
the sex, age or social class of the speaker, the speaker’s social
aspirations, the structure of the society in which the speaker
lives, and complex aspects of the social networks in which the
speaker lives, involving such things as solidarity, group identity
and individual identity. We have not examined these factors
here, but we note that an understanding of them is vital if we
are to gain a comprehensive understanding of variation in
pronunciation in a given speech community.
Variation in pronunciation is also constrained by factors other
than societal ones, such as the nature of the vocal tract, the
relationship between the phonemes within a phoneme system,
and factors to do with the relative perceptual salience of
sounds, depending on what sounds they are preceded or
followed by, where they occur within syllable structure, and
whether they occur in stressed or unstressed syllables. The
following is a summing up of the sorts of phenomena we have
discussed in describing accent variation.
13.4.1 Vowel Phenomena
13.4.1.1 Diphthongization
Diphthongal realizations of vowel phonemes may be triggered
by an adjacent consonant, as in the [i:ə] realization of /i:/
before ‘dark l’, or may occur ‘spontaneously’; we have seen
many examples of the latter in General American, New York
City English, General Australian, London English, RP and
Tyneside English. Similarly, RP used to have monophthongal
realizations of the mid vowels /e/ and /o/, but these have
undergone 
diphthongization 
in 
the 
history 
of 
RP.
350

Diphthongization of these mid vowels has also taken place in
the history of GA, but not in SSE.
13.4.1.2 Monophthongization
We have seen many examples of monophthongal realizations of
diphthongs, as in [ε:] instead of [εə] and [ɔ:] instead of [ʊə] in
RP.
13.4.1.3 Splits
As we have seen, phonemes may have allophones, but those
allophones may gain phonemic status if a pattern of
complementary distribution is disrupted, resulting in a newly
emergent pattern of parallel distribution. Examples include the
emergence of the /ə/-ending centring diphthong phonemes (/ɪə/,
/εə/, /ʊə/), and the /ʊ/ vs /ʌ/ distinction (the FOOT/STRUT
split) in RP and other accents of English.
13.4.1.4 Mergers
Since articulations may shift, it is possible for the realizations
of one phoneme to merge with those of another, resulting in
the loss of a phonemic distinction. Examples are the mergers of
the /k/ vs /x/ and /ʍ/ vs /w/ contrasts in many accents of
English, resulting in words which were previously minimal
pairs becoming homophones, as in lock/loch and which/witch.
13.4.1.5 Vowel Shifts
When the realization of one phoneme encroaches on the
realization of another vowel phoneme, ‘evasive action’ may be
351

taken, so that the phonemic contrast is sustained and merger is
avoided. We have seen examples of this in both London
English and Australian English.
13.4.1.6 Vowel Reduction
Vowels frequently reduce to either a weak form (e.g. /i:/ → [i]
and /u:/ → [u]), or to schwa, in unstressed syllables which, as
we have seen, are perceptually less salient. This phenomenon
occurs in almost every variety of English.
13.4.2 Consonantal Phenomena
13.4.2.1 Weakening of Consonants
A common phenomenon is intervocalic weakening, in which a
consonant articulation becomes more vowel-like, in the sense
of becoming voiced, or undergoing a diminution in degree or
duration of stricture. Flapping in North American English,
voicing of /t/ in Australian English and ‘T-to-R’ in Tyneside
English are all examples of this phenomenon.
In coda position, consonants often undergo weakening in the
form of reduction in degree of stricture, sometimes leading to
complete elision. Examples are the erosion and eventual loss of
coda [ɹ] in non-rhotic accents, and the reduction of voiceless
stops to glottal stops, which occurs to some extent in all of the
accents we have considered. Vocalization of coda /l/, which
occurs in London English, is another such process.
13.4.2.2 Affrication of Stops
352

This phenomenon, in which /p/, /t/ and /k/ may be realized as
[pΦ]/[pf], [tθ]/[ts] and [kx] respectively, appears to be
connected with strong aspiration. It has been attested in New
York City, Liverpool and London.
The principal point to be borne in mind about such processes
is that they are rarely limited to specific accents of English. Nor
are they limited to English. Because they arise from the nature
of the human vocal tract, human perceptual capacities and the
structure of human language phonologies, they are widely
attested across the world’s languages.
Notes
1 There is often quite marked nasalization of the vowel in
cases like these, where a nasal follows an open vowel.
2 Some Tyneside speakers do in fact have a contrast,
between [ʊ] and an unrounded, sometimes centralized,
version of [ʊ], which we might transcribe as [ɨ].
3 It has often been noted that auxiliary verbs which end with
a tensing coda consonant, such as can and had, nevertheless
do not undergo tensing.
Exercises
References for the exercises are given at the end of the
chapter.
1 London English
Listen to Track 13.4. This is a sound file from the IViE
corpus (Intonational Variation in English: see Grabe, Nolan
353

and Farrar 1998 for details and further references), which
contains recordings of UK speakers from London,
Cambridge, Bradford, Leeds, Liverpool, Newcastle,
Cardiff, Northern Ireland (Belfast) and the Republic of
Ireland (Dublin). You can access the corpus at the
following 
website: 
www.phon.ox.ac.uk/files/apps/IViE.
Alternatively, enter ‘IViE’ on a search engine. The speaker
is reading the first two paragraphs of the following
passage:
Once upon a time, there was a girl called Cinderella, but
everyone called her Cinders. Cinders lived with her
mother and two stepsisters called Lilly and Rosa. Lilly
and Rosa were very unfriendly and they were lazy girls.
They spent all their time buying new clothes and going
to parties. Poor Cinders had to wear all their old hand-
me-downs! And she had to do the cleaning!
   One day, a royal messenger came to announce a ball.
The ball would be held at the Royal Palace, in honour
of the queen’s only son, Prince William. Lilly and Rosa
thought this was divine. Prince William was gorgeous,
and he was looking for a bride! They dreamed of
wedding bells!
   When the evening of the ball arrived, Cinders had to
help her sisters get ready. They were in a bad mood.
They’d wanted to buy some new gowns, but their
mother said that they had enough gowns. So they
started shouting at Cinders. ‘Find my jewels!’ yelled
one. ‘Find my hat!’ howled the other. They wanted
hairbrushes, hairpins and hairspray.
(a) Is the speaker consistently non-rhotic?
(b) In words which would have word-final schwa in
354

RP (such as Cinderella and Cinders), what vowels do
you find with this speaker?
(c) Is there any evidence of ‘TH-fronting’ (the
articulation of the dental fricative phonemes /θ/ and /ð/
as labio-dental fricatives [f ] and [v])?
(d) This speaker exhibits /l/ vocalization. We have said
that this occurs in the rhyme of the syllable in London
English, but not in the coda. Is this true for this
speaker?
(e) In what contexts does this speaker produce glottal
stop realizations of the /t/ phoneme?
2 Tyneside English (Newcastle)
Listen to Track 13.5. This is also an IViE file. The
speaker is reading all three paragraphs of the Cinderella
passage in exercise 1.
(a) North of England accents are said to lack the
FOOT/STRUT split (i.e. the phonemic distinction
between /ʊ/ and /ʌ/). Is this the case for this speaker?
Provide examples of relevant words on the sound
track.
(b) In words written with <-er(s)> at the end, such as
Cinders and mother, what vowel does this speaker
utter in that final unstressed syllable? Is this what you
would expect from a Geordie speaker?
(c) Like many speakers of Tyneside English, the
speaker has two realizations of the /aɪ/ diphthong. Can
you transcribe them and give examples of words on the
recording which contain them?
355

(d) In words such as clothes, does the speaker have a
monophthongal or a diphthongal realization of the
vowel?
(e) Geordie speakers are said to have ‘clear’
(palatalized) [lj] in all syllabic contexts. Is this true for
this speaker?
(f) Cite examples of glottaling in the speech of this
speaker. The speaker realizes /d/ as a glottal stop in
one word: can you identify which word this is?
(g) We said that the centring diphthongs /ɪə/ and /ʊə/
are often realized as /ɪɐ/ and /ʊɐ/ in Tyneside English.
Can you hear any examples of this on the recording?
3 Standard Scottish English (Glasgow)
Listen to Track 13.6. This is a recording from the PAC
project (La Phonologie de l’anglais contemporain; see
Carr, Durand and Pukli 2004 for details). The PAC
website is at: http://www.projet-pac.net/
The speaker is reading the following PAC word list:
1. pit
2. pet
3. pat
4. pot
5. put
6. putt
7. sea
8. say
9. sigh
356

10. sue
11. stir
12. steer
13. stairs
14. err
15. far
16. war
17. more
18. purr
19. moor
20. feel
21. fill
22. fell
23. fall
24. full
25. fool
26. fail
27. foal
28. file
29. foul
30. foil
31. furl
32. bird
33. bard
34. beard
35. bared
36. board
37. barred
357

38. bored
39. bode
40. bowed
41. bead
42. bid
43. bed
44. bad
45. bard
46. pant
47. plant
48. master
49. afterwards
50. ants
51. aunts
52. dance
53. farther
54. father
55. row
56. rose
57. rows
58. pore
59. poor
60. pour
61. paw
62. paws
63. pause
64. pose
65. wait
358

66. weight
67. side
68. sighed
69. agreed
70. greed
71. brood
72. brewed
73. fir
74. fair
75. fur
76. four
77. fore
78. for
79. nose
80. knows
81. cot
82. caught
83. meat
84. meet
85. mate
86. naught
87. knot
88. doll
89. dole
90. fierce
91. bird
92. scarce
93. pert
359

94. start
95. horse
96. hoarse
97. word
98. gourd
99. short
100. sport
101. next
102. vexed
103. leopard
104. shepherd
105. here
106. there
107. weary
108. spirit
109. marry
110. Mary
111. merry
112. sorry
113. story
114. hurry
115. jury
116. bury
117. berry
118. heaven
119. leaven
120. earth
121. berth
360

122. cook
123. soot
124. look
125. room
126. pearl
127. peril
(a) SSE is said to be rhotic, but there are speakers who
are variably non-rhotic. Is this speaker consistently
rhotic?
(b) SSE is said not to have a contrast between long /u:/
and short /ʊ/, of the sort found in RP. Instead, SSE is
said to have a single /u/ phoneme, realized as the high
central rounded vowel [ʉ]. Is this true for the speaker
on the recording?
(c) Some SSE speakers have only a two-way contrast
in words such as bird, curd and heard, with bird and
curd having /ʌ/, heard having /ε/. Others have a three-
way contrast, with /ɪ/ in bird, /ʌ/ in curd and /ε/ in
heard. Does this speaker have a two-way contrast in
these ‘pre-r’ positions, or a three-way contrast?
(d) SSE is said to possess a contrast between short /o/,
as in coat, and short /ɔ/, as in cot. It is said not to have
a contrast, of the sort found in RP, between words of
the lexical set LOT (which have a short /ɔ:/ in RP) and
words of the sets THOUGHT and NORTH (with a
long /ɔ:/ in RP). Does this speaker exhibit any length
difference between pairs such as cot/ caught and
knot/naught?
361

(e) The speaker is typically SSE in that she has two
realizations of the /ai/ diphthong: [ɐe] and [ʌi] Can you
identify words containing these?
(f) SSE speakers are said to have monophthongal /e/
and /o/, distinct from the RP diphthongs /eɪ/ and /oʊ/.
Is this true for this speaker?
(g) SSE speakers are said to have ‘dark l’ ([ɫ]) in all
syllabic positions. Is this true for this speaker?
(h) The speaker has both the approximant [ɹ] and the
tap [ɾ]. Identify words containing these.
4 West Texan English (Lubbock)
Listen to Track 13.7. This too is a PAC recording; the
speaker is reading out the following written passage:
I saw Hoyt on the news the other day. I can’t be sure
whether I got the facts right. But I think he wants
Lubbock farmers to plant soy, rye, and maybe rice for
the new crop. I tuned in to the farm report last night.
They say cotton prices will continue to rise. It sure is
good that rot didn’t set in from all the rain. I tell you,
the morning dew wasn’t much help either. I still think
we will get back all our investment this year. Getting in
the cotton crop this year was a challenge. I had my
oldest boy at work with us since he isn’t in school
anymore. He likes to work on the farm. But I feel he
should work in a business like oil, cattle ranching, or
maybe nothing to do with agriculture. He just turned
nineteen. You know, he doesn’t play with toys like tin
soldiers or his bow and arrow. He’s almost a man, and
quite a fine one at that. There’s this story about my boy
362

that I still do like to tell. It’s a tale that really shows how
he turned everything all around. My son Roy was about
ten years old at the time. His friend Tom came over to
play. They decided to steal my neighbor’s dune buggy
and to go for a joy ride in it. They went back behind
this cotton field onto a horse trail. Well, that dune buggy
filled up, with first one kid and then another. Tom was
at the wheel driving this contraption. They didn’t drive
too far when they hit a big brass nail, from the railroad
or something. The tire went flat, they hit a holding pen
and then they all fell head first into ashes and dried mud
when the buggy crashed. Those kids didn’t have good
sense at all about what they were doing. My neighbor
Ken had to sell the dune buggy at a loss after that. I
know I sent Roy to bed without dinner, and that was
the least of his punishments. I told my son he had a
duty to pay back the damages. He toiled all summer in
Ken’s tack room so he could do right by him. My boy
gave up swimming at the community pool that whole
hot summer. He used the cash to pay back Ken. Did
Roy pull something like that again? No he did not. It’s
been nine years since that happened. He learned to
choose his friends and his actions more carefully. I
never used a lash or hit him, but he learned to toe the
line and not to steal or lie ever again. And the law left
him alone because he paid Ken back. He’s not a bad
boy, my Roy, and he didn’t fail to make good choices
other times. Just once he thought he’d like to take out a
hot rod one day and got lucky that his mistake didn’t
ruin his life. Roy has now become a good role model
for Beau, my middle son, and for Luke, the youngest.
(a) Is the speaker rhotic or non-rhotic? Cite examples
363

from the recording.
(b) 
This 
speaker 
has 
variable 
‘smoothing’
(monophthongization) of the /aɪ/ diphthong (in words
of the lexical set PRICE), resulting in an [a:]
pronunciation. Give examples of the variability.
(c) The speaker also has variable ‘smoothing’ of the /
ɔɪ/ diphthong (in words of the lexical set CHOICE),
resulting in an [ɔ:] pronunciation. Give examples.
(d) Can you hear any examples of Southern Breaking
(diphthongization) in the vowels /æ/, /ε/ and /ɪ/?
(e) Many varieties of Texan English are said to exhibit
(variably) neutralization of the /ɪ/ vs /ε/ distinction
before coda /n/. Is this true for this speaker?
5 Australian English
Listen to Track 13.8. This is a PAC recording. The
speaker is reading the same word list as the SSE speaker
in exercise 3.
(a) Australian English is said to be non-rhotic. Is this
true for this speaker?
(b) Australian English is said to have ‘dark l’ in all
syllabic positions. Is this true for this speaker?
(c) Australian English is said to have Flapping for
intervocalic /t/. Is this present on the recording? Is it
variable?
(d) In our discussion of Australian English, we said that
the vowel phoneme system was the same as that of
RP, but that there were vowel shift phenomena. Are
any of these present on the recording?
6 Indian English (Mumbai/Bombay)
364

Listen to Track 13.9. This is a PAC recording. See word
list 2 on the PAC website.
(a) The speaker is variably non-rhotic. Give examples
which demonstrate both rhotic and non-rhotic
pronunciations.
(b) Cite examples of TH-stopping on the recording.
(c) Is there aspiration of the word-initial /p/ phonemes
in words 1-6?
(d) Does the speaker have ‘clear’ (palatalized)
realizations of the /l/ phoneme?
(e) How does the speaker realize the /r/ phoneme?
7 Comparison of the accents in exercises 1–6 with RP and
GA
Listen to Tracks 13.10 and 13.11. These are PAC
recordings of an RP and a GA speaker. They are reading
the following passage from the PAC project:
Christmas interview of a television evangelist
If television evangelists are anything like the rest of us,
all they really want to do in Christmas week is snap at
their families, criticize their friends and make their
neighbours’ children cry by glaring at them over the
garden fence. Yet society expects them to be as jovial
and beaming as they are for the other fifty-one weeks
of the year. If anything, more so.
   Take the Reverend Peter ‘Pete’ Smith, the ‘TV vicar’
who sends out press releases in which he describes
himself as ‘the man who has captured the spirit of the
365

age’. Before our 9 a.m. meeting at his ‘media office’ on
Crawshaw Avenue, South London, he faced, he says, a
real dilemma. Should he make an effort ‘to behave like
a Christian’ – throw his door open, offer me a cup of
tea – or should he just play it cool, study his fingernails
in a manner that showed bored indifference and get rid
of me as quickly as possible? In the end, he did neither.
   ‘As a matter of fact, John’, he says in a loud Estuary
English twang, ‘St Francis said, “At all times preach the
gospel and speak whenever you have to.” ’ But hey, he
didn’t mean “Be on your best behaviour and be happy
all the time.” I could have been extra-polite to you, but
the real me would have come out as I was talking. You
cannot disguise what you are.’
   ‘And what are you then, Pete?’
   ‘Well, I’m a Christian, John. I’ve been one since I
was 14. And I know for sure that Christianity will be
judged more on who you are rather than what you have
to say about it. Many church leaders don’t appear to
understand this. They think we can only be really
Christian when we are ramming the doctrine of the
Creation down people’s throats. But if you try to force-
feed people they get sick of it and think you’re a pain.
It’s seen as the job of a Christian leader to wear a dog-
collar and dress in purple and always be talking about
the real meaning of the New Testament. In reality, that
turns people right off!’
   In many ways, ‘Pete’ Smith looks exactly how you’d
expect a high-profile, born-again Christian to look: tall,
handsome, clean-cut and evenly sun-tanned. He has
366

those scarily white teeth that TV evangelists tend to
have, and he doesn’t wear a dogcollar. In fact, when
doing his various religious programmes on Sunday
mornings, he has been known to wear a black leather
jacket instead, in casual mode. Today, the look is more
business-like: metal-rimmed glasses, a grey suit, a blue
open-neck shirt, and fashionable black shoes with large
buckles. Smith is 44 but he looks a mere 24.
   During the whole interview, there wasn’t any talk of
the poor or the needy but only of his forthcoming trip to
China in February and the masses waiting for his
message there. I ventured a few questions relating to
the charity trust he founded some ten years ago and
which, it is generally agreed, employs eight hundred
staff and runs schools, hospitals and hostels around the
world. And what about the gambling organization he
has been willing to advise? Is that a temporary activity
or might it be true that he has accepted to be paid to sit
on its Board of Directors? Which side is religion on
these days? Does money matter? It was as if I had
launched a few missiles in his direction. He just sighed
in answer: ‘I’m only human, John. God knows I do my
best and often fail, But it’s no skin off my nose if our
enemies sneer at some of the good work we do. Truth
will out.’
(a) Listen to the realizations of the /r/ phoneme and the
/l/ phoneme in all of the accents in exercises 1–7. What
differences do you find?
(b) Listen to the vowel in words of the lexical set LOT
(e.g. not, hot, cot). What differences do you find?
Many American speakers lack the rounded vowel [ɒ]
367

in words of the lexical set LOT, in words such as
possible and dog. Instead, they are said to have an
unrounded [ɑ] vowel, so that words such as pocket
sound like packet to British hearers. Is this true for the
GA speaker?
(c) Which accents exhibit ‘happY Tensing’? Recall that
this is the short, tense [i] pronunciation in the final,
unstressed, syllable of words such as happy, lucky,
slowly.
(d) Listen to words which have word-final schwa in
RP (e.g. leader, Cinderella). What vowels do you find
in such words among the various speakers?
(e) Among the non-rhotic accents, RP is said to have
the centring diphthongs /ɪə/, /εə/ and /ʊə/, in words of
the lexical sets NEAR, SQUARE and CURE. What
realizations of these phonemes do you find among the
non-rhotic speakers?
References
The references to the IViE and PAC projects are:
Carr, P., Durand, J. and Pukli, M. (2004). ‘The PAC project:
principles and methods’. La Tribune Internationale des
Langues Vivantes 36: 24–35. A pdf version of this article can
be found under ‘publications’ on the PAC website:
http://www.projet-pac.net/
Grabe, E., Nolan, F. and Farrar, K. (1998). ‘IViE: a
comparative transcription system for intonational variation in
368

English’. Proceedings of the 1998 International Conference for
Spoken Language Processing. Sydney, Australia.
For more on the PAC project, see:
Przewozny, A., Moore, S. and Turcsan, G. (eds.) (2012). The
Complete Guide to the PAC Project. Carnets de Grammaire,
CLLE-ERSS, Université Toulouse II-Le Mirail.
369

Suggested Further Reading
For a more detailed account of articulatory phonetics, see D.
Abercrombie 
(1967) 
Elements 
of 
General 
Phonetics,
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, and J. C. Catford
(1988) A Practical Course in Phonetics, Oxford: Clarendon
Press. An introduction to phonetics which concentrates mostly
on English is J. D. O’Connor (1973) Phonetics, London:
Penguin. For an introduction to phonetics geared towards
English, and with a good introductory coverage of acoustic
phonetics, see P. Ladefoged (2010) A Course in Phonetics
(sixth edition, with Keith Johnson), New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich. For standard descriptions of the RP accent, see A.
C. Gimson (1993) An Introduction to the Pronunciation of
English, London: Arnold (third edition, ed. by A. Cruttenden).
For an introduction to English phonetics and phonology
which covers, in much greater detail, some of what we have
covered here, and more, see H. Giegerich (1992) English
Phonology: 
An 
Introduction, 
Cambridge: 
Cambridge
University Press.
For an introduction to phonological theory, see any of the
following: P. Carr and J.-P. Montreuil (2012) Phonology
(second edition), London: Palgrave Macmillan; J. Durand
(1990) Generative and Non-Linear Phonology, London:
Longman; F. Katamba (1988) An Introduction to Phonology,
London: Longman; C. Gussenhoven and H. Jacobs (2005)
370

Understanding Phonology (second edition), London: Arnold;
R. Lass (1984) Phonology, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press; A. Spencer (1996) Phonology, Oxford: Blackwell; I.
Roca and W. Johnson (1999) A Course in Phonology, Oxford:
Blackwell.
Students may proceed from one of these textbooks to more
advanced treatments of phonological theory, such as J.
Goldsmith (1989) Autosegmental and Metrical Phonology,
Oxford: Blackwell; M. Kenstowicz (1994) Phonology in
Generative Grammar, Oxford: Blackwell; and R. Kager (1999)
Optimality Theory, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
For an approach to English phonetics and phonology from the
viewpoint of the theory known as government phonology, with
good coverage of varieties of British and American English, see
J. Harris (1994) English Sound Structure, Oxford: Blackwell.
The account of English word stress given here owes a great
deal to the work of Lionel Guierre and his followers, especially
A. Dechamps, J.-L. Duchet, M. Fournier and M. O’Neill
(2004) English Phonology and Graphophonemics, Paris:
Ophrys. For detailed coverage of English word stress, see E.
Fudge (1984) English Word Stress, London: Allen and Unwin.
For a general introduction to the study of intonation, see A.
Cruttenden 
(1986) 
Intonation, 
Cambridge: 
Cambridge
University Press. See too D. Crystal (1969) Prosodic Systems
and Intonation in English, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. An excellent recent textbook coverage of English
intonation is J. C. Wells (2006) English Intonation: An
371

Introduction, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. The
accompanying CD is most useful.
A useful book on British accents and dialects is A. Hughes
and P. Trudgill (1987) English Accents and Dialects (second
edition), London: Arnold. For an extensive description of the
phonetics and phonology of a very wide range of English
accents worldwide, see J. C. Wells’s (1982) three-volume work
Accents of English, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. I
have adopted Wells’s three-way distinction (derived from
Trubetzkoy) between systemic, realizational and lexical
distributional differences between accents. For further textbook
discussion of accent variation based on this tripartite
distinction, see the relevant parts of Giegerich (1992; see
above) and, of course, Wells (1982). I have followed Giegerich
(1992) in comparing and contrasting SSE with RP and GA (for
the simple reason that SSE is the medium in which I teach
English phonetics and phonology). The reader should consult
Giegerich (1992) for similar sorts of discussion. For an
excellent introduction to phonetics and phonology in general,
and varieties of English, see B. Collins and I. M. Mees (2008)
Practical Phonetics and Phonology (second edition), London:
Routledge. As with the Wells book on intonation, the
accompanying CD is very useful. For further reading on
specific varieties of English, see J. Durand (2004) ‘English in
early 21st century Scotland: a phonological perspective’, La
Tribune Internationale des Langues Vivantes 36:87–105; A.
Przewozny (2004) ‘Variation in Australian English’, La Tribune
Internationale des Langues Vivantes 36:74–86; and D. Watt
and L. Milroy (1999) ‘Patterns of variation and change in three
372

Newcastle vowels: is this dialect leveling?’ in G. Docherty and
P. Foulkes (eds.), Urban Voices: Accent Studies in the British
Isles, London: Arnold, pp. 25–46.
It is as well to point out to any reader who wishes to pursue
the further reading suggested here that the choice of symbols
used to represent the vowel phonemes of various accents of
English will almost certainly vary from one author to another.
This is inevitable, since there is a necessary degree of
arbitrariness built into such choices. However, the reader
should not find it too demanding to work out the
correspondences between the symbols. The main point, for
non-native speakers, is that much of the literature, and also the
pronouncing dictionaries, use the symbol /e/ for words such as
‘dress’ in RP and GA, whereas we have used the phonetically
more accurate epsilon symbol ‘ε’, in both phonemic and
phonetic representations. We have used that same symbol for
the RP centring diphthong in words of the sort ‘square’: /εə/.
This helps us show that the current monophthongal realization
in RP is the long, low-mid vowel [ε:], as in [skwε:] (‘square’).
373

Index
accent vs dialect
affricates
affrication
allophone
alternants
alternation
alveolar
alveolar ridge
approximants
aspiration
assimilation
Australian English
back/front
bilabial
breathy voiced stops
cardinal vowels
central vowels
central vs lateral
centring diphthongs
‘clear l’
close approximation
coda
complete closure
374

complex segments
contrast
‘dark l’
dental
derivation
derivational suffix
diphthong
diphthongization
distribution
complementary
parallel
ease of articulation
elision
epenthesis
eurhythmy
expletive insertion
flap (tap)
Flapping
FOOT/STRUT split
fricatives
General American English (GA)
vowel system
glottaling
glottal stop
glottalisation
375

grapheme
digraph
trigraph
graphophonemics
free vs checked values
‘mute e’
/h/ dropping
hard palate
high/low
hyper-correction
Indian English
intonation
cleft sentences
contrastive intonation
co-ordination
deictic expressions
‘event’ sentences
given vs new information
intonation phrase
last lexical item rule
list intonation
parentheticals
phrasal verbs
pseudo-clefts
relative clauses
reporting clauses
sentence adverbials
subordinate clauses
376

tag questions
temporal adverbials
tones
fall
fall-rise
rise
rise-fall
tonic syllable
vocatives
WH questions
IViE corpus
labial-velar
labio-dental
larynx
lexical distribution of phonemes
lexical sets
BATH
CHOICE
CURE
DRESS
FACE
FLEECE
FOOT
FORCE
GOAT
GOOSE
KIT
LOT
MOUTH
NEAR
377

NORTH
PALM
PRICE
SQUARE
START
STRUT
THOUGHT
TRAP
London English
l vocalization
manner of articulation
Maximal Onset principle
metrical foot
rhythm reversal
trochaic foot
minimal pairs
monophthong
monophthongization
monosyllabic morphemes
morpheme
morphological complexity
nasal assimilation
nasal cavity
nasal stops (nasals)
neologisms
New York City English
nucleus
branching nucleus
378

onset
branching onset
empty onset
open approximation
oral cavity
PAC project
palatal
palatalization
palato-alveolar
perceptual and articulatory space
phoneme
phonemic merger
phonemic overlapping
phonemic principle
phonemic split
phonemic vs allophonic distinctions
phonetic motivation
phonetic similarity
phonological constituents
phonological generalizations
phonological rules
phonotactic constraints
Phrasal Stress Rule
pitch
place of articulation
plosives (stops)
polysyllabic morphemes
prefixes
379

PRICE smoothing
primary articulation
primary stress
realization
realizational differences
Received Pronunciation (RP)
resyllabification
retroflex consonants
rhotic vs non-rhotic
rhyme
rhyming
rhythm
rhythm reversal
root morpheme
rounded/unrounded
rule ordering
schwa
secondary articulation
secondary stress
skeletal tier
soft palate
sonority scale
spoonerisms
Standard English
Standard Scottish English (SSE)
stress timing
suffixes
380

derivational
inflectional
stress-neutral suffixes
stress-shifting suffixes
syllabic consonants
syllabification
syllable
closed syllable
CV syllable
light syllable
open syllable
syllable timing
syllable weight
systemic differences
tap (flap)
tautosyllabic consonants
Texan English
TH Fronting
tone group see intonation, intonation phrase
tonic syllable
trills
Tyneside English
velar
velarization
velum
vocal folds
voiced vs voiceless
381

vowel length
vowel reduction
vowel shifts
vowel space
weakening of consonants
word stress assignment
in compound words
Derivational Principle
End-Based Principle
in morphologically complex words
in morphologically simple words
Rhythmic Principle
Stress Clash Avoidance Principle
in words with prefixes
382

