entropy
Article
Dissipative Structures, Organisms and Evolution
Dilip K Kondepudi 1,2,*, Benjamin De Bari 2,3
and James A. Dixon 2,3
1
Department of Chemistry, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC 27109, USA
2
Center for Ecological Study of Perception and Action, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, USA;
benjamin.de_bari@uconn.edu (B.D.B.); james.dixon@uconn.edu (J.A.D.)
3
Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, USA
*
Correspondence: dilip@wfu.edu
Received: 5 September 2020; Accepted: 10 November 2020; Published: 16 November 2020


Abstract: Self-organization in nonequilibrium systems has been known for over 50 years.
Under nonequilibrium conditions, the state of a system can become unstable and a transition to an
organized structure can occur. Such structures include oscillating chemical reactions and spatiotemporal
patterns in chemical and other systems. Because entropy and free-energy dissipating irreversible
processes generate and maintain these structures, these have been called dissipative structures.
Our recent research revealed that some of these structures exhibit organism-like behavior, reinforcing
the earlier expectation that the study of dissipative structures will provide insights into the nature
of organisms and their origin. In this article, we summarize our study of organism-like behavior in
electrically and chemically driven systems. The highly complex behavior of these systems shows the
time evolution to states of higher entropy production. Using these systems as an example, we present
some concepts that give us an understanding of biological organisms and their evolution.
Keywords: nonequilibrium thermodynamics; dissipative structures; organism; entropy production;
evolution
1. Introduction
1.1. Thermodynamics
The ﬁeld of thermodynamics was born out of Sadi Carnot’s fascination with the recently developed
steam engine [1] that generated mechanical motion using heat. Central to understanding these machines
was the nature of heat. In France, at the time of Carnot, heat was thought of as a ﬂuid called Caloric.
In his only publication, Reﬂections on the Motive Power of Fire [1], Carnot expounded on the
fundamental limitations of heat engines and, in doing so, he discovered fundamental nature of
irreversibility in natural processes. The central result of Carnot’s work was that a reversible heat engine
had the highest eﬃciency and this eﬃciency depended only on the temperatures between which the
heat engine operated, regardless of the particular mechanism of the heat engine. Clausius [2] expanded
Carnot’s work into the concept of entropy, S. In this classical theory of entropy, entropy was a function
of state, expressed in terms of state veriables, but its relation to irreversible processes that generated is
was not explicit.
The modern formulation of thermodynamics was extended to include irreversible processes that
drive changes in the system [3–6] through the concepts of thermodynamic forces and ﬂows. In this
formulation, change in entropy in time dt is written as:
dS = diS + deS
(1)
where diS is the entropy production due to irreversible processes, which according to the Second law is
always positive, and deS is due to the exchange of energy and matter with the system’s exterior. diS is
Entropy 2020, 22, 1305; doi:10.3390/e22111305
www.mdpi.com/journal/entropy

Entropy 2020, 22, 1305
2 of 19
directly related to the thermodynamic processes occurring within the system, which are describable
in terms of thermodynamic forces and ﬂows. Thermodynamic forces are gradients of intensive
variables X (e.g., pressure, temperature, and chemical aﬃnity) divided by temperature, and ﬂows are
time-derivatives of the corresponding extensive variable J (volume, heat, and reaction rate, respectively).
The irreversible entropy production per unit volume is calculated as the sum of the product of all
forces and ﬂows in the system:
dis
dt = σ =
X
i
XiJi
(2)
where s is the entropy density. By integrating dis/dt over the volume of the system, the total entropy
production diS/dt is obtained. Flows are driven by forces, as in the ﬂow of heat driven by a temperature
gradient, though forces are not functions of the forces alone. Flows may depend on other variables,
such as catalysts. Flow rates can vary due to system properties independent of the driving force,
such as heat capacity in the case of thermal ﬂows and catalysts in the case of chemical reactions.
Critically, Equation (2) establishes that the entropy is a direct function of the processes driving changes
in a thermodynamic system.
1.2. Extremum Principles in Thermodynamics and the Entropy Production
We note that thermodynamics stands in contrast to mechanics. In mechanics, if the initial conditions
and forces are known, the time evolution of the system is entirely determined. Thermodynamics, on the
other hand, only predicts the ﬁnal state, not the path towards it and, in this sense, it is end-directed.
In the sections below, we will describe how this end directedness gives rise to organism-like behavior
in non-equilibrium systems.
In classical thermodynamics, extremum principles take diﬀerent forms, depending on the system.
Isolated system evolves to a state of maximum entropy; for closed systems that are maintained at
constant temperature, T, and volume, V, the Helmhotz energy evolves to its minimum. In closed
systems at constant pressure, p, and T, Gibbs energy evolves to its minimum [6]. In each case, the theory
only predicts the ﬁnal state, not the dynamic path to it. We can guarantee this end-state, but classical
thermodynamics does not predict the exact nature of the processes that will take it there or how long
it will take. Classical thermodynamics, being a theory of states, not processes, does not have time
evolution of any variable in its formulation (for which reason, it might even be appropriate to call it
thermostatics!)
Modern thermodynamics is a theory of processes and it contains the time evolution of entropy,
i.e., the rate of entropy production, and time evolution of ﬂows and forces. In modern thermodynamics
too there are extremum principles, but these are for the rate of entropy production (which is often
referred to simply as entropy production) [4–6]. One such principle is Prigogine’s minimal entropy
production principle [4–6], which states that for a system close to equilibrium, where ﬂows are linear
functions of forces—the so-called linear regime—the steady-state will be that which minimizes the
rate of entropy production. If the system is not allowed to reach the state of equilibrium at which the
entropy production is zero, it evolves to its minimum possible value. Moreover, as is well known,
in the linear regime we have the celebrated Onsager reciprocal relations [4–6].
A more recent hypothesis that has been of much interest, and some controversy, is the maximum
entropy production principle (MEPP) that prescribes that a non-equilibrium system will tend towards
processes and states for which the rate of entropy production is maximal [7–12].
MEPP is not
applicable to all non-equilibrium systems, as one can give examples of situations in which it is not valid.
For example, in a resistor subject to a constant voltage V, the total entropy production equals VI/T,
in which I is the current and T is the temperature. When the voltage is turned on, consequent heating
increases the resistivity resulting in a decrease in I and an increase in T. As a result, the entropy
production decreases, contrary to MEPP which predicts an increase. On the other hand, MEPP has
been demonstrated to be valid for many other non-equilibrium systems. Some have recently proposed
conditions necessary for MEPP to apply [10–12]. Extremum principles can be powerful tools for

Entropy 2020, 22, 1305
3 of 19
predicting the time evolution of a system to its “end state” independent of knowledge of the complex
processes at work within the system. Non-equilibrium thermodynamics has the promise of being both
a description of processes within a system, in terms of forces and ﬂows, and the end-states of systems,
in terms state variables and the rate of entropy production.
1.3. Dissipative Structures
The most important advance in non-equilibrium thermodynamics is the study of self-organization.
This is a remarkable phenomenon which shows how irreversible processes can lead to spontaneous
organization and creation of ordered states: some far-from-equilibrium systems with nonlinear
relations between forces and ﬂows can develop processes that are structured in space (e.g., ﬂuid
convection rolls, chemical patterns) or time (e.g., oscillating chemical reactions) that persist through
dissipative processes [13–15]. The development of structures in these systems tends to coincide with
an increased rate of entropy production required for the maintenance of such structures [13,14,16].
Since these organized state or structures are maintained through dissipation of free energy and
generation of entropy, they have come to be known as dissipative structures. As will be discussed in
length below, dissipative structures are in stark contrast to machines or designed structures whose
structure is by design originating form an external source, not spontaneous and from within the system
as is the case with dissipative structures. Some of the main characteristics of dissipative structures are
as follows.
1.3.1. Ampliﬁcation of Fluctuations and Establishment of a New Structure
Under far-from-equilibrium conditions, a state can become unstable. When this happens, the
system can make a transition to an organized state, a dissipative structure. In a thermodynamic system
all variables undergo thermal ﬂuctuation. When a system is in a stable state these ﬂuctuations are
damped by irreversible processes. When the system is crosses a point of instability, a particular type
of ﬂuctuation is not damped, and it will grow. The growth of a ﬂuctuation drives the system to
a new state [6,17–19]. This growth is driven by autocatalytic processes, wherein a product of a process
(e.g., light, charges, or chemical compounds) catalyzes its own production. Though the mechanism of
growth of a ﬂuctuation is within the system, which ﬂuctuation will grow and what new structure will
arise depends on the boundary conditions i.e., the environment.
1.3.2. Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking
More often than not dissipative structures arise out of a symmetry-breaking transition [17–22].
In such a transition, the state to which the system evolves does not have the symmetry of the processes
that generate it. In mathematical terms, it means the solution to a diﬀerential equation does not
have the symmetry of the equations. Due to the symmetry of the equations, symmetry breaking
leads to a multiplicity of solutions, each solution related to another through a symmetry operation.
In such situations, at the point of transition to a dissipative structure, the system has several states
to which it can make a transition. Which one it will transition to will depend on environmental
or boundary conditions or some small asymmetries inﬂuencing the time evolution of the system.
It could be said that in symmetry breaking transitions, the environment imprints on the structure.
Such phenomena are compared, in Section 4.3, to the epigenetic pathways related environmental
factors to genetic ﬂuctuations.
1.3.3. Selection of States and Sensitivity
The selection of states through environmental factors make the system very sensitive to
its environment, known as cooperative sensitivity [22–24]. Through such a mechanism, the internal
structure of a dissipative structure becomes correlated with external factors. In our earlier work,
a theory of sensitivity in symmetry breaking transitions was developed [22–24]. In the case of a two-fold
symmetry, such as chiral symmetry, it was shown that the system can become extraordinarily sensitive

Entropy 2020, 22, 1305
4 of 19
to very small chiral inﬂuences during a slow passage through the transition point [6,20–22]. It was also
noted that, through such a mechanism, internal states of small living cells can become correlated with
the direction of gravitational ﬁeld, thus providing a detection mechanism for gravity.
1.3.4. Self-Healing
Dissipative structures are stable to perturbations. If a spatial or a temporal structure is perturbed, in
due course the structure is reestablished [14,25–27]. This implies “self-healing”. When there is damage
to the structure, the structure is restored. Since the irreversible processes that created a dissipative
structure are within the structure, the system has the ability to restore the structure and “heal” damages.
This aspect is an important characteristic of biological organisms.
1.4. Dissipative Structures and Life
The structure and processes of living organisms is driven and maintained by irreversible processes.
Though the particular process of self-organization that has resulted in the familiar forms of life is
not known, living organisms are undoubtedly dissipative structures, given that their existence and
behaviors are sustained by continuous flows of energy and matter [14,17,28,29]. Modern thermodynamics
has the tools of forces, ﬂows, and rates of entropy production that can be used to understand
biological processes.
In line with a number of theorists [14,17,28,29], we hold that living systems are a subset of the
class of dissipative structures, and that their origin, behaviors, and evolution are critically related to
their thermodynamic properties. Recently, we have demonstrated life-like behaviors in an electrical
dissipative structure [25–27,30–32] and a chemical dissipative structure [33,34]. These Bio-analogue
dissipative structures (BDS) provide a compelling scientiﬁc context in which physics and the life
sciences inform one another to develop explanations. Herein, we will propose that such BDS provide
insight into the origins and evolution of living systems and prescribe a thermodynamic framework for
understanding the origin of the behavior we see in living organisms.
2. Machines, Dissipative Structures, and Organisms
The theory of organism we present here is founded in the realization that mechanics is the science
of machines, while in thermodynamics lies the physics of organisms. It means thermodynamics is
the foundational science of organisms. To understand this let us look at the relationship between
mechanics and machines.
Humans have been inventing machines since the dawn of civilization. As machines became
more complex and became substitutes for animal and human labor, the notion (attributed to Réne
Decartes [35]) that animals and organisms are simply complex machines has become integral to the
way we think about organisms. Such thinking has deep roots in the rise of Newtonian mechanics,
and later version, Lagrangian and Hamiltonian mechanics. Their success in explaining motion
in general, and planetary motion using the law of gravitation in particular, ushered a new era in
understanding natural phenomena. The laws of mechanics are time reversible: all motion and its
time-reversed version are in accord with the laws of mechanics. However, it must be noted that from
the outset, mechanics did not give us an explanation or any insight into biological phenomena. It had no
means to distinguish living and dead matter. The great success of both classical and quantum mechanics
lies in their role as the foundation for the invention of machines of increasing complexity, machines that
have transformed human life in unimagined ways, machines of immense power, machines that vastly
outperform humans and animals in performing speciﬁc tasks. Even machines that were inspired by
biological organisms, such as airplanes and submarines, are entirely diﬀerent form the organisms that
inspired them: though it ﬂies, an airplane is nothing like a bird. The diﬀerence is fundamental, in the
very processes that generate the two distinct systems. In contrast, dissipative structures have much in
common with organisms. We now recognize that organisms are highly complex dissipative structures,
not highly complex machines. Let us look at characteristic features of machines on the one hand and

Entropy 2020, 22, 1305
5 of 19
dissipative structures and organisms on the other to see that organisms are indeed more complex
versions of non-living dissipative structures.
Central to the foundational difference between organisms and machines is the role of irreversible
processes. Machines ideally have minimal dissipative or irreversible processes, while dissipative
structures and organisms run on intrinsically irreversible processes. Entropy production in a machine
is a measure of ineﬃciency, where energy is converted to lost heat rather than mechanical work.
In dissipative structures, entropy producing processes maintain structure and function, as in the
irreversible chemical transformations that drive spatiotemporal structuring in a chemical clock.
Similarly, the endogenous chemical cycles of organisms (metabolic, behavioral) are driven by irreversible
entropy-producing processes.
Whereas machines are created by design, prescribing the composition and relations of all parts,
organisms and dissipative structures emerge spontaneously through complex dissipative processes
without externally prescribed instructions. The structure of parts, their relations, and even the
distinction between parts are inﬂuenced by the contexts in which the organism develops.
Machines, unlike organisms, are what Rosen [36] termed fractionable: the structure and function
of component parts are isomorphic such that a machine can be neatly decomposed into its constituents
and each constituent performs a speciﬁc function. Organisms are not fractionable in this sense;
the boundaries between parts are ambiguous (e.g., the integration of the nervous and vascular system),
and the functional role of a given constituent is ﬂexible for changing contexts within and external
to the organism (e.g., the function of a muscle in diﬀerent postures or relative to diﬀerent activities).
Mechanics is the physics of machines—the physics of fractionable systems—and is thus inadequate for
a complete explanation of biological non-fractionable systems.
Rosen’s fractionability [36] has important consequences: for machines, an analysis of their parts
and associated functions also gives us the knowledge of how to make that machines. Such is not the case
for organisms. Despite a detailed understanding of a given biological process, we do not presently have
the means for taking the constituent parts and assembling them in a way that is functionally equivalent
to its natural counterpart. This is because the way we’ve attempted to understand biological processes
is to break them into fractioned component parts with isomorphic structure-function relationships.
As noted, however, biology is critically non-fractionable, and so analyzing an organism it as if it were
a machine of fractionable parts does not enable synthesis of an organism.
The origin of function in machines and organisms are in stark contrast. A machine’s function
is derived externally, either from an engineer’s prescription or in how it is used, whether as its
intended use or not. Function within dissipative structures is intrinsic, identiﬁable in their end-directed
time evolution. Some dissipative structures (expanded on below) exhibit morphological and behavioral
changes that drive the system to states of greater entropy production [25–27,30–32]. In our electrical
dissipative structure, this manifests in an ‘energy-seeking’ behavior where tree-like structures of
conducting spheres move through their environment, directed by electrical gradients, to regions of
higher concentration of charges. This energy-seeking behavior can be paralleled with that of living
organisms which similarly navigate their environments using embedding energetic ﬁelds (light, sound,
chemical) to ﬁnd energetic resources that sustain their structure.
The functionality of biology is, we assert, more like the intrinsic end-directed time evolution
of dissipative structures than the externally prescribed functionality of machines. When a complex
dissipative structure is formed, it is formed as a whole with spatiotemporal correlations and structure;
the process is not a serial aggregation of parts.
However, in understanding the behavior of a
dissipative structure, one might attribute functionnality just as we do with organisms. For example,
in the tree-structure we have studied, before the formation of a tree, the disconnected random beads
are similar in their behavior; the location of each bead has no particular signiﬁcance. However, once
the tree is formed, the connectivity (the number of beads a bead is in contact with) is diﬀerent. A bead
is generally in contact with, one, two or three other beads. The beads at the tip of the tree are the
collectors of charge that is being sprayed from the electrode tip. Our experiments clearly indicated that

Entropy 2020, 22, 1305
6 of 19
the charge ﬂows from the source electrode to the tips of the trees, not to all the beads in the tree [25].
Now we may classify the beads in a tree into three types, the “collector” beads (connected to only one
other bead), transmission beads (beads in contact with two other beads) and branching beads (beads in
contact with three other beads), and assign a functionality, such as the collection of charge, transmission
of charge, and branch transmission of charge, to each type. Other types of functionality are attributed
to biochemical [37,38] dissipative structures. Such functionality is not externally imposed but intrinsic
to the structure, which in turn is an outcome of the system’s intrinsic end-directed evolution.
These and many other distinctions between organisms and machines point to thermodynamics
as the foundational science for both dissipative structures and organisms. It must be noted that,
while machines and organisms are fundamentally diﬀerent classes of systems, machines are richly
integrated into human life. Machines may be understood as parts of a broader non-equilibrium
self-organizing system, but absent that embedding they are fundamentally diﬀerent. It is interesting
to note, however, that industry has advanced humanity’s entropy production, sometimes autocatalytically.
For example, oil extracted from the ground is used to power combustion engines to extract more
oil and produce more combustion-powered machinery. Table 1 summarizes important features
that diﬀerentiate machines on the one hand and dissipative structures and organisms on the other.
The tools for understanding dissipative structures then will be informative for explaining biological
phenomena. In the context of evolution, we identify that the core properties of dissipative structures
in Sections 1.3.1–1.3.4 will be relevant to establishing the relationship between thermodynamics and
biological evolution.
Table 1. Machines, Dissipative Structures and Organisms.
Machines
Dissipative Structures & Organisms
Mechanics is the foundational science
Thermodynamics is the foundational science.
Structure originates
from an external source by design.
Structure originates from and maintained by irreversible
processes within the system.
Irreversible processes decrease functional
eﬃciency of machines. Reducing entropy
generation generally increases
the eﬃciency of machines.
Irreversible processes are essential, without them the they
would not exist. Entropy generation is an integral part of
an organism’s existence. May have end
directed-evolution towards state of
higher entropy production.
Machines are “fractionable”
Dissipative structures are not “fractionable”.
Analysis can lead to synthesis through
assembly of parts.
Analysis as sum of parts does not lead to a possibility of
synthesis. Self-assembly/self-replication, not technology,
is the route to synthesis.
3. Bio-Analogue Dissipative Structures: The Missing Link
Given that organisms are dissipative structures, there is likely a continuum of systems that spans
from non-living to living dissipative systems. Dissipative structures studied for many decades starting
from the 1970s provided insight into how biological form and pattern formation might emerge from
nonequilibrium chemical systems (with appropriate autocatalytic and other mechanisms) and how
irreversible chemical processes might provide “chemical clocks” and give rise to periodic phenomena
in living systems. However, they did not have any bio-analogues that behaved like living systems and
exhibited end-directed behavior such as “foraging” and moving towards the source of energy that
sustains it. In our recent work, we have identiﬁed such a system which is electrically driven. It is a
“missing link” between dissipative structures and organisms: it exhibits organisms-like behavior, but it
is not a living organism. Such non-living dissipative structures, we propose, can serve as examples
of the class of systems that bridges non-living and living dissipative systems. In these complex
systems, several thermodynamic forces and ﬂow are coupled. In our system the structure’s motion is a
consequence of current ﬂow and the convection currents in the oil.

Entropy 2020, 22, 1305
7 of 19
Our studies of such non-living dissipative structures have demonstrated a host of biologically
plausible behaviors, which we discuss here. These bio-analogue dissipative structures (BDS) serve as
minimal models for biology and lend a framework for understanding the physical foundations for a
physics of organism and evolution of life. Dissipative structures have elsewhere been theoretically
proposed as models of psychological systems, including the study of human motor control [39],
especially in the production of rhythmic movements [40].
We have studied two dissipative structures, an electrical and a chemical system, which we classify
as self-organized foraging implementations (SOFIs). Our electrical system (E-SOFI) produces an
array of life-like properties, including foraging [25–27,31]), end-directed behavior [25–27,31], structure
maintenance and self-healing [25–27], and even functional coordination [30,32,41]. The chemical
system (C-SOFI) demonstrates ﬂocking behavior [33,34] sensitivity to external thermal and magnetic
ﬁelds [33], and collective navigation of environments [34]. Several other groups in the ﬁeld of dynamic
self-assembly (DySA) have demonstrated similar life-like behaviors, including chemotaxis [42],
collective dynamics [42–45], and self-healing [46].
3.1. The E-SOFI
The E-SOFI (Figure 1) consists of metal beads in shallow oil subject to a high electrical voltage across
a suspended source electrode and a grounding ring in the dish. The electrical forces drive the formation
of strings of beads, called “trees”, that maintain contact with the grounding electrode. The trees are
rudimentarily end-directed to increase the rate of entropy production [25–27]. The system self-selects
for morphologies and behaviors that maximize the current through the system. In this system, the rate
of total entropy production (REP) (Equation (3)):
diS
dt
= V ∗I(t)
T
(3)
where V is the voltage, I(t) is the total current at time t, and T is the temperature of the system, which was
found to be uniform and fairly constant within a few percent. This intrinsic end-directedness manifests
in the trees’ foraging activities, and in the repair of trees subject to perturbation. Trees move through the
dish to collect charges that build up on the surface of the oil [31] while the current ﬂowing through them
creates the forces that maintain their structure. The trees thus forage, much like organisms, by moving
through their environment to collect the energetic resources that keep them intact. When trees
are perturbed, for example by breaking them up with an insulating rod, the system will reform
into new trees. While the morphology may diﬀer post-perturbation, the new system produces
approximately the same REP [27].
Trees exhibit functional interdependence as well, coordinating their activities to increase the
REP [30,32,41]. Trees that are perturbed from steady-state dynamics, resulting in a decrease in
the current, will relax back to a new steady-state that increases the REP to approximately the
same pre-perturbed level. Critically, during the relaxation epoch, their activities are coordinated,
suggesting that the trees co-regulate their motion to produce a behavioral state of increased REP.
Trees constrained to behave as oscillators exhibit relative-phase coordinative modes characteristic of
biological coupled oscillators [41], and can exhibit compensatory behaviors for a coupled partner that
becomes constrained [32].
The observed tree formation and the associated increase in total current could also be seen form
the viewpoint of Adrian Bejan’s constructal law, which states that:
“For a ﬁnite-size system to persist in time (to live), it must evolve in such a way that it provides
easier access to the imposed currents that ﬂow through it” [47–49].

Entropy 2020, 22, 1305
8 of 19
 
Figure 1. Sample images of an E-SOFI tree (A) Initial randomly positioned beads before formation of
the tree and (B) after formation of the dynamic tree. The tree moves through the system like a worm
foraging for higher current.
One could say that the behavior of E-SOFI is in accordance with the constructal law. In this
one instance, whether we choose a constructal law or the rate of entropy production seems a matter
of choice. Our choice of entropy production is because constructal law applies to the ﬂow of current
but has no direct relationship to a fundamental and universal thermodynamic quantity such as entropy.
Constructal law has been discussed with much generality in which “ﬂow” refers wide range of physical
as well as non-physical entities such as knowledge [49].
3.2. The C-SOFI
The C-SOFI consists of irregularly shaped benzoquinone (BQ) pellets ﬂoating at the air-water
interface in a petri dish. BQ dissolves into the water, changing the surface tension around the pellet,
propelling it across the surface [33,34]. When multiple pellets interact, they tend to aggregate into
a cluster of pellets that move together through the dish, called a “ﬂock” (Figure 2). This ﬂock tends
to move across the surface as a singular entity, though it may ﬂuctuate in size and number of pellets.
The ﬂock tends to move to regions of the dish with lower aqueous BQ concentration, which leads to
faster dissolution and thus greater REP (Equation (4)) [33]. In this system, the total entropy production is
diS
dt = AVk(C0 −C(t))
(4)
where A is chemical aﬃnity, V is volume, k is the dissolution rate, C0 is the saturation concentration
of BQ, and C(t) is the aqueous BQ concentration at time t. The C-SOFI forages for circumstances
that increase the REP, and thus abides by directly analogous thermodynamic processes as the E-SOFI.
The C-SOFI can be similarly couched as end-directed towards states of greater REP.
The ﬂocks demonstrate collective sensitivity to exogenous thermal and magnetic ﬁelds.
Flocks will swim towards or away from hot and cold probes respectively, moving as a single
entity [33]. High temperature likely increases the dissolution rate and thus the REP, making the
thermotaxis functional. When a single pellet is embedded with ferrous material, the ﬂock can become
collectively sensitive to a weak magnetic ﬁeld. A weak magnetic force can be created by positioning
a magnet at a height above the dish that only slightly aﬀects the motion of a single BQ swimmer
(i.e., the swimmer may have a slight bias towards the magnet, but swims freely through most of
the dish). When multiple pellets are then added and a ﬂock forms, the entire ﬂock moves toward
and remains under the magnet [33]. This sensitivity to weak exogenous ﬁelds may be compared
to the perceptual sensitivity of organisms. For example, sighted organisms are sensitive to weak
electromagnetic ﬁelds by virtue of their self-organized structure [35]. Light-driven chemical swimmers
have been developed that similarly exhibit complex collective dynamics [44].

Entropy 2020, 22, 1305
9 of 19
 
Figure 2. Benzoqunione pellets ﬂoat at the air-water interface. Over time the pellets tend to converge
near one another, creating the dynamic ﬂock. Sub-ﬁgures show time-samples of the ﬂock at (A) 0 seconds
elapsed (B) 30 seconds elapsed (C) 60 seconds elapsed (D) 90 seconds elapsed (E) 120 seconds elapsed
(F) 150 seconds elapsed (G) 180 seconds elapsed and (H) a close-up of the ﬂock. Reprinted with
permission from Satterwhite-Warden J. E., Kondepudi D. K., Dixon J. A., Rusling J. F., (2019) Thermal-
and magnetic-sensitive particle ﬂocking motion at the air-water interface. The Journal of Physical
Chemistry B, 123, 3832–3840. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.
3.3. Fractionability in Dissipative Structures
A distinction was drawn between fractionable mechanical systems and non-fractionable
biological ones. If dissipative structures are to be a suitable model of living systems, they ought to be
similarly non-fractionable. The E- and C-SOFI do have properties that suggest they are essentially
non-fractionable much like living systems.
In the E-SOFI, the self-healing phenomenon [25,27]
highlights the clear structure–function ambiguity characteristic of non-fractionable living systems.
Recall that trees, after being subjected to destabilizing perturbations, will reform into new trees of
potentially diﬀerent morphologies that re-stabilize the REP. The functionality of the structure is not tied
to the conﬁguration of component parts, but rather is in achieving a certain relation to the embedding
ﬁeld, here minimizing resistance to allow ﬂow.
The functionality of an E-SOFI tree is not isomorphic with its structure; there is no one speciﬁc
tree to achieve a function. This is apparent in the results that trees can form into a variety of shapes in
diﬀerent trials but approach the same current for the same applied voltage (Figure 3). The function
of foraging for charges and sustaining the structure is achieved in many diﬀerent ways through
self-organization. The variability of structure that achieves a required function is a characteristic of
living organisms. Higher variability gives the organism better survivability.
The non-fractionability manifests also in the way the E-SOFI can be built. Rosen identiﬁed that
for fractionable systems understanding a process entails being able to synthesize it. We can easily
arrange beads into the same conﬁguration that it might arrive at naturally, does this suggest the E-SOFI
is fractionable? While we can replicate the structure of a given tree, the functionality, evaluated in terms
of its conductivity, of that tree depends on its history and present context. The morphology of a tree
has contributions from electrical forces, and complex ﬂuid dynamics, both of which likely interact.
The ﬂuid dynamics in particular are very likely to change from trial to trial, and such contextual
changes may result in diﬀerently functional morphologies. Figure 4 presents examples of diﬀerent
morphologies developed over diﬀerent trials. Dividing a self-organized structure into component
parts and trying to assemble these component parts to obtain a structure may or may not result
in a system remaining in the assembled structure. For example, if the beads are assembled into
a particular tree when the voltage is turned oﬀ, that tree may or may not maintain its structure when
the voltage is turned on. As soon as the voltage is turned on, convection currents begin, and these may
move the beads into a new conﬁguration. When the beads self-organize, the ﬁnal shape of the tree
is a result of a very complex time evolution of the convection currents and the forces that move the
beads [25,27]. Fractionable machines, on the other hand, are not likely to spontaneously change in

Entropy 2020, 22, 1305
10 of 19
a way that maintains or improves function after assembly. Most spontaneous changes in the structure
of machines are characterized as breakage.
Figure 3. Sample proﬁles of the current during tree formation in the E-SOFI. Times are aligned relative
to the time of formation of tree. Trees approach the approximately the same conductivity despite
varying morphologies.
 
Figure 4. A variety of morphologies of E-SOFI trees. Each sub-ﬁgure (A–J) pictures a unique tree from
a separate run of the system. Though the tree shapes are very diﬀerent, they draw the same current.
It is an example of variable structure resulting in the same current and hence entropy production as
shown in Figure 3. Such a sample is far from exhaustive of the possibilities.

Entropy 2020, 22, 1305
11 of 19
The C-SOFI perhaps more dramatically demonstrates the non-fractionability of these systems as
the conﬁguration of the ﬂock is continually changing as are its constituents, with pellets entering and
leaving the ﬂock throughout time. Nevertheless, functional characteristics of the ﬂock such as taxis
are maintained at the level of the ﬂock. The sensitivity to magnetic ﬁelds similarly demonstrates the
structure-function ambiguity. Under a traditional analysis, we might distinguish the functional
roles of the ferrous and non-ferrous pellets, the former being a “sensor” and the latter being
structural components. Interestingly, the ferrous pellet only appears to function as a sensor when it is
embedded in the ﬂock. Its functionality emerges under certain contexts rather than being intrinsic to it.
Insofar as living systems are critically non-fractionable, scientiﬁc attempts to understand biological
functioning will be greatly informed by the study of similarly non-fractionable dissipative structures.
4. Dissipative Structures and Evolution
4.1. Evolution
Evolution is broad as both a phenomenon and concept, and these two aspects are not always
in concert. The “modern synthesis”, combining Mendelian genetics with Darwinian natural selection,
characterizedevolutionastheinter-generationalchangeinfrequenciesofalleleswithinapopulation[50,51].
Such theories focused on the microscopic genetic factors (though the nature of DNA was unknown
early on) as the objects of evolution. More contemporary deﬁnitions expanded to encompass the
phenotypes of developed organisms:
“Evolution may be deﬁned as any net directional change or any cumulative change in the
characteristics of organisms or populations over many generations—in other words, descent with
modiﬁcation . . . It explicitly includes the origin as well as the spread of alleles, variants, trait values,
or character states” [52].
Conservatively, evolution consists of at least the inter-generational change of organisms and the
forces that drive such changes. While lacking an all-encompassing deﬁnition of evolution, we focus on
properties likely to be included in any adequate deﬁnition: (1) micro-scale (i.e., genetic) mutations
with macro-scale (i.e., phenotypic) consequences, (2) adaptive selection of traits by the environment,
and (3) self-replication through reproduction with inheritance of traits. Together these processes
drive the production of organisms whose traits may vary across generations as a joint function
of stochastic mutations and selective environmental pressure. Processes (1) and (2) in biological
evolution are mirrored in dissipative structures through phenomena of (1) ﬂuctuation-ampliﬁcation
and (2) non-equilibrium cooperative sensitivity. Process (3) has, to our knowledge, few present
instantiations in BDS (e.g., [43]), though we speculate on the properties that may enable such a process.
4.2. The Continuum of Dissipative Structures
The BDS described herein are oﬀered as examples of systems that may bridge living and non-living
dissipative structures. These BDS may be considered a form of para-life; analagous to but distinct
from living systems. In the origin and evolution of life, similar types of systems may have been the
progenitors of organisms. Given the shared physical foundations of organisms and BDS, the tools of
non-equilibrium thermodynamics likely can be used to eﬀectively understand biological evolution.
Biological evolution has frequently been couched in thermodynamic terms (for a brief historical review,
see [28]), with much focus on information entropy [29,53,54], or on the hypothesis that a MEPP is
a driving force of evolution (e.g., [7,9,18,29,55,56]). Such a theory is not without dispute (e.g., [57]),
and our own empirical work oﬀers little to support or oppose such far-reaching hypotheses, so we
remain largely agnostic on the subject. Nevertheless, we oﬀer that some tools from non-equilibrium
thermodynamics can inform our study of evolution. We will discuss how the theory of dissipative
structures, especially ﬂuctuation ampliﬁcation and autocatalysis, can be used in the context of evolution.
We will present some evolution-like phenomena that can be observed in the E-SOFI that support the
notion that dissipative structures instantiate fundamental characteristics of biology.

Entropy 2020, 22, 1305
12 of 19
4.3. Fluctuation-Ampliﬁcation and Genetic Mutation
Contemporary understanding of biological evolution identiﬁes the importance of microscopic
ﬂuctuations in the structure of DNA to produce variability in phenotypes that can be selected for,
leading to evolution of subsequent generations [50–52]. These ﬂuctuations, as novel genetic sequences,
are ampliﬁed by selective processes that result in (among many other consequences) the production
of more of the same genetic sequences. The selective processes at the macro-scale, constituted in the
interaction between organism, behavior, and environmental properties, lead to the propagation of
genetic material through reproduction. The phenotype of an organism stems in part from micro-scale
genetic factors and their ﬂuctuations that change the DNA. Similar characteristics can be observed in
non-living dissipative structures, whose properties depend on micro-scale ﬂuctuations.
Dissipative structures are deﬁned by the emergence of new dynamical modes in the structure or
activity of a system as a non-equilibrium control parameter is varied [6,13–16]. These processes can be
described by dynamical equations of the macroscopic forces and ﬂows in the system, with bifurcations
in the solution space corresponding to the emergence of dynamical modes. Dissipative structures
are typically characterized by nonlinear equations, which give rise to a multiplicity of stable modes.
In the range near the critical value of the bifurcation parameter, systems are particularly sensitive to
microscopic ﬂuctuations that can drive the system to one of the stable modes or another.
Whereas, in near-equilibrium systems, fluctuations are typically counteracted by relaxation processes
(e.g., the averaging of particle velocities in an isolated system of gas). The non-linear interactions
and far-from-equilibrium nature of dissipative structures can lead to the amplification of fluctuations
and selection of one of many possible states, as noted above in Section 1.3.1. As a speciﬁc example,
consider convective rolls in a ﬂuid subject to a thermal gradient. If we observe a single convective cell,
the ﬂuid may ﬂow clockwise or counterclockwise, both of which are equally stable dynamical
modes [14,15,58]. The direction of ﬂow is determined by microscopic velocity ﬂuctuations occurring
in the ﬂuid at the time of formation of the convective cells. Small imperfections in the conducting
plates that favor one ﬂuid-ﬂow direction, clockwise or counterclockwise, could determine direction
of ﬂuid ﬂow. The intrinsic instability around bifurcation points means that the development of
a dissipative structure is subject to probabilistic inﬂuences, making the history of the system and
the boundary eﬀects determinants the present state [14,17,18]. Not unlike biology then, microscopic
ﬂuctuations can drive diﬀerentiation of macroscopic phenotype.
Chemical systems similarly can be shaped by microscopic ﬂuctuations.
When a complex
oscillating reaction like the Belousov–Zhabotinsky reaction is prepared in a dish, a wide variety of
spatial patterns cam emerge, often termed “Turing patterns”, which can vary with diﬀerences in
initial conditions [13–15]. These structures are a result of coupling between chemical reactions and
diﬀusion [59,60]. Computer simulations of an autocatalytic reaction happening within two volumes
that exchange compounds reveal multiple steady-state solutions with asymmetrical concentrations
of the compounds [18]. These steady-states are equally probable, and the emergence of one over the
other is driven by microscopic ﬂuctuations near the critical point.
Prigogine summarizes this interplay of microscopic ﬂuctuations and diﬀerentiation of phenotype
as “order through ﬂuctuations” [17,18]. Within nonequilibrium systems, there is an intrinsic interaction
between the structure, given by the dynamical equations and relation between parameters, the function,
given by the various dynamical modes (steady states, limit cycles), and the ﬂuctuations that trigger
instabilities (Figure 5). Biological evolution may be characterized by a similar system where function
may range from the processes within an organism to its behavior, structure is the composition of
the organism, and ﬂuctuations may be due to genetic variation or epigenetic environmental factors.
A similar structure of causality in developmental biology was advocated for by Gilbert Gottlieb [61]
known as probabilistic epigenesis. Throughout the many scales of biological development (e.g., genetic,
cellular, intercellular, neural, behavioral, and environmental) ﬂuctuations at one scale have bidirectional
eﬀects across scales, potentially driving cascading consequences on structure and function throughout
the system.

Entropy 2020, 22, 1305
13 of 19
Figure 5. Such relations hold for both organic and inorganic dissipative structures.
4.4. Cooperative Sensitivity—Environmental Selection
The intrinsic instability near critical points in dissipative structures can render them sensitive to
factors originating outside the system. As outlined above, endogenous ﬂuctuations around the critical
point drive the diﬀerentiation of dynamical modes in dissipative structures. Some external events,
processes, or boundary conditions can similarly introduce ﬂuctuations that bias the selection of one
mode in a multi-stable state. The ampliﬁcation of ﬂuctuations in dissipative structures results for
diﬀerent reasons depending on the system, but there is generally an autocatalytic process at the core of
amplifying ﬂuctuations. Whereas thermal ﬂuctuations in an equilibrium system would likely damp
out the inﬂuence of an external ﬁeld, this cooperativity can amplify its eﬀect. Dissipative structures
then have an intrinsic sensitivity to the contexts in which they develop and exist.
This context-sensitivity mirrors the adaptive evolution of organisms, bearing characteristics
reﬂective of the habitat they co-evolved with. Genes may also be activated in an organism by virtue of
myriad physiological and environmental factors through epigenetic pathways [61,62]. For example,
Drosophila Melanogaster reared at diﬀerent temperatures exhibited developmental and inter-generational
morphological diﬀerences [63]. This suggestion is in contrast to the blind selection much of evolutionary
theory assumes, where changes in genotype (and consequently phenotype) are merely stochastic
and are selected for solely by the reproductive success of the organism [64]. While the boundary
conditions and processes governing selective adaptation in biology are much more complex than
in current BDS, the fundamental process of external factors introducing or biasing ﬂuctuations that
change the phenotype of the system is shared in both living and non-living self-organizing systems.
4.5. Autocatalysis
Aprocesscloselyrelatedtofluctuation-amplificationisautocatalysis, orself-production. Autocatalysis
manifests in nearly all self-organizing phenomena and a variety of thermodynamic systems,
including lasers, electrical dissipative structures, and oscillating chemical reactions. In each case,
a thermodynamic process, e.g., light emission, electrical conduction, or chemical reaction, is driven by
the products of that process. In a laser, photons with a given wavelength stimulate the emission of
other photons at the same wavelength, leading to the multiplicative production of coherent light-waves.
In the E-SOFI discussed above, the conduction of charges through the beads to ground creates the
forces that maintain a polarity imbalance between the trees and the surrounding charge distribution,
driving the ﬂow to the beads. In a chemical process, a given compound can catalyze its own production
through a reaction with another compound. In each example, autocatalysis drives self-organization in
the system, i.e., laser light, tree structures, and oscillating chemical reactions respectively.
Autocatalysis is apparent in living systems as well, and is core to our understanding of biological
evolution and inheritance. Autocatalysis is most clearly present in the processes associated with
genetic transcription and replication (e.g., [65]). DNA molecules participate in a complex reaction
network that ultimately results in more of the same molecules being produced. Autocatalysis is also
present at a more macro-scale: simply put, organisms beget more organisms of (roughly) the same
type. There are sets of reproductive processes in organisms that “transform” an existing organism
into one or more of the same organism. The ﬁssion of a bacterium is particularly illustrative, as a
single cell undergoes a complex process of genetic replication, followed by dramatic morphological
division, resulting in two bacteria with near-copies of the genetic material [66,67]. Coarse graining in
thermodynamic terms, we see a complex nonequilibrium system (a cell) exhibits a critical bifurcation

Entropy 2020, 22, 1305
14 of 19
that drives the emergence of a new reaction network (onset of reproductive processes) that drives the
autocatalysis of complex molecules (copying of DNA) and the production of new spatial structures
(cell ﬁssion). An autocatalytic reaction network can be described as a cycle of reaction steps, not unlike
the life-cycle of an organism: for each, a complex system cycles through a set of transformations that
result in the repetition of certain structures [14]. While self-replication of the kind seen in organisms is
not present in current BDS, it is possible that suﬃciently complex artiﬁcial systems will be developed
that capture such reproductive processes.
4.6. Developmental Context Sensitivity—Empirical Results
Thus far we have summarized some examples of the evolution-like properties of dissipative structures.
Here, we expand with novel empirical results that highlight such biologically plausible features intrinsic
to dissipative structures. As discussed above, ﬂuctuation ampliﬁcation and autocatalysis can lead to
context sensitivity through external inﬂuence during critical bifurcations in dissipative structures, in a
way that mirrors organisms’ adaptive compatibility with their environments. Due to the cooperativity
and long-range correlations within non-equilibrium systems [21–24] weak external ﬁelds have increased
interactive eﬀects compared to equilibrium systems. Such external energy ﬁelds can bias the emergence
of certain modes in multi-stable chemical dissipative structures [21–24]. In some systems it has been
found that MEPP selects among multi-stable states [11,41]. Dissipative structures thus have an intrinsic
context-dependence such that their development is rudimentarily adapted for the circumstances.
We draw a direct analogy to the adaptive changes wrought by biological evolution.
We have demonstrated an analogue of this empirically in the E-SOFI, which can exhibit
morphological variants in the presence of weak external magnetic ﬁelds. We prepared the E-SOFI with
a set of 15 total beads, 10 aluminum, and ﬁve chrome. Chrome beads are sensitive to magnetic ﬁelds
while aluminum beads are not. Beads were distributed approximately uniformly in the center of the
dish prior to turning the system on (Figure 6). We ran the system for brief (i.e., less than 60 s) trials to
observe tree formation, running until stable structures formed. Trials were performed in the absence or
presence of a weak magnetic ﬁeld, and we compared the morphology of trees indexed by the relative
position of the chrome beads.
 
Figure 6. The E-SOFI setup for morphological variants. A magnet is visible below the dish. The ﬁve
chrome beads are visibly darker.

Entropy 2020, 22, 1305
15 of 19
4.6.1. Methods
A magnet was set up on a moveable arm below the dish. To ensure the magnetic ﬁeld was
suﬃciently weak, the magnet was positioned at a distance below the dish such that lateral movements
of the magnet could not move a single chrome bead while the system was oﬀ. The magnet forces
were thus not strong enough to overcome frictional and inertial forces on the bead. The magnet was
positioned approximately halfway between the grounding electrode and the source electrode (Figure 6).
Ten trials were performed with the magnet removed from the dish, and ten trials were performed at
the weak-ﬁeld threshold. The system was run until stable trees formed (some beads did not connect to
ground or incorporate into trees).
We quantiﬁed the morphology with the relative position of chrome beads in the trees by counting
beads from the grounding electrode up to the chrome bead (e.g., if there were 5 beads between the
grounding electrode and the chrome bead, the chrome bead was in position 6). Chrome beads that did
not incorporate into trees are excluded from analysis. We expected that chrome beads should occupy
greater position numbers (i.e., be further out on the tree) in the presence of the magnet than in the
absence of the magnet.
4.6.2. Results
An independent samples t-test revealed a signiﬁcant diﬀerence (t(98.934) = 2.3967, p < 0.05)
between the position of chrome beads in the presence (M = 6.627, SD = 3.053) and absence (M = 5.22,
SD = 2.916) of the magnet. The chrome beads tended to be further out in the trees, and thus closer to the
magnet. The morphology of the trees was aﬀected by a weak external ﬁeld during their development.
4.6.3. Discussion
The morphological development of E-SOFI trees was demonstrated to be sensitive to a weak
magnetic ﬁeld. Magnetic chrome beads tended to be further towards the end of trees (by about one
bead position) in the presence of a weak magnetic ﬁeld than in its absence. While the force on a chrome
bead was not strong enough to move the bead, the weak force likely counter-balanced the electrical
forces driving the beads to the grounding electrode during the development of trees. This is a simple
demonstration of the intrinsic context-sensitivity of dissipative structures, that even weak exogenous
inﬂuences present in the development of dissipative structures (i.e., near the critical points) can drive
substantive changes in structure. Future work will investigate whether such morphological diﬀerences
have functional consequences, which would further the comparison with biology.
A key aspect of biological evolution is the intrinsic variability of heritable genetic components,
in concert with the environmental activation and selection of such genes. We have argued that these
properties are rudimentarily present in dissipative structures, constituted in ﬂuctuation-ampliﬁcation
theory. The microscopic ﬂuctuations of dissipative structures, like in genetics, are sensitive to external
factors as well, resulting in developmental and inter-generational variability. We demonstrated such
developmental variability in an electrical dissipative structure where a weak magnetic ﬁeld drove
morphological variants.
This discussion motivates a novel notion of selective ﬁtness owing to (1) self-stabilizing
autocatalytic dynamics and (2) developmental context sensitivity. Fitness in evolution has always
depended on the survival and procreation of organisms [50–52]. Like organisms, dissipative structures
can exhibit mutations (ﬂuctuations) that vary phenotype (dynamical modes) which can either persist or
die out. Autocatalytic processes can be diﬀerentially self-stabilizing, and thus will diﬀerentially survive,
leading to rudimentary ﬁtness. Environmental constraints can drive selection based on phenotype
(phylogenetic selection) but can also drive developmental changes (ontogenetic selection) that adapt the
organism to its environment. The intrinsic context-sensitivity of dissipative structures drives adaptive
development. If these contextual changes enhance the system’s stability, they can be understood as

Entropy 2020, 22, 1305
16 of 19
conferring a selective advantage. Both the autocatalytic dynamics and intrinsic context sensitivity
support notions of evolutionary ﬁtness in non-living dissipative structures.
4.7. Energy Flow in Organisms and Natural Selection
The conclusion that organisms are dissipative structures, rather than machines, fundamentally
changes the theoretical relationship between energy consumption (or entropy production) and
biological function, with important implications for our understanding of evolution. When we consider
organisms as machines, it naturally follows that minimizing irreversible processes will increase
biological function (e.g., the ability of the organism to maintain itself, use energy resources eﬀectively)
and ultimately survival. Imagine two competing species, one of which uses the vast majority of its
energetic resources to support motility, growth, reproduction, etc., and a second species that loses
much of its available energy to heat production. Clearly, the ﬁrst species will enjoy a considerable
advantage and be more likely to survive, all other things being equal.
When we consider organisms as dissipative structures, it naturally follows that high levels of
irreversible processes (i.e., the degradation of energy or the production of entropy) will increase the
ability of organisms to maintain themselves and ultimately survive. Again, consider two competing
species, one of which is superior at accessing and consuming energetic resources. Clearly, the species
that consumes more resources will be more likely to survive, all other things being equal.
It is worth noting that both the conclusions above seem eminently reasonable: organisms that
use energy more eﬃciently will enjoy an evolutionary advantage; organisms that access and consume
energy at faster rates will enjoy an evolutionary advantage. However, from a physical perspective,
if the processes that support biology are driven towards being optimal machines (i.e., produce entropy
at minimal rates), then something additional must be at work, because machines themselves are not
intrinsically driven to minimize entropy production. In fact, with repeated use, machines will become
less optimal as components break down and byproducts build up. Thus, the organism-as-machine
perspective must have a means to explain how and why processes are pushed away from entropy
production (i.e., irreversible processes). Clearly, one could invoke evolution as the explanation here.
Of course, this places another burden on evolutionary theory, as it must now explain the relationship
between biological structure and energy consumption. That is, how does an organism continually
organize itself such that it minimizes entropy production? Thus, the organism-as-machine perspective
adds to evolutionary theory’s explanatory burden.
If we consider organisms as dissipative structures, evolutionary theory does not have to explain
the relationship between structure and energy consumption, because that relationship is entailed in
dissipative structure theory. That is to say, dissipative structures come into existence in the service
of degrading energy potentials. They do not require any special processes to explain their origins or
continued existence. By the same token, dissipative structures are in a continuous relationship with
the free energy sources that they degrade. If a change in the environment or in the internal state of
the structure impacts the rate at which it dissipates energy, compensatory adjustments in structure
will occur, such that dissipation again returns to high levels. For example, in the E-SOFI system
described above, if a tree structure is hand-set such that it has many small branches, rather than one
long trunk, it will spontaneously elongate into a less branched structure (thus increasing the current).
Likewise, if the ﬂow of current to the tree structure is partially blocked, the tree will move to a location
that allows for higher current. The point here is that the physics of dissipative structures is such that
they intrinsically entail a self-maintaining relationship between the free energy they degrade and
their own morphology and behavior. We suggest that evolution has capitalized on the remarkable
properties of dissipative structures to create living systems.
5. Conclusions
We have aimed to provide theoretical and empirical support for the notion that the tools of
nonequilibrium thermodynamics and the theory of dissipative structures can inform the theory of

Entropy 2020, 22, 1305
17 of 19
biological evolution. While a machine metaphor has had much pragmatic value for describing
the properties of organisms, dissipative structure theory will be better suited to explain many
functions of living systems. Dissipative structure theory oﬀers a focus on process rather than state,
can explain intrinsic functions (i.e., end-directedness) in nonequilibrium systems, and explains the
context-sensitivity of self-organizing systems. The E- and C-SOFI systems instantiate these three
aspects and demonstrate ostensibly life-like behaviors; they are structurally and functionally dynamic,
they are end-directed to states of high dissipation, and they exhibit complex reorganization with small
environmental changes.
The mechanisms of nonequilibrium self-organization, namely ﬂuctuation ampliﬁcation and
autocatalysis, can readily be mapped on to aspects of biological evolution. The complex relationship
between micro- and macroscopic variability is evident in ﬂuctuation-ampliﬁcation analysis of
dissipative structures, as in the interaction between genotype and phenotype. Exogenous ﬂuctuations
can also bias the development of dissipative structures, rendering them intrinsically context-dependent.
The self-replication of chemical species is apparent in abiotic complex autocatalytic chemical reactions
as in the mechanisms of genetic replication. These microscopic autocatalytic processes mirror the
macroscopic reproductive processes of organisms broadly. Though questions remain, we propose
that treating organisms as dissipative structures, and evolution as a complex nonequilibrium process,
will expand our explanatory power beyond a machine-metaphor.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, D.K.K.; methodology, D.K.K., and B.D.B.; resources, D.K.K., B.D.B.
and J.A.D.; data collection, B.D.B.; analysis, B.D.B.; writing—original draft preparation, B.D.B. and D.K.K.;
writing—review and editing, D.K.K., B.D.B. and J.A.D. All authors have read and agreed to the published version
of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Carnot, S. Réﬂexions sur la Puissance Motrice du Feu et sur les Machines Propres a Développer Cette Puissance;
Chez Bachelier: Paris, France, 1824.
2.
Clausius, R. Über die bewegende Kraft der Wärme, Part I, Part II. Ann. Phys. 1850, 79, 368–397. [CrossRef]
3.
Prigogine, I. Etude Thermodynamique des Phénomènes Irréversibles; Editions Desoer: Liège, Belgium, 1947.
4.
Prigogine, I. Introduction to Thermodynamics of Irreversible Processes; John Wiley and Sons: London, UK, 1967.
5.
De Groot, S.R.;
Mazur, P. Non-Equilibrium Thermodynamics;
North Holland Press:
Amsterdam,
The Netherlands, 1969.
6.
Kondepudi, D.K.; Prigogine, I. Modern Thermodynamics: From Heat Engines to Dissipative Structures, 2nd ed.;
John Wiley and Sons: New York, NY, USA, 2015.
7.
Kleidon, A. Nonequilibrium thermodynamics and maximum entropy production in the Earth system.
Naturwissenschaften 2009, 96, 653–677. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.
Martyushev, L.M.; Seleznev, V.D. Maximum entropy production principle in physics, chemistry and biology.
Phys. Rep. 2006, 426, 1–45. [CrossRef]
9.
Swenson, R. Emergent attractors and the law of maximum entropy production: Foundations to a theory of
general evolution. Syst. Res. 1989, 6, 187–197. [CrossRef]
10.
Martyushev, L.M.; Seleznev, V.D. The restrictions of the maximum entropy production principle. Phys. A
2014, 410, 17–21. [CrossRef]
11.
Endres, R.G. Entropy production selects nonequilibrium states in multi-stable systems. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7,
14437. [CrossRef]
12.
Ross, J.; Corlan, A.D.; Muller, S.C. Proposed Principle of Maximum Local Entropy Production. J. Phys. Chem. B
2012, 116, 7858–7865. [CrossRef]
13.
Nicolis, G.; Prigogine, I. Self-Organization in Non-equilibrium Systems; John Wiley and Sons: New York,
NY, USA, 1977.
14.
Nicolis, G. Physics of far-from-equilibrium systems and self-organization. In The New Physics; Davies, P., Ed.;
Flammarion: Paris, France, 1989.

Entropy 2020, 22, 1305
18 of 19
15.
Haken, H. Synergetics: An Introduction; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1977.
16.
Kondepudi, D. Self-organization, entropy production, and physical intelligence. Ecol. Psychol. 2012, 24,
33–45. [CrossRef]
17.
Prigogine, I.; Stengers, I. Order Out of Chaos: Man’s New Dialogue with Nature; Bantam Press: New York, NY,
USA, 1984.
18.
Prigogine, I. From Being to Becoming: Time and Complexity in the Physical Sciences; W. H. Freeman: San Francisco,
CA, USA, 1980.
19.
Prigogine, I.; Nicolis, G. On symmetry-breaking instabilities in dissipative systems. J. Chem. Phys. 1967, 46,
3542–3550. [CrossRef]
20.
Kondepudi, D.K.; Nelson, G.W. Weak Neutral Currents and the Origin of Biomolecular Chirality. Nature
1985, 314, 438–441. [CrossRef]
21.
Kondepudi, D.K. State Selection Dynamics in Symmetry Breaking Transitions. In Noise in Nonlinear Dynamical
Systems; Moss, F., McClintock, P.V., Eds.; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 1989; Volume 2,
pp. 251–270.
22.
Kondepudi, D.K.; Nelson, G. Chiral Symmetry Breaking states and Their Sensitivity in Nonequilibrium
Systems. Phys. A 1984 125, 465–496. [CrossRef]
23.
Kondepudi, D.K.; Prigogine, I. Sensitivity of nonequilibrium systems. Phys. A 1981, 107, 1–24. [CrossRef]
24.
Kondepudi, D.K. Sensitivity of chemical dissipative structures to external ﬁelds: Formation of propagating
bands. Phys. A 1982, 115, 552–566. [CrossRef]
25.
Kondepudi, D.; Kay, B.; Dixon, J. End-directed evolution and the emergence of energy-seeking behavior in
a complex system. Phys. Rev. E 2015, 91. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.
Dixon, J.A.; Kay, B.A.; Davis, T.J.; Kondepudi, D. End-directedness and context in nonliving dissipative
systems. In Contextuality from Quantum Physics to Psychology; Ehtibar, D., Ed.; World Scientiﬁc Publishing Co.:
Singapore, 2016; pp. 185–208.
27.
Kondepudi, D.; Kay, B.; Dixon, J. Dissipative structures, machines, and organisms: A perspective. Chaos
2017, 27, 104607. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.
Skene, K.R. Life’s a gas: A thermodynamic theory of biological evolution. Entropy 2015, 17, 5522–5548.
[CrossRef]
29.
Brooks, D.R.; Collier, J.; Maurer, B.A.; Smith, J.H.; Wiley, E.O. Entropy and information in evolving biological
systems. Biol. Philos. 1989, 4, 407–432. [CrossRef]
30.
Davis, T.J.; Kay, B.A.; Kondepudi, D.; Dixon, J.A. Spontaneous Interentity Coordination in a Dissipative
Structure. Ecol. Psychol. 2016, 28, 23–36. [CrossRef]
31.
De Bari, B.; Dixon, J.A.; Kay, B.A.; Kondepudi, D. Oscillatory dynamics of an electrically driven dissipative
structure. PLoS ONE 2019, 14, e0217305. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.
De Bari, B.; Paxton, A.; Kondepudi, D.; Kay, B.A.; Dixon, J.A. Functional interdependence in coupled dissipative
structures: Physical foundations of intra- and inter-personal biological coordination. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Thermodynamics 2.0, Worcester, MA, USA, 21–24 June 2020.
33.
Satterwhite-Warden, J.E.; Kondepudi, D.K.; Dixon, J.A.; Rusling, J.F. Thermal- and magnetic-sensitive particle
ﬂocking motion at the air-water interface. J. Phys. Chem. B 2019, 123, 3832–3840. [CrossRef]
34.
Chen, T.; Kondepudi, D.K.; Dixon, J.A.; Rusling, J.F. Particle ﬂock motion at air-water interface driven by
interfacial free energy foraging. Langmuir 2019, 35, 11066–11070. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.
Turvey, M.T. Lectures on Perception: An Ecological Perspective; Routledge: London, UK, 2018.
36.
Rosen, R. Essays of Life Itself; Columbia University Press: New York, NY, USA, 2000.
37.
Goldbeter, A. Biochemical Oscillations and Cellular Rhythms: The Molecular Bases of Periodic and Chaotic Behaviour;
Cambridge University Press: New York, NY, USA, 1996.
38.
Demirel, Y. Energy coupling. In Information and Living Systems in Philosophical and Scientiﬁc Perspectives;
Terzis, G., Arp, R., Eds.; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2011; pp. 25–53.
39.
Kugler, P.N.; Kelso, J.A.S.; Turvey, M.T. On the concept of coordinative structures as dissipative structures:
I. theoretical lines of convergence. In Tutorials in Motor Behavior; Stelmach, G.E., Requin, J., Eds.; Elsevier:
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1980.
40.
Kugler, P.; Turvey, M.T. Information, Natural Law, and the Self-Assembly of Rhythmic Movement; Routledge:
London, UK, 1987.

Entropy 2020, 22, 1305
19 of 19
41.
De Bari, B.; Kondepudi, D.; Kay, B.A.; Dixon, J.A. Collective dissipative structures, force ﬂow reciprocity, and
the foundations of perception-action mutuality. Ecol. Psychol. 2020. [CrossRef]
42.
Grzybowski, B.A.; Fitzner, K.; Paczesny, J.; Granick, S. From dynamic self-assembly to networked chemical
systems. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2017, 46, 5647–5678. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43.
Fialkowski, M.; Bishop, K.J.M.; Klajn, R.; Smoukov, S.K.; Campbell, A.C.J.; Grzybowski, B.A. Principles and
Implementations of Dissipative (Dynamic) Self-Assembly. J. Phys. Chem. B 2006, 110, 2482–2496. [CrossRef]
44.
Palacci, J.; Sacanna, S.; Steinberg, A.P.; Pine, D.J.; Chaikin, P.M. Living Crystals of Light-Activated Colloidal
Surfers. Science 2013, 339, 936–940. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.
Solis, K.J.; Martin, J.E. Complex magnetic ﬁelds breathe life into ﬂuids. Soft Matter 2014, 10, 9136–9142.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.
Bachelard, N.; Ropp, C.; Dubois, M.; Zhao, R.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, X. Emergence of an enslaved phononic
bandgap in a non-equilibrium pseudo-crystal. Nat. Mater. 2017, 16, 808–813. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47.
Bejan, A. Constructal-theory network of conducting paths for cooling a heat generating volume. Int. J. Heat
Mass Transf. 1997, 40, 799–816. [CrossRef]
48.
Bejan, A. Advanced Engineering Thermodynamics; John Wiley and Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2016.
49.
Bejan, A.; Zane, J.P. Design in Nature. How the Constructal Law Governs Evolution in Biology, Physics, Technology,
and Social Organization; Doubleday: New York, NY, USA, 2012.
50.
Huxley, J. Evolution: The Modern Synthesis; Allen and Unwin: London, UK, 1942.
51.
Pigliucci, M.; Müller, G.B. Evolution: The Extended Synthesis; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2010.
52.
Endler, J. Natural Selection in the Wild; Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ, USA, 1986.
53.
Collier, J. Entropy in evolution. Biol. Philos. 1986, 1, 5–24. [CrossRef]
54.
Weber, B.; Depew, D.J.; Dyke, C.; Saithe, S.N.; Schneider, E.D.; Ulanowicz, R.E.; Wicken, K.S. Evolution in
thermodynamic perspective: An ecological approach. Biol. Philos. 1989, 4, 373–405. [CrossRef]
55.
Kleidon, A. Non-equilibrium thermodynamics, maximum entropy production and Earth-system evolution.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 2010, 368, 181–196. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56.
Martyushev, L.M. Life and evolution in terms of maximum entropy production principle. Preprints 2020.
[CrossRef]
57.
Jennings, R.C.; Belgio, E.; Zucchelli, G. Does maximal entropy production play a role in the evolution of
biological complexity? A biological point of view. Rend. Fis. Acc. Lincei 2020. [CrossRef]
58.
Swift, J.; Hohenberg, P.C. Hydrodynamic ﬂuctuations at the convective instability. Phys. Rev. A 1977, 15,
319–328. [CrossRef]
59.
Kapral, R.; Showalter, K. (Eds.) Chemical Waves and Patterns; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1994.
60.
Demirel, Y.; Gerbaud, V. Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics: Transport and Rate Processes in Physical, Chemical and
Biological Systems, 4th ed.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2019.
61.
Gottleib, G. Environmental and behavioral inﬂuences on gene activity. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 2000.
[CrossRef]
62.
Kumar, S.; Singh, A.K.; Mohapatra, T. Epigenetics: History, present status and future perspective. Indian J.
Genet. Plant Breed. 2017, 77, 445–463. [CrossRef]
63.
Partridge, L.; Barrie, B.; Fowler, K.; French, V. Evolution and development of body size and cell size in
Drosophila Melanogaster in response to temperature. Evolution 1994, 48, 1269–1276. [CrossRef]
64.
Dawkins, R. The Blind Watchmaker; Norton and Company, Inc.: London, UK, 1989.
65.
Dinner, A.R.; Blackburn, G.M.; Karplus, M. Urical-DNA glycosylase acts by substrate autocatalysis. Nature
2001, 413, 752–755. [CrossRef]
66.
Donachie,W.D.Co-ordinateregulationoftheEscherichiacolicellcycleorThecloudofunknowing.Mol.Microbiol.
2001, 40, 779–785. [CrossRef]
67.
Angert, E.R. Alternatives to binary ﬁssion in bacteria. Nat. Rev. Genet. 2005, 3, 214–224. [CrossRef]
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
aﬃliations.
© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

