

Epistemology
This comprehensive introduction explains the concepts and theories central 
to understanding knowledge. The third edition features new sections on such 
topics as the nature of intuition, the skeptical challenge of rational disagree-
ment, and “the value problem”—the question why knowledge is preferable to 
mere true belief.  Special features of the third edition of Epistemology include:
•	
enhanced treatment of key topics such as perception, scientific 
hypotheses, self-evidence and the a priori, testimony, contextualism, 
understanding, and virtue epistemology
•	
expanded discussion of the relation between epistemology and related 
fields, especially philosophy of mind, philosophy of science, and ethics 
•	
greater clarity for undergraduate readers.
Praise for the third edition:
“. . . Robert Audi’s Epistemology, Third Edition, is the most authorita-
tive, comprehensive, and state-of-the-art textbook in the field. In clear, 
masterful prose, Audi covers all the main topics in epistemology .  . . 
Every student of epistemology—new and old—should read this book.”
—Peter Graham, University of California, Riverside
“. . . unusually comprehensive, elegantly structured, and accessible . . . 
a cutting-edge treatment of the latest debates about the nature of intu-
itions, the significance of rational disagreement, and the value of knowl-
edge and justified true belief.”
—Ralph Kennedy, Wake Forest University
“. . . a well-motivated, comprehensive, accessible introduction for stu-
dents as well as an original, exciting, cutting-edge work of epistemology 
in its own right.  Novices and experts alike will continually profit—and 
tremendously so—from studying it . . . an ideal text for undergraduate 
courses in epistemology, and even graduate-level surveys.”
—E.J. Coffman, University of Tennessee

Praise for the second edition:
“. . . philosophically insightful and masterfully written—even more so in 
its new edition.  Guaranteed to fascinate the beginner while retaining its 
exalted status with the experts.”
—Claudio de Almeida, PUCRS, Brazil
“My students like this book and have learned much from it, as I have 
. . . Epistemology . . . is simply the best textbook in epistemology that I 
know of.”
—Thomas Vinci, Dalhousie University
Praise for the first edition:
“No less than one would expect from a first-rate epistemologist who is 
also a master expositor . . . A superb introduction.”
—Ernest Sosa, Rutgers University
“This is a massively impressive book, introducing . . . virtually all the 
main areas of epistemology. .  .  . lucid and highly readable, while not 
shirking the considerable complexities of his subject matter.”
—Elizabeth .M. Fricker, University of Oxford
“A state-of-the-art introduction to epistemology by one of the leading 
figures in the field.”
—William P. Alston, Syracuse University
Robert Audi is John A. O’Brien Professor of Philosophy at the University of 
Notre Dame and author of many papers and books on knowledge and belief, 
justification, and rationality.

Epistemology
A Contemporary Introduction to the 
Theory of Knowledge
Third Edition
Robert Audi


Routledge Contemporary Introductions to Philosophy
Series editor: Paul K Moser, Loyola University of Chicago
This innovative, well-structured series is for students who have already done 
an introductory course in philosophy. Each book introduces a core general 
subject in contemporary philosophy and offers students an accessible but 
substantial transition from introductory to higher-level college work in that 
subject. The series is accessible to non-specialists and each book clearly moti-
vates and expounds the problems and positions introduced. An orientating 
chapter briefly introduces its topic and reminds readers of any crucial material 
they need to have retained from a typical introductory course. Considerable 
attention is given to explaining the central philosophical problems of a sub-
ject and the main competing solutions and arguments for those solutions. 
The primary aim is to educate students in the main problems, positions, and 
arguments of contemporary philosophy rather than to convince students of 
a single position.
Epistemology
Third edition
Robert Audi
Philosophy of Mind
Third edition
John Heil
Philosophy of Perception
William Fish
Metaphysics
Third edition
Michael J. Loux
Philosophy of Mathematics
Second edition
James Robert Brown
Classical Philosophy
Christopher Shields
Classical Modern 
Philosophy
Jeffrey Tlumak
Ethics
Harry Gensler
Philosophy of Science
Second edition
Alex Rosenberg
Philosophy of Biology
Alex Rosenberg and Daniel W. McShea
Philosophy of Language
Second edition
Willam G. Lycan
Philosophy of Religion
Keith E. Yandell
Philosophy of Art
Noël Carroll
Philosophy of Psychology
José Bermudez
Social and Political 
Philosophy
John Christman
Continental Philosophy
Andrew Cutrofello
Free Will (forthcoming)
Michael McKenna
Ethics (forthcoming)
Second edition
Harry Gensler
Feminist Philosophy 
(forthcoming)
Lorraine Code
Philosophy of Literature 
(forthcoming)
John Gibson

First edition published 1998, second edition published 2003
by Routledge
This edition first published 2011
by Routledge
270 Madison Ave, New York, NY 10016
Simultaneously published in the UK
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
First edition © 1998 Taylor & Francis
Second edition © 2003 Taylor & Francis
Third edition © 2011 Taylor & Francis
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or 
reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, 
or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including 
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval 
system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be 
trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for 
identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Audi, Robert
Epistemology : a contemporary introduction to the theory of 
knowledge / Robert Audi. — 3rd ed.
p. cm. — (Routledge contemporary introductions to philosophy)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
[etc.]
1. Knowledge, Theory of. I. Title.
BD161.A783 2010
121—dc22
2010005139
ISBN 13: 978-0-415-87922-4 (hbk)
ISBN 13: 978-0-415-87923-1 (pbk)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2010.
To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.

To Malou


Contents
Preface to the first edition
xiii
Acknowledgments to the first edition
xvi
Preface to the second edition
xviii
Acknowledgments to the second edition
xx
Preface to the third edition
xxi
Acknowledgments to the third edition
xxii
	Introduction: a sketch of the sources and nature of belief, 
justification, and knowledge
1
Perception, belief, and justification
1
Justification as process, as status, and as property
2
Knowledge and justification
4
Memory, introspection, and self-consciousness
5
Reason and rational reflection
5
Testimony
6
Basic sources of belief, justification, and knowledge
6
Three kinds of grounds of belief
7
Fallibility and skepticism
8
Overview
9
Part One
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
13
	 1	
Perception: sensing, believing, and knowing
16
The elements and basic kinds of perception
17
Seeing and believing
22
Perceptual justification and perceptual knowledge
26
Notes
31

x  Contents
	 2	
Theories of perception: sense experience,  
appearances, and reality
38
Some commonsense views of perception
38
The theory of appearing
40
Sense-datum theories of perception
41
Adverbial theories of perception
47
Adverbial and sense-datum theories of sensory experience
49
Phenomenalism
51
Perception and the senses
55
Notes
59
	 3	
Memory: the preservation and reconstruction of  
the past
62
Memory and the past
63
The causal basis of memory beliefs
64
Theories of memory
66
Remembering, recalling, and imaging
72
Remembering, imaging, and recognition
74
The epistemological centrality of memory
75
Notes
79
	 4	
Consciousness: the life of the mind
84
Two basic kinds of mental properties
84
Introspection and inward vision
86
Some theories of introspective consciousness
87
Consciousness and privileged access
91
Introspective consciousness as a source of justification and knowledge
96
Notes
100
	 5	
Reason I: understanding, insight, and intellectual  
power
104
Self-evident truths of reason
104
The classical view of the truths of reason
107
The empiricist view of the truths of reason
116
Notes
121
	 6	
Reason II: meaning, necessity, and provability
130
The conventionalist view of the truths of reason
130
Some difficulties and strengths of the classical view
133
Reason, experience, and a priori justification
138
Notes
145
	 7	
Testimony: the social foundation of knowledge
150
The nature of testimony: formal and informal
150
The psychology of testimony
151

Contents  xi
The epistemology of testimony
155
The indispensability of testimonial grounds
161
Notes
167
Part Two
The structure and growth of justification and  
knowledge
173
	 8	
Inference and the extension of knowledge
176
The process, content, and structure of inference
177
Inference and the growth of knowledge
182
Source conditions and transmission conditions for inferential knowledge  
and justification
185
Memorial preservation of inferential justification and inferential  
knowledge
197
Notes
199
	 9	
The architecture of knowledge
206
Inferential chains and the structure of belief
206
The epistemic regress problem
210
The epistemic regress argument
215
Foundationalism and coherentism
216
Holistic coherentism
217
The nature of coherence
221
Coherence and second-order justification
229
Moderate foundationalism
232
Notes
236
Part Three
The nature and scope of justification and knowledge 243
	10	
The analysis of knowledge: justification, certainty,  
and reliability
246
Knowledge and justified true belief
246
Knowledge conceived as the right kind of justified true belief
248
Naturalistic accounts of the concept of knowledge
253
Problems for reliability theories
257
Notes
264
	11	
Knowledge, justification, and truth: internalism, 
externalism, and intellectual virtue
270
Knowledge and justification
270
Internalism and externalism in epistemology
272
Internalist and externalist versions of virtue epistemology
277

xii  Contents
Justification, knowledge, and truth
281
The value problem
282
Theories of truth
286
Concluding proposals
290
Notes
292
	12	
Scientific, moral, and religious knowledge
298
Scientific knowledge
298
Moral knowledge
308
Religious knowledge
319
Notes
328
	13	
Skepticism I: the quest for certainty
334
The possibility of pervasive error
334
Skepticism generalized
337
The egocentric predicament
343
Fallibility
344
Uncertainty
347
Notes
353
	14	
Skepticism II: the defense of common sense in the  
face of fallibility
358
Negative versus positive defenses of common sense
358
Deducibility, evidential transmission, and induction
359
The authority of knowledge and the cogency of its grounds
362
Refutation and rebuttal
365
Prospects for a positive defense of common sense
366
The challenge of rational disagreement
371
Skepticism and common sense
374
Notes
375
15	
Conclusion
379
Short annotated bibliography of books in epistemology
389
Index
399

Preface to the first edition
This book is a wide-ranging introduction to epistemology, conceived as the 
theory of knowledge and justification. It presupposes no special background 
in philosophy and is meant to be fully understandable to any generally edu-
cated, careful reader, but for students it is most appropriately studied after 
completing at least one more general course in philosophy.
The main focus is the body of concepts, theories, and problems central 
in understanding knowledge and justification. Historically, justification—
sometimes under such names as ‘reason to believe’, ‘evidence’, and ‘war-
rant’—has been as important in epistemology as knowledge itself. This is 
surely so at present. In many parts of the book, justification and knowledge 
are discussed separately; but they are also interconnected at many points. 
The book is not historically organized, but it does discuss selected major 
positions in the history of philosophy, particularly some of those that have 
greatly influenced human thought. Moreover, even where major philosophers 
are not mentioned, I try to take their views into account. One of my primary 
aims is to facilitate the reading of those philosophers, especially their epis-
temological writings. It would take a very long book to discuss representa-
tive contemporary epistemologists or, in any detail, even a few historically 
important epistemologies, but a shorter one can provide many of the tools 
needed to understand them. Providing such tools is one of my main purposes.
The use of this book in the study of philosophy is not limited to courses 
or investigations in epistemology. Epistemological problems and theories are 
often interconnected with problems and theories in the philosophy of mind; 
nor are these two fields of philosophy easily separated (a point that may hold, 
if to a lesser extent, for any two central philosophical fields). There is, then, 
much discussion of the topics in the philosophy of mind that are crucial for 
epistemology, for instance the phenomenology of perception, the nature of 
belief, the role of imagery in memory and introspection, the variety of mental 
properties figuring in self-knowledge, the nature of inference, and the struc-
ture of a person’s system of beliefs.
Parts of the book might serve as collateral reading not only in pursuing 
the philosophy of mind but also in the study of a number of philosophers 
often discussed in philosophy courses, especially Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas, 

xiv  Preface to the first edition
Descartes, Leibniz, Locke, Berkeley, Hume, Kant, and Mill. The book might 
facilitate the study of moral philosophy, such as Kantian and utilitarian 
ethics, both discussed in some detail in Chapter 9; and it bears directly on 
topics in the epistemology of religion, some of which are also discussed in 
Chapter 9.
The writing is intended to be as simple and concrete as possible for a 
philosophically serious introduction that does not seek simplicity at the cost 
of falsehood. The territory surveyed, however, is extensive and rich. This 
means that the book cannot be traversed quickly without missing landmarks 
or failing to get a view of the larger segments and their place in the whole. 
Any one chapter can perhaps be read at a sitting, but experience has shown 
that even the shortest chapter covers too many concepts and positions for 
most readers to assimilate in a single reading and far more than most instruc-
tors can cover in any detail in a single session.
To aid concentration on the main points, and to keep the book from 
becoming more complicated, notes are limited, though parenthetical refer-
ences are given in some places and there is also a short selected bibliography 
with thumbnail annotations. By and large, the notes are not needed for full 
comprehension and are intended mainly for professional philosophers and 
serious students. There are also some subsections that most readers can 
probably scan, or even skip, without significant loss in comprehending the 
main points of the relevant chapter. Technical terms are explained briefly 
when introduced and are avoided when they can be. Most of the major terms 
central in epistemology are defined or explicated, and boldfaced numbers in 
the index indicate main definitional passages. But some are indispensable: 
they are not mere words, but tools; and some of these terms express concepts 
valuable outside epistemology and even outside philosophy. The index, by its 
boldfaced page references to definitions, obviates a glossary.
It should also be stressed that this book is mainly concerned to intro-
duce the field of epistemology rather than the literature of epistemology—an 
important but less basic task. It will, however, help non-professional readers 
prepare for a critical study of that literature, contemporary as well as classi-
cal. For that reason, too, some special vocabulary is introduced and a number 
of the notes refer to contemporary works.
The sequence of topics is designed to introduce the field in a natural pro-
gression: from the genesis of justification and knowledge (Part One), to their 
development and structure (Part Two), and thence to questions about what 
they are and how far they extend (Part Three). Even apart from its place in 
this ordering, each chapter addresses a major epistemological topic, and any 
subset of the chapters can be studied in any order provided some appropriate 
effort is made to supply the (generally few) essential points for which a later 
chapter depends on an earlier one.
For the most part this book does epistemology rather than talk about it 
or, especially, about its literature. In keeping with that focus, the ordering 
of chapters is intended to encourage understanding epistemology before 

Preface to the first edition  xv
discussing it in large-scale terms, for instance before considering what sort 
of epistemological theory, say normativist or naturalistic, best accounts for 
knowledge. My strategy is, in part, to discuss myriad cases of justification 
and knowledge before approaching analyses of what they are, or the skeptical 
case against our having them.
In one way, this approach differs markedly from that of many epistemo-
logical books. I leave the assessment of skepticism for the last chapter; early 
passages indicate that skeptical problems must be faced and, in some cases, 
how they are connected with the subject at hand or are otherwise important. 
Unlike some philosophers, I do not think extensive discussion of skepticism 
is the best way to motivate the study of epistemology. Granted, historically 
skepticism has been a major motivating force; but it is not the only one, and 
epistemological concepts hold independent interest. Moreover, in assessing 
skepticism I use many concepts and points developed in earlier chapters; to 
treat it early in the book, I would have to delay assessing it.
There is also a certain risk in posing skeptical problems at or near the 
outset: non-professional readers may tend to be distracted, even in discuss-
ing conceptual questions concerning, say, what knowledge is, by a desire to 
deal with skeptical arguments purporting to show that there is none. There 
may be no best or wholly neutral way to treat skepticism, but I believe my 
approach to it can be adapted to varying degrees of skeptical inclination. An 
instructor who prefers to begin with skepticism can do so by taking care 
to explain some of the ideas introduced earlier in the book. The first few 
sections of Chapter 10 (Chapter 13 in the third edition), largely meant to 
introduce and motivate skepticism, presuppose far less of the earlier chapters 
than the later, evaluative discussion; and most of the chapter is understand-
able on the basis of Part One, which is probably easier reading than Part Two.
My exposition of problems and positions is meant to be as nearly unbiased 
as I can make it, and where controversial interpretations are unavoidable I try 
to present them tentatively. In many places, however, I offer my own view. 
Given the scope of the book, I cannot provide a highly detailed explanation 
of each major position discussed, or argue at length for my own views. I 
make no pretense of treating anything conclusively. But in some cases—as 
with skepticism—I do not want to leave the reader wondering where I stand, 
or perhaps doubting that there is any solution to the problem at hand. I thus 
propose some tentative positions for critical discussion.

Acknowledgments to the first edition
This book has profited from my reading of many articles and books by con-
temporary philosophers, and from many discussions I have had with them 
and, of course, with my students. I cannot mention all of these philosophers, 
and I am sure that my debt to those I will name—as well as to some I do not, 
such as some whose journal papers I have read but have not picked up again, 
and some I have heard at conferences—is incalculable. Over many years, I 
have benefited greatly from discussions with William Alston, as well as from 
reading his works; and I thank him for detailed critical comments on parts of 
the manuscript. Reading of books or articles (or both) by Roderick Chisholm, 
Richard Foley, Paul Moser, Alvin Plantinga, Walter Sinnott-Armstrong, and 
Ernest Sosa, and a number of discussions with them, have also substantially 
helped me over many years. My colleagues at the University of Nebraska, 
especially Albert Casullo, and several of my students have also helped me 
at many points. I have learned greatly from the participants in the National 
Endowment for the Humanities seminars and institutes I have directed. I 
also benefited much from the papers given to the seminars or institutes by 
(among others) Laurence BonJour, Fred Dretske, Alvin Goldman, Gilbert 
Harman, Keith Lehrer, Ruth Marcus, and John Perry, with all of whom I 
have been fruitfully discussing epistemological topics on one occasion or 
another for many years.
In relation to some of the main problems treated in the book, I have 
learned immensely from many other philosophers, including Frederick 
Adams, Robert Almeder, David Armstrong, John A. Barker, Richard Brandt, 
Panayot Butchvarov, Carol Caraway, the late Hector-Neri Castañeda, Wayne 
Davis, Michael DePaul, Susan Feagin, Richard Feldman, Roderick Firth, 
Richard Fumerton, Carl Ginet, Alan Goldman, Risto Hilpinen, Jaegwon 
Kim, John King-Farlow, Peter Klein, Hilary Kornblith, Christopher Kulp, 
Jonathan Kvanvig, Brian McLaughlin, George S. Pappas, John Pollock, 
Lawrence Powers, W.V. Quine, William Rowe, Bruce Russell, Frederick 
Schmitt, Thomas Senor, Robert Shope, Donna Summerfield, Marshall Swain, 
William Throop, Raimo Tuomela, James Van Cleve, Thomas Vinci, Jonathan 
Vogel, and Nicholas Wolterstorff. In most cases I have not only read some 

Acknowledgments to the first edition  xvii
epistemological work of theirs, but discussed one or another epistemological 
problem with them in detail.
Other philosophers whose comments or works have helped me with some 
part of the book include Anthony Brueckner, Stewart Cohen, Earl Conee, 
Dan Crawford, Jonathan Dancy, Timothy Day, Robert Fogelin, Elizabeth 
Fricker, Bernard Gert, Heather Gert, David Henderson, Terence Horgan, 
Dale Jacquette, Eric Kraemer, Noah Lemos, Kevin Possin, Dana Radcliffe, 
Nicholas Rescher, Stefan Sencerz, James Taylor, Paul Tidman, Mark 
Timmons, William Tolhurst, Mark Webb, Douglas Weber, Ümit Yalçin, and 
Patrick Yarnell.
I owe special thanks to the philosophers who generously commented in 
detail on all or most of some version of the manuscript: John Greco, Louis 
Pojman, and Matthias Steup. Their numerous remarks led to many improve-
ments. Detailed helpful comments were also provided by readers for the 
Press, including Nicholas Everett, Frank Jackson, and Noah Lemos. All of 
the philosophers who commented on an earlier draft not only helped me 
eliminate errors, but also gave me constructive suggestions and critical 
remarks that evoked both clarification and other improvements. I am also 
grateful for permission to reuse much material that appears here in revised 
form from my Belief, Justification, and Knowledge (Wadsworth Publishing 
Co., 1988) and I thank the editor of American Philosophical Quarterly for 
allowing me to use material from ‘The Place of Testimony in the Fabric of 
Knowledge and Justification’ (vol. 34, 1997). For advice and help at several 
stages I thank Paul Moser, Editor of the series in which this book appears, 
and Adrian Driscoll and the staff at Routledge in London, including Moira 
Taylor and Sarah Hall, and Dennis Hodgson.
Robert Audi
February, 1997

Preface to the second edition
This preface will presuppose the Preface to the first edition and can therefore 
be brief. Many improvements have been made in this edition, but they do not 
make the previous preface inapplicable, and reading it should help anyone 
considering a study of even part of the book.
My main concern in revising has been to produce a book that is both 
philosophically stronger and easier to read. Doing this has required adding 
new substantive material, making minor changes throughout, adding or 
extending many examples, making various refinements and corrections, and 
bringing in new references, notes, and bibliography.
Instructors who have used the volume in their teaching will find that 
the content and organization are highly similar and that a transition from 
the first edition to this one is easy. Students and people reading for general 
interest should find the book easier to understand. The emphasis is still on 
enhancing comprehension of the field of epistemology—its concepts, prob-
lems, and methods—rather than on presenting its literature. But, perhaps 
even more than in the first edition, the book is generally in close contact 
with both classical and contemporary literature. In this edition there are 
also many more references to pertinent books and papers, particularly those 
published in recent years.
This edition includes more extensive discussion of virtue epistemology and 
social epistemology, with feminist epistemology figuring significantly (though 
not exclusively) in relation to social epistemology. The connection of episte-
mology with philosophy of mind and language also receives more emphasis 
in this edition. So does contextualism and the related theory of “relevant 
alternatives.”
I am happy to say that Routledge has published a fine and wide-ranging 
new collection of readings to accompany this book: Michael Huemer’s 
Epistemology: Contemporary Readings (2002). Huemer has chosen clas-
sical and contemporary book sections and papers that go well with every 
chapter in the present book; his larger sections match mine; and he offers 
helpful introductions to each section and study questions on each chapter. 

Preface to the second edition  xix
This edition of my book is certainly self-contained, but its integration with 
Huemer’s supporting collection (for which I have done a long narrative intro-
duction to help both instructors and students) is close, and the two together 
provide enough substance and diversity to facilitate numerous different 
kinds of epistemology courses.

Acknowledgments to the second 
edition
Fortunately, I have continued to benefit from reading of or discussions 
with most of the people acknowledged above, in the first edition. But since 
that writing I have come to know the work of many other writers in the 
field and profited from teaching many more students. I am bound to omit 
some people I should thank, but I want to acknowledge here a number of 
people not mentioned above: John Broome, Tyler Burge, David Chalmers, 
Roger Crisp, Mario DeCaro, Keith DeRose, Rosaria Egidi, Guido Frongia, 
Douglas Geivett, Joshua Gert, Peter Graham, D.W. Hamlyn, Brad Hooker, 
Christopher Hookway, Michael Huemer, Jonathan Jacobs, Ralph Kennedy, 
Simo Knuutila, Matthias Lutz-Bachmann, Hugh McCann, John McDowell, 
Tito Megri, Cyrille Michon, Nicholas Nathan, Ilkka Niiniluoto, Tom O’ Neil, 
Derek Parfit, James Pryor, Jlenia Quartarone, Joseph Raz, John Searle, John 
Skorupski, David Sosa, William Talbot, Wilhelm Vossenkuhl, Fritz Warfield 
and Paul Weirich. In addition, I have continued to benefit from regular 
exchanges of ideas or papers (usually both) with many philosophers, including 
William Alston, Laurence BonJour, Panayot Butchvarov, Elizabeth Fricker, 
Alvin Goldman, John Greco, Gilbert Harman, Jaegwon Kim, Christopher 
Kulp, Jonathan Kvanvig, Bruce Russell, Walter Sinnott-Armstrong, Ernest 
Sosa, Matthias Steup, Eleonore Stump, Richard Swinburne, Raimo Tuomela, 
Nicholas Wolterstorff, and Linda Zagzebski.
Readers of earlier versions of this edition deserve special thanks, not only 
the anonymous readers for the Press but also Michael Pace, Bruce Russell, 
Mark Owen Webb, and especially Claudio de Almeida, who provided numer-
ous expert comments and criticism (more, indeed, than I could fully take 
into account in the available time and space). Special thanks are also due the 
Editors at Routledge, particularly Tony Bruce, Simon Bailey, and Siobhan 
Pattinson, whose ideas and support have been immensely helpful.

Preface to the third edition
This edition reflects some of the benefits of nearly a decade of teaching and 
writing about epistemology since the second edition went to press. There are 
revisions and improvements throughout. Some revisions are responsive to 
new developments in epistemological literature; others respond to comments 
by professional colleagues, including various instructors who have used the 
book. Student responses have also been taken into account.
The book is structurally much as in the second edition, and the previ-
ous prefaces largely apply to it. As before, instructors should read prefatory 
material and the introduction. Long chapters have been divided, but the 
chapters remain cumulative in content. Most of them, however, can be read 
independently of the others or by simply looking into some earlier chapter 
at certain points. The index may also help readers, and its boldface numerals 
indicate places where the term in question is defined.
Those who have used the second edition will find no difficulty adjusting 
their teaching or discussions to this one. Chapters that have been divided 
still cover the same issues, though with new material included and revisions 
of much that is included. The fit with Michael Huemer’s large collection of 
major papers (cited in the bibliography) is equally good. 
 Some topics treated in this edition are not addressed in the second. 
These include the nature of intuitions, the skeptical challenge of rational 
disagreement, and the value problem: the range of questions concerning why 
knowledge and justified true belief have value beyond that of merely true 
belief. Other topics receive considerably more exploration than in the second 
edition, especially contextualism, perception (including perceptual content), 
self-evidence and the a priori, memorial justification, inferential versus direct 
knowledge, inference to the best explanation, scientific hypotheses, testi-
mony and trust, understanding, and virtue epistemology.

Acknowledgments to the third edition
I have been fortunate in being able to exchange ideas with most of the phi-
losophers named in the previous two sets of acknowledgments, and this 
book has continued to benefit from those discussions. I look back on them 
with much gratitude. I should particularly mention continuing conversations 
with the late William P. Alston and with Laurence BonJour, Mario DeCaro, 
Elizabeth Fricker, Peter Graham, John Greco, Ralph Kennedy, Peter Klein, 
Christopher Kulp, Jonathan Kvanvig, Jennifer Lackey, Bruce Russell, Walter 
Sinnott-Armstrong, Ernest Sosa, and Thomas Vinci.
On one or another topic in the book I have greatly benefited from epis-
temological discussions with my Notre Dame colleagues Marian David, 
Michael DePaul, Peter van Inwagen, Alvin Plantinga, Leopold Stubenberg, 
and Fritz Warfield. Interactions with Andrew Bailey, Michael Bergmann, E.J. 
Coffman, Roger Crisp, Claudio De Almeida, Keith DeRose, Fred Dretske, 
Richard Feldman, Richard Fumerton, Alvin Goldman, Christopher Green, 
Stephen Grimm, Michael Huemer, Thomas Kelly, Matthew Kennedy, Hilary 
Kornblith, Markus Lamenranta, Duncan Pritchard, Baron Reed, David 
Sosa, Jeff Speaks, Matthias Steup, Raimo Tuomela, Jonathan Vogel, Michael 
Zimmerman, and, especially, Sanford Goldberg and Timothy Williamson 
have also been of great help to me.
Detailed comments on the penultimate version were provided by Scott 
Hagaman and (on a few parts) by Matthew Lee and Ezra Cook, and these 
were of great help. Hagaman also made numerous helpful comments and 
critical remarks in seminar discussions at Notre Dame. The numerous ques-
tions and responses by seminar students at the Universities of Notre Dame 
and Nebraska have been valuable at many points.
The editorial advice of Andrew Beck, Andrew R. Davidson, Michael 
Andrews, and, since the book’s first edition, Tony Bruce have helped me in 
several important matters. They and their staff have been essential in both 
design and production.

	
Introduction
A sketch of the sources and nature of belief, 
justification, and knowledge
Before me is a grassy green field. A line of trees marks its far edge, which 
is punctuated by a spruce on its left side and a maple on its right. Birds are 
singing. A warm breeze brings the smell of roses from a nearby trellis. I reach 
for a glass of iced tea, still cold to the touch and flavored by fresh mint. I am 
alert, the air is clear, the scene is quiet. My perceptions are quite distinct.
It is altogether natural to think that from perceptions like these, we come 
to know a great deal—enough to guide us through much of daily life. But 
we sometimes make mistakes about what we perceive, just as we sometimes 
misremember what we have done, or infer false conclusions from what we 
believe. We may then think we know something when in fact we do not, as 
when we make errors through inattention or are deceived by vivid dreams. 
And is it not possible that we are mistaken more often than we think?
Perception, belief, and justification
Philosophers have thought a great deal about these matters, especially about 
the nature of perceiving and about what we can know—or may mistakenly 
think we know—through perception or through other sources of knowledge, 
such as memory as a storehouse of what we have learned in the past, con-
sciousness as revealing our inner lives, reflection as a way to acquire knowl-
edge of abstract matters, and testimony as providing knowledge originally 
acquired by others. In approaching these topics in epistemology—the theory 
of knowledge and justification—it is appropriate to begin with perception. 
In my opening description, what I detailed was what I perceived: what I saw, 
heard, smelled, felt, and tasted. In describing my experience, I also expressed 
some of what I believed: that there was a green field before me, that there 
were bird songs, that there was a smell of roses, that my glass felt cold, and 
that the tea tasted of mint.
It seems altogether natural to believe these things given my experience, 
and I think I justifiedly believed them. I believed them, not in the way I would 
if I accepted the result of wishful thinking or of merely guessing, but with 
justification. By that I mean above all that the beliefs I refer to were justified. 

2  Introduction
This a good thing; justified beliefs are of a kind it is desirable and reasonable 
to hold.
Justification as process, as status, and as property
Being justified, in the sense illustrated by my beliefs about what is clearly 
before me, need not be the result of a process. Being justified is not, for 
instance, like being purified, which requires a process of purification. My 
beliefs about what is before me are not justified because they have been 
through a process of being justified, as when we defend a controversial belief by 
giving reasons for it. They have not; the question whether they are justified 
has not even come up. No one has challenged them or even asked why I hold 
them. They are justified—in the sense that they have the property of being 
justified—justifiedness—because there is something about them in virtue of 
which they are natural and appropriate for me as a normal rational person.
We can see what justifiedness is by starting with a contrast. Unlike believ-
ing something that one might arrive at through a wild guess in charades, our 
justified perceptual beliefs are justified for us simply through their arising 
in the normal way from our clear perceptions. Roughly, they are justified in 
the sense that they are quite in order from the point of view of the standards 
for what we may reasonably believe. That, in turn, is roughly what we may 
believe without being subject to certain kinds of criticism, say as intellectu-
ally lax, as sloppy, as overhasty, or the like. Justified beliefs are also a kind 
that we tend to expect to be true. Imagine someone’s saying ‘His belief is 
justified, but I don’t expect it to turn out to be true’. Without special explana-
tion, this would be to take away with one hand something given by the other.
In saying that I justifiedly believe there is a green field before me, I am 
implying something else, something quite different, though it sounds very 
similar, namely that I am justified in believing there is a green field before 
me. To see the difference, notice that we can be justified in believing some-
thing—roughly in the sense that we have a justification for believing it—
without believing it at all, quite as we can be justified in doing something, 
such as criticizing a person who has failed us, without doing it. Similarly, I 
might be justified in believing that I can do a certain difficult task, yet fail to 
believe this until someone helps me overcome my hesitation. I may then see 
that I should have believed it.
Being justified in believing something is having justification for believing 
it. This, in turn, is roughly a matter of having ground for believing it (and we 
also speak of having a ground or a justification or a reason). Just as we can 
have reason to do things we do not do, we can have reason to believe things 
we do not believe. You can have reason to go to the library and forget to, and 
I can have reason to believe someone is making excuses for me but—because 
I have no inkling that I need any—fail to believe this. Our justification for 
believing is basic raw material for actual justified belief; and justified belief is 
commonly good raw material for knowledge.

Introduction  3
The two justificational notions are intimately related: if one justifiedly 
believes something, one is also justified in believing it, hence has justifica-
tion for believing it. But the converse does not hold: not everything we are 
justified in believing is something we do believe. When I look at a lawn, I am 
justified in believing it has more than ten blades of grass per square foot, but 
I would not normally have any belief about the number of blades per square 
foot. We have more justificational raw material than we need or use. We do 
not believe anywhere near the number of things that we have justification 
to believe. This holds not just in trivial matters but also in, for instance, 
mathematics.
There are many things we are justified in believing which we do not actu-
ally believe, such as the proposition that normal people do not drink 100 
liters of water a day. Let us call the first kind of justification—justifiedly 
believing—belief justification, as it belongs to actual beliefs. It is also called 
doxastic justification, from the Greek doxa, translatable as ‘belief’. Call the 
second kind—being justified in believing—situational justification, since it is 
based on the informational situation one is in. It is a status one has in virtue 
of that situation. This situation includes not just what one perceives, but 
also one’s background beliefs and knowledge, such as the belief that people 
drink at most a few liters of water a day. Situational justification is also called 
propositional justification, since the proposition in question is justified for the 
person whose situation provides justification for believing it, and the person 
has justification for it.
In any ordinary situation in waking life, we have both a lot of general 
information stored in memory and much specific information presented in 
our perceptions. We do not need all this information, and our situational 
justification for believing something is often unaccompanied by our actually 
believing that it is so. We have situational justification for vastly more justi-
fied beliefs than we actually have. Here nature is very generous. We are built 
to gain from a mere glance enough information to ground vastly more beliefs 
than we normally form or rely on.
Without situational justification, such as the kind that comes from seeing 
a green field, there would be no belief justification. I would not, for instance, 
justifiedly believe that there is a green field before me. We cannot have a 
justified belief without being in a position to have it. Without situational jus-
tification, we are not in such a position. Without belief justification, on the 
other hand (i.e., doxastic justification), we would have no beliefs of a kind 
we want and need, those with a positive status—being justified—that makes 
them appropriate for us as rational creatures and warrants us in expecting 
them to be true. Belief justification, then, is more than the situational kind 
it presupposes.
Belief justification occurs when there is a certain kind of connection 
between what yields situational justification and the justified belief that ben-
efits from it. Belief justification occurs when a belief is grounded in, and thus 
in a way supported by (or based on), something that gives one situational 

4  Introduction
justification for that belief, such as seeing a field of green. Seeing is of course 
perceiving; and perceiving is a basic source of knowledge—perhaps our most 
elemental source, at least in childhood. This is largely why perception is so 
large a topic in epistemology.
Knowledge and justification
Knowledge would not be possible without belief justification—or a kind of 
grounding significantly like it. If I did not have the kind of justified belief I 
do—if, for instance, I were wearing dark sunglasses and could not tell the 
difference between a green field and a smoothly ploughed one that is really an 
earthen brown—then on the basis of what I now see I would not know that 
there is a green field before me.
To see how knowledge fits into the picture so far sketched, consider two 
points. First, justified belief is important for knowledge because at least the 
typical things we know we also justifiedly believe on the same basis that 
grounds our knowing them. If I know someone is making excuses for me, say 
by the way she explains my lateness, I do not just believe this but justifiedly 
believe it. Second, much of what we justifiedly believe we also know. Surely 
I could have maintained, regarding each of the things I have said I justifiedly 
believed through perception, that I also knew it. And do I not know these 
things—say that there is a lawn before me and a car on the road beyond 
it—on the same basis on which I justifiedly believe them, for instance on the 
basis of what I see and hear? This is very plausible.
As closely associated as knowledge and justified belief are, there is a major 
difference. If I know that something is so, then it is true, whereas I can jus-
tifiedly believe something false. If a normally reliable friend tricked me into 
believing something false, say that he lost my car keys, I could still justifiedly 
believe he lost them. We must not assume, then, that everything we learn 
about justified belief applies to knowledge. We should look at both concepts 
independently.
I said that I saw the green field and that my belief that there was a green 
field before me arose from my seeing it. If the belief arose, under normal 
conditions, from my seeing the field (so that I believed it is there simply 
because I saw it there), then the belief was true, justified, and constituted 
knowledge. Again, however, we can alter the example to bring out how 
knowledge and justification may diverge: the belief might remain justified 
even if, unbeknownst to me, the grass had been burned up since I last saw it, 
and there was now a perfect artificial replica of it spread out in grassy-looking 
strips of cloth that hide the charred ground. Then, although I might think I 
know the green field is there, I would only falsely believe I know this. Such a 
bizarre happening is, to be sure, improbable. Still, a justified but false belief 
could arise in this way.

Introduction  5
Memory, introspection, and self-consciousness
As I look at the field before me, I remember carefully cutting a poison ivy 
vine from the trunk of the spruce. Surely, my memory belief that I cut off 
this vine is justified. I think I also know that I did this. But here I confess 
to being less confident than I am of the justification of my perceptual belief, 
held in the radiant sunlight, that there is (now) a green field before me.
As our memories become less vivid, we tend to be correspondingly less 
sure that our beliefs apparently based on them are justified. Still, I distinctly 
recall cutting the vine. The stem was furry; it was bonded to the tree trunk; 
the cutting was difficult and slightly wounded the tree. By contrast, I have 
no belief about whether I did this in the summer or the fall. I entertain the 
proposition that it was in the summer; I consider whether it is true; but, being 
utterly uncertain, I suspend judgment on it. I thus neither believe it nor dis-
believe it, that is, believe it is false. My stance is one of non-belief. I need not 
try to force myself to resolve the question and judge the proposition either 
way. I might need to resolve it if something important turned on when I did 
the pruning; but here suspended judgment, with the resulting non-belief, is 
not uncomfortable.
As I think about cutting the vine, it occurs to me that in recalling that 
task, I am vividly imaging it. Here, I seem to be looking into my own con-
sciousness, thus engaging in a kind of introspection. I can still see, in my 
mind’s eye, the furry vine clinging to the tree, the ax, the sappy wound along 
the trunk where the vine was severed from it. I have turned my attention 
inward to my own imagery. The object of my attention, my own imaging 
of the scene, seems internal and is present to my consciousness, though its 
object is external and long gone by. But clearly, I believe that I am imaging 
the vine; and there is no apparent reason to doubt that I justifiedly believe 
this and know that it is so. This is a simple case of self-knowledge.
Reason and rational reflection
I now look back at the field and am struck by how perfectly rectangular it 
looks. If it is perfectly rectangular, then its corners are right angles. Here I 
believe something different in kind from the things cited so far: that if the 
field is rectangular, then its corners are right angles. This is a geometrical 
belief. I do not hold it on the same sort of basis I have for the other things 
I have mentioned believing. My conception of geometry as applied to ideal 
figures seems to be my basis. On that basis, my belief seems to be firmly 
justified and to constitute knowledge.
I can see that the spruce is taller than the maple, and that the maple is 
taller than the crab apple tree on the lawn closer by. I now realize that the 
spruce is taller than the crab apple. My underlying belief here is that if one 
thing is taller than a second and the second taller than a third, then the first 
is taller than the third. And, perhaps even more than the geometrical belief, 

6  Introduction
this abstract belief seems to arise simply from my grasp of the concepts in 
question, above all the concept of one thing’s being taller than another.
Testimony
The season has been dry, and it now occurs to me that the roses will not 
flourish without a good deal of water. But this I do not believe simply on the 
basis of perception. One source from which I learned it is repeated observa-
tion. But there is another possible source: although much knowledge comes 
directly from our own experience, much also originates with testimony from 
others. I have received testimony as to where on the stem to trim off dead 
roses. If I did not learn about watering roses from my own experience, I 
could have learned the same things from testimony, just as I learned from a 
friend how far back to clip off dead roses.
To be sure, I need perception, such as hearing what I am told, to acquire 
knowledge on the basis of testimony, just as I needed perception to learn 
these things about roses on my own; and I need memory to retain them what-
ever their source. They are, however, generalizations and hence do not arise 
from perception in the direct and apparently simple way my visual beliefs do, 
or emerge from memory in the way my beliefs about past events I witnessed 
do. But do I not still justifiedly believe that the roses will not flourish without 
a lot of water? The commonsense view is that I both justifiedly believe and 
know this about roses, and that I can know it either through generalizing—a 
kind of reasoning—from my own observations, or from testimony, or from 
both.
Basic sources of belief, justification, and knowledge
The examples just given represent what philosophers have called perceptual, 
memorial, introspective, a priori, inductive, and testimony-based beliefs. The 
first four kinds are basic in epistemology. My belief that the glass is cold to 
the touch is perceptual, being based as it is on tactual perception. My belief 
that I cut the poison ivy vine from the spruce is memorial, since it is stored 
in my memory and held because of that fact. My belief that I am imagining a 
green field is called introspective because it is conceived as based on “looking 
within” (the etymological meaning of ‘introspection’); but it could also be 
called simply self-directed: no “peering” within or special concentration is 
required. My belief that if the spruce is taller than the maple and the maple 
is taller than the crab apple then the spruce is taller than the crab apple is 
called a priori (meaning, roughly, based on what is “prior” to observational 
experience) because it apparently arises not from experience of how things 
actually behave, but simply in an intuitive way. It arises from a rational grasp 
of the key concepts one needs in order to have the belief, such as the concept 
of one thing’s being taller than another.
By contrast, my belief that the roses will not grow well without abundant 

Introduction  7
water does not arise directly from one of the four basic sources just men-
tioned: perception, memory, introspection, and a priori intuition (reason, 
in one sense of the term). It is called inductive because it is formed (and 
held) on the basis of a generalization from something more basic, in this case 
what I learned from perceptual experiences with roses. Those experiences, 
apparently through my beliefs recording them, “lead into” the generalization 
about roses, to follow the etymological meaning of ‘induction’. For instance, 
I remember numerous cases in which roses have faded when dry, and I even-
tually concluded that they need abundant water.
Each of the four basic kinds of belief I have described—perceptual, memo-
rial, introspective, and a priori—is grounded in the source from which it 
arises. The nature of this grounding is explored in detail in Part One, which 
concerns perception, memory, consciousness, and reason. These sources are 
commonly taken to provide raw materials for inductive generalizations, as 
where observations and memories about roses yield a basis for generalizing 
about their needs.
Any of the beliefs we considered could instead have been grounded in tes-
timony (the topic of Chapter 7), had I formed the beliefs on the basis of being 
given the same information by someone I trust. That person, however, would 
presumably have acquired it through one of these other sources (or ultimately 
through someone’s having done so), and this makes testimony a different 
kind of source. This is why testimony is not a basic source of knowledge. It is 
still, however, incalculably important for human knowledge and unlimitedly 
broad. It can, for instance, justify a much wider range of propositions than 
perception can. We can credibly tell others virtually anything we know.
Three kinds of grounds of belief
Our examples illustrate not only grounding of beliefs in a source, such as 
perception or introspection, but also how they are grounded in these sources. 
There are at least three important kinds of grounding of beliefs—ways they 
are grounded. These are causal, justificational, and epistemic grounding. All 
three are important for many major epistemological questions.
Consider my belief that there is a green field before me. It is causally 
grounded in my experience of seeing the field because that experience pro-
duces or underlies the belief. It is justificationally grounded in that experience 
because the experience, or at least some element in the experience, justifies 
my belief. And it is epistemically grounded in the experience because in virtue 
of that experience my belief constitutes knowledge that there is a green field 
before me (‘epistemic’ comes from the Greek episteme meaning, roughly, 
‘knowledge’). These three kinds of grounding very often coincide (though 
Chapter 11 will describe important cases in which knowledge and justifica-
tion do not). I will thus often speak simply of a belief as grounded in a source, 
such as visual experience, when what grounds the belief does so in all three 
ways.

8  Introduction
Causal, justificational, and epistemic grounding each go with a very 
common kind of question about belief. Let me illustrate.
Causal grounding goes with ‘Why do you believe that?’ An answer to this, 
asked about my belief that there is a green field before me, would be that I see 
it. This is the normal kind of reply; but as far as mere causal production of 
beliefs goes, the answer could be brain manipulation or mere hypnotic sug-
gestion. If, however, mere brain manipulation or mere hypnotic suggestion 
produces a belief, then the causal ground of the belief would not justify it. If, 
under hypnosis, I am told that someone dislikes me and as a result I believe 
this, the belief is not thereby justified.
Justificational grounding goes with such questions as ‘What is your justi-
fication for believing that?’ or ‘What justifies you in thinking that?’ or ‘Why 
should I accept that?’ (‘Why do you believe that?’ can be asked with this 
same justification-seeking force.) Again, I might answer that I see it. I might, 
however, have a justification (the situational kind) that, unlike seeing the 
truth in question, is not a cause of my believing it.
The justification I cite could also be the testimony of a credible good 
friend. It could be this even when, by a short circuit, brain manipulation does 
the causal work of producing my belief and leaves the testimony like a board 
that slides just beneath a roof beam but bears none of its weight. This shows 
that an element that provides situational justification for a belief may play 
no role in producing or supporting the belief, even if this element, like the 
auxiliary unstressed board, stands ready to play a supporting role if the belief 
is put under pressure by a challenge.
Epistemic grounding goes with ‘How do you know that?’ Once again, 
saying that I see it will commonly answer this. Here, however, it may be 
that a correct answer must cite something that is also a causal ground for the 
belief (a matter discussed in Chapter 10). Certainly a justificational ground 
need not be a ground of knowledge. One can justifiedly believe a proposition 
without knowing it.
Clearly, the same sorts of points can be made for the other five cases I 
have described: memorial beliefs are grounded in memory, self-directed 
(“introspective”) beliefs in consciousness, inductively based beliefs in fur-
ther, premise-beliefs that rest on experience, a priori beliefs in reason, and 
testimony-based beliefs in testimony.
Fallibility and skepticism
Even well-grounded beliefs can be mistaken. We can be deceived by our 
senses. We are fallible in perceptual matters, as in our memories, in our 
reasoning, and in other respects. One might now wonder, as skeptics do, 
whether we know even that it is improbable that our senses are now deceiving 
us. One might also wonder whether, when we take ourselves to see green 
grass, we are even justified in our belief that no such mistake has occurred.
Suppose that I am in an unfamiliar park. I might not know or even 

Introduction  9
justifiedly believe that artificial grass has not replaced the natural grass I take 
to be before me. (I may have heard of such substitutions and may have no 
good reason to believe this has not happened, though I do not consider the 
matter.) Am I justified in believing that there is green grass before me?
Suppose that I am not justified in believing there is green grass before me. 
If not, how can I be justified in believing what appear to be far less obvious 
truths, such as that my home is secure against the elements, my car safe to 
drive, and my food free of poison? And how can I know the many things I 
need to know in life, such as that my family and friends are trustworthy, that 
I can control my behavior and thus partly determine my future, and that the 
world we live in at least approximates the structured reality portrayed by 
common sense and science?
These are difficult and important questions. They indicate how insecure 
and disordered human life would be if we could not suppose that we possess 
justified beliefs and knowledge. We stake our lives every day on what we take 
ourselves to know. It would be unsettling to revise this stance and retreat 
to the view that at best we have justification to believe. But if we had to give 
up even this moderate view and to conclude, say, that what we believe is not 
even justified, we would face a crisis. Much later, in discussing skepticism, 
I will explore such questions at some length. Until then I will assume the 
commonsense view that beliefs with a basis like that of my belief that there is 
a green field before me are not only justified but also constitute knowledge.
Once we proceed on this commonsense assumption, it is easy to see that 
there are many different kinds of circumstances in which beliefs arise in such 
a way that they are apparently both justified and constitute knowledge. In 
considering this variety of circumstances yielding justification and knowl-
edge, we can explore how beliefs are related to perception, memory, con-
sciousness, reason, and testimony (the topics of Chapters 1–7).
Overview
There is a great deal more to be said about each of these sources of belief, jus-
tification, and knowledge and about how they ground what they do ground. 
The first seven chapters explore, and in some cases compare, the basic sources 
of belief, justification, and knowledge.
In the light of what those chapters show, we can discuss the development 
and structure of knowledge and justification (the task of Part Two). Much of 
what we believe does not come directly from perception, memory, introspec-
tion, or reflection of the kind appropriate to knowledge of such truths as 
those of elementary mathematics or those turning on our grasp of simple 
relations, for instance the proposition that if the spruce is taller than the 
maple, then the maple is shorter than the spruce, which we know by virtue 
of understanding the relations expressed by ‘taller’ and ‘shorter’. We must 
explore how inference and other developmental processes expand our body 
of knowledge and justified beliefs (this is the task of Chapter 8). Moreover, 

10  Introduction
once we think of a person as having the resulting complex body of knowledge 
and justified belief, we encounter the questions of what structure that large 
and intricate body has, and of how its structure is related to the amount and 
kind of knowledge and justification it contains. As we shall see in Part Two, 
these structural questions take us into an area where epistemology and the 
philosophy of mind often overlap.
On the basis of what Part One shows about sources of knowledge and 
justification and what Part Two shows about their development and struc-
ture, we can fruitfully proceed to consider more explicitly what knowledge 
and justification are and what kinds of things can be known (the task of Part 
Three). It is true that if we had no sense at all of what they are, we could 
not find the kinds of examples of them needed to explore their sources and 
their development and structure. If we do not have before us a wide range 
of examples of justification and knowledge, we lack the data appropriate to 
seeking a philosophically illuminating analysis of them. It is in the light of 
the examples and conclusions of Parts One and Two that Chapters 10 and 11 
clarify the concept of knowledge, and, to a lesser extent, that of justification, 
in some detail.
With a conception of knowledge laid out, it is possible to explore the 
apparent extent of knowledge and justification in three major territories—the 
scientific, the ethical, and the religious. In exploring these domains, Chapter 
12 applies some of the epistemological results of the earlier chapters. These 
chapters continue to assume the commonsense view that we have a great deal 
of knowledge and justification. If, however, skepticism is justified, then the 
commonsense assessment that the first twelve chapters make regarding the 
extent of knowledge and justification must be revised. Whether skepticism is 
justified is the focus of Chapters 13 and 14.
Along the way in all fourteen chapters, there is much to be learned about 
concepts that are important both in and outside epistemology, especially 
those of belief, causation, certainty, coherence, explanation, fallibility, 
illusion, inference, intellectual virtue, introspection, intuition, meaning, 
memory, rationality, reasoning, relativity, reliability, truth, and understand-
ing. There are also numerous epistemological positions to be considered, 
sometimes in connection with historically influential philosophers. But the 
main focus will be on the major concepts and problems in the field, not on 
any particular philosopher or text. This may well be the best way to facilitate 
studying philosophers and epistemological texts; it will certainly simplify an 
already complex task.
Knowledge and justification are not only interesting in their own right as 
central epistemological topics; they also represent positive values in the life 
of every reasonable person. For all of us, there is much we want to know. We 
also care whether we are justified in what we believe—and whether others are 
justified in what they tell us. The study of epistemology can help in making 
this quest, even if it often does so indirectly. It can certainly help us assess 
how well we have done in the quest when we review our results.

Introduction  11
Well-developed concepts of knowledge and justification can serve as ideals 
in human life. Positively, we can try to achieve knowledge and justification 
in relation to subjects that concern us. Negatively, we can refrain from form-
ing beliefs where we think we lack justification, and we can avoid claiming 
knowledge where we think we can at best hypothesize. If we learn enough 
about knowledge and justification conceived philosophically, we can better 
search for them in matters that concern us and can better avoid the danger-
ous pitfalls that come from confusing mere impressions with justification or 
mere opinion with knowledge. This is not to say that epistemological knowl-
edge can be guaranteed to yield new everyday knowledge. But the more we 
know about the constitution of knowledge and justification, the better we 
can build them through our own inquiries, and the less easily we will fall into 
the pervasive temptation to take an imitation to be the real thing.


Part One
Sources of justification, 
knowledge, and truth


1	
Perception
Sensing, believing, and knowing
•	
The elements and basic kinds of perception
Perceptual belief
Perception, conception, and belief
Propositional and objectual perception
•	
Seeing and believing
Perceptually embedded beliefs
Perception as a source of potential beliefs
The perceptual hierarchy
Simple, objectual, and propositional perception
The informational character of perception
•	
Perceptual justification and perceptual knowledge
Seeing and seeing as
Perceptual content
Seeing as and perceptual grounds of justification
Seeing as a ground of perceptual knowledge

1	
Perception
Sensing, believing, and knowing
As I look at the green field before me, I might believe not only that there 
is a green field there but also that I see one. And I do see one. I visually 
perceive it. Both beliefs, the belief that there is a green field there, and the 
self-referential belief that I see one, are grounded, causally, justificationally, 
and epistemically, in my perceptual experience. They are produced by that 
experience, justified by it, and constitute knowledge in virtue of it.
The same sort of thing holds for the other senses. Consider touch. I not 
only believe, through touch (as well as sight), that there is a glass here, I 
also feel its cold surface. Both beliefs—that there is a glass here and that it 
is cold—are grounded in my tactual experience. I could believe these things 
on the basis of someone’s testimony. My beliefs would then have a quite dif-
ferent status. For instance, my belief that there is a glass here would not be 
a perceptual belief, but only a belief about a perceptible, that is, a perceivable 
object, the kind of thing that can be seen, touched, heard, smelled, or tasted. 
Through testimony we have beliefs about perceptibles we have never seen or 
experienced in any way.
My concern is not with the hodgepodge of beliefs that are simply about 
perceptibles, but with perception and perceptual beliefs. Perceptual beliefs 
are not simply beliefs about perceptibles; they are beliefs grounded in percep-
tion. We classify beliefs as perceptual by the nature of their roots, not by the 
color of their foliage; by their grounds, not their type of content. Those roots 
may be visual, auditory, and so forth for each perceptual mode. But vision 
and visual beliefs are an excellent basis for discussing perception, and I will 
concentrate on them and mention the other senses only when it adds clarity.
Perception is a source of knowledge and justification mainly by virtue of 
yielding beliefs that constitute knowledge or are justified. But we cannot hope 
to understand perceptual knowledge and justification simply by exploring 
those beliefs. We must also understand what perception is and how it yields 
beliefs. We can then begin to understand how it yields knowledge and justifi-
cation or—sometimes—fails to yield them.

Perception  17
The elements and basic kinds of perception
There are apparently at least four elements in perception: (1) the perceiver, 
me; (2) the object, the field I see; (3) the sensory experience, say my visual 
experience of colors and shapes; and (4) the relation between the object and 
the subject, commonly taken to be a causal relation by which the object pro-
duces the sensory experience in the perceiver. To see the field is apparently 
to have a certain sensory experience as a result of the impact of the field on 
our vision.
Some accounts of perception add to the four items on this list; others 
subtract from it. To understand perception we must consider both kinds 
of account and how these elements are to be conceived in relation to one 
another. But first, it is essential to explore examples of perception.
There are several quite different ways to speak of perception. Each cor-
responds to a different way of perceptually responding to experience. We 
often speak simply of what people perceive, for instance see. We also speak 
of what they perceive the object to be, and we commonly talk of facts they 
know through perception, such as that the grass is long. Visual perception 
most readily illustrates this, so let us start there.
I see, hence perceive, the green field. Second, speaking in a less familiar 
way, I see it to be rectangular. Thus, I might say that I know it looks irregular 
from the nearby hill, but from the air you can see it to be perfectly rectangu-
lar. Third, I see that it is rectangular. Perception is common to all three cases. 
Seeing, which is a paradigm perception, is central in each.
The first case is one of simple perception, perception taken by itself (here, 
visual perception). I see the field, and this experience is the visual parallel of 
hearing a bird (an auditory experience), touching a glass (a tactual experi-
ence), smelling roses (an olfactory experience), and tasting mint (a gustatory 
experience). If the first case is simply perceiving of some object, the second is 
a case of perceiving to be, as it is seeing something to be so: I do not just see 
the field, as when I drive by at high speed and do not even realize what is in 
my peripheral vision; rather, I see the field to be rectangular. The third case 
is one of perceiving that; it is seeing that a particular thing is so, namely that 
the field is rectangular.
These cases represent three kinds, or modes, of perception. Perception 
of the simplest kind (or in the simplest mode), such as seeing, occurs in all 
three; but, especially because of their relation to knowledge and justified 
belief, they are significantly different. We can best understand these three 
kinds (or modes) of perception if we first focus on their relation to belief.
Perceptual belief
The last two cases—perceiving that, and perceiving to be—are different 
from the first—perceiving of—in implying corresponding kinds of beliefs: 
seeing that the field is rectangular implies believing that it is, and seeing it 

18  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
to be green implies believing it to be green. If we consider how both kinds 
of beliefs—beliefs that something is so and beliefs of (hence about) some-
thing—are related to perception, we can begin to understand how perception 
occurs in all three cases, the simple and the more complex. In my second and 
third examples of perception, visual perception (seeing) issues in beliefs that 
are grounded in seeing and can thereby constitute visual knowledge, such as 
knowing that the field is green.1
In our example of simple perception, my just seeing the field provides a 
basis for both kinds of beliefs. It does this even if, because my mind is entirely 
occupied with what I am hearing on the radio as I glance over the field, no 
belief about the field actually arises in me. The visual experience is, in this 
instance, like a foundation that has nothing built on it but is ready to support 
a structure. If, for example, someone were to ask if the field has shrubbery, 
then given the lilacs prominent in one place, I might immediately form the 
belief that it does and assent. This belief is visually grounded; it comes from 
my seeing the field though it did not initially come with it. When visual expe-
riences do produce beliefs, as they usually do, what kinds of beliefs are these, 
and how are they specifically perceptual?
Many of my beliefs arising through perception correspond to perception 
that, say to seeing that the lilacs are blooming. I believe that the field is lighter 
green toward its borders, that it is rectangular in shape, and that it has many 
ruts. But I may also have various beliefs about it that are of the second kind: 
they correspond to perception to be, for instance to seeing something to be 
a certain color. Thus, I believe the field to be green, to be rectangular, and 
so on. The difference between these two kinds of belief is significant. As we 
shall shortly see, it corresponds first of all to two distinct ways in which we 
are related to the objects we perceive and, second, to two different ways of 
assessing the truth of what, on the basis of our perceptions, we believe.
The first kind of belief just described is the kind people usually think of 
when they consider beliefs: it is called propositional, as it is generally consid-
ered a case of believing a proposition—say, that the field is rectangular. The 
belief is thus true or false depending on whether the proposition in ques-
tion—here that the field is rectangular—is true or false. In holding the belief, 
moreover, in some way I think of what I see as a field which is rectangular: in 
believing that the field is rectangular, I conceive what I take to be rectangular 
as a field.
The second kind of belief might be called objectual: it is a belief regarding 
an object, say the field, with which the belief is actually connected. This is an 
object of (or about) which I believe something, say that it is rectangular. If I 
believe the field to be rectangular, there really is such an object, and I have 
a certain relation to it. A special feature of this relation is that there is no 
particular proposition I must believe about the field. To see that there is no 
particular proposition, notice that in holding this objectual belief I need not 
think of what I see as a field. I might mistakenly take it to be (for instance) a 
lawn or a grasslike artificial turf, yet still believe it to be rectangular. I might 

Perception  19
think of it just in terms of what I believe it to be and not in terms of anything 
else.
Thus, although there is some property I must take the field to have—cor-
responding to what I believe it to be—there is no other particular way I 
must think of it. With objectual belief, then, there is no particular notion, no 
specific conceptual “handle,” that must yield the subject of any proposition 
I believe about the object: I do not have to believe that the field is green, that 
the grass is green, or any such thing. Perception leaves us vast latitude as to 
what we learn from it. People differ greatly in the beliefs they form about the 
very same things they see.2
 The concept of objectual perception, then, is very permissive about what 
one believes about the object perceived. This is one reason why it leaves so 
much space for imagination and learning—a space often filled by the for-
mation of propositional beliefs, each capturing a different aspect of what is 
perceived, say that the field is richly green, that it is windblown, and that it 
ends at a treeline.
A different example may bring these points out further. After seeing a 
distant flare and coming to believe, of something blurry and far away, that it 
glowed, one might ask, ‘What on Earth was it that glowed?’ Before we can 
believe the proposition that a flare glowed, we may have to think about where 
we are, the movement and fading of the glow, and so forth. The objectual 
belief is a guide by which we may arrive at propositional beliefs and proposi-
tional knowledge.
Perception, conception, and belief
The same kind of example can be used to illustrate how belief depends on 
our conceptual resources in a way that perception does not. Suppose I had 
grown up in the desert and somehow failed to acquire the concept of a field. 
I could nonetheless see the green field, and from a purely visual point of view 
it might look the same to me as it does now. I could also believe, regarding the 
field I see—and perhaps conceive as sand artificially covered with something 
green—that it is rectangular. But I could not believe that the field is rectan-
gular. This propositional belief as it were portrays what I see as a field in a 
way that requires my having a concept of one.
There is a connection here between thought and language (or at least 
conceptualization). If I believe (think) that the field is rectangular, or even 
simply have the thought that it is, I should be able to say that it is and to know 
what I am talking about. But if I had no concept of a field, then in saying this 
I would not know what I am talking about.3 Similarly, a two year old, say, 
Susie, who has no notion of a tachistoscope, can, upon seeing one and hear-
ing its fan, believe it to be making noise; but she cannot believe specifically 
that the tachistoscope is making noise. Her propositional belief, if any, would 
be, say, that the thing on the table is making noise. Since this is true, what she 
believes is true and she may know this truth, but she need not know much 

20  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
about the object this truth concerns: in a way, she does not know what it is 
she has this true belief about.
The general lesson here is important. A basic mode of learning about 
objects is to find out truths about them in this elementary way: we get a 
handle on them through perceptually discriminating some of their proper-
ties; we form objectual (and other) beliefs about them from different per-
spectives; and (often) we finally reach an adequate concept of what they are. 
From the properties I believe the flare in the distance to have, I finally figure 
out that it is a flare that has them. This suggests that there is at least one 
respect in which our knowledge of (perceptible) properties is more basic than 
our knowledge of the substances that have them; but whether that is so is a 
question I cannot pursue here.
Unlike propositional beliefs, objectual beliefs have a significant degree of 
indefiniteness in virtue of which it can be misleading simply to call them 
true or false; they are accurate or inaccurate, depending on whether what 
one believes of the object (such as that it is rectangular) is or is not true of it. 
Recall Susie. If she attributes noise-making to the tachistoscope, she truly 
believes, of it, that it is making noise. She is, then, right about it. But this 
holds even if she has no specific concept of what it is that is making the noise. 
If we say unqualifiedly that her belief about it is true, we invite the question 
‘What belief?’ and the expectation that the answer will specify a particular 
proposition, say that the tachistoscope is making noise. But it need not, and 
we might be unable to find any proposition that she does believe about it. She 
can be right about something without knowing or even having any concep-
tion of what kind of thing it is that she is right about.
Knowledge is often partial in this way. Still, once we get the kind of epis-
temic handle on something that objectual belief can provide, we can usually 
use that to learn more about it.4 Suppose I see a dog’s tail projecting from 
under a bed and do not recognize it as such. If I believe it to be a slender furry 
thing, I have a place to start in finding out what else it is. I will, moreover, be 
disposed to form such beliefs as that there is a slender furry thing there. I will 
also have justification for them. But I need not form them, particularly if my 
attention quickly turns elsewhere.
Propositional and objectual perception
Corresponding to the two kinds of beliefs I have described are two ways of 
talking about perception. I see that the field is rectangular. This is (visual) 
propositional perception: perceiving that. I also see it to be rectangular. This 
is (visual) objectual perception: perceiving to be. The same distinction appar-
ently applies to hearing and touch. Perhaps, for example, I can hear that a 
piano is out of tune by hearing its sour notes, as opposed to hearing the 
tuner say it needs tuning. As for taste and smell, we speak as if they yielded 
only simple perception: we talk of smelling mint in the iced tea, but not of 
smelling that it is minty or smelling it to be minty. Such talk is, however, 

Perception  21
intelligible on the model of seeing that something is so and seeing it to be so. 
We may thus take the distinction between perceiving that and perceiving to 
be to apply in principle to all the senses.
It is useful to think of perceptual beliefs as embedded in the correspond-
ing propositional or objectual perception, roughly in the sense that they 
are integrally tied to perceiving of that kind and derive their character and 
perhaps their authority from their perceptual grounding. Take propositional 
belief first. My belief that the field is rectangular is embedded in my seeing 
that it is, and Susie’s believing the tachistoscope to be making noise is embed-
ded in her hearing it to be doing so. In each case, the belief is an element 
in perception of the corresponding kind. These kinds of perception might 
therefore be called cognitive, since belief is a cognitive attitude: roughly the 
kind having a proposition (something true or false) as its object.5 The object 
of the belief that the field is rectangular is the specific proposition that the 
field is rectangular, which is true or false.
Now consider objectual perceptual beliefs. If believing the tachistoscope 
to be making noise has a propositional object, that object may be plausibly 
taken to be some proposition or other to the effect that it is making noise, 
which (though left unspecified by the ascription of the belief) is also true 
or false. But some objectual perceptions may also be plausibly conceived as 
simply attributions of a perceptible property to the thing perceived; here the 
embedded objectual belief is true of the object rather than simply true. A tiny, 
prelingual child might see the liquid offered to it to be milk yet not believe 
(or disbelieve) the proposition that it is milk. In this respect, belief is unlike 
attitudes of approval or admiration or indignation, which are evaluated not as 
true or false but rather as, say, appropriate or inappropriate.6
Both propositional and objectual beliefs are grounded in simple percep-
tion. If I do not see a thing at all, I do not see that it has any particular prop-
erty and I do not see it to be anything. Depending on whether perceptual 
beliefs are propositional or objectual, they may differ in the kind of knowl-
edge they give us. Propositional perception yields knowledge both of what it 
is that we perceive and of some property of it, for instance of the field’s being 
rectangular. Objectual perception may, in special cases, give us knowledge 
only of a property of what we perceive, say of its being green, when we do not 
know what it is or have any belief as to what it is.
In objectual perception, we are, to be sure, in a good position to come 
to know something or other about the object, say that it is a green expanse. 
Objectual perception may thus give us information not only about objects 
of which we have a definite conception, such as home furnishings, but also 
about utterly unfamiliar objects of which we have at most a very general con-
ception, say ‘that noisy thing’. This is important. We could not learn as read-
ily from perception if it gave us information only about objects we conceive 
in the specific ways in which we conceive most of the familiar things we see, 
hear, touch, taste, and smell.7

22  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
Seeing and believing
Both propositional and objectual perceptual beliefs are commonly grounded 
in perception in a way that apparently connects us with the outside world and 
assures their truth. For instance, my visual belief that the field is rectangular 
is so grounded in my seeing the field that I veridically (truly) see that it is 
rectangular; my tactually believing the glass to be cold is so grounded in 
my feeling it that I veridically feel it to be cold. Let us explore the relation 
between perception and belief.
Perceptually embedded beliefs
Must beliefs grounded in seeing be true? Admittedly, I might visually (or 
tactually) believe that something is rectangular under conditions poor for 
judging it. Compare viewing a straight stick half submerged in water (it will 
look bent). My visually grounded belief might then be mistaken. But such a 
mistaken belief is not embedded in propositional perception that the stick is 
bent—that proposition is false and hence is not something one sees is so (or 
to be so). The belief is merely produced by some element in the simple percep-
tion of the stick: I see the stick in the water, and the operation of reflected 
light causes me to have the illusion of a bent stick. I thus do not see that the 
stick is bent: my genuine perception is of it, but not of its curvature. Seeing 
that curvature or seeing that the stick is bent would entail that it is bent, 
which is false. If the stick is not bent, I cannot see that it is.
As this suggests, there is something special about both perceiving that 
and perceiving to be. They are veridical experiences, that is, they imply truth. 
Specifically, if I see that the field is rectangular, or even just see it to be 
rectangular, then it truly is rectangular. Thus, when I simply see the rect-
angularity of the field, if I acquire the corresponding embedded perceptual 
beliefs—if I believe that it is rectangular when I see that it is, or believe it to 
be rectangular when I see it to be—then I am correct in so believing.
Perceiving that and perceiving to be, then, imply (truly) believing some-
thing about the object perceived—and so are factive. Does simple perception, 
perception of something, which is required for either of these more complex 
kinds of perception, also imply true belief? Very commonly, simple percep-
tion does imply truly believing something about the object perceived. If I 
hear a car go by, I commonly believe a car is passing. But could I not hear 
it, but be so occupied with my reading that I form no belief about it? Let us 
explore this.
Perception as a source of potential beliefs
As is suggested by the case of perception overshadowed by preoccupation 
with reading, there is reason to doubt that simple perceiving must produce 
any belief at all. Moreover, it commonly does not produce beliefs even of 

Perception  23
what would be readily believed if the question arose. Suppose I am looking 
appreciatively at a beautiful rug. Must I believe that it is not producing yellow 
smoke, plain though this fact is? I think not; there seems to be a natural 
economy of nature—perhaps explainable on an evolutionary basis—that pre-
vents our minds from being cluttered with the innumerable beliefs we would 
have if we formed one for each fact we can see to be the case.
This line of thought may seem to fly in the face of the adage that seeing is 
believing. But properly understood, that may apply just to propositional or 
objectual seeing. In those cases, perception plainly does entail beliefs. Seeing 
that golf ball-size hail is falling is (in the sense that it entails) believing it.8 
This fact, however, is not only perceptible; it is striking.
In any event, could I see the field and believe nothing regarding it? Must I 
not see it to be something or other, say green? And if so, would I not believe, 
of it, something that is true of it, even if only that it is a green object some 
distance away? Consider a different example.
Imagine that we are talking excitedly and a bird flies quickly across my 
path. Could I see it, yet form no beliefs about it? There may be no clearly 
correct answer. For one thing, although there is much we can confidently 
say about seeing and believing, ‘seeing’ and ‘believing’ are, like most philo-
sophically interesting terms, not precise. They have an element of vague-
ness. No standard dictionary definition or authoritative statement can be 
expected either to tell us precisely what they mean or, especially, to settle 
every question about when they do and do not apply.9 Still, we should be wary 
of concluding that vagueness makes any significant philosophical question 
unanswerable. How, then, should we answer the question whether seeing 
entails believing?
A negative response might be supported as follows. Suppose I merely see 
the bird but pay no attention to it because I am utterly intent on our conversa-
tion. Why must I form any belief about the bird? Granted, if someone later 
asks if I saw a blue bird, I may assent, thereby indicating a belief that the bird 
was blue. But this belief is not perceptual: it is about a perceptible and indeed 
has visual content, but it is not grounded in seeing. Moreover, it may have 
been formed only when I recalled my visual experience of the bird. Recalling 
that experience in such a context may produce a belief about the thing I saw 
even if my original experience of the thing did not. For plainly a recollected 
sensory experience can produce beliefs about the object that caused it, espe-
cially when I have reason to gain information about that object. Perhaps one 
notices something in one’s recollected image of the bird, an image merely 
recorded in the original experience, but one formed no belief about the bird. 
Granted, perception must produce a sensory experience, such as an image, 
and granted such an image—and even a recollection of it—is raw material for 
beliefs; it does not follow that perception must produce beliefs.
It might be objected that genuinely seeing an object must produce beliefs, 
even if we are not conscious of its doing so. How else can perception guide our 
behavior, as it does when, on seeing a log in our path, we step over it?

24  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
One answer is that not everything we see, including the bird that flies 
by as I concentrate on something else, demands or even evokes a cognitive 
response, particularly one entailing belief-formation. If I am cataloguing 
local birds, the situation is different. But when an unobtrusive object we 
see—as opposed to one blocking our path—has no particular relation to 
what we are doing, perhaps our visual impressions of it are simply a basis 
for forming beliefs about it should the situation call for it, and it need not 
produce any belief if our concerns and the direction of our attention give the 
object no significance.
Despite the complexity I am pointing to in the relation between seeing 
and believing, clearly we may hold what is epistemologically most important 
here. Suppose I can see a bird without believing anything about (or of) it. Still, 
when I do see one, I can see it to be something or other, and my perceptual 
circumstances are such that I might readily both come to believe something 
about it and see that to be true of it. Imagine that someone suddenly inter-
rupts a conversation to say, ‘Look at that bird!’ If I see it, I am in a position to 
form some belief about it, if only that it is swift, though I need not actually 
form any belief about it, at least not one I am conscious of.
To see these points more concretely, imagine I am alone and see the bird 
in the distance for just a second, mistakenly taking it to be a speck of ash. If 
there is not too much color distortion, I may still both know and justifiedly 
believe it to be dark. Granted, I would misdescribe it, and I might falsely 
believe that it is a speck of ash. But I could still know something about it, 
and I might point the bird out under the misleading but true description, 
‘that dark thing’. The bird is the thing I point at; and I can see, know, and 
justifiedly believe that there is a dark thing there.
My perception of the bird, then, gives me a ready basis for some knowledge 
and justification, even if the perception occurs in a way that does not cause 
me to believe that there is, say, a bird before me and so does not give me actual 
knowledge of it. Seeing is virtual believing, or at least potential believing. A 
similar point holds for simple perception in the other senses, though some, 
such as smell, are in general less richly informative than sight.10
The perceptual hierarchy
Our discussion seems to show that simple perceiving need not produce belief, 
and objectual perceiving need not always yield propositional perceiving. Still, 
this third kind of perception is clearly not possible without the first and, I 
think, the second as well. I certainly cannot see that the bird is anything if 
I do not see it at all; and I must also see it in order to see it to be something, 
say a speck of blue. Thus, simple perceiving is fundamental: it is required for 
objectual and propositional perceiving, yet does not clearly entail either. If, 
for instance, you do not perceive in the simple mode, say see a blue speck, 
you do not perceive in the other two modes either, say see a speck to be blue 
or see that it is blue. And as objectual perceiving seems possible without 

Perception  25
propositional perceiving, but not conversely, the former seems basic relative 
to the latter.
Simple, objectual, and propositional perception
We have, then, a perceptual hierarchy: propositional perceiving depends on 
objectual perceiving, which in turn depends on simple perceiving. Simple 
perceiving is basic, and it commonly yields, even if it need not always yield, 
objectual perceiving, which, in turn, commonly yields, even if it need not 
always yield, propositional perceiving. Simple perceiving, such as just seeing 
a green field, may apparently occur without either of the other two kinds, but 
seeing something to be anything at all, such as rectangular, requires seeing it; 
and seeing that it is something in particular, say green, requires both seeing it 
to be something and, of course, seeing it.
Thus, even if simple perception does not always produce at least one 
true belief, it characteristically does position us to form any number of true 
beliefs. It gives us cognitive access to perceptual information, perhaps even 
records that information in some sense, whether or not we register the infor-
mation conceptually by forming perceptual beliefs of either kind.
The informational character of perception
As this suggests, perception by its very nature is informational; it might even 
be understood as equivalent to a kind—a sensory kind—of receipt of infor-
mation about the object perceived.11 The point here is that not all perceptu-
ally given information is propositional or even conceptualized. This is why 
we do not receive or store all of it in the contents of our beliefs. Perceptual 
content—conceived as the content of a simple perception—is at least in part 
determined by the properties we are sensorily conscious of in having that 
experience; it is not equivalent to the content of the perceptual belief(s) that 
experience may produce.
Some of the information perception yields is imagistic. Indeed, we may 
think of all the senses as capable of yielding images or, for the non-visual 
senses, at least of yielding the non-visual counterparts of images—percepts, 
to use a technical term for such elements in perceptual experience occurring 
in any sensory mode, whether visual or auditory or of some other kind. It is 
in these sensory impressions that the bulk of perceptual information appar-
ently resides. This point explains the plausibility of the idea that a picture 
is worth a thousand words—which is not to deny that, for some purposes, 
some words are worth a thousand pictures. A single report of smoke may 
avert a catastrophe; a single promise may alter a million lives.
It is in part because perception is so richly informative that it normally 
gives us not only imagistic information but also situational justification. Even 
if I could be so lost in conversation that I form no belief about the passing 
bird, I am, as I see it pass, normally justified in believing something about it, 

26  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
concerning its perceptible properties, for instance that it glides.12 There may 
perhaps be nothing highly specific that I am justified in believing about it, 
say that it is a cardinal or that its wingspan is ten inches, but if I really see it, 
as opposed to its merely causing in me a visual impression too indistinct to 
qualify me as seeing it, then there is something or other that I may justifiably 
believe about it.
When we have a clear perception of something, it is even easier to have 
perceptual justification for believing a proposition about it without actually 
believing it. Just by taking stock of the size of the field in clear view before 
me, I am justified in believing that it has more than 289 blades of grass; but I 
do not ordinarily believe—or disbelieve—any such thing about grassy fields 
I see. It was only when I sought a philosophical example about perception 
and belief, and then arbitrarily chose the proposition that the field has more 
than 289 blades of grass, that I came to believe this proposition. Again, I was 
justified in believing the proposition before I actually did believe it.
Perceptual justification and perceptual knowledge
What is it that explains why seeing the bird or the field justifies us in believ-
ing something about what we see, that is, gives us situational justification for 
such a belief? And does the same thing explain why seeing something enables 
us to know various facts about it?
Seeing and seeing as
One possible answer is that if we see something at all, say a bird, we see it as 
something, for instance black or large or swift, and we are justified in believ-
ing it to be what we see it as being. The idea is that all seeing and perhaps 
all perceiving is aspectual perception of a kind that confers justification. We 
see things by seeing their properties or aspects, for instance their colors or 
their front sides, and we are justified in taking them to have the properties or 
aspects we see them as having.
Let us not go too fast. Consider two points, one concerning the nature of 
seeing as, the other its relation to justification.
First, might not the sort of distinction we have observed between situ-
ational and belief justification apply to seeing itself? Specifically, might not 
my seeing the bird imply that I am only in a position to see it as something, 
and not that I do see it as something? It is true that when we see something, 
we see it by seeing some property or aspect of it; but it does not follow that 
we see it as having this property or aspect. I might see a van Gogh painting 
by its colors, shapes, and distinctive brush strokes, but not see it as having 
them because my visual experience is dominated by the painting as a whole. 
Someone might reply that if I see it by those properties, I am disposed to 
believe it has them and so must see it as having them; but this disposition 

Perception  27
implies at most a readiness to see it as having them. There may, to be sure, 
be a sense in which if we see something aright, for example see a van Gogh 
with recognition of it as his, then we must see it as what we recognize it to be.
Seeing as can also be a matter of conceptualization—roughly, conceiving 
as. But this is different from perceptual seeing as. The distinction between 
perceptual seeing as and perceptual seeing by remains. Seeing by is causal and 
discriminative but not necessarily ascriptive or, especially, conceptual. Seeing 
as, though also causal, is often ascriptive and commonly conceptual. We see 
faces by seeing (for example) the distinctive shape of the eyes and mouth, but 
need not ascribe those to those we see or conceptualize these properties. But 
if we see a painting as blurry, we commonly ascribe that property to it and 
may conceptualize the painting as blurry.
Second, suppose that seeing the bird did imply (visually) seeing it as some-
thing. Clearly, this need not be something one is justified in believing it to be 
(and perhaps it need not be something one does believe it to be). Charles, our 
biased birdwatcher, might erroneously see a plainly black bird as blue, simply 
because he so loves birds of blue color and so dislikes black birds that (as he 
himself knows) his vision plays tricks on him when he is bird-watching. He 
might then not be justified in believing that the bird is blue.
Assume for the sake of argument that seeing implies seeing as and that 
typically, seeing as implies at least objectually believing something or other 
about the thing seen. Still, seeing an object as having a certain property—say, 
a stick in the water as bent—does not entail that it has the property. Nor does 
it always give one (overall) situational justification for believing it to have 
that property.
Perceptual content
It is natural to think of perception as in some way representational. If we see 
things by seeing their properties, for instance, then our perceptual experi-
ence in some way represents the object as having them. If perceiving entailed 
believing, we could perhaps take it to have the same content of the entailed 
belief(s). But (simple) perception apparently does not entail believing, so 
this conception of its content is mistaken. For propositional and objectual 
perception, however, we might plausibly say something like this: the content 
of my perception that p includes both the proposition that p (hence also the 
content of that proposition) and also the content of my objectual perception 
of the thing in question; that content includes the properties I perceive the 
thing to have.
If we seek a broad notion of perceptual content for simple perception, we 
might say that all the properties represented in a perceptual experience con-
stitute its content. Then, for greater specificity, we might call the totality of 
perceptually represented properties the property content. These include prop-
erties an object is seen as having.13 They apparently also determine “what it 

28  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
is like” to perceive the object, say a squirrel in a tree. In seeing it, one’s visual 
field is determined mainly by the grey, the distinctive furry shape, and the 
arboreal background.
For propositional and objectual perception, we might call the property-
ascriptive propositions that the perceiver perceptually believes on the basis of 
the perceptual experience their doxastic propositional content. If we want to 
capture all the propositions that one might justifiedly believe (and know) on 
the basis of the perception, we might speak of its total propositional content. 
This would include such propositions as that the squirrel is crouching, has a 
nut in its mouth, is in sunlight, and many more that need not be believed as a 
result of simply seeing the animal.14
Seeing as and perceptual grounds of justification
Whether or not seeing always implies seeing as, it does have property content 
and normally puts one in a position to form at least one justified belief about 
the object seen. Suppose I see the bird so briefly and distractedly that I do 
not see it as anything in particular; still, my visual impression of it has some 
feature or other by which I am justified in believing something of the bird, 
if only that it is a moving thing. Even Charles would be justified in believing 
something like this. His tendency to see black birds as blue is irrelevant to 
his perception of movement and does not affect his justification for believing 
such moving objects to be in motion.
Suppose, however, that for hours Charles had been hallucinating all manner 
of unreal things, and he knows this. Then he might not be justified in taking 
the bird he sees to be anything real, even though it is real. For as a rational 
person in this position he should see that if his belief is true, it may well be 
true only in the way a lucky guess is. Thus, the best conclusion here—and I 
suggest that this is an important justification principle concerning percep-
tion—is that normally, seeing an object gives one situational justification for 
believing something or other about it.
More broadly, it is very plausible to hold that the evidence of the senses—
including above all the sensory experiences characteristic of perception—
normally provides justification for beliefs with content appropriate to that 
evidence. If your experience is of a green expanse, you are justified in believ-
ing there is something green before you; if it is of something cool in your 
hand, you are justified in believing there is something cool in your hand; and 
so on.
One might also say something slightly different, in a terminology that 
is from some points of view preferable: seeing an object (always) gives one 
prima facie justification for believing something or other about it. Prima facie 
justification is roughly justification that prevails unless defeated. The two 
main kinds of defeater are such overriding factors as a strong justification for 
believing something to the contrary and such undermining (or undercutting) 
factors as my knowledge that I have been hallucinating and at present cannot 

Perception  29
trust my senses. Overriders defeat prima facie justification by justifying an 
incompatible proposition instead; undermining defeaters simply prevent 
the would-be justification from succeeding. If I see a green field, I have a 
justification for believing it to be green; but I may not be justified, overall, 
in believing this if credible friends give me compelling reason to believe that 
despite appearances the field is entirely covered by blue grass, or that I am not 
seeing a field at all but hallucinating one.15 In the former case, my justification 
is defeated by my acquiring better justification for a contrary proposition; in 
the latter, my visual justification is reduced below the threshold of success. If 
it is not eliminated, it is too weak to license saying I am justified in believing 
the proposition.
 If seeing is typical of perception in (normally) putting us in a position 
to form at least one justified belief about the object seen, then perception 
in general normally gives us at least situational justification. This is roughly 
justification for holding a belief of the proposition for which we have the 
justification. As our examples show, however, it does not follow that every 
perceptual belief is justified. Far from it. Some perceptual beliefs, such as 
perceptual beliefs that are evidentially undermined by one’s having formed 
similar beliefs based on hallucinations, are not. As with the biased bird-
watcher, belief can be grounded in perception under conditions that prevent 
its being justified by that grounding.
Nevertheless, there is a simple principle of justification we can see to be 
plausible despite all these complexities: normally, a visual belief that is embed-
ded in seeing that something is so or in seeing it to be so is justified (and it is 
always prima facie justified). If we see that an object has a property (say, that 
a field is rectangular) and, in virtue of seeing that it has that property (say, is 
rectangular), believe that it does, then (normally) we justifiedly believe that 
it does. Call this the visual justification principle, since it applies to cases of 
belief based on seeing that what is believed is true (or seeing it to be true).
I say normally (and that the justification is prima facie) because even here 
one’s justification can be defeated. Thus, Charles might see that a bird is blue 
and believe on this basis that it is, yet realize that all morning he has been 
seeing black birds as dark blue and thus mistaking the black ones for the 
blue ones. Until he verifies his first impression, then, he does not justifiedly 
believe that the bird is blue, even though it in fact is. (We could say that he 
has some justification for believing this, yet better justification for not believ-
ing it; but to simplify matters I am ignoring degrees of justification.) He does 
indeed see a bird and may justifiedly believe that, but his belief that the bird 
is blue is not justified.
Suppose, on the other hand, that Charles has no idea that he has been 
hallucinating. Then, even when he does hallucinate a blue bird, he may be jus-
tified in believing that there is a blue bird before him. This suggests a related 
principle of justification, one that applies to visual experience whether it is 
a case of seeing or merely of visual hallucination: When, on the basis of an 
apparently normal visual experience (such as the sort we have in seeing a bird 

30  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
nearby), one believes something of the kind the experience seems to show (for 
instance that the bird is blue), normally this belief is justified. Call this the visual 
experience principle, since it applies to cases in which one has a belief based 
on visual experience even if not an experience of actually seeing (the veridical 
kind). The visual principle takes us from seeing (vision) to justification; the 
visual experience principle takes us from visual experience—conceived as 
apparent seeing—to justification. The latter is wider: it indicates that visual 
experience can justify a huge range of beliefs, not just a belief to the effect 
that an object in fact has a property one sees it to have.
Similar principles can be formulated for all of the other senses, though the 
formulations will not be as natural. If, for example, you hear a note to be flat 
and on that basis believe that it is flat, normally your belief is justified. It is 
grounded in a veridical perception in which you have discriminated the flat-
ness you believe the note has. And suppose, by contrast, that in what clearly 
seem to be everyday circumstances you have an utterly normal-seeming audi-
tory hallucination of a flat note. If that experience makes it seem clear that 
you are hearing a flat note, then if you believe on the basis of the experience 
that this is a flat note, normally your belief would be justified. You have no 
reason to suspect hallucination, and the justification of your belief that the 
note is flat piggybacks, as it were, on the principle that normally applies to 
veridical beliefs.16
Seeing as a ground of perceptual knowledge
Some of what holds for the justification of perceptual beliefs also applies to 
perceptual knowledge. Seeing the green field, for instance, normally yields 
knowledge about the field as well as justified belief about it. This suggests 
another visual principle, a visual knowledge principle. It might be called an 
epistemic principle, since it states a condition for the visual generation of 
knowledge: At least normally, if we see that a thing (such as a field) has a prop-
erty (say is rectangular), we (visually) know that it has it. A parallel principle 
holds for objectual seeing: At least normally, if I see something to have a 
property (say to be rectangular), I know it to have the property.
There are, however, special circumstances that explain why these epistemic 
principles may have to be restricted to “normal” cases. It may be possible to 
see that something is so, believe on that basis that it is, and yet not know that 
it is. Charles’s case seems to show this. For if, in the kind of circumstances he 
is in, he often takes a black bird to be blue, then even if he sees that a certain 
blue bird is blue and, on that basis, believes it is blue, he apparently does not 
know that it is.17 He might as well have been wrong, one wants to say; he is 
just lucky that this time his belief is true and he was not hallucinating. As 
he has no reason to think he has been hallucinating, and does not realize he 
has been, one cannot fault him for holding the belief that the bird is blue or 
regard the belief as inappropriate to his situation. Still, knowledge apparently 
needs better grounding than is provided by his blameless good fortune. This 

Perception  31
kind of case has led some philosophers to maintain that when we know that 
something is so, our being right is not accidental.
There is an important difference here between knowledge and justifica-
tion. Take knowledge first. If Charles is making errors like this, then even 
if he has no idea that he is and no reason to suspect he is, he does not know 
that the bird he believes to be blue is blue. But even if he has no idea that he is 
making errors, or any reason to suspect he is, he may still justifiedly believe 
that the bird is blue. The main difference between knowledge and justification 
here may be this: he can have a true belief that does not constitute knowledge 
because there is something wrong for which he is in no way criticizable (his 
errors might arise from a handicap which he has no reason to suspect, such 
as sudden color blindness); but he cannot have a true yet unjustified belief 
without being in some way criticizable. The standards for knowledge, one 
might say, permit fewer unsuspected weaknesses in discriminating the truth 
than those for justification, if the standards for knowledge permit any at all.
This difference between knowledge and justification must be reflected in 
the kinds of principles that indicate how justification, as opposed to knowl-
edge, is generated. Justification principles need not imply that the relevant 
basis of a belief’s justification assures its truth; but since a false belief cannot 
constitute knowledge, epistemic principles (knowledge principles) cannot 
capture elements that generate knowledge unless they rule out factors that 
might produce a false belief. A ground of knowledge must, in some way, suf-
fice for the truth of the proposition known; a ground of justification must, 
in some way, count toward the truth of the proposition one is justified in 
believing, but need not rule out its falsehood.
On the basis of what we see, hear, feel, smell, and taste, we have a great 
many beliefs, propositional and objectual. There is apparently no good reason 
to doubt that these perceptual beliefs are commonly justified or that, quite 
often, they are true and constitute knowledge. But to see that perception is 
a basis of justification and knowledge is to go only part way toward under-
standing what perception, justification, and knowledge are. Here the main 
question is what constitutes perception, philosophically speaking. Until we 
have a good understanding of what it is, we cannot see in detail how percep-
tion grounds belief, justification, and knowledge. These problems cannot be 
fully resolved in this book, but we can achieve partial resolutions. I want to 
discuss (further) what perception is first and, later, to illustrate in new ways 
how it grounds what it does. The next chapter, then—also concentrating on 
vision—will start by considering some of the major theories of the nature of 
perception.
Notes
	 1	 Perceiving of, perceiving to be, and perceiving that may also be called 
perception of, perception to be, and perception that, respectively; but the 

32  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
second expression is not common, and in that case at least, the -ing form 
usually better expresses what is intended.
	 2	 A related way to see the difference between objectual and propositional 
beliefs is this. If I believe something to have a property, say a British 
Airways plane to be a Boeing 777, then this same belief can be ascribed to 
me using any correct description of that plane, say, as the most traveled 
plane in the British Airways fleet: to say I believe BA’s most traveled 
plane to be a 777 is to ascribe the same belief to me. This holds even if 
I do not believe it meets that description—and it can hold even when I 
cannot understand the description, as a child who believes a tachisto-
scope to be making noise cannot understand ‘tachistoscope’. By con-
trast, if I have a propositional belief, say that the United Airlines plane 
on the runway is the most traveled in its fleet, this ascription cannot be 
truly made using just any correct description of that plane, say the plane 
on which a baby was delivered on Christmas Day, 2001. I may have no 
inkling of that fact—or may mistakenly think it holds for a BA plane. A 
rough way to put part of the point here is to say that propositional beliefs 
about things are about them under a description or name, and objectual 
beliefs about things are not (even if the believer could describe them in 
terms of a property they are believed to have, such as being noisy). It is in 
part because we need not conceptualize things—as by thinking of them 
under a description—in order to have objectual beliefs about them that 
those beliefs are apparently more basic than propositional ones.
	 3	 In terminology common in epistemology, objectual belief is de re—of 
the thing—whereas propositional belief is de dicto—of the proposition—
and I am similarly distinguishing between objectual and propositional 
perception. The objectual cases, unlike the propositional ones, require 
no particular concept of the thing perceived. To be sure, those who do 
have the concept of a field and know that I believe it to be rectangular 
may say, ‘He believes the field is rectangular’, meaning that I believe it 
to be rectangular. English idiom is often permissive in this way, and in 
everyday life nothing need turn on the difference. Moreover, some phi-
losophers have held that a thing, such as a field, can be a constituent in a 
proposition—in which case it might be considered a kind of content of a 
belief of that proposition—and this might provide a basis for saying that 
the two belief ascriptions may be properly interchangeable. I am ignor-
ing that controversial and uncommon conception of a proposition. For 
detailed discussion of the extent to which perception is conceptual and 
of how it yields perceptual beliefs, see Michael Pendelbury, ‘Sensibility 
and Understanding in Perceptual Judgments’, South African Journal of 
Philosophy 18, 4 (1999), 356–69.
	 4	 It may be best to leave open here that Susie could, at least for a moment, 
believe (in an admittedly weak sense of the term), of a tachistoscope, that 
it is making noise, yet not believe any proposition about it: she attributes 
noise-making to it, yet does not conceptualize it in the way required for 

Perception  33
having a propositional belief about it, the kind of belief expressed in a 
complete declarative sentence such as ‘The thing on the table is making 
noise’. She would then have no propositional belief about the instrument, 
the kind of belief that should unqualifiedly be called true (or false), such 
as that the tachistoscope is making noise. On this approach, what I am 
calling objectual belief is (or often is) better called property attribution. 
It is an attribution to the thing in question because of the kind of causal 
role that thing plays in grounding the attribution; and if it is not strictly 
speaking a belief, it does imply a disposition to form one, such as that the 
thing on the table is making noise.
	 5	 Specifically, these are doxastic attitudes (from the Greek doxa, for 
‘belief’). A fear can be propositional and thereby cognitive, but it need 
not entail believing the proposition one fears is so, for example that the 
man approaching one will attack. Some might consider objectual aware-
ness, say awareness of perfect symmetry, cognitive, at least when the 
person has the concept of relevant property. By contrast, desires, the 
paradigm conative attitudes, should not, I think, be taken to have propo-
sitional objects (e.g. ‘to swim’ in ‘my desire to swim’ does not express a 
truth or falsehood).
	 6	 Perceptions that embody beliefs in the ways illustrated are also called 
epistemic, since the embedded belief is commonly considered to con-
stitute knowledge. Their connection with knowledge is pursued in this 
chapter and others.
	 7	 The distinction between simple and propositional perceiving and other 
distinctions drawn in this chapter are not always observed. At one point 
W.V. Quine says: 
think of “x perceives y” rather in the image of “x perceives that 
p”. We say “Tom perceives the bowl” because in emphasizing 
Tom’s situation we fancy ourselves volunteering the observation 
sentence “Bowl” rather than “Surface of a bowl,” “Front half of a 
bowl,” “Bowl and background,” and so on. When we ask “What 
did he perceive?” we are content with an answer of the form “He 
perceived that p”. 
(Pursuit of Truth, revised edn [Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1992], p. 65)
	
	 Notice that because seeing that (say) there is a bowl in front of one obvi-
ously entails seeing a bowl, it is no surprise that we are content with a 
report of the propositional perception even if we wanted to know only 
what object was seen: we get what we sought and more. It does not follow 
that simple seeing is or even entails propositional seeing. It is also worth 
noting that Quine is apparently thinking only of seeing here; for the 
other four senses, there is less plausibility in maintaining what he does.
	 8	 The adage could not be taken to refer to simple seeing, for what we simply 

34  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
see, say a glass or leaf or field, is not the sort of thing that can be believed 
(to be true or false). To be sure, seeing something, especially something 
as striking as golf ball-size hail, produces a disposition to believe certain 
propositions, say that this is a dangerous storm. But, by what seems an 
economy of nature, there are many things we are disposed to believe but 
do not. I have defended these points in detail in ‘Dispositional Beliefs 
and Dispositions to Believe’, Noûs 28 (1994), 419–34.
	 9	 This applies even to full-scale philosophical dictionaries written by 
teams of experts, though such a work can provide concise statements 
of much valuable information. See, for example, the entries on blind 
sight and perception in Robert Audi (ed.), The Cambridge Dictionary of 
Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995, 1999).
	10	 In the light of what has been said in this chapter so far we can accom-
modate much of what is plausible in the common view that, as D.M. 
Armstrong puts it: 
[perception] is an acquiring of knowledge or belief about our 
physical environment (including our own body). It is a flow of 
information. In some cases it may be something less than the 
acquiring of knowledge or belief, as in the cases where percep-
tions are entirely discounted or where their content has been 
confidently anticipated.
(Belief, Truth and Knowledge [Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1973], p. 22)
	
	 First, I can agree that perception entails acquisition of information; the 
point is that not all our information is possessed as the content of a belief. 
Second, Armstrong himself notes an important way in which perception 
might fail to produce belief: it is “discounted,” as, for example, where 
one is sure one is hallucinating and so resolutely refuses to accept any of 
the relevant propositions.
	11	 This is the kind of view developed in detail by Fred Dretske. See esp. 
Knowledge and the Flow of Information (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1981).
	12	 The notion of normality here is not statistical; it implies that what is not 
normal calls for explanation. In the world as we know it, exceptions to 
the normality generalizations I propose seem at least rare; but the point 
is not that statistical one, but to bring out that the very concepts in ques-
tion, such as those of seeing and knowing, have a connection in virtue 
of which explanation is called for if what is normally the case does not 
occur.
	13	 A property that something is seen as having need not be a property it 
actually has; but here seeing as is phenomenal, not doxastic. Roughly, the 
perceptual content represents what the object is like if it in fact has the 
properties it is seen as having.

Perception  35
	14	 A detailed discussion of the representationality of perception and the 
kind of content it has is provided by Fred Dretske in Naturalizing the 
Mind (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997). He deals with the sense in 
which perceptual content is external. If, loosely speaking, we call the 
perceived object the objectual content then simple perception obviously 
has a kind of external content; but as the object is “in” the experience, it 
might be considered a kind of content, as indeed it may for propositional 
and objectual perceptions as well. With this idea in mind, it is clear how 
the perceptually believed propositions themselves may also be con-
ceived as having external content. I have discussed internal and external 
content in relation to such examples in ‘Internalism and Externalism 
in Epistemology and Semantics’, in Mark Timmons, John Greco, and 
Alfred R. Mele (eds.), Rationality and the Good: Critical Essays on the 
Ethics and Epistemology of Robert Audi (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2007). (This responds to a challenge from Timothy Williamson, 
‘On Being Justified in One’s Head’, ibid., 106–122)
	15	 In speaking of justification that prevails, and of overall justification, I 
have in mind the kind appropriate to a rational person’s believing the 
proposition in question, construed as roughly the kind such that when 
we believe a true proposition with that kind of justification then (apart 
from the kinds of case discussed in Chapter 10 that show how justified 
true beliefs need not constitute knowledge) we know it.
	16	 There are complexities I cannot go into, such as how one’s competence 
figures. I am imagining here someone competent to tell whether a note is 
flat (hence someone not tone deaf): in general, if we are not competent 
to tell whether a kind of thing has a property or not, an experience in 
which it seems to have it may not justify us in believing it does. There is 
also the question of what the belief is about when the “object” is hallu-
cinatory, a problem discussed shortly. Still other problems raised by this 
justification principle are discussed in Chapter 11 in connection with the 
controversy between internalism and externalism.
	17	 If, as is arguable, seeing that it is blue entails knowing that it is, then he 
does not see that it is, though he sees its blue color. But this entailment 
claim is far from self-evident. Suppose he clearly sees a blue bird and 
believes it is blue, but does not know that it is because of his frequent 
hallucinations. A moment before, he hallucinated such a bird; a moment 
later, he will again; and he realizes his senses have been playing such 
tricks on him. Still, he cannot help believing this bird is blue and believes 
that on the basis of clearly seeing it and its color in normal light. Might we 
say that he sees that the bird is blue, but does not know this? We cannot 
say that he “can’t believe his own eyes,” because he does; but if, in the 
normal way, they show him the truth and he thereby believes it, might he 
not see it through them?


2	
Theories of perception
Sense experience, appearances, and reality
•	
Some commonsense views of perception
Perception as a causal relation and its four main elements
Illusion and hallucination
•	
The theory of appearing
•	
Sense-datum theories of perception
The argument from hallucination
Sense-datum theory as an indirect, representative realism
Appraisal of the sense-datum approach
•	
Adverbial theories of perception
•	
Adverbial and sense-datum theories of sensory experience
•	
Phenomenalism
A sense-datum version of phenomenalism
Adverbial phenomenalism
Appraisal of phenomenalism
•	
Perception and the senses
Indirect seeing and delayed perception
Sight and light
Vision and the eyes

2	
Theories of perception
Sense experience, appearances, and reality
Much has now been said about perception and its relation to belief, justifica-
tion, and knowledge. What we have seen puts us in a position to frame a 
theory of what perception is, but we have not yet stated any such theory. 
Stating and assessing theories of perception is the task of this chapter.
Some commonsense views of perception
One natural thing to say about what it is for us to see the green field is appeal-
ingly brief. We simply see it, in an ordinary way: it is near and squarely before 
us; we need no light to penetrate a haze or a telescope to magnify our view. 
We simply see the field, and it may normally be taken to be pretty much 
as it appears. This sort of view, called naive realism, has been thought to 
represent common sense: it says roughly that perception is simply a matter of 
the senses telling us about real things.
The view is naive because it ignores problems of a kind to be described in 
a moment; it is a form of realism because it takes the objects of perception to 
be real things external to the perceiver, the sorts of things that are “out there” 
to be seen whether anyone sees them or not.
A more thoughtful commonsense view retains the realism without the 
naivety. It is quite commonsensical, for instance, to say that I see the field 
because it is before my open eyes and stimulates my vision, thereby appear-
ing to me as a green, rectangular shape. Stimulating my vision is a causal 
relation. For instance, the field, by reflecting light, causes me to have the 
visual experience that is part of my seeing that very field. Moreover, the field 
apparently must cause my visual experience if I am to see it. As the more 
thoughtful commonsense view specifies that the object of perception must 
be a real external thing, we might call it a perceptual realism. Most—but not 
all—theories of perception incorporate perceptual realism.
To understand why perception must have a causal element, suppose I am 
looking at the field and, without my noticing, someone instantaneously drops 
a perfect picture of the field before my eyes. My visual experience might not 
change. What appears to me might look just as the field did. Yet I no longer 
see the field. Instead, I see a picture of it. (I do see the field in the picture, but 

Theories of perception  39
that is secondary seeing and not the kind we are talking about.) The reason I 
do not now see the field is roughly that it has no (causal) effect on my visual 
experience.
Perception as a causal relation and its four main elements
Examples like this suggest that perception is a kind of causal relation between 
whatever is perceived and its perceiver, wherein the object perceived produces 
a sensory experience in the perceiver. This is a plausible, commonsensical, 
and important point, though it does not tell us precisely what perception is. I 
call any theory of perception which incorporates the point a causal theory of 
perception. Most theories of perception are causal.
We can now better understand the four elements I have described as 
among those crucial in perception: the perceiver, the object perceived, the 
sensory experience in which the object appears to the perceiver, and the 
causal relation between the object and the perceiver, the relation wherein the 
object produces that experience. If you see the field, there is a distinctive 
way, presumably involving light transmission to your eyes, in which the field 
produces the visual sensory experience of a green, rectangular shape charac-
teristic of your seeing it. If a picture of the field produces an exactly similar 
visual experience in the same way, it is the picture you see, not the field. 
Similarly, if you hear a piano piece, there is a special way in which it causes 
you to have the auditory sensations of chords and melody and harmony that 
go with it.
It is difficult, though fortunately not necessary for a general understand-
ing of perception, to specify precisely what these causal paths from the object 
to the perceiver are. Some of the details are the business of the psychology 
and neurophysiology of perception. Others are determinable by philosophi-
cal inquiry. Philosophical reflection shows us, for instance, that not just 
any causal chain is the right sort for perception. Consider what is sometime 
called a wayward (or deviant) causal chain. Suppose the piano sounds cause 
a special machine, created by a prankster, to produce in me both temporary 
deafness and a faithful auditory hallucination of the piece. Then I do not 
hear it, though my sensory experience, the auditory experience I enjoy in my 
own consciousness, is just what it would be if I did hear it. Nor do I hear it 
if, though the sound waves reach my brain and cause me to believe a piano is 
playing just the piece in question, I have no auditory experience. Even such a 
highly informed inner silence is not musical.
Illusion and hallucination
We can make progress by pursuing the question of why naive realism is naive. 
Suppose there is a gray haze that makes the green field look gray. Or suppose 
the mouth of the cup I am holding appears, from a certain angle, as if it were 
an ellipse rather than a circle, or feels warm only because my hand is cold. 

40  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
These are perceptual illusions, roughly perceptual experiences that (in the way 
illustrated) misrepresent the object of perception. They illustrate that things 
are not always as they seem. The cup is round and at room temperature.
Now imagine that the field burns up. I sorely miss its rich green and the 
spruce and maple, and on waking from a slumber in my chair I have a hal-
lucination, roughly a sense experience qualitatively like a perceptual one but 
not of an external object. In this case, my (hallucinatory) visual experience is 
just as it would be if I were seeing the field. Here the grass I seem to see is not 
there at all. The point is not that something I see is not as it seems (as in the 
case of illusion) but that there seems to be something where there is nothing. 
With illusion, as illustrated by a partly submerged stick’s looking bent, what 
is there is perceived distortedly; with hallucination, it appears that something 
is perceived when nothing is. Illusions and hallucinations are possible for the 
other senses too. When they occur, we do not just see (or hear, taste, smell, 
or touch) the object. Either we do not see it as it is or (perhaps) we do not see 
anything at all. Not everything we perceive is as it appears to be, and naive 
realism does not explain why.
One way to deal with illusion and hallucination is to stress how they show 
the need to distinguish appearance from reality. In a visual illusion, one sees 
something, but it does not appear as it really is, say circular. In a hallucina-
tion, nothing need appear to me at all, and if anything does, it is in reality 
even less what it appears to be than is the object of an illusion, or is not what 
it appears to be at all: instead of a blue spruce tree’s appearing blue to me, 
for instance, it is as if the conical section of space where it stood appears 
“bespruced.”
The theory of appearing
The sort of account of perception just sketched as an improvement over naive 
realism has been called the theory of appearing: it says roughly that perceiving 
an object, such as a book, is simply its appearing to one in a certain (sensory) 
way. It may, for instance, appear to be rectangular. Thus, one perceives it—in 
this case, sees it—as rectangular. The theory can also provide the basis of 
an account of the sort of experience we have in hallucination as opposed 
to normal perception: that experience, too, the theory takes to be a case 
of something’s appearing to one to have a set of properties; the object that 
appears is simply a different kind.1
The theory of appearing is initially plausible. It incorporates much reflec-
tive common sense, for instance the view that if one sees something, then it 
appears to one in some way, say as a red barn or at least as a visually experi-
enced rectangular patch. The theory says nothing, however, about the need 
for a causal relation between the object and its perceiver (though it allows 
that there be one). If, consistently with its commonsense motivation, one 
stipulated that the crucial relation of appearing to the perceiver to have a 

Theories of perception  41
property—say to be rectangular—is a causal relation, one would then have a 
different theory (of a kind to be discussed shortly).
In addition to the question of how the theory can do justice to the causal 
element in perception, it faces a problem in accounting for hallucinations 
in which there is no object to appear to the person at all. I could, after all, 
hallucinate a green field when I see nothing, say because it is pitch dark or 
my eyes are closed. In such an empty hallucination—one that occurs despite 
my perceiving nothing—what is it that appears green to me? One plausible 
answer is given by a quite different theory of perception. Let us explore that 
view.
Sense-datum theories of perception
Once we think seriously about illusion and hallucination, we may begin to 
question not only naive realism but also any kind of direct realism in the 
theory of perception, any perceptual realism which, like the theory of appear-
ing, says that we see (or otherwise perceive) external objects directly, rather 
than through seeing (or at least visually experiencing) something else. After 
all, not only do light rays come between us and what we see, there are also 
brain events crucial for seeing. Perhaps these events or other intermediaries 
in perception produce or indicate an interior object, presumably a mental 
object that plays an intermediary role in perception.
Hallucination illustrates most readily how such an intermediary might 
figure in understanding perception. Imagine that you vividly hallucinate the 
field just as it would be if it were before you. This seems quite possible. If 
such a “faithful” hallucination occurs, your visual experience—roughly, what 
you are aware of in your visual consciousness—is exactly like the experience 
you have when you see the field. Does it not then seem that the difference 
between ordinary seeing and visual hallucination is simply in what causes the 
visual experience, rather than in what you directly see? When I see the field, 
it causes my visual experience. When I hallucinate it, something else (such as 
my deep desire to have it back) causes my visual experience. But apparently 
what I directly see—the immediate object of my visual experience—is the 
same object in both cases. This point presumably explains why my visual 
experience is qualitatively the same whether I am hallucinating the field or 
really seeing it. If it were not the same, we could not say things like ‘It was 
exactly as if I were seeing the tree in normal light’.
The argument from hallucination
We might develop these ideas by considering an argument from hallucina-
tion. It consists of two connected arguments. The first constituent argument 
attempts to show a parallel between hallucination and ordinary perception:

42  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
	 1	 A perfectly faithful (visual) hallucination of a field is qualitatively just 
like, and so intrinsically indistinguishable from, an ordinary experience 
of seeing that field, that is, not distinguishable from it just in itself as a 
visual experience, as opposed to being distinguishable through verifying 
one’s visual impression by touching the things around one.2
Hence:
	 2	 What is directly “seen,” the immediate object of one’s visual experience, 
is the same sort of (non-physical) thing in a perfect hallucination of a 
field as in an ordinary experience of seeing a field.
But—and we now come to the second constituent argument, which builds on 
(2) as its first premise—clearly:
	 3	 What is directly seen in a hallucination of a field is not a field (or any 
other physical thing).
Indeed, no field is seen at all in a hallucinatory visual experience, so (3) seems 
plainly true. Hence, putting (1)–(3) together, we may infer that:
	 4	 What is directly seen in an ordinary experience of seeing a field is not a 
field.
The overall idea is that when we ordinarily see an everyday perceptible object 
such as a field, we see it through seeing—in the sense of visually experienc-
ing—something else directly: something not seen by seeing anything else. 
What we see directly—call it a sense-datum—might be an image. One may 
prefer (as some philosophers do) to say that we do not in any sense see such 
things but are only visually acquainted with them. To simplify, let us bear 
this alternative in mind but use the more natural term ‘see’.
Just what is directly seen when one sees a field, then, and how is the field 
indirectly seen? Why not say that what is directly seen is a two-dimensional 
object consisting of the same sorts of colors and shapes one sees in the hal-
lucinatory experience? After all, nothing, not even (physical) light, inter-
venes between us and them. There is no “space” for intermediaries. Hence, 
no intermediaries can misrepresent these special objects. These objects are 
apparently internal to us: as traditionally conceived, they could exist even 
if—as Descartes, in his Meditation I, supposed to be possible—we were dis-
embodied minds in an otherwise empty world. The only space they need is in 
the mind. Yet we do see the field by seeing them; hence, we see it indirectly, 
at least in the sense that we see it by having a visual experience that is directly 
of something else.
The idea that experiencing sense-data is required for perception is nicely 
expressed in Emily Dickinson’s poem ‘I Heard a Fly Buzz When I Died’. In 
the final moment of her terminal experience:

Theories of perception  43
There interposed a fly,
With blue, uncertain stumbling buzz,
Between the light and me;
And then the windows failed, and then
I could not see to see.
The external light from the window blocks her eyesight, but this leaves inner 
seeing—portrayed here as a necessary condition for ordinary seeing—still 
possible. Until the end, she can see to see. It is sense-data that are conceived 
as the direct objects of such inner sight.
A sense-datum theory is perfectly consistent with a causal theory of per-
ception: the field produces the colors and shapes in my visual consciousness 
in a way that fully accords with the view that perception is a causal relation 
between something external and the perceiver. Perception is simply a medi-
ated, hence indirect, causal relation between external objects we perceive and 
us: the object produces the mediating colors and shapes that appear in our 
visual fields, and, through seeing them, we see it.
The theory I am describing is a version of a sense-datum theory of per-
ception. Such theories are so called because they account for perception 
by appeal to a view of what is directly given in sense experience, hence is a 
datum, a given, for such experience—the sort of thing one is visually aware 
of in hallucinating a field. This sense-datum thesis (unlike the phenomenalist 
sense-datum view to be discussed shortly) is a realist view; but its realism, by 
contrast with that of naive realism and the theory of appearing, is indirect.3
Sense-datum theory as an indirect, representative realism
A sense-datum theory is a kind of representative realism because it conceives 
perception as a relation in which sense-data represent perceived external 
(hence real) objects to us. On some conceptions of sense-data, they are 
copies of those objects: shape for shape, color for color, sound for sound. 
John Locke held a view of this kind (and in 1689 published it in An Essay 
Concerning Human Understanding, especially Books II and IV), though for 
him sense-data are copies (“resemblances”) only of the primary qualities of 
physical things—solidity, extension (in space), shape, and mobility—not of 
their secondary qualities, above all colors, sounds, smells, and tastes. (He 
took the primary qualities to be objective and of the kind that concern physi-
cal science; and he considered the secondary ones to be in a sense subjective, 
not belonging to physical things but something like representational mental 
elements that they cause in us. Color, then, disappears in the dark, though 
the physical object causing us to see it is not changed by the absence of light.) 
Our question is whether any sense-datum version of representationalism is 
sound, and we need not pursue the interesting question of how these two 
kinds of qualities differ.
Sense-datum theories have had illustrious defenders down to the present 

44  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
age. The theory has also had powerful opponents. To appreciate it better, let 
us first consider how it takes perception to be indirect. Sense-datum theorists 
might offer several reasons to explain why we do not ordinarily notice the 
indirectness of perception (I speak generally, not solely of Locke’s version of 
the theory). Here are two important reasons.
First, normally what we directly see, say colors and shapes, roughly cor-
responds to the physical objects we indirectly see by means of what we see 
directly. It is only when there is an illusion or hallucination that we are forced 
to notice a discrepancy between what we directly see and the object com-
monly said to be seen, such as a book.
Second, the beliefs we form on the basis of perception are formed sponta-
neously, not through any process requiring us to consider sense-data. Above 
all, we do not normally infer what we believe about external objects we see 
from what we believe about the colors and shapes we directly see. This is why 
it is easy to think we “just see” things, directly. Perceiving is not inferential, 
and for that reason (perhaps among others) it is not epistemically indirect, in 
the sense that knowledge of external objects or beliefs about them are indi-
rect, in the sense that they are based on knowledge of sense-data, or beliefs 
about them. On a plausible sense-datum view, I know that the field is green 
through having rectangular green sense-data, not through inference from 
propositions about them.4
It is apparently true that, as a sense-datum view may allow, perception 
is not inferential or epistemically indirect in the way inferentiality would 
imply. But, for sense-datum theorists, perception is nonetheless causally 
and objectually indirect. The perceived object is presented to us via another 
object, though not by way of a premise. These theories are causally indirect, 
then, because they take perceived physical objects to cause sensory experi-
ence, say of colors and shapes, by causing the occurrence of sense-data, with 
which we are directly (and presumably non-causally) acquainted in percep-
tual experience. Perception is also objectually indirect because we perceive 
external things, such as fields, through our acquaintance with other objects, 
namely sense-data. Roughly, we perceive external things through perceptual 
acquaintance with internal things.
Despite the indirectness of perception in these two respects, a sense-
datum theorist need not deny that we normally do not use information about 
sense-data to arrive at perceptual beliefs inferentially, say by an inference 
from my directly seeing a grassy, green rectangular expanse to the conclusion 
that a green field is before me. Ordinarily, when I look around, I form beliefs 
about the external environment and none at all about my sensory experience. 
That experience causes my perceptual beliefs, but what they are about is the 
external things I perceive. It is when the colors and shapes do not correspond 
to the external object, as when a circle appears elliptical, that it seems we 
can understand our experience only if we suppose that the direct objects of 
sensory experience are internal and need not match their external, indirect 
objects. Is the sense-datum view, however, correct on this point?

Theories of perception  45
Appraisal of the sense-datum approach
Let us focus first of all on the argument from hallucination, whose conclusion 
suggests that what is directly seen in visual perception of external objects are 
sense-data. Suppose I do have a hallucination that is qualitatively just like, 
and intrinsically indistinguishable from, the normal experience of seeing a 
field. Does it follow that what is directly seen in the hallucination is the same 
sort of thing as what is directly seen in the normal experience? At least two 
problems confront the sense-datum theory here.
First, why must anything be seen in a hallucination? Imagine that I hal-
lucinate the burned-up field. I might get up, still half asleep, and, pointing to 
the area, cry out, “It’s regrown!” You might conclude that I think I see the 
field again. My initial reaction to realizing I had hallucinated the field might 
be that, hallucination or no, I saw it. But I might just as easily slump back in 
my chair and mumble that I wish I had seen it.
A compromise view would be that I saw the hallucinated grass in my 
mind’s eye. But suppose I did see it in my mind’s eye, and again suppose that 
the hallucination is intrinsically just like the ordinary seeing. Does it follow 
that what I directly see in the ordinary experience is the same as what I see 
in the hallucination, namely, something in my mind’s eye? It does not. The 
notion of seeing in one’s mind’s eye is metaphorical, and such seeing need 
not imply that there is any real object seen, in or outside the mind. However 
vividly I may, in my mind’s eye, see myself standing atop a giant pyramid in 
Toronto, that city has no pyramid, nor need there be any pyramidal object 
in my mind.
There is a second reason to resist concluding that something must be 
directly seen in hallucinations. Recall that my seeing a green field is appar-
ently a causal relation between a sensory experience in me and the field that 
produces the experience. If so, why should the possibility that a hallucination 
can mimic my seeing the field tell us anything about what is directly seen 
(or is an object of visual acquaintance) when one sees that field? It is not as 
if we had to assume that only an experienced object can produce, or causally 
sustain, the relevant sensory experience, and must then conclude that it is an 
internal perceptual object, since there is no other candidate. Many things can 
have more than one causal basis, and the sense-datum theorist has no argu-
ment to show that only an internal perceptual object, or an acquaintance with 
it, as opposed, say, to an abnormality in the visual cortex (which need not be 
an object at all), can cause or sustain the hallucinatory experience.
Moreover, from the similarity of the internal, experiential elements in 
the hallucination and the internal ones occurring in genuine perception, one 
might as well conclude that since the ordinary experience is one of seeing 
only an external rather than an internal object, the hallucinatory experience 
is different only in the absence of the external object. Rather than add to the 
components that seem needed to account for the ordinary experience, we 

46  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
subtract one that seems needed to account for the hallucination. This yields 
a more economical theory of perception.
An analogy may help. Compare trying to infer facts about how we see an 
original painting from facts about how we see it in a photo of it. From the 
indirectness of the latter seeing, it certainly does not follow that ordinary 
seeing of the painting is indirect. And even if a photographic viewing can be 
so realistic that it perfectly mimics an ordinary viewing, it does not follow 
that photographic, two-dimensional objects are components in ordinary 
seeing. Similarly, no matter how much like ordinary experiences hallucina-
tions can seem, it does not follow that the former have all the internal ele-
ments (roughly, mental or mind-dependent elements) of the latter.
It will help to consider a different analogy. Two perfect ball-bearings, by 
virtue of identical diameter and constitution, can be qualitatively alike and 
so intrinsically indistinguishable, yet they can still differ, one being on your 
left and one on your right. Their intrinsic (i.e., non-relational) properties can 
thus be identical, while their relations (to you) differ. Hence they do differ in 
their relational properties. Similarly, the hallucination of a field and the ordi-
nary visual experience of a field can be qualitatively alike, and so intrinsically 
indistinguishable, yet differ in their relations to me or to other things. One 
of them, the visual experience of a field, may be an element in a perceptual 
relation to the field; and the experience we call hallucination, which is not 
based on perceiving the external object hallucinated, may not be an element 
in any perceptual relation to the field, but only something I undergo (an 
element simply “in” me, on the plausible assumption that it is mental).
To account for the difference between the two kinds of experience, we 
might say this: the visual experience indicates the presence of an external 
thing; the hallucinatory experience, though intrinsically just like the visual 
one, only pretends to indicate an external thing to me. Thus, for all the argu-
ment from hallucination shows, the ordinary experience of seeing might be 
a relation to an object such as a green field, namely the relation of directly 
seeing, while the hallucinatory experience of a green field is not a relation to 
that field, such as being an internal copy of it, or even a relation to any other 
object, such as a perceiver.
The points just made about the argument from hallucination indicate that 
it is not sound. Its first premise, (1), does not entail (2) the conclusion drawn 
from it. Nonetheless, the argument poses serious problems for alternative 
theories. What explanatory account of hallucinations and illusions besides 
the sense-datum account might we adopt? To see some of our alternatives, it 
is best to begin with illusion rather than hallucination.
Recall the mouth of the cup viewed from an angle. A sense-datum theory 
will say we directly see (or anyway experience) an elliptical shape and indi-
rectly see the cup. The theory of appearing, however, can also explain this: 
it reminds us that things need not be what they appear to be and says simply 
that they can appear elliptical even if they are round.

Theories of perception  47
Adverbial theories of perception
One could also combine the causal element in the sense-datum approach 
with the direct realism of the theory of appearing and move to a third theory, 
one that says the cup causes us to see it directly, rather than through produc-
ing sense-data in us, yet (because of our angle of vision) we see it as if it were 
elliptical. To avoid suggesting that anything in one’s experience need be ellip-
tical, one could take this to mean that the cup visually “appears elliptically” 
to us. Here the adverb ‘elliptically’ modifies the verb ‘appears’ and describes a 
way in which we visually experience the cup. It does not imply that there is an 
object that appears to us and is elliptical.5 Let us explore this idea in relation 
to the theory associated with it.
It should now be clear why we need not grant (what sense-datum theorists 
sometimes seem to assume about perception) that in order for an object to 
appear a given way to us there must be something we see that is that way, 
for instance an elliptical sense-datum. Suppose that one says simply that the 
cup appears elliptically, using this adverb to designate, from the perceiver’s 
point of view, how one visually experiences it: elliptically. To say it appears 
elliptically is roughly to say it appears in the way an ellipse does, viewed from 
directly above its center, as opposed to the way a circle does when so viewed.
If this adverbial interpretation of such statements as ‘I see an ellipse’ 
seems artificial, consider an ordinary analogy. If I say I have a fever, no one 
could plausibly insist that there is an object, a fever, which I have. ‘I have a 
fever’ is a way of saying I am feverish, that is, my body is above a certain tem-
perature. What our language seems to treat as a statement of a relation to an 
object, a fever, is really an ascription of a property: the property of having a 
temperature above a certain level. Just as ‘having a fever’ can ascribe a certain 
temperature, ‘seeing elliptically’ (in illusional and hallucinatory cases) can 
ascribe a certain visual experience.
On the basis of this move, one can construct what is called the adverbial 
theory of perception. Unlike the theory of appearing, which takes perception 
to be an unanalyzable relation in which things appear to us as having one or 
more properties, an adverbial theory conceives perception as an analyzable 
way of experiencing things. In what may be its most plausible form, it says 
roughly that to perceive an object is for that object (in a certain way) to produce 
in one a sensory experience of it: to cause one’s experiencing it in a certain 
qualitative way, say to see a stick as straight (or, given the illusion induced by 
partial submersion, as bent). Both theories are, however, direct realist views. 
In both, the perceptual object appears to the perceiver without an intermedi-
ary. Other similarities (and some differences) between the two theories will 
soon be apparent.6
The adverbial theorist stresses that we see (or otherwise perceive) things 
in a particular qualitative way and that they thus appear to us in that way. 
Often they appear as they are; sometimes they do not. In each case they 

48  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
are seen directly, not through intermediaries. Even if I do not see the cup as 
circular, I do see it: it is seen directly, yet appears elliptically.
So far, so good, perhaps. But what about hallucinations? Here the adver-
bial theory again differs from the theory of appearing. Unlike the latter, it 
denies that all sensory experience is of some object. The importance of this 
denial is not immediately apparent, perhaps because we suppose that usually 
a person visually hallucinating does see something. Consider Shakespeare’s 
Macbeth, distraught by his murder of Duncan, hallucinating a dagger that 
seems to him to hover in mid-air:
Is this a dagger which I see before me,
The handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch thee.
I have thee not, and yet I see thee still.
Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible
To feeling as to sight? or art thou but
A dagger of the mind, a false creation,
Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain?
I see thee yet, in a form as palpable
As this [sword] which now I draw.
	
(Act II, scene i)
Perhaps Macbeth does see something in the place in question, say the wall 
behind “the dagger” or at least a chunk of space where it hovers. Thus, to 
explain what it is for Macbeth to experience “daggerly,” an adverbial theorist 
might posit an “object” where the “dagger” seems located, if only the section 
of space where it seems to be. On one view, this object might be thought to 
play a role in causing him to have daggerish visual sensations. But there need 
not be any such object in a hallucination. For the theory of appearing, too, 
the space before him, despite being transparent, might somehow appear to 
him to be a dagger.
Supposing we accept this adverbialist account, what happens if it is pitch 
dark and Macbeth’s hallucination is therefore empty, in the sense that there 
is nothing he sees, and hence nothing to serve as an object visually distorted 
into an apparent dagger? Then, whereas the theory of appearing may have to 
posit a sense-datum (or other special kind of object) to serve as what appears 
to be a dagger, the adverbial theory can deny that there is any kind of object 
appearing to Macbeth. It may posit some quite different account of his “be­
daggered” visual experience, such as a psychological account appealing to the 
influence of drugs or of his “heat-oppressed brain.”
Is it really plausible to hold, with the adverbial theory, that Macbeth saw 
nothing at all? Can we really explain how the normal and hallucinatory 
experiences are intrinsically alike without assuming they have the same 
direct objects? In the light of the special case of empty hallucination, the 
sense-datum theory may seem the most plausible of the three. It provides an 
object of Macbeth’s visual experience even if that occurs in utter darkness, 

Theories of perception  49
whereas the adverbial theory posits no perceptual objects at all in empty 
hallucinations. Moreover, the sense-datum view postulates the same sort of 
direct object for ordinary perception, illusion, and hallucination, whereas the 
theory of appearing does not offer a uniform account of their direct objects 
and must explain why entities such as sense-data do not occur in normal 
perception as well as in empty hallucination.
Perhaps, however, the hallucination problem seems more threatening 
than it should to the adverbial theory because hallucinations are felt to be 
perceptual experiences and hence expected to be of some object. But as we 
have seen, although hallucinatory experiences can be intrinsically indistin-
guishable from perceptual ones, all that can be assumed is that the former 
are sensory experiences. Hallucinatory experiences, on the adverbial view, are 
simply not cases of perceiving, at least not in a sense requiring that any object 
appear to one.
Thus, nothing at all need appear to one in hallucinations, though it may 
appear to the subject that something is there. The hallucinator may then be 
described as having a visual sensory experience, but—as nothing is per-
ceived—not a genuine perceptual experience.
Adverbial and sense-datum theories of sensory 
experience
A perceptual experience is always sensory, and normally a sensory experience 
of the sort we have in perceiving is genuinely perceptual. But, as hallucina-
tion shows, a kind of short-circuit can cause the sense-receptors to produce 
sensory experience that is not a normal perceptual experience (or even part 
of one). It is important to consider the debate between adverbial and sense-
datum theories in relation to sensory experience. Both theories take such 
experience to be essential to perception, and both offer accounts of sensory 
experience as well as of perception.
The most natural thing for adverbial theorists to say about hallucinatory 
experience is that it is not genuinely perceptual, but only sensory. They might, 
however, say instead that when a perceptual experience is hallucinatory, it is 
not a case of seeing (except perhaps in the mind’s eye, or perhaps in the sense 
that it is seeing colors and shapes conceived abstractly as properties and not 
as belonging to sense-datum objects). The former description accords better 
with how seeing is normally understood: normally, we cannot be said to see 
what is not there.
The theory suggested by these responses to the hallucination problem 
might be called the adverbial theory of sensory experience. It says that having 
a sensory experience, such as a hallucination of a green field, is experiencing 
in a certain way, for example visually experiencing “green-fieldly.” Our com-
monsense assumption is that hallucination is not usual (for normal people) 
and that most of our vivid sensory experiences are genuinely perceptual. 
They are of, and thus caused by, the external object(s) apparently perceived. 

50  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
But some sensory experiences are neither genuinely perceptual nor externally 
caused. People having them are in, say, a vision-like state, and what occurs in 
their visual cortex may be the same sort of process that occurs when they see 
things. Yet they are not seeing, and their visual experience typically has an 
internal cause, such as an abnormal emotion.
May we, then, regard sense-datum theories of perception as refuted by 
the points just made in criticism of the argument from hallucination and 
on behalf of the suggested adverbial theory and the theory of appearing? 
Certainly not. We have at most seen how one major argument for a sense-
datum theory of perception fails and how alternative theories of perception 
can account for the apparently central elements in perception: the perceiver, 
the (ordinary) object perceived, the sensory experience, and the causal rela-
tion between the second and third.
Indeed, supposing that the argument from hallucination fails to show that 
sense-data are elements in normal everyday perception, sense-data might 
still be needed to account for non-perceptual sensory experience (sometimes 
loosely called perceptual experience because it is characteristic of perception). 
In this limited role, one might posit a sense-datum theory of non-perceptual 
sensory experience: such experience is considered direct acquaintance with 
sense-data.
A sense-datum view may seem preferable to an adverbial theory of sensory 
experience. For one thing, there is something unsatisfying about the idea 
that even in a visual hallucination so vivid that, if one did not suspect error, 
one would stake one’s life on the presence of the hallucinated object, one sees 
nothing, except either in one’s mind’s eye, or in a sense of ‘see’ which does 
not require that any object be seen. Still, perhaps there is such a sense of ‘see’.
There is another aspect of the controversy. It concerns the metaphysics 
associated with adverbial and sense-datum theories of any kind, specifically 
the sorts of things they require us to take as fundamental realities. In this 
respect, the adverbial theories of perception and sensory experience have 
an advantage over the counterpart sense-datum theories: the former do not 
posit a kind of object we would not otherwise have to regard as real. From 
the adverbial perspective, the objects that perception and sensory experience 
involve are simply perceivers and what they perceive. These are quite familiar 
entities which we must recognize and deal with anyway.
Sense-data are quite different from ordinary (presumably physical) objects 
of perception. Sense-data are either mental or at least depend for their exis-
tence on the mind of the subject. Yet they are unlike some mental phenomena 
in that no plausible case can be made for their being really brain phenomena, 
since they have properties, for instance being green and perfectly rectangu-
lar, not normally found in the brain.7
Moreover, there are difficulties in fully understanding sense-data in 
any terms. Is there, for instance, even a reasonable way of counting them? 
Suppose my image of the green field gradually gets greener. Is this a sense-
datum changing or a new one replacing an old one? There seems to be no 

Theories of perception  51
way to tell. If there is no way to tell, how can we ever be sure we learn more 
about a sense-datum than what initially appears to us in experiencing it: how 
can one distinguish learning something more about it from learning about 
something new?8
Problems like these also affect the theory of appearing insofar as it must 
posit sense-data or similar entities to account for hallucinations. To be sure, 
such problems can also beset our understanding of ordinary objects. Can we 
always distinguish a mountain with two peaks from two mountains, or one 
snarled barberry bush from two with intertwined roots? But these problems 
seem less serious, if only because there is no question that there are some 
things of the physical kind in question. The corresponding problems may 
in the end be soluble for sense-data, but they at least give us some reason to 
prefer a theory that does not force us to regard sense-data as the only objects, 
or as even among the objects, we are directly aware of when we see, hear, 
touch, taste, and smell.
Phenomenalism
If some philosophers have thought that perception can be understood with-
out appeal to sense-data, others have conceived it as understandable in terms 
of sense-data alone as its objects. This view has the advantage of being, in at 
least one way, simpler than the adverbial and sense-datum theories. But the 
view is motivated by other considerations as well.
A sense-datum version of phenomenalism
Think about the book you see. It is a perceptible object. Suppose we may 
conceive a real perceptible object as a perceptible object that is as it is, inde-
pendently of what we think it to be. Still, real perceptibles, such as tables and 
chairs and books, are also plausibly conceived to be, by their very nature, 
knowable, at least in being experienceable. Indeed, it is doubtful that real 
objects of this sort could be unknowable, or even unknowable through the 
senses if lighting and other perceptual conditions are good. Now suppose we 
add to these ideas the assumption that our only genuine, certain knowledge 
of perceptibles is restricted to what directly appears to us and would be as it is 
even if we should be hallucinating. And what more does appear to us besides 
colors, shapes and other sensory (sensible) properties? Further, how do we 
know that this book, for example, could even exist without someone’s per-
ceiving its sensory properties? Certainly we cannot observe the book existing 
unperceived. If you observe it, you perceive it.
Moreover, if you imagine subtracting the book’s sensory properties one 
by one—its color, shape, weight, and so on—what is left of it? This is not 
like peeling an apple, leaving its substance. It is like stripping layer after layer 
from an onion until nothing remains. Might we not conclude, then, that the 
book is not only known by its sensory properties, as the other theories of 

52  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
perception also hold, but also constituted by a stable collection of them—by 
visual, tactual, and other sense-data that recur in our experience, confronting 
us each time we have the sense-data corresponding to, say, a certain bookcase 
in our home? Similarly, might it not be that to see the book is simply to be 
visually acquainted with such a stable collection of sense-data?
George Berkeley argued from a variety of angles that this is indeed what 
a perceptible object is. This view (which Berkeley developed in detail in his 
Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge, published in 1710) 
is a version of what is often called phenomenalism, as it constructs external 
objects out of phenomena, which, in this use of the term, are equivalent to 
sense-data. The view is also considered a kind of idealism, since it construes 
physical objects as ideal, in the sense of being composed of “ideas” (an old 
term for sense-data) rather than material stuff that would exist even if there 
were no minds and no ideas.9
Adverbial phenomenalism
Phenomenalism as just described is focused on the nature of perceptible 
objects but implies a related view of perception. In the sense-datum version 
of phenomenalism we have been examining, the associated account of per-
ception retains a sense-datum theory of sensory experience, but not a sense-
datum theory of perception. The latter view posits external objects as causes 
of the sense-data experienced in ordinary perception, whereas sense-datum 
phenomenalism says that physical objects are collections of sense-data.
Using the adverbial theory of sensory experience, one might also formu-
late an adverbial phenomenalism, which constructs physical objects out of 
sensory experience alone and says that to see (for instance) a green field is to 
experience “green-fieldly” in a certain vivid and stable way. To see a thing is 
to have a visual experience that predictably occurs under certain conditions, 
say when one has the experiences of walking out on the porch and looking 
ahead.
On this phenomenalist view, perception can occur without even sense-
data; it requires only perceivers and their properties. Sense-datum versions of 
phenomenalism, however, have been more often discussed by philosophers, 
and I will concentrate on them.
Whereas the sense-datum theory is an indirect realism, phenomenalism is 
a direct irrealism: it says that perceptual objects are directly perceived, but it 
denies that they are real in the sense that they are mind-independent and can 
exist apart from perceivers. This is not to say they are not perceptually real—
real items in sensory experience. The point is that they are not metaphysically 
real: things that are “out there,” which are the sorts of things we think of as 
such that they would exist even if there were no perceivers.
Phenomenalism does not, then, deny that physical objects exist in the 
sense that they are both stable elements of our experience and governed by 

Theories of perception  53
causal laws, such as those of physics. Nor does it deny that there can be hal-
lucinations, as when certain experiences, like those presenting Macbeth’s 
hallucinatory dagger, are too unstable to represent a physical object, or occur 
in only one mode, such as vision, when they should have tactile elements 
as well, such as a cool, smooth surface. What phenomenalism denies is that 
physical objects are real in the classical sense, implying that their existence is 
independent of our experience.
One naturally wonders why things would not go in and out of existence 
depending on whether they are experienced, and why, when they do exist, 
they obey the laws of physics, which certainly do not seem to depend on our 
minds. Berkeley did not neglect to consider what happens to things when 
we cease to perceive them, as when we leave a book in an empty room. His 
answer has been put in the following exchange:
There was a young man who said “God
Must think it exceedingly odd
If he finds that this tree
Continues to be
When there’s no one about in the quad.”
Reply:
Dear Sir:
Your astonishment’s odd:
I am always about in the quad
And that’s why the tree
Will continue to be,
Since observed by, Yours faithfully, God.
If the very existence of external objects is sustained by divine perception, it 
is not difficult to see how their behavior could obey laws of nature that are 
divinely ordained.
A phenomenalist need not be a theist, however, to offer an account of the 
stability of external objects and their lawful behavior. John Stuart Mill, writ-
ing in the same epistemological tradition as Berkeley but without any appeal 
to God, considered external objects permanent possibilities of sensation. To 
say that the book is in the room when no one is there to perceive it is to say 
that there is a certain enduring possibility of the sensations, where having 
those sensations in a certain stable way constitutes perceiving such a book. If 
one enters the room and looks in the appropriate direction, that possibility 
should be realized. By contrast, if one merely hallucinated, there would be 
no reason to expect this. A phenomenalist can, however, be more radical and 
take objects not to have any kind of existence when unperceived. They are 
born and die with the experiences in which they appear.

54  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
Appraisal of phenomenalism
Unlike the sense-datum theory of perception, phenomenalism is only 
occasionally defended by contemporary philosophers. But it has had major 
influence. Moreover, compared with the sense-datum theory, it is more 
economical and in that way simpler. Instead of perceivers, sense-data, and 
external objects, it posits, as the things figuring in perception and sensory 
experience, just perceivers and sense-data. Indeed, adverbial phenomenalism 
does not even posit sense-data.
As a theory of perception, then, phenomenalism has fewer objects to ana-
lyze and interrelate than do the other theories we have discussed. In addition, 
it appears to bridge the most important gap between sensory experience and 
perception of objects: since the objects are internal and directly experienced, 
it seems natural to say that they must be as they appear to be—we see all there 
is of the surface facing us and in principle can see all there is to them as physi-
cal objects. On the other hand, for the external objects of common sense, 
whose reality is independent of perceivers, phenomenalism (if nontheistic) 
must substitute something like permanent possibilities of experience. Thus, 
the bare-bones appearance of the theory is illusory. Even that metaphor is 
misleading; for our bodies are also collections of sense-data; even the flesh 
itself is not too solid to melt into the sensations of its perceivers.
It is tempting to reject phenomenalism as preposterous. But if we do, we 
learn nothing from it. Let me pose just one objection from which we learn 
something important about the relation between sense experience and exter-
nal objects. The theory says that a book, for instance, is—or at least that its 
presence is (necessarily) equivalent to—one’s having or potentially having 
a suitably stable collection of sense-data, and that seeing it is being visually 
acquainted with them. If this is a correct analysis of what seeing a book is, 
then there is a combination of sense-data, sensory items such as colors and 
shapes in one’s visual field, such that if, under appropriate conditions, these 
elements occur in me, then it follows that I see a book. But surely there is no 
such combination of sense-data—a point that is important for understanding 
skepticism. No matter how vividly and stably I (or anyone) may experience 
the colors and shapes appropriate to a book, it does not follow that anyone 
sees one. For it is still possible that I am just hallucinating one or seeing 
something else as a book.10
This kind of hallucination remains possible even if I have supporting 
tactual experiences, such as the smooth feel of paper. For even the sense of 
touch can be hallucinatorily stimulated. Thus, seeing a book is not just having 
appropriate booklike experiences, even if it is partly this, and even though, 
as phenomenalists may hold, there is no experienceable difference between a 
sufficiently stable combination of booklike sense-data and an independently 
real material book. Still, if seeing a book is not equivalent to any such collec-
tion of sensory experiences, phenomenalism fails to account for perception 
of ordinary objects. If there are objects for which it holds, they are not the 
kind we have in mind in seeking an account of perception.

Theories of perception  55
Perception and the senses
I want to conclude this chapter by indicating some remaining problems about 
perception. I have already suggested that adverbial theories, sense-datum 
theories, and the theory of appearing provide plausible accounts of percep-
tion, though I consider some version of the first kind prima facie best and I 
leave open that some theory different from all of them may be better than 
any of them. I have also suggested that some perceptually grounded beliefs 
fail to be justified, and that, even when justified and true, they can fail to 
constitute knowledge. There are two further kinds of problems we should 
explore. One kind concerns observation, the other the relation of perception 
to the five senses.
Indirect seeing and delayed perception
Observing something in a mirror can count as seeing it. Indeed, it illus-
trates the sort of thing ordinarily considered seeing something indirectly, 
as opposed to seeing it by seeing sense-data. We can also speak of seeing 
through telescopes and other instruments of observation, again indirectly. 
But what if the object is microscopic and colorless, yet appears to us through 
our lens as gray? Perhaps we see it, but not quite as it is.
If we see a microscopic object at all, however, there must be some respect 
in which what we see it by is faithful to it or at least represents it by some 
relation of causal dependence—sometimes called functional dependence. 
This relation is perhaps more aptly termed a discriminative dependence, since 
perceptual experience seems to vary as a function of certain changes in the 
object, as where a bird’s moving leftward is reflected in a movement of the 
image in our binoculars, yet in a systematic way that enables us to discrimi-
nate it from its environment. But what we see a thing by, such as color and 
shape, need not be faithful in all respects. A green field can look black at 
night; we are nonetheless seeing it. Moreover, we can see something move in 
the field even if its color and shape are distorted.
How much correspondence between an object and our sensory impressions 
representing it to us is required in order for us to see it (or hear it, touch it, 
and so on)? There may be no answer to this question that is both precise and 
highly general. The cases vary greatly, and many must be examined in their 
own terms.
Observation of faraway objects poses further problems. Consider seeing 
the nearest star. It is commonly taken to be about four light years away. 
Presumably we see it (if at all) only as it was. For the sense-datum theory, we 
have a sense-datum produced by it as it was. On the adverbial view, we are 
sensing “starly” in the way we would if we received the relevant visual stimuli 
at the time the star produced them. If, however, we see it only as it was, do 
we see it, or just its traces?
Suppose that unbeknownst to us the star exploded two years ago. Is it not 
odd to say we now see it, as opposed to seeing traces of it (as it was)? The 

56  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
latter view is preferable, on the ground that if we unqualifiedly see some-
thing now, it exists now. But this point is compatible with the view that even 
though we may see a thing that exists now only as it was, we still literally see 
it now, just as, if we see a cup as elliptical when it is in fact round, we still do 
see the cup. In the case of the star, if the causal connection between it and 
our sensory experience representing it required no elapse of time, we would 
discriminate it sufficiently to see it as it now is.
Similar points hold for everyday seeing, since there is still some temporal 
gap, and for hearing. But if I can see the field only as it was a fraction of a 
second ago, can I still know that it is now green? I think so, provided there 
is no reason to believe its color has suddenly changed (but this is something 
to be reconsidered in the light of our discussion of skepticism in Chapter 
13). The same is not clear for the star: may we know by sight alone that it 
exists now, when it would take about four years for us to realize that the light 
that had been emitted was its last? This seems doubtful, but it may depend 
on how likely it is that a star of this kind might have burned out during the 
period in question. If we knew that such stars last billions of years and that 
this one is only a few million years old, we might plausibly think we know it 
still exists. It is plain, however, that understanding perception and perceptual 
knowledge in these sorts of cases is not easy.
Sight and light
We normally regard seeing as intimately connected with light. But must 
seeing involve light? Suppose you could step into a pitch-dark room and have 
precisely the experiences you would have if it were fully lighted. The room 
would thus look to you just as it would if fully lighted, and you could find any 
unobscured object by looking around for it. Would this not show that you 
can see in the dark? If so, then the presence of light is not essential to seeing.
However, the case does not establish quite this much. For seeing is a causal 
relation, and for all I have said you are just vividly hallucinating precisely the 
right things rather than seeing them. But suppose you are not hallucinat-
ing and that if someone covered a coin you see with lead or covered your 
eyes, you would no longer have a visual experience of a coin. In this case, 
it could be that somehow the coin affects your eyes through a mechanism 
other than light transmission, yet requiring an unobstructed path between 
the object seen and your eyes. Now it begins to seem that you are seeing. You 
are responding visually to stimuli that causally affect your eyes. Yet their 
doing so does not depend on the presence of light.
Vision and the eyes
In an ominous couplet in Shakespeare’s Othello, Desdemona’s father warns 
Othello:

Theories of perception  57
Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see;
She has deceived her father and may thee.
	
(Act 1, scene iii)
It would not have occurred to him to question whether there is any way (lit-
erally) to see without eyes (figuratively, Othello cannot see well at all, which 
causes his downfall). But philosophers must sometimes ask whether what 
seems patently obvious is in fact true. Let us, then, go a step further than 
treating light as inessential to seeing.
Suppose Emma has lost her eyes in an accident, but a camera is later con-
nected to her brain in the way her eyes were. When she points it in a given 
direction in good light, she has just the visual sensations, say of color and 
shape, that she would have had by looking with her eyes. Might this not be 
seeing? Indeed, do we not think of the camera as functioning like the eye? 
If, under the right causal conditions, she gets the right sorts of sensations 
through her eyes or a functional equivalent of them, she is seeing.
But are even “eyes” (or organs functioning like eyes) necessary for seeing? 
What if someone who lacks “eyes” could get visual sensations “matching” the 
objects in the room by strange radiations they emit? Suppose, for instance, 
that moving the coin away from the person results in the person’s visual 
impression’s representing a decrease in its size, and that the impressions of 
it are eliminated entirely by enclosing the coin in cardboard. This confirms 
the presence of an appropriate causal connection between the coin and the 
discriminative visual experience of it. If no part of the body (other than the 
brain) is required for the visual impression of the coin, there is no organ 
plausibly considered a functional equivalent of eyes, but might we not have 
seeing?
 If what is crucial for seeing an object is its producing visual sensations 
suitably corresponding to it and appropriately responsive to changes in it, 
presumably the case is one of seeing. If seeing requires the use of an eye 
or equivalent organ, then it is not—unless the brain itself is a visual organ. 
It is clear enough that the person would have knowledge of what we might 
call visual properties, above all colors and shapes. One might call that 
visual knowledge. But visual knowledge of this kind could be held not to be 
grounded in seeing, nor acquired through use of any sense organs. For these 
reasons, we might doubt whether it must be a kind of perceptual knowledge. 
But a case can surely be made for the visual sensation conception of seeing, as 
against the organ-of-sight conception.
This case, however, may be challenged: can there be “blind sight,” seeing 
in the absence of visual sensations? Something like this is reported in the 
psychological literature. Imagine an ideal case in which a person with excel-
lent blind sight can navigate among obstacles as if the person saw them, while 
honestly reporting an absence of visual sensations. Could this be seeing?
We automatically tend to understand such behavior in terms of seeing, 

58  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
and there is thus an inclination to say that this is seeing. The inclination 
is even stronger if light’s reaching the eyes is necessary for the person to 
avoid the obstacles. But if the subject has no visual sensations—as opposed 
to lacking ordinary awareness of such sensations—it is not clear that we must 
say this, and I doubt that it would be true. The most we must say is that the 
person seems to know where the obstacles are. Knowing through some causal 
process by which objects produce true beliefs about them is not necessarily 
perception, and certainly need not be seeing.11
It may seem that blind sight is genuine seeing because it produces knowl-
edge of “visual propositions”—propositions ascribing visual properties. But 
knowledge of these propositions is possible without vision, for instance by 
something like sonar. Moreover, even dependence on light does not establish 
that the process in question is visual: the light might somehow stimulate non-
visual mechanisms that convey information about the objects emitting it. 
Similar questions arise for the importance of sensations to perception in the 
other sensory modes, for instance of auditory sensations in hearing. There, 
too, we find hard questions for which competing answers are plausible.
It is difficult, then, to provide an overall philosophical account of just what 
seeing, or perception in general, is. All the theories we have discussed can 
help in answering the questions just posed, but none does so in such a simple 
and decisive way as to leave all its competitors without some plausibility. Still, 
in exploring those theories we have seen many important points about per-
ception. It is a kind of causal relation. Even its least complex and apparently 
most basic mode, simple perceiving, requires, in addition to the perceiver, 
both an object of perception and a sensory experience that in some way cor-
responds to that object and records, if only imagistically, an indefinite and 
possibly quite extensive amount of information about the object. Partly on 
the basis of this information, perception tends to produce beliefs about the 
perceived object. It implies that the perceiver at least normally has justifica-
tion for certain beliefs about the object, and it normally produces both justi-
fied beliefs about that object and knowledge of it.
Perception may be illusory, as when something appears to have a property 
it does not have, such as ellipticality when it is really circular. Perception—or 
sensory experience that seems to the subject just like it—may also be hal-
lucinatory, as with Macbeth’s dagger. When it is, the question arises whether 
there must be interior objects, sense-data, with which perceivers are directly 
acquainted. But both illusions and hallucinations can apparently be accounted 
for without positing sense-data, and thus without adding a further element to 
the four that seem central in perception—the perceiver, the object perceived, 
the sensory experience, and the causal relation between the object and per-
ceiver in virtue of which that experience occurs. Illusion and hallucination 
can also be accounted for without denying that perceptual experience—the 
evidence of the senses—normally yields justified belief and knowledge about 
the world outside the perceiver. Many questions remain, but so far we have 

Theories of perception  59
seen no reason to doubt that perception is a rich and basic source of both 
knowledge and justification.
Notes
	 1	 The theory of appearing has not been widely defended, but a detailed 
sympathetic treatment is given in William P. Alston’s ‘Back to the 
Theory of Appearing’, Philosophical Perspectives 13 (1999), 181–203.
	 2	 That the hallucinatory experience is (in its sensory and other phenom-
enal properties) qualitatively exactly similar to the corresponding veridi-
cal one, as a proponent of the argument from hallucination intends, is 
denied by some philosophers—disjunctivists—who hold that there are 
two qualitatively different elements here (hence a disjunction), not a 
single experiential element common to both cases. Disjunctivists need 
not deny the plausibility of the argument, however, but evaluating their 
case against its first premise would require much discussion. For an 
informative non-technical treatment of disjunctivism see William Fish, 
Philosophy of Perception (New York: Routledge, 2010), esp. Chapter 6.
	 3	 For a recent study and defense of a sense-datum theory see Howard 
Robinson, Perception (London: Routledge, 1994). Cf. Laurence BonJour’s 
Epistemology: Classical Problems and Contemporary Responses, 2nd edn 
(Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2009).
	 4	 The view that ordinary perceptual belief is non-inferential is controver-
sial and—for various senses of ‘inference’—has been widely discussed 
by both philosophers and psychologists. Not all sense-datum views, 
moreover, take perceptual belief to be non-inferential. For a discussion 
of perception that brings to bear both psychological and philosophi-
cal literature see John Heil, Perception and Cognition (Berkeley and 
Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1983), esp. Chapter 2. Cf. 
Armstrong, Belief, Truth and Knowledge.
	 5	 Granted, the mouth of the cup does not appear to us to be elliptical if 
we realize its shape cannot be judged from how it visually appears at an 
angle, but that is a different point. It concerns what shape we take it to 
have, not what shape visually appears in our consciousness antecedently 
to our taking it to be of any particular kind.
	 6	 For a detailed and influential discussion of the adverbial theory, with 
criticism of the sense-datum view, see R.M. Chisholm, Perceiving 
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1957).
	 7	 This is a very important point. One major materialist theory of the 
mind–body relation—the identity theory—says that mental phenomena 
are identical with brain states or processes. But this theory fails if sense-
data exist as mental entities and have properties, such as being green and 
rectangular, that no brain process has. Identity theorists thus generally 
oppose the sense-datum theory. See, for example, J.J.C. Smart’s much-

60  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
discussed ‘Sensations and Brain Processes’, Philosophical Review 68 
(1959), 141–56.
	 8	 These and other problems are brought against the sense-datum theory 
by Winston H.F. Barnes in ‘The Myth of Sense-Data’, Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society 45 (1944–5), 89–117. Cf. R.M. Chisholm’s discussion 
of the problem of the speckled hen: is there, for instance, any answer 
to the question of how many spots there are in an image of such a hen? 
And how can we distinguish miscounting the number there are from the 
number’s changing as we count or recount? See his Theory of Knowledge, 
3rd edn (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1989), p. 25.
	 9	 For a detailed twentieth-century defense of phenomenalism, see Book 
II of C.I. Lewis’s An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation (La Salle, IL: 
Open Court, 1946). Cf. R.M. Chisholm’s widely known criticism of this 
defense in ‘The Problem of Empiricism’, Journal of Philosophy 45 (1948), 
512–17.
	10	 Berkeley might hold that if God has booklike sense-data, it does follow 
that there really is a book. A case can be made for this, but one might 
also argue that as an all-powerful being God could bring it about that 
there is a distinction between his creating a physical object and having 
the corresponding sense-data.
	11	 A subject who really does have visual impressions could also misreport. 
The possibility of such misreporting about one’s own consciousness is 
discussed in Chapter 3.

3	
Memory
The preservation and reconstruction of the past
•	
Memory and the past
•	
The causal basis of memory beliefs
•	
Theories of memory
Three modes of memory
The direct realist view
The representative theory of memory
Memory images
Remembering
The phenomenalist conception of memory
The adverbial conception of memory
•	
Remembering, recalling, and imaging
•	
Remembering, imaging, and recognition
•	
The epistemological centrality of memory
Remembering, knowing, and being justified
Memorial justification and memorial knowledge
Memory as a retentional and generative source

3	
Memory
The preservation and reconstruction of the past
I believe that I have pruned the flowering crab apple tree which stands in the 
center of the lawn. This belief is apparently grounded in my memory. When I 
look at the tree and notice its shape, it often occurs to me that I have pruned 
it. When this does occur to me, I have a sense of already believing it. The 
proposition that I have pruned the tree does not seem to be a discovery or a 
result of inference or a bit of wishful thinking, but rather something I have 
had in mind before and now believe with some conviction.
On the basis of all these facts about my belief that I have pruned this 
tree—especially my sense of having already believed this—the belief is justi-
fied. Indeed, I cannot help also thinking I know that I have pruned the tree. 
In particular, my belief that I have seems to be grounded in memory, in the 
way that what I genuinely remember is grounded there. Consider remember-
ing one’s having just read the preceding part of this page. If one has just done 
so, there is likely to be a clear sense of having done it. We do not, for instance, 
simply have a dreamlike recollection, nor are we concluding what we seem to 
remember from something else, as you might conclude, from the distinctive 
shape of a tree, that it must have been you who pruned it.
What, in general terms, is memory? Is it anything beyond a storehouse of 
some of what we have experienced and learned? And what is it to remember 
something? Whatever remembering is, its objects include people, material 
things, facts, events, and, among the events, our own experiences. We might 
also say that remembering is the chief “function” of memory. Is remember-
ing, then, exercising, or being able to exercise, the capacity of memory? And 
is there—as with perceptual knowledge by contrast with mere perceptual 
belief—a special kind of success that goes with remembering something as 
opposed to simply believing it from memory?
In pursuing these questions, it is useful to compare memory with percep-
tion. Both are crucial for our knowledge of what is external to the mind: 
the latter gives us a view of what is outside of us in the present, the former 
of what is outside of the present altogether. Moreover, memory builds on 
perception; it preserves much important information we acquire through the 
senses. It also preserves information about our mental lives. But how does 
memory achieve this preservation? Must it, for instance, operate by storing 

Memory  63
images, or can it preserve bare facts? Before we can see how memory is con-
nected with knowledge and justification, we must first understand what it is 
and something about how it works.
Memory and the past
We can learn some basic points about memory and remembering by clear-
ing away some tempting mistakes. To begin with, we cannot say simply that 
memory is a capacity for knowledge or belief about the past. It is true that 
memory entails that capacity; but one could have and even exercise the capac-
ity without exhibiting memory of the past. Consider the events of World War 
II. I can know a good deal about them through reading, but at the time I am 
learning about them through reading I have no memory of them. I witnessed 
none of them, and I do not remember them. To be sure, I may remember a 
description of them and thereby say—perhaps recalling a history class—that 
I remember (for instance) the invasion of Normandy. This could be called 
remembering the events indirectly. But it is not remembering in the direct 
and primary sense that concerns us.
Far from all knowledge of the past being a kind of remembering, then, we 
commonly know propositions about the past on a basis other than remember-
ing it. Consider again the knowledge of the past obtained while reading; this 
knowledge is not a case of remembering the past but a kind of knowledge of 
the past acquired through testimony about it. Similarly, I can gain knowledge 
about the past from your present description of what you did yesterday. This 
knowledge may not be retained, hence need not become memorial. It may 
never get into the storehouse: I could lose it after I have acquired it, just as we 
forget a phone number needed only for a moment. In these instances, I have 
knowledge of the past, but only for too brief a time to qualify as remembering 
the propositions I momentarily knew.
The same example shows a second major point. Like knowledge of the 
past, beliefs about the past, such as those I acquire about your activities, do 
not necessarily represent memory. For they need not be retained and so are 
not memory beliefs, that is, beliefs grounded in the “faculty” of memory. They 
are grounded in testimony and are forgotten before being memorially stored.
Moreover, even when one does memorially retain beliefs about the past, 
they need not amount to remembering something. Retained beliefs about the 
past can be sheer fabrications unconnected with memory capacities. Imagine, 
for instance, that although I have not seen you for a year, for some reason I 
groundlessly form the belief that precisely a month ago you wore the belt I 
see you wearing now. This belief is not memorial, and even when retained, it 
would not constitute remembering. It comes not from memory of a past event 
but from undisciplined imagination. Retention of a conviction grounded in 
fantasy does not upgrade it into remembering.
One might think that beliefs about the past, when they are memorial, 
and not merely retained, constitute remembering. But this need not be so, 

64  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
because they may be false, whereas everything we genuinely remember to be 
the case is true. Remembering is, then, factive. If, for instance, I remember 
that Thomas Reid discussed John Locke’s ideas about memory, then he in 
fact did.
To see that even a vivid memory belief that something is so need not rep-
resent genuinely remembering that it is, suppose my memory plays a trick 
on me and I misremember an actual event. I mistakenly think, and vividly 
imagine, that I planted a green spruce when it was really a blue one I planted. 
I would now have a memory belief (one tracing back in a normal way to 
an event it is about) that is mistaken, even though its close relatives in my 
memory are true. Still, I cannot remember that I planted a green spruce if in 
fact I did not. Even when a falsehood resides in the neighborhood of truth, 
it is not elevated into an object of remembering simply because it is retained 
in a memory belief.
Suppose, however, that a retained belief about the past is true. Is it then 
an instance of remembering? Not necessarily. Even true beliefs about the 
past may be utterly baseless and true only by lucky accident. Suppose that 
my memorially retained belief that you wore that belt just happens to be true 
because by chance you did select the same belt for both occasions. This belief 
still does not represent remembering. I have merely retained my luckily true 
impression that you wore the same belt. A retained belief of this sort is stored 
in memory, but only properly grounded true beliefs stored there constitute 
remembering that something is so.1
The causal basis of memory beliefs
One might think that just as perceptual beliefs are caused by an object per-
ceived, memory beliefs are caused by a past event remembered. Some memory 
beliefs are caused in this way, and we will soon see that causal connections 
to the past are essential for genuine remembering. But even if it should be 
true that all memory beliefs are produced at least partly by events in the past, 
past events are not the only objects of memory or the only things it “stores.” 
We remember, and thereby retain and believe, general truths, such as math-
ematical theorems. Mathematical propositions are certainly not past events 
(propositions are not events of any kind). Learning them is a past event for 
many people, but that is a quite different point. Nor are the propositions 
past objects of some other sort, or even about the past; but many truths of 
mathematics are clearly among the objects of remembering—the things we 
remember.
Moreover, even if every memory belief is at least partly caused by a past 
event, not every belief caused by a past event is memorial. This point applies 
even if the belief is true. Suppose that my unknowingly taking a poisonous 
drug causes me to feel strangely ill an hour later, and my feeling ill then causes 
me to believe I have been poisoned. Then, indirectly, the past event of taking 

Memory  65
poison causes me to believe that I have been poisoned. But this belief is not 
memorial: it is in no way grounded in my capacity for remembering, and I 
have no memories connected with the belief, such as a memory of someone’s 
putting a white powder into my soup. I arrive at the belief by inference to 
what I think best explains my illness. Thus, the belief’s being caused by the 
past event of my taking the drug need not make it a memory belief, even if the 
belief is true. My memory has played no role in supporting the content of the 
belief. The belief lacks a ground appropriate for suitably connecting it with 
the past event it represents.
An analogy with perception will help. Consider a belief caused by a flash 
that I do not see, but merely feel as a momentary heat. This belief need not be 
a visual belief, even if it is a true belief with visual content, say that a camera 
flashed near my hand. A belief caused by something visible is not thereby a 
visual belief, just as a belief caused by a past event—something remember-
able—is not thereby a memory belief. Since a belief caused by a past event 
need not be memorial, it is not true that a memory belief simply is a belief at 
least partly caused by a past event.2
The analogy between memory and perception is limited, but it does get 
us on the right track. For surely a belief about the past is memorial only if it 
has some causal connection to a past event, just as a belief is perceptual (say, 
visual) only if there is some causal connection between it and the perceived 
object. Even a belief that arises from testimony and not from first-hand 
observation and is then stored in memory is traceable to the past event of 
one’s acquiring the belief. A thing cannot normally be stored in memory 
unless it has entered that storehouse. Since memory beliefs can concern any 
subject, including future events or mathematical truths, we can see that such 
beliefs need not be about any particular event even if their existence does 
trace to one.
Could we, however, have innate beliefs? If so, they could be about the 
past but not memorially connected with a past event, perhaps because the 
belief is possessed at the time one came into being and does not trace to any 
remembered experience. It would not enter the storehouse of memory: it is 
part of one’s initial equipment. To be sure, perhaps an innate belief could be 
memorial in roughly the ordinary way if in some previous incarnation it traces 
to an appropriate event, something of the kind that produces a memory.3 
Otherwise, it is best considered merely a retained belief, say retained from 
birth as part of one’s native endowment, rather than a belief entering one’s 
memory through, say, observation or testimony.
Just as it is hard to specify how, in order to be perceptual, a belief must be 
causally connected to the perceptible object it is about, it is hard to specify 
how, in order to be memorial, a belief must be causally connected to the past. 
This will become clearer as we explore memory, but fortunately many points 
can be made about memory without a detailed account of the kind of causal 
connection in question.

66  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
Theories of memory
If we view theories of memory on the model of three major kinds of theories 
of perception discussed in Chapter 1, there is much we can discover both 
about the kinds of causal relations required for remembering and about how 
memory grounds justification and knowledge. Broadly speaking, the three 
kinds are direct realism (including the adverbial theory and the theory of 
appearing as well as naive realism), representative realism, and phenomenal-
ism. Each has an analogue in the theory of memory.
Three modes of memory
In constructing theories of memory, there are at least three different but 
closely related notions we must track: memory, remembering, and recalling. 
We have memories of many things. We remember, and we sometimes recall—
roughly, call back to mind—much that we have experienced. Both points 
apply to us in virtue of the power of our memory, conceived as a capacity (a 
mental “faculty”). There are things we remember, such as isolated facts, that 
we may never have occasion to recall. But they remain in the storehouse of 
memory ready to be retrieved if needed. When retrieved, we may be said to 
have, at the time of retrieval, a memory of them.
Our memory, conceived as a “faculty,” is a general capacity: the better it 
is, the more memories we can have, the better we remember, and the more we 
can recall. Among the things we remember are skills and related behavioral 
capacities, both mental and physical. Memory of skills is remembering how. 
Much of what emerges here concerning remembering will apply to remem-
bering how (though the notion does not seem reducible to any kind of know-
ing that), but I will not take time to discuss it specifically.
There are, then, three memorial notions to be accounted for by a theory 
of memory: first, remembering of events, things, and propositions; second, 
recalling those items; and third, memory as the capacity in virtue of which 
remembering and recalling occur. There is a further task: accounting for 
errors. Like perception, memory, as the capacity for remembering and recall-
ing—and I include recollection as a kind of recalling—can produce impres-
sions that are illusory or, in a way, hallucinatory. Not every memory belief is 
true; not every recollection is faithful to what it recalls.
In developing the memorial counterparts of the three main kinds of theo-
ries of perception, I will concentrate chiefly on remembering, particularly 
on the simple remembering of events—event memory, for instance of my 
pruning the tree—as opposed to remembering that I pruned it, propositional 
remembering, or remembering the pruning to be hard, objectual remembering. 
I assume that, like simple perception of something, simple remembering of 
an event, such as a bird’s flying by, does not entail having a belief about it, 
as opposed to being disposed to form beliefs about it if the occasion elicits 
them. But let us concentrate on cases in which one does have such a belief. 
These cases are crucial for understanding memory knowledge.

Memory  67
The direct realist view
There is a memorial counterpart of naive realism in the theory of perception. 
It is the view that when we remember an event, we just plain remember it 
and it is as it seems to us to be. This might be taken to mean that the event 
is directly presented to us by our memory, as if it were present in memory, 
just as a flash might be present to vision. The difference is that unlike a flash 
that fills one’s visual field, the remembered event is not taken to be occur-
ring. Like all the plausible accounts of memory, this one is best construed as 
causal: as assuming that some causal chain links us to the remembered event. 
If I remember seeing Bill a year ago, then it must be in part because I did see 
him that I believe (or am disposed to believe) that I did, and not, say, because 
I dreamt that I did.
As a direct realist view, this position also maintains that a memory belief is 
not produced by any intermediary with which we are acquainted, such as an 
image. To say that would imply a counterpart of the sense-datum theory. We 
would have an indirect realism: just as we perceive the outside world through 
sense-data that present it to us, we remember the past by virtue of memory’s 
presenting it to us.
Naive realism about memory is inadequate. To begin with, not just any 
causal connection to the past will do, as we saw with the poisoning case. The 
causal chain linking a memory belief to a remembered event must be in a 
sense unbroken. In part, the idea is that a belief retained in memory cannot be 
lost from it during the period of retention. To see the idea, consider a broken 
chain. Imagine that you saw me prune the apple tree and you remember my 
doing so. The pruning is then the main causal ground of your memory belief, 
as it is of mine, and we both remember my pruning it. But suppose I com-
pletely forget the event and thus no longer believe I pruned the tree, then, 
solely on the basis of your testimony, later come to believe (once again) that 
I pruned it. There is still a causal chain from my present belief back to the 
pruning; for the pruning produced your belief, which in a way produced your 
testimony, which in turn produced my present belief. But the memorial chain 
in me was broken by my forgetting.
 Given this kind of broken chain to my pruning, I do not retain my origi-
nal belief and do not remember my pruning; I simply know, from your testi-
mony, that I did it. I now believe the “same thing” but do not have the same 
(the original) belief.4 To be sure, after your testimony, when I have retained 
the knowledge you gave me, we might say that I now remember, again, that 
I pruned the tree but no longer remember pruning it. Propositional memory 
about an event, even an action of one’s own, does not entail event memory 
of it.
The case also shows that knowledge of a past event, even if it is one’s own 
action, does not entail remembering it. I know that I pruned the tree, but I do 
not remember pruning it. My propositional knowledge of the event no more 
represents remembering it than my knowledge based solely on your testi-
mony that there is a radiant sunset visible from the front porch represents my 

68  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
seeing it, when I am inside reading. If, however, I know that I pruned it, then 
that event is a real element in the past.
A realist view of remembering seems correct, then, if it is coupled with 
the requirement of an unbroken causal chain. But as stated so far, the view 
is deficient in some of the ways that naive realism about perception is. For 
one thing, memory is subject to illusion. I might remember an event, such 
as meeting you, but not quite as it was, just as you might see white paper 
in yellow light, and thus not see it as white but as yellow. Here I do not 
simply remember; I remember incorrectly, for example in remembering 
the meeting as taking place in New York when it was in fact in Chicago. 
(I correctly remember meeting you; I do not remember the location of the 
meeting.) Second, there is the memorial counterpart of hallucination: I may 
have a vivid image of mailing a letter, and might believe I remember doing so, 
yet be mistaken. We must, then, account for memorial illusion and similar 
problems.
The representative theory of memory
The territory may begin to look familiar, particularly if we recall the sense-
datum theory of perception, which posits inner sensory objects that, as 
intermediaries between external things and the mind, represent the former 
to the latter. For instance, suppose that there are memory images, and that 
they are genuine objects which figure in remembering rather as sense-data 
are thought to figure in perceiving. These images might even be sense-data if 
they are vivid enough, but normally they are more like the images of imagina-
tion. It might be like this: seeing the apple tree as I prune it produces sensory 
images in me (whether these are sense-data or not); my memory images of 
the tree might be conceived as a kind of residue of perception.5
Perhaps, then, we may be said to remember an event when we have at least 
one true belief about it suitably grounded in a memory image of it, that is, an 
image of it which derives, by a suitable unbroken chain, from our experience 
of the event and represents it correctly in at least some way. The better the 
memorial representation of the event, the better our memory of it. Call this 
view the representative theory of event memory. It takes event memory to be a 
representational faculty that works through images that “picture” what they 
represent.
Memory images
Like the sense-datum theory of perception, the representative theory of 
memory is an indirect realism. It construes our remembering as mediated 
by memory images (though not as based on inference from facts about such 
images); it is through images that we are acquainted with the past. The view is 
also like the sense-datum theory in readily accounting for memorial illusion 

Memory  69
and similar problems. To remember incorrectly, as opposed to simply having 
a false belief about the past with no basis in memory, is to be acquainted with 
a memory image that, despite its being sufficiently faithful to the remembered 
event to ground one’s remembering it, has some aspect which produces a false 
belief about the event, say that it was in New York rather than in Chicago.
The counterpart of hallucination is also treated as one would expect by 
analogy with the sense-datum theory. Memorial hallucination occurs when 
one has an image that is intrinsically like a memorial one, but not linked to 
a past event by a suitable causal chain, just as, in perceptual hallucinations, 
the sense-data are not produced by the object (or are produced by it in an 
abnormal way).
Unfortunately, the representative theory of memory has many of the dif-
ficulties of the sense-datum theory and some of its own. Consider the similar 
difficulties first, particularly in relation to remembering.
Remembering
Remembering an event surely does not require acquaintance with an image of 
it. You may be able to reel off, from memory, some details of a conversation 
you heard a week ago, even if you have no images, even auditory ones, of the 
conversation or what it concerned. Moreover, misremembering an event does 
not require acquaintance with something, such as an image, which actually 
has the property one mistakenly remembers the event as having had, as a 
sense-datum representing the mouth of a cup from a certain angle is sup-
posed to have the property of ellipticality. I can misremember my meeting 
you by remembering our meeting as being in New York, when it was actually 
in Chicago, even if the mistaken element in my memory is not accompanied 
by images of anything in New York (and even if the correct aspect of my 
memory is not accompanied by an image that is of our actual meeting in 
Chicago). I may simply remember the occasion with its animated conversa-
tion, yet have the false impression that it was in New York.
Memorial thinking—an episode of thinking about one or more remem-
bered objects or events—may also be possible without objects to serve as 
images of the past. In retrospective imagination, might I not vividly experi-
ence our conversation even if I am acquainted with no object that represents 
it for me in the way that, in hallucinations, sense-data are supposed to repre-
sent physical objects?
Granted, if I have no images, then I cannot recall—in the sense of bringing 
back into my visual consciousness—the color of your sweater. But I might 
still remember what you said and the hoarseness of your voice owing to the 
flu, and I might remember what color your sweater was even if I cannot 
bring the color itself to mind (perhaps you said that its pale blue matched 
your jacket, and by that remark I remember what the color was without 
imaging it). I can apparently imagine past events—whether accurately or 

70  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
inaccurately—without having direct acquaintance with memorial pictures of 
them, just as I can apparently hallucinate an object without having direct 
acquaintance with a sense-datum representation of it.
A further difficulty for the representative theory arises when we consider 
a disanalogy between remembering and perceiving. I can remember our 
meeting and describe it to someone from memory even if I have no images 
or image-like experiences at all, whereas I apparently cannot see a tree if I 
have no visual sensations, such as the impressions of foliage that make up 
an image of a tree. Remembering, even of events that one has perceived, is 
neither a sensory event nor necessarily an imaginational one (even if it often 
is, especially in some people, such as those who are highly “visual”). So there 
need not be, in every case of remembering, even the makings of a representa-
tive theory to which images are crucial.
The phenomenalist conception of memory
The kinds of difficulties we have seen in relation to the representative theory 
of memory suggest that the memorial counterpart of phenomenalism may 
also suffer irreparable difficulties. Above all, a phenomenalist account of 
memory relies on images or imaging at least as heavily as does the repre-
sentative theory, but neither images nor imaging seems either necessary or 
sufficient for remembering events. Let us explore this.
On what may be the most plausible phenomenalist account of memory, 
remembering an event is understood in terms of the imaginational content 
of present experience. To remember an event is (roughly) to have a suitable 
collection of images representing it, on the basis of which, in a certain way, 
one believes (or is disposed to believe) something about that event.
This will not do. Remembering an event simply does not require a collec-
tion of images analogous to the sense-data from which phenomenalists try 
to construct physical objects (or even a collection of imaging experiences 
such as an adverbial phenomenalist might posit). Images of the kind posited 
to account for remembering are not only not necessary for remembering, 
as our examples show; they also are not sufficient for it either. Just as no 
collection of sense-data is such that its existence implies perception of an 
external object, no collection of images (even apparently memorial images) 
is such that, in having a belief about the past grounded on those images, one 
must be remembering something. No matter how vivid my images of talking 
with you beneath the skyscrapers of Wall Street, I might not remember our 
talking there, and my belief that we did talk there (or anywhere) might still 
be mistaken.
The adverbial conception of memory
If these difficulties are as serious as they seem, then if, in search of a better 
account of memory, we are to change course and construct a plausible 

Memory  71
alternative theory of remembering, we must take account of them. First, such 
a theory will not claim for remembering all the kinds of directness it posits 
for perception. Plainly, memory is not temporally direct, as past events are not 
temporally present, whereas we can see a thing’s properties at the same time 
that it has them.6
By contrast, any plausible account of remembering, such as a well con-
structed adverbial theory of it, will take remembering to be (as perceiving 
apparently is) epistemically direct. Memory beliefs, as we have seen, are not 
inferential. It is not on the basis of any premise that I believe (or know) that 
I have pruned that crab apple tree. My belief is grounded in memory as a 
preserver of beliefs and other elements, not in other beliefs which give me 
premises to support the memory belief.7
Moreover, an adequate theory must not say that (actively) remembering an 
event, such as pruning a tree, is constituted by memorially imaging in a way 
suitably caused by that past event, as perceiving an object is sensory stimula-
tion suitably caused by the thing perceived. For no such imaging need occur 
(though it commonly does, especially in the case of the active remembering 
that constitutes recalling). We can describe a past event to others, and in 
doing so actively remember it, even if we are imaging nothing but their faces.
Positively, the adverbial view of memory, applied to remembering events, 
should be expressed as something like this. First, actively (occurrently) 
remembering an event is manifesting—realizing, in a sense—a memorial 
capacity concerning it, in which this manifestation is linked to the event 
by an unbroken causal chain. Just as, in observing a cat, one is manifesting 
a perceptual capacity, in describing a play from memory one is realizing a 
memorial one. The most typical manifestations—the things that constitute 
experiencing in a memorial way—are probably (1) imaging processes con-
cerning the event; (2) formations of memory beliefs about it, often through 
considering one’s memory images; and (3) considering the propositions so 
believed, with a sense of already believing them. But there may be other real-
izations, for instance recognizing a picture of the event. Second, passively 
(dispositionally) remembering an event is having this capacity in an unmani-
fested way, as when, though I can recall the pruning if I want to, my mind is 
wholly on other things. For me to remember the pruning actively, something 
must call it to mind.
To see the difference between the dispositional and the occurrent in 
another context, consider elasticity in a rubber band. It is a dispositional 
property, whereas stretching is an occurrent property that manifests the 
disposition (this distinction is further discussed in Chapter 4). Recalling 
an event can be related to dispositionally remembering it much as a thing’s 
stretching is to its elasticity. Just as stretching manifests the disposition of 
elasticity, recalling is a case of actively remembering that manifests the dis-
positional memory which retains the thing recalled.
Propositional remembering—remembering that—can be construed simi-
larly. On the adverbial view imagined, to remember that an event occurred 

72  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
is a memorial way of truly believing that it did, roughly, to have one or more 
true beliefs about it which are suitably linked by an unbroken chain to past 
experience and represent the event in a certain way (if only as occurring). 
These beliefs constitute knowledge that is preserved in memory. On this 
view, then, remembering that something is so constitutes knowledge from 
memory, rather as seeing that the cat is sleeping constitutes knowledge 
through perception.
Most of what we propositionally remember is dispositional, roughly, 
recorded in dispositional memory beliefs. When these beliefs are called up 
in active propositional remembering, as when I describe how I pruned the 
tree, one is experiencing in a memorial way. This does not require being 
acquainted with imagistic memorial objects. One may, but need not, image 
memorially, as when one actually calls up the remembered experience and 
focuses on its features in one’s imagination.
Moreover, whether one images a remembered event or not, the event need 
not be entirely as one remembers it. Here event memory differs from propo-
sitional memory; the former, like seeing as, can misrepresent the thing in 
question, whereas remembering that something is so, like seeing that it is, 
entails its being (exactly) so. One can remember a meeting as being in the 
wrong city, thus remember it in the wrong way geographically, just as one can 
see a circular cup as elliptical and so see it in the wrong way visually.
In neither case of illusion, to be sure, does one have to be fooled: with 
memory as with perception, illusion does not always produce false belief. 
Typically, if I remember something as having a certain quality, say a con-
versation as being rushed, I believe it was like that; but I can remember it as 
such, yet know from independent evidence (such as testimony) that it was 
not rushed. If, however, we really remember some object or event, then we 
are right about some aspect of it, or are at least in a position to form some 
true beliefs about it on considering the matter. This is parallel to the point 
that if one really sees something, one is at least in a position to see it to be 
something or other.
Remembering, recalling, and imaging
So far, the adverbial view seems superior to its competitors in relation to 
the crucial notions to be accounted for, such as remembering and recalling. 
Will this direct realist view stand scrutiny? In answering this, it is important 
to see that the view can account for imaging; it simply does not take imag-
ing to be an acquaintance with inner objects. Still, there may be a nagging 
doubt about whether it does not incline us to posit too little imaging. When 
I am remembering an event, especially a perceived one like a ship’s docking 
as opposed to an imperceptible one like thinking about knowledge, I typi-
cally do image some aspect of it. I refer, of course, to active remembering, 
as opposed to my stored remembering of events that are now far from my 
mind but which I could actively recall if the subject came up. The first kind of 

Memory  73
remembering is occurrent, as it is in part a matter of something’s occurring 
in me. The second kind is dispositional, as it is a matter of my being disposed 
(roughly, tending) to remember a thing actively (occurrently) provided that 
something activates my memory. Thus, although yesterday’s concert may be 
far from my mind while I write a letter, if someone asks how I liked the 
Chopin, then my dispositional memory may be activated; and, as I recall it, 
thereby occurrently remembering it, I may say I thought it inspiring.
It is occurrent remembering that is analogous to perception and is of chief 
concern now; and it is occurrent remembering that is closely associated with 
imaging. Does occurrent remembering require some sort of imagery after all, 
even if not images as sense-datum objects?
Here is a natural way to answer. Consider one of your memories of an 
event, for instance meeting someone for the first time. Do this in such a 
way that you take yourself to be actively remembering that event. Second, 
ask yourself whether you are now imaging. When I do this, I image. Here, 
remembering involves imaging. But notice what has happened: I have called 
up a memory and inspected the results of my effort. Perhaps I am imaging 
because of the way I evoked the remembering, or because I scrutinized the 
process of my calling up the meeting. Self-conscious evocation of the past 
and scrutiny of the results may yield findings unrepresentative of remember-
ing in general.
This procedure of evoking memories of the past, then—selecting them 
by recalling past phenomena—is defective as a way of determining whether 
remembering requires imaging. But the procedure does show something. For 
suppose that what I have done is to recall a past event. Perhaps recalling, 
which is calling back to mind, often by a lengthy search of one’s memory, 
does require imaging provided it is a recalling of an imageable event, such as 
pruning a tree, as opposed to, say, recalling a theorem. There is some reason 
to think this. If no imaging of our seaside luncheon enters my consciousness, 
how can I have recalled it? Sometimes, moreover, we say that we cannot recall 
someone, meaning not that we do not know who the person is, but that we 
cannot image the person. There, recalling seems to imply imaging. To be 
sure, recalling the content of our conversation is possible simply by becom-
ing conscious, in a certain recollective way, of its informational content. But 
the content of a conversation, as distinct from our activity of conversing, is 
not imageable in the first place.
Even if the most common kinds of recalling should imply imaging, how-
ever, remembering does not. Why, then, does that idea persist? For one thing, 
when we collect specimen memories in order to examine remembering, we 
often do it by recalling things. If so, it should be no surprise that the speci-
men memories involve recalling something. If, in trying to determine the 
shades of beech leaves, I collect specimens only from the nearby copper 
beeches, it is no surprise that I may erroneously think beeches in general 
have copper-colored leaves.

74  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
Remembering, imaging, and recognition
A related point is that what we cannot recall we often believe we cannot 
remember. On the adverbial view, this is natural; for an inability to remember 
is a lack of a memorial capacity, and, understandably, we may think we lack 
that capacity when, under normal conditions, we cannot exercise it in an 
expectable way—such as recalling an event we have been taking ourselves to 
remember. But imaging is only one exercise of memorial capacity, important 
though it is; and just as we can be capable of climbing a mountain, but not 
necessarily by every route to the top, we may have the capacity constituted 
by remembering something, but be unable to exercise the capacity in every 
way it can be exercised. Hence, inability to image does not imply that one 
does not remember the thing in question. We can see, then, both why there is 
a tendency to think that remembering requires imaging and why we should 
not accept this view.
Imaging may still seem more important for remembering than so far 
granted. But take another case. Suppose I can neither recall nor image Jane. I 
might still remember her; for on seeing her, I might recognize her, and might 
even recall, our last meeting. This would suggest that my memory simply 
needed to be “jogged.” In adverbial terms, before I see her again I disposi-
tionally know her in a certain memorial way—I remember her—even though 
I cannot imagistically experience her in a memorial way—namely, recall her.
I choose the example of remembering a person because it is easy to show 
that we do remember someone by creating the right occasion. Recalling her 
is an indication of my remembering her, but it may not be possible despite my 
remembering her; recognizing her when I meet her is a proof of the pudding. 
We cannot draw this contrast with past events, since, unlike people, they 
cannot be literally brought back. But even here, there is indirect recognition, 
as when one recognizes a ship’s docking in Helsinki harbor upon seeing a 
picture of the event. It is doubtful, then, that the relation between recalling 
and remembering is different with events.
It is important to see that the way I am now considering the relation 
between recalling and remembering is direct and non-introspective. I am 
exploring what is possible and what it would show. It is possible, however 
unlikely, that I might have no retained image of pruning the apple tree, yet be 
able to give an account of the pruning that is both remarkably accurate and 
grounded by a suitable causal chain in the original experience of the pruning. 
If I do this without my having received any information about the event from 
anyone else, it is an excellent reason to think I remember the event. It is akin 
to recognition of a person one could not recall, say by picking the person out 
of a crowd.
To be sure, our beliefs about what events we remember may depend on 
what we can recall, which, in turn, may be largely dependent on what we can 
image. But what events we do remember is a matter of how our memorial 
capacities are grounded in the past and not of what kind of evidence we can 
get, imagistically or otherwise, concerning that grounding.

Memory  75
In exercising my capacity to remember events, then, I need not rely on 
my images or even on my ability to image, though in fact retention of images 
doubtless aids remembering. The representative theory of memory therefore 
seems mistaken, and some memorial analogue of direct realism regarding 
perception is apparently preferable. The possibility of a good analogy is 
already implicit in the point that an event can be perceived even though the 
time at which one has a sensory experience representing it is later than its 
occurrence. The suggested adverbial view of remembering is a good position 
from which to work; but I leave some important questions about memory 
unexplored, and it would be premature to present that view as clearly correct.
The epistemological centrality of memory
We can now see some points about memory as a source of belief, knowledge, 
and justification. Let us start with beliefs. Memory is a source of beliefs in 
the way a storehouse is a source of what has been put there, but it is not a 
source of beliefs in the generative way perception is. Clearly our memory, as 
a mental capacity, is a source of beliefs in the sense that it preserves them and 
enables us to call them up. It also enables us to draw on our beliefs to supply 
premises in reasoning. We do this when we solve mathematical problems using 
memorized theorems. We may also be guided by other kinds of presupposed 
premises without having to call them to mind. Remembered propositions 
(and patterns) can be like routes we know well: they can guide our journey 
while we concentrate on the road just ahead.
When our memory beliefs are of propositions we remember to be true, 
they constitute knowledge. If you remember that we met, you know that we 
did. Similarly, if you remember me, you know me, at least as I was once—you 
may not be able to recognize me now. So memory, when it is a source of 
what is remembered, commonly yields both knowledge that and knowledge 
of. Remembering, then, is knowledge-entailing. The analogy to perception is 
significant here too.
Is memory also a source of justification? Surely what justifies the great 
majority of my justified beliefs about the past is my memory. For instance, 
my belief that I twice pruned the crab apple tree is justified because of the 
way that belief resides in my memory. It has, for example, a special kind of 
familiarity, confidence, and connection with other things I seem to remem-
ber. Moreover, it appears that if I remember that I met you, I am justified in 
believing I met you. It thus seems that when memory yields genuine remem-
bering it also yields justification. Certainly this commonly holds.
Remembering, knowing, and being justified
Perhaps, however, I could remember that I met you, yet fail to be justified in 
my belief because (in fun) you convince me, by good arguments and by enlist-
ing the corroboration of plausible cohorts, that I am probably confusing you 

76  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
with someone else. Still, suppose my belief remains properly grounded in my 
actual memory of having met you, perhaps because the memory is so clear 
that the belief is almost unshakable. Then I may still genuinely remember 
that I met you. Despite this point, if your arguments are good enough, I may 
properly reproach myself for still holding the belief that I met you, and my 
belief may perhaps cease to be justified. Its justification would be defeated 
by your arguments and by my own credible self-reproaches based on seeing 
their plausibility.
If this case is possible, it has an important implication. If, as I have sug-
gested, remembering that something is so entails knowing it is so, then 
the case as described implies that knowing that something is so does not 
imply justifiedly believing it. (In Chapters 11 and 12, I return to the relation 
between knowledge and justification, but it is important here to see that the 
domain of memory provides a challenge to understanding that relation.)8
Furthermore, if the case is possible and one can remember that something 
is so, yet fail to be justified in one’s believing that it is so, then we might 
question whether memory yields any justified beliefs after all. Fortunately, 
the example by no means rules this out. Quite apart from cases of genuine 
remembering, memory often yields justified belief. If I have a vivid and confi-
dent belief that I met Jane, and this belief seems to me to arise from a memory 
of the occasion, I may, simply on that basis, be justified in the belief. Surely 
this is, after all, just the sort of belief that usually does represent remember-
ing; in any case, I have no reason to question its credentials.
Memory can justify a belief even when that belief does not constitute 
knowledge or rest on actual remembering of the proposition or event in ques-
tion. If, for instance, I do not in fact remember meeting Jane, perhaps the 
only reason why I do not is that it was her identical twin, of whose existence I 
had no idea, whom I met. That excusable ignorance may prevent my knowing 
that I met Jane, but it does not preclude my justifiedly believing that I did.
Memorial justification and memorial knowledge
These reflections suggest a memorial justification principle for events: nor-
mally, if one has a clear and confident memory belief that one experienced 
a given thing, then the belief is justified. We might also call clear, confident 
memory beliefs prima facie justified.9 A memory belief is one grounded in 
memory; this is commonly a kind of belief which represents the event or 
proposition in question as familiar in a certain way. Commonly, if one con-
sidered the matter, the belief would seem to one to arise from one’s memory; 
but the notion of a memory belief cannot be defined by that normal prop-
erty of such beliefs, and it is not easily defined at all.10 We can believe—even 
know—from memory propositions we do not find familiar (as when we have 
not recalled them or thought of them in years).
A still broader principle may perhaps be true—the general memorial jus-
tification principle: normally, clear, confident memory beliefs with any subject 

Memory  77
matter are prima facie justified. Moreover, if they do not conflict with other 
beliefs one holds, say that one has never been to the country where one now 
seems to remember going to a museum, they tend to be justified on balance. 
With both principles the degree of justification may not be great, particularly 
if there is no corroboration, such as apparently recalling a sequence of events 
related to the belief. My belief that I met someone at a restaurant tends to 
be better justified if I apparently remember related events, such as a friend’s 
recently mentioning our meeting that person there, than if it is isolated from 
other apparent memory beliefs that confirm it.
Both these and similar principles help to describe how memory is plausibly 
conceived as a source of justification. This is certainly how it is standardly 
conceived. Imagine someone saying “I have a clear and confident memory 
belief that we met at the Café Rouge, but this gives me no justification what-
ever for thinking so.” We can understand someone’s holding that there is 
better justification for not believing this—say, because of known memory 
failure—but that would show only that the justification is defeated, not that 
there is none whatever to be defeated.
Memory as a retentional and generative source
There is a very important difference between the way in which memory is a 
source of knowledge and the way in which it is a source of justification. To 
see this, we must take account of several points. Memory is a preservative 
capacity with respect to both belief and knowledge. First, when you initially 
come to believe something, you do not (yet) remember it. Second, you 
cannot (propositionally) remember something unless you previously knew or 
at least believed it, for instance perceptually, and your belief of it is suitably 
preserved.
Thus, memory retains belief and knowledge. Retention is roughly equiva-
lent to preservation but has a lesser implication of unchangingness; a belief 
held with considerably less confidence than originally, for example, is less 
properly said to be preserved than to be retained. Memory does not generate 
belief and knowledge, except in the sense that, by using what you have in 
memory, you can acquire beliefs and knowledge through inference (or per-
haps through other processes that themselves yield belief and knowledge). I 
may, for instance, infer much from propositions I remember, or I may arrive 
at greater knowledge of a movie I saw by calling up images of various scenes. 
Here it is thought processes—inferential and recollective—that, partly on 
the basis of retained material, produce belief and knowledge.
To say that memory is not a generative source of knowledge is not to deny 
that memory is sufficiently connected with knowledge to figure in a plausible 
epistemic principle—call it the memorial knowledge principle: normally, a 
true memory belief, supported by a vivid, steady experience of recall that is in 
turn corroborated by other memory experiences, represents knowledge. But if 
this principle is correct, that is because such beliefs are of a kind that ordinarily 

78  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
constitutes knowledge originally, say when one learned through perception 
the truth that a tree has recently been pruned, and continued therefore to 
have grounds, preserved by one’s memory, for holding this belief.
Memory is not, then, a basic source of belief or knowledge, a source that 
generates them other than through dependence on a contribution by some 
different source of them. It is, however, a basic source of justification. We can 
be justified in believing something either on the basis of remembering that it 
is so, or on the basis of our having a clear and confident memory belief that 
it is, even if this belief is not true. If, however, we genuinely remember that 
something is so, it is so, and we know that it is.
Memory can not only generate justification, as when my vivid sense of 
remembering a line of poetry justifies believing that I do. Memory can also 
preserve justification, particularly when the justification resides in memo-
rially retained beliefs, for instance beliefs of one’s premises for a view one 
holds. But the original justification of a belief need not be retained in order 
for the belief to be memorially justified. The sense of memory can generate 
justification by virtue of the way the proposition or event in question occurs 
to us, and this could occur when we have forgotten our original, remembered 
justification, such our as witnessing the event that, perhaps because we have 
read a vivid account of it, we now have a memorial sense of remembering.11
This justifying capacity of memory often operates even when we have 
no associated images. But in accounting for what justifies memory beliefs, 
images do have a significant if restricted role. We are better justified in a 
memory belief supported by imagery, especially vivid imagery, than in 
memory beliefs not thus supported (other things being equal). Perhaps the 
reason is that we have at least some justification for believing that there is less 
likelihood of error if both imagery and beliefs point in the same direction, 
say to my having met you two years ago.12
For all the analogy between memory and perception, then, there are impor-
tant differences. Although both are essential to our justification for believ-
ing a huge proportion of what we believe, perception is more fundamental 
in a way that is crucial to the development of our outlook on the world. It 
supplies memory with much of its raw material, whereas memory, though it 
guides us in seeking what to observe and, in that way, often determines what 
we perceive, does not supply raw materials to perception: it manufactures 
no perceptibles. It does, to be sure, supply raw materials for introspection 
and thought: we would have vastly less to “look in on” or think about if we 
did not remember sights and sounds, conversations and embraces, ideas and 
plans.
Both memory and perception, however, are to be causally conceived, and 
both are, in different ways, sources of belief, justification, and knowledge, 
propositional as well as objectual. But perception is a basic source of all three: 
it can produce them without dependence on contributions from another 
belief-producing capacity, such as reasoning. Memory, being a capacity for 

Memory  79
the preservation, and not the creation, of belief and knowledge, is not a basic 
source of them.
Still, without memory, perceptual knowledge could not be amassed and 
used to help us build theories of the world or of human experience, or even 
to make local maps to guide daily living. We would not even have a sense 
of who we are, since each moment in our lives would be dead to us by the 
next. Beyond this, memory is a basic source of justification. That is a vitally 
important epistemological point. And as we shall see, the role of memory in 
our knowledge in general is also of enormous epistemological importance.
Notes
	 1	 We might call merely retained beliefs weakly grounded in memory, but 
I reserve the terms ‘memory belief’ and ‘memorial belief’ for beliefs 
grounded in the normal way illustrated by remembering what I come to 
believe from, say, perception or testimony.
	 2	 The point that how beliefs are caused, and what their content is, may not 
indicate how they are grounded (where grounding is the notion crucial 
to determining whether the belief is justified or represents knowledge) 
is even wider than so far suggested. A noise too faint for me to hear may 
cause Tom to jump, which in turn causes me to believe that he is startled; 
my belief that he is startled is thus (indirectly) caused by the noise, but it 
is not auditory. It is in no way grounded in my hearing.
	 3	 In both Western philosophy—for example in Plato and Descartes—and 
Eastern philosophy, innate ideas have played a significant part. In recent 
times there has been much skepticism about whether they—as opposed 
to innate dispositions to form ideas—are even possible. I cannot discuss 
this issue here but see no reason not to leave the matter open for the 
sake of argument. In any case, the possibility of “innate” beliefs seems 
implicit in something less controversial: that in principle a person could 
be created as a perfect copy of another, and so would have at least some 
beliefs at the moment of “birth.”
	 4	 The belief is the same in the sense of being an instance of the same cogni-
tive property—the one we both instantiate—as is indicated by our each 
believing the proposition; but the instance of that property is not the 
same, much as if I raise my hand twice in the same way there are two 
(act) tokens of the same (act) type.
	 5	 John Locke, in (e.g.) his Essay Concerning Human Understanding, speaks 
of perception as “the inlet of all the materials of” knowledge (Book II, 
Chapter IX, section 15) and says, comparing perception and memory, 
that: 
when my eyes are shut or windows fast, I can at pleasure recall to 
my mind the ideas of light, or the sun, which former sensation had 
lodged in my memory . . . there is a manifest difference between 

80  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
the ideas laid up in my memory . . . and those [of perception] 
which force themselves upon me . . . there is nobody who doth 
not perceive the difference in himself between contemplating the 
sun, as he hath the idea of it in his memory, and actually looking 
upon it: Of which two, his perception is so distinct, that few of 
his ideas are more distinguishable from one another.
(Book IV, Chapter XI, section 5; italics added)
	 6	 Or virtually the same time: the time-lag argument discussed in Chapter 
2 indicates that if light transmission is essential to seeing, there will be a 
tiny gap between (1) the time at which something we see has a property 
we are visually caused to believe it has and (2) the time at which we see 
it as having, or believe it to have, that property. We also found, however, 
that light transmission does not seem absolutely essential for seeing. 
Note that any causal theory will imply a time-lag when the needed 
causal connection requires time; but, as with an engine pulling a train, 
the production of effects by causes need not in all cases require temporal 
passage.
	 7	 I assume that simple inferences do not require the use of memory; but 
even if they do, once a belief is formed inferentially, it can be inferentially 
held only insofar as it remains supported by the premise beliefs. Then 
memory may well be what preserves the inferential structure represented 
by believing p on the basis of premises; but the belief that p is itself only 
preserved by memory without being genuinely memorial. Not every 
way that memory preserves a belief renders the belief memorial, and one 
would explain why one holds this belief not by saying ‘I remember . . .’ 
but by citing one’s premises.
	 8	 I develop this case, defend the conclusion tentatively stated here, and dis-
cuss other matters considered in this chapter in ‘Memorial Justification’, 
Philosophical Topics 23, 1 (1995), 31–45. For a different position on some 
of the relevant issues see Carl Ginet, Knowledge, Perception, and Memory 
(Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1975).
	 9	 It is natural to wonder whether the degree of justification normally 
belonging to such memory beliefs is as great as that normally belonging 
to perceptual beliefs. Perhaps not, and one could add ‘to some degree’ in 
the normality formulation. But it still appears that the kind of justifica-
tion is such that it is generally reasonable to believe the propositions in 
question and that when they are true we commonly can know them on 
the basis of the relevant kind of justifier.
	10	 My ‘Memorial Justification’ (cited in note 8) and some of the literature 
it refers to consider this difficult question; fortunately, it is not one that 
requires here any more than the sketch of an answer given.
	11	 Cf. Michael Huemer’s conception of memorial justification in his ‘The 
Problem of Memory Knowledge’, Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 80 

Memory  81
(1999), 346–57 reprinted in his Epistemology: Contemporary Readings 
(London: Routledge, 2002).
	12	 Note that ascribing justificatory power to memorial images and other 
memorial experiences, such as the sense of having believed a proposition, 
p, does not commit one to holding that each time we have the relevant 
experience we get more justification for p, so that we could enhance 
our justification simply by repeatedly calling up confirmatory images. 
Granted, a more vivid recollection of the event that p represents, such as 
pruning a tree, may, other things being equal, better justify believing one 
pruned it than does a less vivid image. We should distinguish occurrent 
justification—the kind based on an experience one is now having—from 
dispositional justification—the kind one has for a belief simply retained 
in memory. The former varies in degree with the justificatory force of 
the ground in one’s experience at the time; the latter either is invariant, as 
when one’s ground is of a constant justificatory power, or changes only as 
one acquires new grounds or loses one or more actually possessed. New 
grounds include new confirmatory evidences; justificatory losses include 
forgetting or having the confirmatory images one can recall become 
less vivid. Variability in the force of occurrently justificatory elements 
does not entail an additive effect. For instance, regarding my belief that 
I pruned the spruce, calling up my image of pruning it may provide more 
support on one occasion than on another, perhaps because of differing 
levels of concentration; but this does not entail that I can parlay my 
recollections into certainty by simply repeating the exercise, any more 
than verifying that a pillar remains firmly attached to the corner of one’s 
porch strengthens its support. Indeed, repeating the exercise of recalling 
an event can tend to reduce our justification, at least when it amounts 
to inflating our self-assurance. I thank Sven Bernecker for raising the 
difficult question of the justificatory force of repeated recollection.


4	
Consciousness
The life of the mind
•	
Two basic kinds of mental properties
•	
Introspection and inward vision
•	
Some theories of introspective consciousness
Realism about the objects of introspection
An adverbial view of introspected objects
The analogy between introspection and ordinary perception
Introspective beliefs, beliefs about introspectables, and fallibility
•	
Consciousness and privileged access
Infallibility, omniscience, and privileged access
Difficulties for the thesis of privileged access
The possibility of scientific grounds for rejecting privileged access
•	
Introspective consciousness as a source of justification  
	
and knowledge
The range of introspective knowledge and justification
The defeasibility of introspective justification
Consciousness as a basic source

4	
Consciousness
The life of the mind
So far, we have talked mainly about beliefs concerning things outside our-
selves: the green of grass, the smell of roses, the feel of glasses in our hands. 
But there is much that we believe about what is internal to us. I believe that 
I am thinking about self-knowledge, that I am imaging cool blue waters, and 
that I believe I am a conscientious citizen. In holding these beliefs, I attribute 
rather different sorts of properties to myself: thinking, imaging, and believ-
ing. What sorts of properties—or at least phenomena—are they, and how do 
our beliefs about them give us justification and knowledge? For instance, are 
some of these self-directed beliefs the products of a kind of inner perception? 
This seems a natural view, and we have already seen how an understanding of 
perception can clarify memory. If there is some truth in the inner perception 
view of self-knowledge, exploring the analogy between outer perception and 
self-consciousness might help to explain how beliefs about our inner lives are 
justified or constitute knowledge.
Our most important kind of self-knowledge is not about our bodies, but 
about our minds—for instance about what we believe, want, feel, and take 
ourselves to remember. It will help to start by describing the kinds of mental 
properties illustrated by thinking, imaging, and believing. Since they are all 
broadly mental, this is a task in the philosophy of mind. But epistemology 
cannot proceed without considerable reflection on mental phenomena, and 
here it overlaps the philosophy of mind. Thinking, inferring, and believing, 
for example, are central in both branches of philosophy; and to understand 
self-knowledge, we need a good sense of what kinds of properties character-
ize us. We might begin with two kinds that, for our purposes, yield a basic 
division.
Two basic kinds of mental properties
Thinking is a kind of process and involves a sequence of events, events natu-
rally said to be in the mind. Thinking in human beings has a beginning, a 
middle, and an end; it is constituted by mental events, such as considering 
a proposition; and these events are always ordered in time, often in subject 
matter, and sometimes in logic.

Consciousness  85
Simply having an image, in the minimal way one does when there is a 
static, changeless picture in the mind’s eye, is being in a certain (mental) 
state. Unlike something that changes, the existence of such a state does not 
absolutely require the occurrence of any events during the time it exists. 
Imaging can be a process of calling up a succession of images or, as when one 
of them is held changeless in the imagination, static. I could image some-
thing for a time without any change whatever in my imaging, and without the 
occurrence of any mental event that might be part of the imaging.
Believing could also be called a mental state, but this terminology can be 
misleading in suggesting that having a belief is a state of mind, where that 
implies a global mental condition like worry or excitement. Unlike images 
and aroused emotions such as jubilation, beliefs do not tend to crowd one 
another out.
Beliefs differ from images in at least two further ways. First, beliefs need 
not be in consciousness and indeed we can be conscious of only a quite lim-
ited number at once. We all have many which, unlike my belief that I am now 
writing, we cannot call to mind without some effort. Second, believing need 
not in any sense be “pictorial.” Consider a belief present in consciousness, in 
the way my belief that the rain has stopped is. This belief is present because I 
have called it to my attention. I might have held it without attending to it or 
even to the fact it records.
Even a belief present in consciousness in a prominent way and about some-
thing as readily picturable as the Statue of Liberty need not involve anything 
pictorial in the way my imaging must. Suppose I believe that the Statue of 
Liberty has a majestic beauty standing high in the Bay of New York. Without 
picturing anything, I can entertain this proposition, and in that way have this 
belief in my consciousness. By contrast, imaging cool blue waters requires 
picturing a blue surface. To be sure, when we call up this belief about the 
statue, we tend to picture that structure. But I could later get the proposition 
in mind, as when I am listing some majestically beautiful landmarks deserv-
ing preservation, without picturing anything. I could even retain the belief 
if I had forgotten what the statue looked like and simply remembered my 
aesthetic judgment of it.
It will help in sorting things out if we observe a distinction that has 
already come up but needs more development. Let us call mental properties 
like beliefs dispositional and mental properties like thinking (processes-
properties, we might say) occurrent. The latter are constituted by mental 
events and are occurrences: they take place in the way events do and may be 
said to happen or to go on. The former are not occurrences and may not be 
said to happen, take place, or go on.1
The basic contrast is this. To have a dispositional property, or (perhaps not 
quite equivalently) to be in a dispositional state, is to be disposed—roughly, 
to tend—to do or undergo something under certain conditions, but not nec-
essarily to be actually doing or undergoing or experiencing something or 
changing in any way. Thus, my believing that I am a conscientious citizen 

86  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
is, in part, my being disposed to say that I am one, under conditions that 
elicit that sort of verbal manifestation of my belief, such as your asking me 
whether I intend to vote. Yet I can have this belief without doing or undergo-
ing anything connected with it, just as sugar can be soluble while it is still in 
a solid, unaltered lump. I can have the belief in dreamless sleep. By contrast, 
to have an occurrent property is to be doing, undergoing, or experiencing 
something, as sugar undergoes dissolution. Thus, if you are thinking about 
mental phenomena you are doing something, even if you are in an armchair; 
and if you are imaging a flowering crab apple tree, you are experiencing some-
thing, at least in the sense that your imaging the tree is now present in your 
consciousness.
Having a static image, however, as opposed to calling up an image, is not 
a process as, say, silently talking to oneself is. Occurrent mental properties, 
then, must be subdivided. To mark the difference, we might call occurrent 
mental properties like thinking experiential process properties and occurrent 
mental properties like having a static image in mind experiential state prop-
erties.2 Clearly, both differ from dispositional mental properties; possessing 
those does not even require being conscious, much less having a kind of 
experience. All three kinds of mental properties turn out to be important for 
understanding the epistemological role of introspection.3
Introspection and inward vision
If we take a cue from the etymology of ‘introspection’, which derives from 
the Latin introspicere, meaning ‘to look within’, we might construe intro-
spection as attending to one’s own consciousness and, when one’s mind is 
not blank, thereby achieving a kind of inner seeing. I might introspect my 
images, for instance, and conclude that my image of the spruce and nearby 
maple indicates that the spruce is taller than the maple. I might have to intro-
spect my image of the maple to tell without looking back at it whether it 
has three secondary trunks. Introspection need not, however, be labored or 
even constitute an act. It may be simply a matter of becoming conscious of 
something in my mind. This can be as natural as something’s coming into 
one’s physical field of vision, rather than like making the effort of observa-
tion in order to see.
It is not only in consciously introspecting that one can vividly image. In 
Shakespeare’s King Lear there is a scene in which Edgar wants to convince 
Gloucester, who has lost his sight, that he is at the top of a cliff. Edgar’s 
description is so vivid that the deception succeeds:
How fearful and dizzy ’tis to cast one’s eye so low!
The crows and choughs that wing the midway air
Show scarce so gross as beetles. Halfway down
Hangs one that gathers samphire, dreadful trade!
Methinks he seems no bigger than his head.

Consciousness  87
The fishermen that walk upon the beach
Appear like mice, and yond tall anchoring bark . . .
Almost too small for sight.
	
(Act IV, scene vi)
What Gloucester sees in his mind’s eye is so vivid that he believes he is at 
the edge of a precipice. His visual consciousness is filled with images from 
Edgar’s portrait. Here introspection is simply a matter of vivid consciousness 
of the imagery that is before the mind.
If introspective consciousness does produce inner seeing and other sensu-
ous imagery (such as, commonly, sound), we can try to understand it by 
drawing on what we know about perception. For instance, we can explore 
introspectional counterparts of some theories of perception and sensory 
experience. But one limitation of that procedure is apparent the moment we 
reflect on the dispositional mental properties, for instance believing, want-
ing, or having a fear of cancer. We do not see such properties in any sensory 
way, nor even as we may be thought to see (in our mind’s eye) an image of 
cool blue waters.
The analogy to vision might, however, still hold for introspection regard-
ing occurrent mental properties. If it does, it presumably applies only to the 
mental state properties, such as imaging. For surely thinking is not seen. It 
need not even be heard in the mind’s ear. I may hear my silent recitation of 
Shelley’s ‘Ozymandias’, but thinking need not occur in inner speech, cer-
tainly not speech of that narrative, punctuated sort.
Perhaps it is only pictorial mental properties that we see through inner 
vision; and perhaps it is only other “phenomenal” properties, such as inner 
recitations, tactual imagings (say, of the coldness of a glass), and the like, that 
seem accessible to inner analogues of perception: to hearing in the mind’s 
ear, touching in the tactual imagination, and so on. It is doubtful, then, that 
we can go very far by conceiving introspection as simply producing inward 
seeing. Still, it is worth exploring how the analogy to seeing holds up for the 
one important case of pictorial properties.
Some theories of introspective consciousness
Suppose that introspecting such things as images of cool blue waters does 
produce a kind of inner seeing. Are we to understand this seeing on realist 
lines, so that there must be some real object seen by the introspective eye?
Realism about the objects of introspection
One might think that the sense-datum view simply cannot be extended in 
this way to introspection. This is at least a natural assumption about self-
understanding. For on the introspectional counterpart of the sense-datum 
view, seeing (in one’s mind’s eye) an image of cool blue waters would require 

88  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
something like another image, one that represents the first one in the way 
sense-data represent a physical object seen by virtue of the perceiver’s 
acquaintance with them. Call it a second-order image, as it is an image of an 
image.
What would second-order images be like? If I try to image my image 
of cool blue waters, I get that very image all over again, or I image some-
thing else, or I get something that is not an image at all, such as a thought 
of my original image. But this point does not show that there could not be 
second-order images. Perhaps there could be some that are less vivid than the 
originals they picture, just as my imaginational image of blue waters is less 
vivid than the sensory image I have in seeing those waters. In any case, sense-
datum theorists could avoid positing second-order images. It would be more 
plausible to hold that to image simply is to be acquainted with sense-data of a 
kind different and typically less vivid than outer perception yields.
An adverbial view of introspected objects
A defender of an adverbial account of sensory experience would not coun-
tenance images as sense-datum-like entities with properties in their own 
right. Take first perceptual imaging that is later “copied” in retrospective 
imagination. Adverbialists will likely hold that there is really just one basic 
kind of imaging process, and that it occurs more vividly in perception than 
in imagination. Thus, imaging blue waters is simply imaginationally, rather 
than perceptually, sensing in the way one does upon seeing blue waters: sens-
ing “blue-waterly,” as we might adverbially express it. Since the adverbial 
view conceives imaging as a way of experiencing rather than as a relation to 
an object, there is no image as an object to be copied.
On the adverbial view, then, there is no need to posit second-order images 
to represent first-order mental images to us, and the less vivid imagings which 
might seem to represent mental images are best construed as less vivid occur-
rences of the original imaging process. This point does not show that there 
cannot be second-order images or similar interior objects of inner vision, but 
the adverbial view reduces the inclination to think that there are any by sug-
gesting a plausible alternative account of the facts needing explanation. Chief 
among these facts is that in recalling an image (especially a sensory image), 
one may have a less vivid image which apparently stands to the former as an 
imaginational image of a scene stands to the sensory image of that scene from 
which the imaginational image seems copied. The adverbial account of sen-
sory (and other) experiences might explain this by interpreting the recalled 
image, say of blue waters, as recollectively sensing blue-waterly, where this is 
like visually sensing blue-waterly, but less vivid.
Given these and other points, it seems doubtful whether any realist theory 
of the introspection of images—one that takes them to be objects existing 
in their own right and having their own properties—can justify a strong 
analogy between that kind of introspection and ordinary viewing. For it is 

Consciousness  89
by no means clear that there is any object introspected to serve as the coun-
terpart of an object of ordinary vision. For an adverbial approach to experi-
ence, although realism about the (physical) objects of perception is a highly 
plausible view, realism about the objects of introspection is not. The idea is 
roughly that mental properties, such as imaging, can adequately represent 
physical objects in our mental life; inner objects should not be postulated for 
this task.
The anti-realist element in this adverbial view should not be exaggerated. 
To deny that mental images are objects having their own properties and in 
that sense are not real does not in the least imply that imaging is not real. 
Imaging processes are surely real properties of persons, even though they are 
not relations between persons and objects of immediate, inner perception. 
Does this imply, say, that introspection has no object in the sense of some-
thing it is of (or about), such as imaging blue waters? Certainly not. But this 
“object” is a kind of content, not an entity to which the mind is related. On 
the adverbial view of introspection, this kind of object is determined by what 
the introspection is about and is not a thing with its own properties, such as 
colors and shapes, sounds and movements, depths and textures.4
The analogy between introspection and ordinary perception
The adverbial view in question may seem unable to do justice to the appar-
ently causal character of introspection. There is surely some causal expla-
nation of my being acquainted with, say, imaging blue waters rather than 
imaging the Statue of Liberty when I monitor a daydream of a rural summer 
holiday. Perhaps it is mainly in what causes the relevant imaging that such 
introspective consciousness differs from seeing. How might this difference 
be explained?
Suppose the adverbial account is true. Introspection may still be like 
simple perception in two ways. First, introspective viewing may imply some 
kind of causal relation between what is introspected in it, say an imaging, and 
the introspective consciousness of that state or process. Second, such view-
ing may imply a causal relation between the object of introspective knowl-
edge—for instance one’s imaging blue waters—and the beliefs constituting 
this knowledge.
In explaining the analogy between introspection and perception, I want 
to concentrate mainly on introspective beliefs as compared with perceptual 
beliefs; we can then understand how introspection, and indeed consciousness 
in general, can ground justification and knowledge. A major question is how 
we can determine whether what the theory says is true: whether, in intro-
specting, as when we concentrate on our own imaging, the beliefs we thereby 
form about what we are concentrating on are produced by that very thing  
or by some aspect of it such as its imagined blue color. Only to the extent 
that they are should we expect introspection to ground justification and  

90  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
knowledge in the broadly causal way that perception does. Many consider-
ations are relevant here, but let me cite just two sorts.
First of all, it is surely because I am imaging cool blue waters that, when, 
with closed eyes, I introspectively consider what I am conscious of, I believe 
I am imaging them (and am conscious of my imaging them). It is natural (and 
reasonable) to take this ‘because’ to express a causal relation, even if I could be 
mistaken in thinking there is one. If the causal basis of my belief is not some 
inner object seen (as on the sense-datum theory), it is presumably the state or 
process of imaging. This is, in any event, how an adverbial theory of sensory 
experience would view the causal relations here. Similarly, if I introspectively 
believe that I am thinking about introspection, I believe this because I am 
thinking about it: it is the thinking itself that causes me to believe that it 
is occurring. In both cases, the introspective beliefs are produced by inner 
processes, and indeed in a way that makes it plausible to regard the beliefs 
as true. Some inner processes are like seeing an object in still other ways, but 
these processes can all be understood without positing inner objects analo-
gous to perceptible ones such as trees and seen by the introspective eye.
A second point is this. Suppose my believing that I am imaging cool blue 
waters is not caused by my imaging them. The belief is then not introspective 
at all. It is about what is introspectable, but it is not grounded in introspec-
tion, any more than a belief merely about a perceptible, such as the rich red in 
a painting in a faraway museum, is a perceptual belief. Here, then, is another 
important similarity between introspection and perception.
Introspective beliefs, beliefs about introspectables, and 
fallibility
It may seem that the case described—believing one is imaging something 
when in fact one is not—is impossible. But suppose I have been asked to 
image cool blue waters, yet I hate the water and anyway have a lot on my 
mind. Still, if I want to be cooperative, then even though my mind is mainly 
on my problems, I may call up an image. However, as I am not concentrating 
on calling up the image, the image that I actually get might be only of a blue 
surface, not of blue waters. I might now inattentively assume (and thereby 
come to believe) that I have called up the requested image of cool blue waters. 
This belief is produced by a combination of my calling up the wrong image, 
which I do not attentively introspect at all, and by non-imaginational factors 
such as my desire to cooperate. I might even retain the belief for at least some 
moments after I cease to image at all. In that case, it is not only not true; it is 
not even introspective.
This example suggests that even a true belief about one’s conscious states 
or processes would not be introspective without being causally connected 
with them. It would be about these introspectable elements but not grounded 
in “seeing” them in the way required for being an introspective belief. Other 
examples support the same point. Imagine that my task is to think about 

Consciousness  91
introspection for a solid hour. I monitor myself and, on the basis of intro-
spection, conclude from time to time that I am thinking about introspection. 
As I reflect on my topic, I continue to believe that I am thinking about intro-
spection. Now when I truly believe this simply because I have repeatedly 
confirmed it and am confident of steady concentration, and not because I am 
still monitoring myself introspectively, my belief, though perfectly true, is 
not introspective.
The best explanation of this point seems, again, to be that my belief is not 
caused (in the right way, at least) by the thinking that should be its ground. 
It is a retained belief about my ongoing mental activity; it is not grounded 
in that activity as a focus of my introspective attention. My belief that I am 
thinking about introspection is a propositional belief that I am now doing so, 
but it is not an objectual belief, regarding my present thinking, to the effect 
that it is about introspection. It is not grounded in my present thinking at all, 
any more than my belief that a painting I remember portrays a rich red coat 
is grounded in seeing that red.
An overall conclusion we may draw here is that although there may be no 
objects such as sense-data or imaginational copies of them which we intro-
spect, the process by which self-consciousness leads to introspective beliefs, 
and thereby to knowledge and justified beliefs about one’s own mind, is nev-
ertheless causal. Like perception of the outside world and (though in a dif-
ferent way) recalling events of the past, it produces something like a sensory 
impression and, at least commonly, beliefs about what seems to be revealed 
to one by that impression. The causes of introspective beliefs, however, are 
apparently processes and events in the mind. They are not, or at least need 
not be, objects that reside therein.
Consciousness and privileged access
Suppose that introspective consciousness is causally grounded in the way we 
have seen. We should then raise some of the same epistemological questions 
about it that we raised about perception. For instance, is introspection sub-
ject to counterparts of illusion and hallucination? And if it is, how might it 
still be a source of justification and knowledge? Let us start with the question 
of how anything like illusion or hallucination might occur in consciousness.
Infallibility, omniscience, and privileged access
One might think that, regarding the inner domain, which is the subject of 
introspective beliefs, one cannot make mistakes. If so, one might conclude 
that illusion and hallucination regarding this domain are impossible. Indeed, 
David Hume maintained that since “the contents of the mind” are known by 
“consciousness” (by which he meant something at least much like introspec-
tion), “they must appear in every respect what they are, and be what they 
appear.”5

92  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
Hume’s statement suggests two far-reaching claims about self-knowledge. 
One claim—that the contents of our minds must be what they appear to us 
to be—expresses the idea that introspective consciousness can give us beliefs 
that cannot be mistaken. The other claim—that these contents must appear 
to be what they are—expresses the idea that consciousness makes us so richly 
aware of the (introspectable) contents of the mind that it guarantees us full 
knowledge of them. These ideas need refinement before we can reasonably 
appraise them.
The first claim suggests a thesis of infallibility (impossibility of error): 
an introspectional belief—roughly one to the effect that one is (now) in an 
occurrent mental state (such as imaging) or that one is undergoing a mental 
process (such as thinking) or that one is experiencing something (such as 
pain)—cannot be mistaken. The infallibility thesis rests largely on the idea 
that we are in such a strong position regarding occurrent mental phenomena 
that we cannot err in thinking they are going on inside us.
The second claim suggests a thesis of omniscience (all-knowingness) 
with respect to the present occurrent contents of consciousness: if one is 
in an occurrent mental state, undergoing a mental process, or experiencing 
something, one cannot fail to know that one is. The omniscience thesis rests 
largely on the idea that occurrent mental phenomena are so prominent in 
consciousness that one cannot help knowing that they are present.
Together, these two theses constitute the strong doctrine of privileged 
access. The infallibility thesis says that our access to what is (mentally) occur-
ring in us is so good that our beliefs about its present make-up are infallible; 
there is no risk of error. The omniscience thesis says that our access to it is 
so good that we cannot fail to know what (mentally) occurs in us; there is 
no risk of ignorance. It is because no one else is in such a good position to 
know about our mental life, and because we ourselves are not in such a good 
position to know about the external world, that it is natural to speak here of 
privileged access. The strong doctrine of privileged access is associated not 
only with Hume but even more with René Descartes, who is widely taken to 
maintain it in his famous Meditations on First Philosophy (1641), especially in 
Meditation Two.
Suppose for the sake of argument that the infallibility and omniscience 
theses are true. One might think that this would preclude inward counter-
parts of illusion and hallucination. It would not. Having illusions and halluci-
nations does not imply having false beliefs or ignorance of anything. Looking 
from a sharp angle from corner to corner, you can see a book as having the 
shape of a (non-rectangular) parallelogram without believing that it has that 
shape; and I can hallucinate a spruce tree like one that has burned to the 
ground without believing it is before me. We may know the facts. For inner 
perception as for ordinary sense perception, phenomenal experience is one 
thing and belief another.
 Suppose, on the other hand, that there are no inner objects, such as blue, 
watery images, to appear to us to have properties they do not possess, such as 

Consciousness  93
wavy surfaces. Then illusions of the kind we have in perception, in which an 
object appears to have properties it actually lacks, could not occur, as there is 
no object to appear to us. Nor could a hallucination of, say, an image of blue 
waters be of such an object and true or false to it, though of course in a sense 
it “misrepresents” reality. Suppose, however, that there are inner objects that 
we see when we image. How would hallucinating an image of, for instance, a 
loved one differ from just having that image? A sense-datum theorist might 
say that the hallucinatory image would be less vivid or stable than a real one. 
But it would still be an image of the same thing and could also be just like a 
normal image in vividness and other respects. It would be wrong to say, then, 
that a hallucinatory image is necessarily a less vivid or less stable version of 
a normal image, and the difficulty of explaining the difference between hal-
lucinatory and real images is an additional reason to avoid (as the adverbial 
view does) positing mental images as objects.6
Difficulties for the thesis of privileged access
It might be, however, that quite apart from illusion or hallucination, we can 
have false beliefs, or suffer some degree of ignorance, about our mental life. 
This is clear for some mental phenomena, such as dispositions like believing, 
wanting, and fearing. We can mistakenly believe that we do not have a certain 
ignoble desire (say to make a fool of a pretentious boss), particularly if it is 
important to our self-image that we see ourselves as having no hostile desires. 
For the same reasons, we can fail to know that we do have the desire. One can 
also discover a fear which, previously, one quite honestly disavowed because 
it was at odds with one’s sense of oneself as courageous.7
Dispositions, however, should not be conceived as occurring, and in any 
case it is the occurrent mental phenomena to which philosophers have tended 
to think we have the kind of privileged access expressed in the theses of infal-
libility and omniscience. Can we be mistaken, or at least ignorant, about our 
occurrent mental states or processes?
Consider first the possibility of mistake. Could I believe I am thinking 
about the nature of introspection when I am only daydreaming about the 
images and feelings I might introspect? It seems so, provided I do not attend 
closely to what is occurring within me. Granted, this would not be a whole-
sale mistake; it would be like thinking I am watching someone observing a 
game, when I have become preoccupied with the game itself and have ceased 
to attend to its observer.
Suppose, however, that the infallibility thesis is restricted to beliefs based 
on attentive introspection, where this implies “looking” closely at the rele-
vant aspect of one’s consciousness. Call this the restricted infallibility view; it 
says only that attentive introspectional beliefs are true. If I carefully consider 
the proposition that I am thinking about introspection, and I believe it on 
the basis of attentive introspection (i.e. on the basis of my carefully focusing 
on the relevant aspect of my consciousness), could this belief be mistaken?

94  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
It may seem that error here is impossible. But suppose I desperately want 
to believe that I am thinking about introspection. Could this not lead me to 
take my daydreaming to be such thinking and even cause me to form an atten-
tive introspective belief that I am doing such thinking? It seems so. Similarly, 
I could believe, on the basis of attentive but imperfect introspection, that I 
am imaging an octagon and then, concentrating harder and counting sides, 
discover that the figure has only seven.
If, for some occurrent mental states (such as thinking), it is possible to be 
mistaken in believing that one is now in them, then the omniscience thesis 
of privileged access should be abandoned along with the infallibility view. 
This holds even if the omniscience thesis, too, is restricted, as it should be, 
to cases of carefully attending to one’s consciousness. The easiest way to see 
why fallibility cuts against omniscience is to note how omniscience would 
tend to guarantee infallibility and so would be cast in doubt if the latter is. 
Let me explain.
Given the extensive self-knowledge implied by omniscience, if, instead of 
thinking about the nature of introspection, I am only daydreaming, then I 
must know that I am daydreaming. But I will presumably not be so foolish 
as also to believe that I am thinking about introspection—something plainly 
different from daydreaming. Since I would know as well that I am occupied 
with, say, a series of images that portray me as swimming in cool blue waters, 
it is even less likely that I will believe I am thinking about introspection. It 
appears, then, that if I know every truth about—am omniscient about—my 
consciousness, then I presumably cannot believe any falsehood about it and 
so am infallible about it as well.8
It is at best extremely unlikely (and perhaps impossible) that these two 
things—knowing every truth about one’s consciousness and nonetheless 
believing some falsehood about it—occur together, leaving one omniscient 
regarding one’s own consciousness, yet inconsistent and fallible about it. 
One would know every truth about it yet would also somehow believe false-
hoods incompatible with those truths. This being at best improbable, if I am 
fallible I am at least very likely not omniscient. Now recall our daydreaming 
example. It casts doubt even on the restricted thesis of omniscience. In that 
example, although I am in fact daydreaming, I would presumably not know 
that I am. If I do know that I am daydreaming, I would believe this, and then 
it is very doubtful that I would also believe I am thinking about introspection.
These points suggest that, contrary to the thesis of omniscience, I can fail 
to know certain things about my consciousness even when I am attending to 
it; but they do not imply that the omniscience side of the privileged access 
view is wildly mistaken, in that I might be ignorant of every truth about my 
daydreaming. Far from it. As I (objectually) believe the daydreaming to be 
thinking about introspection, I presumably at least know my daydreaming to 
involve words or colors or shapes. I have some knowledge of it, but I would 
still not know the proposition that I am daydreaming and thus would not be 
omniscient regarding the mental processes occurring in me.

Consciousness  95
The possibility of scientific grounds for rejecting privileged 
access
Perhaps there could someday be a source of significant evidence against even 
the restricted doctrines of privileged access. For it could turn out that every 
occurrent mental phenomenon is uniquely correlated with some distinct set 
of brain processes. Then someone could devise a “cerebroscope” for viewing 
the brain and could read off the contents of consciousness from the cerebro-
scopic data (a possibility with disturbing implications that require ethical 
scrutiny). What would guarantee that our introspective beliefs must match 
what the machine says about our mental lives? And what would a mismatch 
show?
Imagine that we could discover cerebroscopically a unique neural pattern 
for, say, believing on the basis of attentive introspection that one is imaging 
cool blue waters, at the same time as we discover the pattern for imaging 
a field of blue-green grass. It would be natural here to suppose the subject 
is mistaking the grassy imaging for a watery one. Might we not regard the 
sophisticated equipment as more likely to be right than the subject?
There is a problem with this reasoning. How could one establish the 
unique correlations except by relying on the accuracy of people’s introspec-
tive beliefs? Might it not be necessary to start by asking people what they 
are, say, imaging, to assume that they are correct, and only then record the 
associated brain state? And if learning the correlations would depend on 
the accuracy of introspective reports, how could the correlations show such 
reports to be mistaken?
A possible reply is this. First, let us suppose that learning the correlations 
would depend on the accuracy of introspective reports. Still, neuroscientists 
would not have had to rely on the accuracy of precisely the introspective 
belief being shown to be mistaken, and perhaps not even on the accuracy of 
highly similar beliefs. In any event, once they construct their instrument, 
they might no longer need to consult introspection to use it. They might 
throw away the very ladder they have climbed up on.
Imagine, however, that they do have to rely on just the sorts of belief 
we are examining, together with evidence regarding these beliefs’ reliabil-
ity—evidence we already have independently of the cerebroscope. Would 
this imply that the cerebroscope could not provide powerful evidence against 
introspective beliefs?
Consider an analogy. We might use a mercury thermometer to construct 
a gas thermometer. We might calibrate a container of gas with a piston that 
rises and falls as the gas is heated and cooled. The new temperature read-
ings might correlate perfectly with mercury readings in many instances: in 
measuring water temperature, wood temperature, and in other cases. The gas 
thermometer might then be used for the same jobs as the mercury thermom-
eter and might gauge temperatures that the mercury thermometer cannot 
measure, say because they are above its boiling point. Could we not use a gas 

96  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
thermometer to correct a mercury thermometer in some cases, or perhaps 
to correct all mercury thermometers within limits? We could. This seems 
so even if we originally thought the mercury thermometer infallible in mea-
suring temperature, perhaps because we mistakenly considered its readings 
partly definitive of what temperature is. We would rebuild the ladder we have 
climbed up on.
Similar points might hold for beliefs about what is now occurring in one. 
If the analogy does extend this far—if the gas thermometer is to the mercury 
thermometer rather as the cerebroscope is to sincere testimony about cur-
rent mental states—then even the restricted omniscience view fares no better 
than the restricted infallibility view. For even when I am attentive to what 
is in my consciousnes, a cerebroscope could indicate that I do not believe 
(hence do not know) that a certain thing is occurring, such as a frightening 
image which I believe I have put out of mind.
Introspective consciousness as a source of 
justification and knowledge
It is important not to overextend our criticism of various claims of privileged 
access. After all, even the restricted infallibility and omniscience views are 
very strong claims of privileged access. They can be given up along with the 
strong theses of privileged access quite consistently with holding that our 
access to what is occurring in us is very privileged indeed. Let us explore this.
The range of introspective knowledge and justification
Nothing I have said undermines a qualified epistemic principle. This self-
knowledge principle says: our attentively formed introspective beliefs about 
what is now occurring in us are normally true and constitute knowledge. The 
difficulty of finding grounds for thinking they even could be false provides 
some reason to consider them at least very likely to be correct. Similarly, when 
we are attentive to what is occurring in us, then if something (knowable) is 
occurring in us, such as a certain melody in the mind’s ear, normally we know 
that it is occurring, or at least we are in a position to know this simply by 
attentively forming a belief about what is going through our mind. At least 
this qualified epistemic principle holds for the domain of our conscious life.
Granted, our “access” to our dispositional properties is not as good as our 
access to what is occurring in us. We need not be conscious of the former 
properties, whereas the very existence of one’s imaging (or of an image if 
there are such objects) consists in its place in consciousness. Beliefs and other 
mental dispositions need not even enter consciousness, or ever be a subject of 
our thoughts or concerns. Some of them may indeed be repressed, so that we 
normally cannot easily become aware of them.9
Nevertheless—and here is a justification principle applicable to the 

Consciousness  97
dispositional mental domain—our beliefs to the effect that we are now in 
a dispositional mental state, for instance wanting, fearing, intending, or 
believing, are normally justified. We might also say that such beliefs, though 
defeasibly justified, are always prima facie justified, so that they are justified 
overall unless some defeating factor, such as an abnormal psychological inter-
ference, occurs. Moreover, normally, when we have a want (or fear, intention, 
belief, or similar disposition), we are in a position to know (and justifiedly 
believe) this. We can, then, usually know this if we need to. We very com-
monly do not know it, however; for such things may not enter consciousness 
at all, and there is often no reason to take any notice of them or form any 
beliefs about them. This kind of ignorance is innocuous.
There are many issues and details I have not mentioned; but we can now 
generalize about introspection (roughly, self-consciousness, i.e., conscious-
ness turned inward) in relation to belief, justification, and knowledge, and 
summarize our main epistemological conclusions. Plainly, many beliefs arise 
from introspection, and the points that have emerged suggest a general epis-
temic principle concerning self-knowledge which, though far weaker than the 
infallibility thesis, is far-reaching: normally, introspective beliefs grounded in 
attentive self-consciousness are true and constitute knowledge. (This principle 
is slightly different from the self-knowledge one stated above.)
A second epistemic principle—an attentional epistemic principle concern-
ing self-knowledge—though far weaker than the omniscience thesis, is that 
normally, if we attentively focus introspectively on something going on in us, 
we know that it is going on, under at least some description. I may not know 
that I am humming the slow movement of Beethoven’s Pathétique Sonata, 
but I do know I am humming a melodic piano piece.
The corresponding justification principles suggested by our discussion 
seem at least equally plausible. First—to cite an introspective justification 
principle—normally, introspective beliefs grounded in attentive introspec-
tion are justified; and, second, normally, if I attentively focus on something 
going on in me, I am justified in believing that it is going on in me. To be 
sure, some such beliefs are better justified than others, and even some that 
are not attentive are justified. All of them are plausibly regarded as prima 
facie justified.
There are many possible principles regarding our justification and knowl-
edge about ourselves, and there are many possible qualifications of the one 
just stated. But those principles are sufficient to suggest the power of intro-
spection as a source of justification and knowledge. The examples I used 
to argue that introspection is fallible do not show that the apparently false 
introspective beliefs were unjustified or that true ones are not knowledge. A 
false belief, particularly if it is of a kind usually justified, can still be justified; 
and a true belief of a kind that can sometimes be false may itself constitute 
knowledge.10

98  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
The defeasibility of introspective justification
These points about the high degree of privileged access we apparently do 
have may create a danger of overestimating the strength of introspective jus-
tification. From our examples, it might be thought that attentive introspec-
tion, even if not absolutely infallible, generates a kind of justification that at 
least cannot be defeated. Even if I am somehow mistaken about whether I am 
imaging blue waters, if I believe this on the basis of introspection, it would 
seem that I am in the right, even if objectively I am not right.
How could I fail to be justified in believing that I am imaging cool blue 
waters, if my belief is grounded in attentive introspection? If the question 
seems rhetorical, this may be because one thinks there simply is nothing else 
I should have done besides attending and hence no possible defeaters of my 
justification by appeal to another kind of ground for belief. Let us explore 
this.
Granting that I could not fail to be justified unless I could have good 
reason to believe I may be mistaken, still, perhaps I could fail to be justi-
fied if I had good reason for believing I am mistaken, such as evidence from 
repeated cerebroscopic results indicating that I have been mistaken in many 
quite similar cases. It is far from obvious that I could not have sufficient 
evidence of this sort. It seems wisest, then, to conclude that although intro-
spective justification tends to be very strong, it remains prima facie rather 
than absolute and can be defeated by counter-evidence.
In any case, plainly beliefs grounded in attentive introspection, such as 
my belief that I am now imaging blue waters, are normally justified to a very 
high degree. Moreover—and here we have still another justification prin-
ciple—normally, my simply being engaged in attentive introspection also yields 
situational (propositional) justification for beliefs about what I am attending 
to, even when it does not in fact yield any such beliefs. If I somehow “notice” 
my imaging blue waters yet do not form the belief that I am doing so, I am 
nonetheless (prima facie) justified in believing, and have justification for 
believing, that I am, just as, if I see a bird fly past and take no notice of it, I 
am still justified in believing it is flying past me. The analogy to perception 
seems sound here, and that is one reason why introspection is considered a 
kind of inner observation and (unless it somehow yields no content) a kind 
of inner perception.
Consciousness as a basic source
If we now ask whether consciousness, including especially introspective con-
sciousness, is a basic source of belief, justification, and knowledge, the answer 
should be evident. It is. In this, as in many other respects, it is like percep-
tion. But it may well be that the degree of justification which consciousness 
(including introspection) generates is greater than the degree generated by 
perceptual experience, other things being equal.

Consciousness  99
The special strength of justification on the part of beliefs about elements 
in consciousness has led some philosophers to think that these beliefs are a 
kind of foundation for knowledge and for the justification of all other beliefs. 
Descartes is often thought to have so regarded introspectively grounded 
beliefs or knowledge. Whether knowledge and justification need a kind of 
foundation and whether, if they do, these beliefs are the best candidates to 
serve as a foundation—better than, say, perceptual and memory beliefs—are 
the major questions pursued in Chapter 9.
There is a further epistemologically significant difference between per-
ception and consciousness, especially as manifested in introspection, as 
sources of knowledge (and justification). We can by and large introspect at 
will—roughly, just by (sufficiently) wanting to—though we may also do it 
quite spontaneously. Moreover, there is no limit to how many things we can 
come to know by introspecting, if only because we can, without limit, call 
up images and construct thoughts. But we cannot perceive at will; and what 
we can know through perception is limited by what there is outside us to 
perceive and by external conditions of observation, just as what we can know 
through remembering or recalling is limited by what has actually happened 
(or what propositions are true) and by the conditions of belief or image reten-
tion crucial for remembering or recalling.11
Introspective consciousness, then, is unlike perception and memory in 
enabling us to acquire a considerable amount of knowledge whether external 
circumstances cooperate or not. Whatever one can “observe” in one’s own 
mind is a possible subject of study, and it appears that many of the beliefs 
we attentively form concerning our mental lives tend to constitute genuine 
knowledge. Very roughly, introspective consciousness is a substantially 
active faculty; perception and memory are largely reactive faculties.
Granted, some content—like sensations of pain—comes into conscious-
ness uninvited. Still, we can very freely call to mind both propositional and 
imagistic content. Some of it may come from memory, which shows that 
introspective consciousness may draw on that as well on resources created 
by imagination or intellect. By contrast, sensory content, such as perceptual 
images, enters our mind only when our senses are taken, by our own obser-
vational efforts or by contingencies of experience, to it. In the inner world, 
by sharp contrast with the external world, there is far more at our beck and 
call. This is perhaps another reason why introspectively grounded beliefs 
have sometimes seemed to be such good material to serve as foundations for 
knowledge and justification. In addition to the high degree of justification 
self-consciousness commonly confers on beliefs, it is an active source of both 
justification and knowledge.
There is a trade-off, however. Through perception, we acquire (primarily) 
justified beliefs and knowledge about the external world; without these, we 
would likely not survive. Through introspection, we acquire (primarily) jus-
tified beliefs and knowledge only about the internal world; with only this, our 
knowledge and justification would be sadly limited, even if we could survive. 

100  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
This is not to underplay the importance of the internal world: without good 
access to it we would have little if any self-knowledge and, for that reason, 
probably at best shallow knowledge of others.
Self-knowledge is also important as a back-up when questions arise about 
one’s justification or knowledge regarding external objects. Confronted with 
a strange object, one may carefully consider the stability, coherence, and 
variations of one’s perceptual experiences of it in order to rule out hallucina-
tion. Told that one merely imagined a car’s passing, one may try to recall 
the event and then scrutinize both the vividness of one’s imagery and one’s 
confidence that the belief comes from memory rather than merely imagi-
nation. Without the kind of self-knowledge possible here, we would have 
less knowledge about the external world. Both perceptual and introspective 
knowledge are vital, and both, as we shall soon see, can be extended, by good 
reasoning from the raw materials they supply, far beyond their beginnings in 
our experience.
Notes
	 1	 To say that beliefs are dispositional properties does not imply that the 
concept of believing is dispositionally analyzable, hence equivalent to a 
set of conditional propositions; and I do not think the concept is dispo-
sitionally analyzable.
	 2	 To be sure, images can be possessed memorially, as is my image of the 
Statue of Liberty when I do not have it in mind; and ‘imaging’ can des-
ignate a process, as when I call up the series of images corresponding to 
looking at the statue from the Brooklyn Heights Promenade and glanc-
ing northward to Lower Manhattan, thence to the Brooklyn Bridge, and 
up the East River beyond the bridge.
	 3	 Both kinds of properties are experiential, in that they represent features 
of experience. Both, then, might be considered phenomenal, but some-
times the term ‘phenomenal property’ is restricted to the sensory kind 
that characterizes either the five senses or “inner sense,” by which we feel 
sensations of pain and pleasure.
	 4	 Such contentual objects are often called intentional objects, largely on the 
ground that, like lofty deeds we intend to perform but do not do, they 
need not exist. 
	 5	 See David Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature (first published in 
1739–40) (Part IV, section II), ed. by L.A. Selby-Bigge (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1888).
	 6	 One might still distinguish genuine from hallucinatory images by insist-
ing that to be a genuine image of (say) a loved one is to be an image caused 
by the corresponding sense, say seeing that person. But this view has an 
odd consequence. Through hearing a detailed description I could have an 
accurate image of Maj that is in a sense of her, as it perfectly “pictures” 
her, even if I have never seen her; but this would be mistakenly classified 

Consciousness  101
as a hallucinatory image, by the causal conception just stated. There are 
certainly different kinds of images and various ways in which they can 
mislead, but the analogy between perception and introspective con-
sciousness does not extend in any simple way to the possibility of inner 
illusions and hallucinations. I cannot pursue the matter further here, but 
for a detailed non-technical discussion of mental imagery see Alastair 
Hannay, Mental Images: A Defence (London: George Allen & Unwin, 
1971) and my critical examination of this book in ‘The Ontological 
Status of Mental Images’, Inquiry 21 (1978), 348–61.
	 7	 Some of these cases seem to occur in self-deception, a phenomenon that 
raises profound questions for both epistemology and the philosophy 
of mind. For a comprehensive collection of papers on it (including one 
offering my own account), see Brian P. McLaughlin and Amélie O. 
Rorty (eds.), Perspectives on Self-Deception (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 
CA: University of California Press, 1988).
	 8	 The thesis of omniscience might be restricted to introspectable truths, 
as opposed to such truths as that there are 101 berries visible on the 
blackberry bush I am imaging, which I could know only on the basis of 
memory (and arithmetic) as well as introspection. The infallibility thesis 
might also be plausibly restricted in a similar way. This point bears on 
the connection between the two theses but should not affect the argu-
mentation in the text.
	 9	 Repression need not be exactly the kind of thing Sigmund Freud 
described, requiring psychoanalysis or special techniques to come to 
consciousness. There are various kinds and degrees of repression; the 
point here is simply that having a belief (or other dispositional state) is 
possible even if it is repressed. One might, for example, still act in the 
way expected of a believer of the relevant proposition. Such action is one 
route to discovering repressed beliefs.
	10	 For reasons to be considered in Chapter 13, skeptics tend to deny this.
	11	 There is less disanalogy in the negative cases: we cannot always cease at 
will to concentrate introspectively on our mental life, as illustrated by 
preoccupying pains; and we cannot in general cease perceiving at will; we 
must, for example, do so by closing our eyes or turning off a radio. This 
blocks the path of observation, just as an aspirin might block the path of 
pain.


5	
Reason I
Understanding, insight, and intellectual power
•	
Self-evident truths of reason
The concept of self-evidence
Two types of immediacy
•	
The classical view of the truths of reason
Analytic propositions
Necessary propositions
The analytic, the a priori, and the synthetic
Three types of a priori propositions
The empirical
Analytic truth, concept acquisition, and necessity
•	
The empiricist view of the truths of reason
Rationalism and empiricism
Empiricism and the genesis and confirmation of arithmetic beliefs
Empiricism and logical and analytic truths

5	
Reason I
Understanding, insight, and intellectual power
I see the green field and I believe that it is there before me. I look away, and 
I believe that I am now imaging it. I remember its shape, and I believe that it 
is rectangular. These are beliefs grounded in my experience: perceptual, self-
conscious, and memorial. But I also believe something quite different: that 
if the spruce to my left is taller than the maple to my right, then the maple is 
shorter than the spruce.
On what basis does one believe this obvious truth? Do we even need to see 
the trees to know it? Certainly it is on the basis of perception that I believe 
each of the two comparative propositions; it is easy to see, for instance, that 
the spruce is taller than the maple. But I do not believe on the basis of percep-
tion that if the spruce is taller than the maple then the maple is shorter than 
the spruce. As a rational being, I quite easily grasp this truth and thereby 
believe it.
The kind of apparently elementary use of reason this case illustrates seems 
basic for both knowledge and justification. But there is continuing debate 
about the nature and grounds of our knowledge and justification regarding 
the simple, obvious truths that we seem to know just in virtue of the kind of 
understanding of them any rational being might be expected to have. A good 
way to understand the epistemological role of reason is to begin with a notion 
that seems central for the most basic kind of knowledge and justification 
reason gives us—self-evidence.
Self-evident truths of reason
Such truths as the luminous one that if the spruce is taller than the maple 
then the maple is shorter than the spruce have been said to be evident to 
reason, conceived roughly as a mental capacity of understanding. They are 
presumably called self-evident because they are thought to be evidently true 
taken by themselves, with no need for supporting evidence. Indeed, they 
are often considered obvious in themselves, roughly in the sense that simply 
upon attentively coming to understand them, one normally sees their truth 
and thereby knows them.

Reason I  105
The concept of self-evidence
In the light of such points, we might more specifically characterize self-
evident propositions as those truths such that (1) if one (adequately) under-
stands them, then by virtue of that understanding one is justified in (hence 
has justification for) believing them, and (2) if one believes them on the basis 
of (adequately) understanding them, then one thereby knows them.1 (1) says 
roughly that understanding them suffices for being situationally justified 
in believing them; it provides a justification for belief—which one can have 
without actually believing the proposition in question. (2) says in effect that 
this understanding can ground knowledge: the understanding is sufficient 
to render a belief based on it knowledge. (2) implies, then, that self-evident 
propositions are true. This implication is appropriate, since the self-evident 
is standardly regarded as true (and for clarity I have put truth explicitly into 
the characterization above).
What I have said does not imply, however, that the kind of justification 
one gains from understanding the self-evident is indefeasible, that is, so 
secure that it cannot be defeated, rather than prima facie. If the understand-
ing in question is eliminated or obscured, the belief may cease to be justified. 
But at least some cases of this kind of justification are plausibly taken to 
exhibit justification as strong as any we can have. It can be difficult to see 
how defeasibility can occur here because self-evident truths are so commonly 
considered also obvious. But not all of them are—at least to finite minds. 
Apart from logical training, certain self-evident logical truths are not obvi-
ous to us; and it may not be obvious to most of us, on first considering it, 
that first cousins share a pair of grandparents. But this satisfies both (1) and 
(2) and is self-evident.2
There is an important analogy to perception. Just as one can see a visible 
property of something, such as its rectangularity, without believing that it 
has that property, one can comprehendingly (understandingly) consider a 
self-evident proposition without coming to believe that proposition; and 
just as one’s seeing a bird fly past gives one justification for believing it did 
whether or not one forms this belief, adequately understanding the proposi-
tion that if the spruce is taller than the maple, the maple is shorter than the 
spruce, gives one (situational) justification for believing this whether one 
does or not.
When it comes to concepts, there is a further analogy to perception: a 
hierarchy analogous to the perceptual one. There is understanding a concept, 
such as being taller than. Second, there is objectually believing it to apply to 
something, say to a pair of things, such as the spruce and the maple. Third, 
there is propositionally believing something that “applies it,” as when one 
conceives the trees as, say, the spruce and the maple, and believes that the 
spruce is the taller.3
With self-evident propositions like the straightforward proposition that if 
the spruce is taller than the maple then the maple is shorter than the spruce, 

106  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
one need not consult one’s experience of the kind of thing described, or even 
ponder the propositions in question, in order to grasp—roughly, to under-
stand—those propositions. And when one does come to understand them 
and focuses on them in the light of that understanding, one thereby normally 
comes to believe and know that they are true.4
Two types of immediacy
There are many truths which, as just illustrated, we readily grasp and thereby 
immediately believe. In the simple case of comparison of heights, our belief 
is immediate in both (1) the temporal sense of ‘instantly formed’ and (2) the 
epistemic sense—the sense entailing that we see their truth without inferring 
them from anything else. The point, then, is not the temporal one that we 
grasp them instantly, though we may. What is crucial is that our belief exhib-
its epistemic immediacy: the belief is not based on inference or on a further, 
evidential belief. If it were, it would be epistemically mediate: mediated by 
(and thereby at least partly grounded in) the set of premises from which we 
infer (or on the basis of which we believe) the proposition, as my belief that 
Socrates is mortal is mediated by the two propositions which are part of the 
basis of my believing this: that he is a human being, and that all human beings 
are mortal.5
The proposition that Socrates is mortal is in another way unlike the prop-
osition that if the spruce is taller than the maple then the maple is shorter 
than the spruce. It is not self-evident. There are at least two ways to explain 
why. First, Socrates and mortality are not intrinsically connected, as are one 
thing’s being taller than a second and the second’s being shorter than the 
first. An omnipotent God could have kept him in existence. Second (and 
speaking more generally), to know that Socrates is mortal one needs more 
than reflection—a temporally extended use of reason—on this proposition. 
One apparently needs information not given by the proposition. Even think-
ing of him as a human being does not absolutely preclude every route to his 
immortality. But reflection—indeed even intuition as a sometimes momen-
tary use of reason—indicates that the spruce’s being taller than the maple 
precludes the maple’s not being shorter than the spruce.
This kind of point concerning propositions such as the one about the two 
trees has led philosophers to consider them to be truths of reason—roughly, 
truths knowable through the use of reason as opposed to reliance on sense 
experience. This kind of knowability has led philosophers to regard them as 
also necessarily true—necessary, for short, that is, such that their falsehood 
is absolutely precluded: there are simply no circumstances in which they are 
false. If a proposition is not necessary (necessarily true) and its negation is 
also not necessary, it is called contingent, because whether it is true—that is, 
its truth or falsity, in another terminology—is contingent on (dependent on) 
circumstances. That there are more than two trees in my yard is contingent. 
There are more, but there need not be: the number is contingent on how 
many I want.

Reason I  107
The classical view of the truths of reason
How might we understand the justification of our beliefs of self-evident and 
apparently necessary propositions? And how do we know them? The best-
known answers to these questions, and probably the only ones we should 
call the classical answers, derive largely from Immanuel Kant, though there 
are similar ideas in earlier philosophers who very likely influenced Kant. He 
discussed both the truth of the kinds of propositions in question and how we 
know them.6
What Kant said is complex and difficult to interpret precisely, and I am 
simply going to lay out a version of the classical account which may cor-
respond only roughly to Kant’s views. Moreover, although I am interested 
mainly in justification and knowledge regarding the truths of reason, I will 
also talk about the basis of these truths themselves when that is useful in 
discussing how we can know or justifiedly believe them.
Analytic propositions
Take the proposition that all vixens are female. I easily grasp its truth, and 
I immediately believe it: I depend on no premises or evidence. There was a 
time when ‘vixen’ was not in my vocabulary. I might then have looked at the 
sentence ‘All vixens are female’ and not known what proposition it expressed, 
much less seen the particular truth (true proposition) it does express. But this 
point does not show that I do not immediately believe that truth once I do 
(comprehendingly) consider it. It shows only that encountering a sentence 
which expresses a truth does not enable one to consider that truth unless one 
understands the sentence.
We can see, moreover, that when we do consider the truth that all vixens 
are female, we do not (or at least need not) know it on the basis of beliefs 
about the sentence ‘All vixens are female’. For we can consider that same 
truth by using some other sentence to express it (say in Spanish), and perhaps 
without using a sentence at all.7 If, however, we think about what grounds the 
truth of the proposition, we may discover something which in turn helps to 
explain why we so readily understand and believe it.
To get a sense of the ground of this truth, consider what a vixen is. It is a 
female fox. Indeed, the concept of a vixen may be analyzed in terms of being 
female and being a fox. So, in saying that a vixen is a female fox, one could 
be giving an elementary analysis of the concept of a vixen. Now suppose that 
(like Kant) we think of an analysis of a concept as indicating what the con-
cept contains, or, in a certain way, includes. We can now say that the concept 
of being female is part of the concept of a vixen, and that being female is thus 
an element in being a vixen.8
In the light of all this, we might call the truth that all vixens are female an 
analytic proposition. To cite one major conception Kant presented, this is a 
proposition such that what it predicates of its subject can be “analyzed out 
of” the concept of that subject. Here the subject is vixens (or any arbitrarily 

108  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
given vixen), and the predicate is being female, which is part of, and so analyz-
able out of, the concept of a vixen. The same sort of thing holds for the prop-
ositions that all bachelors are unmarried, that all triangles have three angles, 
that all sound arguments have true premises and true conclusions, and so on. 
Analytic propositions are usually considered clear cases of the self-evident.9 
This is explainable in terms of our account of the self-evident—provided we 
make the not implausible assumption that, given an adequate understanding 
of such a proposition, one can frame an analysis in which the containment 
relation is clearly evident. By contrast, Kant and others have viewed non-
analytic propositions as empirical, and taken empirical propositions to be 
knowable not by using reason alone but only on the basis of confirmatory 
experience—most prominently (and perhaps necessarily) perception.
Necessary propositions
This way of looking at our example helps to explain something else that is 
true of the proposition that all vixens are female: it cannot be false and, in 
that sense, is necessary (a necessary truth). To see this point, try to conceive 
of a non-female vixen. Since the concept of a vixen is analyzable as (and hence 
equivalent to) that of a female fox, one is in effect trying to conceive of a 
non-female female fox. This would be both female and not female. We would 
have a contradiction. Hence, there cannot be such a thing, on pain of contra-
diction. It is thus absolutely impossible—in a sense implying impossibility by 
the laws of logic—that there be a non-female vixen. By contrast, it is possible 
that there is, and also that there is not, a 200-pound vixen. The proposition 
that all vixens weigh less (or more) than this is contingent: neither necessarily 
true nor necessarily false.
 Because the falsity of analytic propositions entails a contradiction in 
this way, they are often thought to be—and are sometimes even defined 
as—those that are true on pain of contradiction. That is, their falsity entails 
a contradiction, and hence they can be false only if a contradiction is true. 
That is absolutely impossible. Analytic propositions are therefore regarded 
as truths that hold in any possible situation and hence are necessary (though 
other kinds of truths are also considered necessary).
Now if analytic propositions are true by virtue of the sort of conceptual 
containment relation we have been exploring, might we not know each one 
we do know in virtue of grasping the containment relation basic to it, in the 
sense that we have an adequate understanding of that relation? In considering 
the proposition that all vixens are female, one in some way grasps the con-
tainment relation between the concept of a vixen and that of being female. 
Intellectually—intuitively, in one widely used terminology—one sees the 
relation and thereby sees and (non-inferentially) knows the truth it underlies.
It might be objected that the correct account is instead this. One quickly 
or subconsciously reasons: The concept of a vixen is analyzable as that of 
a female fox; being female is contained in that analysis; hence all vixens are 

Reason I  109
female. So, it may be claimed, one knows that all vixens are female only infer-
entially. A defender of the classical view would reply that this second-order 
reasoning indicates how one might show that one knows that all vixens are 
female, but it does not indicate how one knows it, at least not if one just 
grasps its truth in the normal way.
The classical account can grant that one perhaps could come to know the 
proposition in that indirect way, by conceptual analysis. But one need not 
come to know it in that way; and normally, if one did not already know that 
vixens are female foxes, one would not even be in a position to know (on one’s 
own) the sophisticated truth that the concept of a vixen is analyzable as that 
of a female fox. Believing that all vixens are female, in virtue of grasping the 
crucial containment relation between the concept of a vixen and that of a 
female, does not require coming to know this proposition in that sophisti-
cated way.
The analytic, the a priori, and the synthetic
We can now see how the classical account of the truths of reason might apply 
to apparently non-analytic truths that are directly and intuitively grasped. 
Think about the proposition that nothing is both red and green all over at 
one time (different kinds of examples will be considered in Chapters 12 and 
14). This is apparently self-evident and hence a truth of reason. But is it ana-
lytic? Can we analyze being non-red out of the concept of being green, or 
being non-green out of the concept of being red, so that anyone who said that 
something is red and green all over at once could be shown to be implying 
that it is (wholly) red and non-red, or green and non-green? This is doubtful. 
For one thing, it is not clear that we can analyze the concept of being red (or 
the concept of being green) at all in the relevant sense of ‘analyze’. Still, on 
the classical view, we can know through the use of reason the necessary truth 
that nothing is red and green all over at once.
Let us consider two kinds of objections to the idea that the proposition 
that nothing is red and green all over at once is self-evident and necessary, yet 
not analytic. The first is based on treating the proposition as empirical and 
contingent; the second objection says it is analytic after all.
Take the contingency objection first. One might think that there could be 
a scientific explanation of why nothing is red and green all over at once; and if 
there is, then (on a plausible and standard view of such matters) the proposi-
tion is empirical and not self-evident or even necessary. How might such an 
explanation go? We can, after all, scientifically clarify what being red (or any 
other color) is by appeal to facts about light. This might seem to enable us to 
know all there is to know about basic relations among colors, even though 
the relevant facts about light are contingent. On the classical view, however, 
although scientific investigation helps us to understand certain facts about 
red things (and perhaps about the property of being red), it does not indicate 
what is essential to the concept of a red thing, such as being non-green at 

110  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
the time it is red. Similarly, it is essential to the concept of a vixen that it is 
equivalent to that of a female fox.
To be sure, one could discover scientifically that vixens have a unique 
tracking system. But normally one would be identifying them for study as 
female foxes and hence would not set out to discover whether they are female. 
On the classical view, we cannot identify anything as a vixen—say, for 
experimental purposes—except under the assumption that it is female. Thus, 
the possibility of discovering anything inconsistent with its being female is 
ruled out from the start. If our experimental subject is selected by its having 
a specified property, we cannot find out experimentally that it (as opposed to 
something else it may turn into) lacks that property.
Similarly, one would not normally set out to discover scientifically whether 
what is red all over is ever also green all over at the same time—since it would 
be at best difficult to wonder whether this is true without immediately seeing 
that it is. This does not make analytic or any self-evident truths more impor-
tant than scientific truths. The former are simply different: they are not of 
the right kind to be open to scientific verification or falsification, and in part 
for this reason they also do not compete with scientific truths.
It appears, then, that the suggested “scientific” objection to the classical 
view fails. If, however, the proposition that nothing is red and green all over 
at once is not a “scientific truth,” that might be because it is analytic after all. 
Let us explore further whether the classical view is correct in claiming that 
the two self-evident truths in question still differ in this: being non-green 
is not analyzable out of the concept of being red, whereas being female is 
analyzable out of the concept of being a vixen.10
 This brings us to the second objection. The objection proceeds by arguing 
(against the classical view) that the proposition that nothing is red and green 
all over at once is analytic. Could one not indirectly analyze the concept of 
being red as equivalent to the concept of having a color other than green and 
blue and yellow, and so on, in which we list all the remaining colors? This 
claim may seem right, because it seems self-evidently true that red is the only 
color filling that bill. But the claim is doubtful. For one thing, it is question-
able whether a determinate list of all the other colors is even possible. More 
important, even if it is possible, the concept of being red is not negative in 
this way. To be red is to have that color; to be red is not simply to be a color 
other than green, blue, yellow, etc. Third, there is an important disanalogy 
to our paradigm of the analytic: whereas one could not have the concept of a 
vixen without having the concepts of a fox and a female, one could have the 
concept of being red (and so understand that concept) without even having 
all of these other color concepts (even if one must have some other color 
concept).
Moreover, proponents of the classical view would stress here (what is inde-
pendently plausible) that an analysis does not merely provide a conceptual 
equivalent, that is, one which (necessarily) applies to the same things to which 
the concept being analyzed does, as the concept of being not-not-red applies 

Reason I  111
to everything the concept of being red does. An analysis of a concept (as we 
shall see in Chapter 11 in exploring analyses of the concept of knowledge) 
must meet at least two further conditions. First, it must exhibit a suitable 
subset of the elements that constitute the concept; second, it must do so in 
such a way that one’s seeing that they constitute it can yield some significant 
degree of understanding of the concept. The concept of being red is surely 
not constituted by the complex and mainly negative property of being a color 
that is not green, not blue, and so on; and one could not understand what it 
is for something to be red simply in terms of understanding that long and 
perhaps indefinite list.
The relevant notion of understanding is understanding of, not understand-
ing that, which is plausibly considered a special kind of knowledge of the 
proposition indicated by the ‘that’ clause, as in the case of understanding 
that citizenship requires being politically informed. Understanding of has 
an intimate connection with explanation. The implication of this point here 
is that an analysis of a concept must provide sufficient understanding of it 
to provide at least some explanation of it. The analysis of the concept of a 
vixen as a female fox provides material for an elementary explanation of that 
concept; but noting that being red is equivalent to being non-green, non-
blue, and so on for all the other colors would not provide any explanation of 
what it is to be red. The concept of being red is simply not thus analyzable. 
Even the property of being red is not identical with that negative property. 
Indeed, one could presumably understand the list of other colors quite well 
even if one had never seen or imagined redness, and one had no perceptual, 
imaginational, or other concept of redness.
The point that an analysis should provide understanding of the kind that 
goes with explanation must not be taken to imply that we can have under-
standing only when we can explain. It is arguable, in fact, that the concept 
of redness is simple in the sense that, unlike that of a vixen, it is not analyz-
able into elements of any kind. One’s understanding of the concept does not 
require its analyzability; it is enough to be able (above all) to apply it to the 
right things, withhold it from the wrong ones, and see what follows from its 
application—such as the thing’s not being green.
On balance, then, it appears that the proposition that nothing is red 
and green all over at once is not analytic. This does not, however, prevent 
our rationally grasping the truth of that proposition. Truths that meet this 
rational graspability condition—roughly a knowability through conceptual 
understanding condition—have been called a priori propositions (proposi-
tions knowable ‘from the first’), because they have been thought to be such 
that they can be known a priori, in a very strict sense of this phrase: known 
not on the basis of sense experience but simply through reason as directed 
toward them and toward the concepts occurring in them, at least if reason 
is used extensively enough and with sufficient care. Propositions that are a 
priori in this strict, knowability sense—as is the proposition that nothing is 
red and green all over at once—are also plausibly considered self-evident.11 

112  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
Moreover, the kind of justification for believing a self-evident proposition 
when we believe it in the indicated way is a basic kind of justification and is 
often called a priori.
By contrast with analytic propositions, however, the kind of a priori 
proposition exemplified by that one seems to assert something beyond what 
analysis of the relevant concepts can show. For this reason, propositions 
of this kind are also called synthetic propositions, though these are typi-
cally defined negatively, simply as non-analytic. Positively conceived, they 
typically bring together or “synthesize” concepts and properties, even if in a 
negative way (as by linking redness with colors other than green—by includ-
ing it among these other colors). Synthetic propositions need not, even in 
part, analyze concepts, and many are empirical in the straightforward way in 
which propositions evident to the five senses are.
It is noteworthy that although analytic propositions are characterized 
roughly in terms of how they are true—by virtue of conceptual containment 
(or, on a related account, on pain of contradiction)—a priori propositions 
are characterized in terms of how they are known, or can be known: through 
the operation of reason.12 (This allows that they can also be known through 
experience, say through receiving testimony, at least if the attester’s knowl-
edge is, directly or indirectly, grounded in the operation of reason.)
On this basis, a priori propositions are also negatively characterized as 
knowable “independently of experience,” in which this phrase above all 
designates no need for evidential dependence on experiential grounds, such 
as those of perception. But even if this negative characterization of a priori 
propositions is correct so far as it goes, understanding them through it will 
require understanding of the kinds of positive characteristics I am stressing. 
Let us pursue these.
Three types of a priori propositions
If we take knowability through the use of reason as a rough indication of 
what constitutes the a priori in general, then it includes not only self-evident 
propositions but certain others that are not self-evident: most clearly those 
propositions not themselves knowable simply through reason as directed 
toward them and toward the concepts occurring in them, but self-evidently 
following from (entailed by) such (self-evident) propositions. This is the sim-
plest case of what is a priori in the broad sense. Consider the proposition that 
either nothing is red and green all over at once or I am flying to the moon. 
This self-evidently follows from the proposition about red and green, which 
(apparently) is self-evident. It self-evidently follows because it is self-evident 
that if nothing is red and green all over at once, then either that is true or I am 
flying to the moon.
One might think that this disjunctive (either–or) proposition is self- 
evident because it is so obviously both true and necessary. But even though 
this is true, one knows it, not in virtue of understanding the proposition 

Reason I  113
itself, but in virtue of its self-evidently following from something that is 
self-evident. One knows it inferentially, on the basis of knowing the simpler 
proposition that nothing is red and green all over at once. One cannot know 
it just from understanding it, as with a self-evident proposition, but only 
through seeing the quite different truth that if nothing is both red and green 
at once, then either that proposition is true or I am flying to the moon. This 
conditional (if–then) proposition is self-evident; hence, it is an utterly secure 
ladder on which to climb from knowledge that nothing is red and green all 
over at once to knowledge that either this is so or I am flying to the moon. 
That disjunctive proposition is a priori in the broad sense.
Suppose, however, that a proposition is neither self-evident nor self- 
evidently entailed by a self-evident proposition, but is provable by self-evident 
steps (perhaps many) from a self-evident proposition. Because there is more 
than one step and there can be many steps, such a provable proposition might 
or might not be knowable without reliance on memory, depending on the 
mental capacity of the rational being in question. Nonetheless, since it can 
be known through such a rigorous proof—one that begins with a self-evident 
proposition and proceeds only by self-evident steps (entailments) to its con-
clusion—a rigorously provable proposition may be called ultimately a priori 
(or ultimately self-evident, though the former term seems preferable). It is 
not a priori in the broad sense because (1) it is not linked to the self-evident 
by a single step and—more important—(2) it is not necessarily self-evidently 
linked to it.13 But as it is ultimately traceable to a self-evident proposition, it 
may be considered a priori in the ultimate provability sense.
Thus, in speaking of propositions that are a priori in the most compre-
hensive terminology, I include not only the intuitively central cases that are 
self-evident or just one step from it—propositions self-evidently entailed by 
a self-evident proposition—but also those not thus entailed but nonetheless 
provable by self-evident steps from a self-evident proposition.
We could say, then, that for the kind of classical view in question, the 
self-evident is the base of the a priori: a priori propositions are those that are 
either self-evident (i.e., a priori in the narrow sense) or, though not them-
selves self-evident, self-evidently follow from at least one proposition that 
is (hence are a priori in the broad sense). The general notion of an a priori 
proposition, applicable to both cases and others, is roughly the notion of a 
truth that either is a self-evident proposition or is self-evidently entailed by 
one, or provable from one by self-evident steps.14
Knowledge of propositions a priori in the broad or ultimate provability 
sense, unlike knowledge of those a priori in the narrow sense, depends on 
knowledge of some self-evident proposition as a ground. But neither kind of 
knowledge depends on knowledge of any empirical proposition, and in that 
sense both kinds are “independent of experience.”
It is because a priori propositions (of any sort) are understood in relation 
to how they can be known that the notion of the a priori is commonly con-
sidered epistemological. But many a priori propositions also have a special 

114  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
property of a different kind. Many are said to be analytic. The notion of the 
analytic is more often taken to be of a different, non-epistemological kind, 
say conceptual, since analytic truths are conceived as grounded in a simple 
containment relation between concepts.15
It should not be surprising, then, that the categories of the analytic and 
the a priori are not identical. In both cases, however, proponents of the clas-
sical view have taken the relevant propositions to be necessary: this is com-
monly thought to be obvious for the analytic ones, which are true “on pain 
of contradiction,” but it has seemed reasonable to classical theorists to hold 
that even synthetic a priori propositions are invariably necessary. Perhaps the 
underlying thought is that if their truth were contingent and so depended on 
what holds in (is contingent on) some possible situations but not others, one 
could not know it just on the basis of understanding the proposition itself.
The empirical
A huge variety of truths are not a priori. That the spruce is taller than the 
maple is one of them. Truths that are not a priori are called empirical (or 
a posteriori) truths. This means, roughly, that the propositions in question 
can be known only empirically: knowable (assuming they are knowable) only 
on the basis of experience, as opposed to reason—above all on the basis of 
perceptual or self-conscious experience (in the ways described in Chapters 
1, 2, and 4).
Saying simply that a proposition is empirical (or a posteriori) leaves open 
whether it is true: there are empirical falsehoods, such as that it is not the case 
that the spruce is taller than the maple, as well as empirical truths. (In this 
the term ‘empirical proposition’ is unlike ‘a priori proposition’ and ‘necessary 
proposition’, which are not commonly used to refer to falsehoods, but my 
main examples of empirical propositions will be truths.)
For the classical view, empirical propositions as well as a priori proposi-
tions are crucial for our lives. Indeed, the former include every truth known 
perceptually, such as those known through observing the colors and shapes 
of things, and all truths known scientifically, such as generalizations link-
ing the temperatures and the volumes of gases, or ingestion of drugs with 
change in behavior. A certain range of a priori propositions, such as those of 
logic and pure mathematics, are presupposed by both common sense and sci-
ence. Empirical propositions are also required to guide us in dealing with the 
world, but the classical view sees them as open to disconfirmation through 
experience in a way that a priori propositions are not.
Analytic truth, concept acquisition, and necessity
Analytic truths, as well as certain synthetic ones, are called a priori because 
analytic truths are knowable through the use of reason. But analytic truths 
appear to be knowable—or at least are showable—through a different use 

Reason I  115
of reason than is appropriate to the synthetic a priori truths. It may be that 
I know that nothing is red and green all over at once by virtue of simply 
grasping, as a rational being, a kind of incompatibility between the concept 
of being red (at a time and place) and the concept of being green. But, as 
pointed out earlier, I apparently do not know it by virtue of grasping a con-
tainment relation between being red (or green) and anything else. If this does 
not illustrate two different uses of reason, it at least indicates a different kind 
of application of reason to different kinds of relations of concepts.
Because my knowledge of the proposition that nothing is red and green all 
over at once is not based on grasping a containment relation, it differs from 
my knowledge of the analytic truth that all vixens are female. Yet in both 
cases the relation between the concepts involved in the truth seems to be the 
basis of that truth. In both, moreover, I apparently know the truth through 
rationally understanding that relation: a relation of analytic containment in 
one case, and of mutual exclusion in the other.
These points do not imply that experience is irrelevant to knowledge of 
the a priori. On the classical view, I do need experience to acquire the con-
cepts in question, for instance to acquire color concepts or the concept of a 
fox. But once I have the needed concepts, it is my grasp of their relations, and 
not whatever experience I needed to acquire the concepts, which is the basis 
of my knowledge of analytic and other a priori truths.
In part because of these similarities, as well as because the falsity of a 
priori propositions seems inconceivable, the classical view takes synthetic 
a priori truths as well as analytic truths to be necessary. They cannot be 
false, even though in the synthetic a priori cases it seems not to be strictly 
contradictory to deny one. For instance, claiming that something is red and 
green all over is not contradictory in the sense that it (formally) entails that 
some proposition—say, that the object in question has a definite color—is 
and is not true. Still, on the classical view it is absolutely impossible that 
something be red and green all over at once. We need only reflect on the 
relevant concepts (mainly the color concepts) to realize that nothing is red 
and green all over at once; we readily grasp (apprehend) an exclusion relation 
between being red and being green.
It is also commonly held by philosophers in the classical tradition that all 
necessary propositions are a priori. One rationale for this might be that neces-
sity is grounded in relations of concepts and these (or at least the relevant 
relations) are the same in all possible situations. A mind that could adequately 
survey all possible situations (like the divine mind as often conceived) could 
thus know the truth of all necessarily true propositions. Since this survey 
method would be possible without analyzing one concept out of another, the 
grounding of necessity in conceptual relations would also explain how there 
can be synthetic necessary truths. And for the classical view, these, being 
necessary, are also a priori.16
Summarizing, then, the classical view says that all necessary proposi-
tions are a priori and vice versa, but it maintains that analytic propositions 

116  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
constitute a subclass of a priori ones, since some a priori propositions are 
synthetic rather than analytic. The view tends to conceive the truth of all 
a priori propositions as grounded in relations of concepts (or of similar 
abstract entities, such as “universals,” in Bertrand Russell’s terminology).17 
But the position conceptually accounts for these propositions differently: 
for necessary propositions in terms of the unrestricted circumstances of their 
truth (the absolute impossibility of their falsehood in any circumstances), for 
analytic ones in terms of how they are true (typically, by virtue of contain-
ment relations), and for a priori propositions in terms of how their truth is 
known (through understanding).
The empiricist view of the truths of reason
The classical view of the nature of what I am calling a priori truths—truths of 
reason—and of our knowledge of them has been vigorously challenged. To 
appreciate the epistemological significance of reason as a source of justifica-
tion and knowledge, and of truths of reason themselves, we must consider 
some alternative accounts of these truths.
John Stuart Mill held that ultimately there are only empirical truths and 
that our knowledge of them is based on experience, for instance on percep-
tion.18 We might call this sort of view empiricism about the (apparent) truths 
of reason. The name suits the view, since the position construes apparently 
a priori truths as empirical, though it need not deny that reason as a capac-
ity distinct from perception has some role in giving us justification and 
knowledge. Reason may, for example, be crucial in extending knowledge by 
enabling us to prove geometrical theorems from axioms. But the view I want 
to explore (without following Mill in particular) denies that reason grounds 
justification or knowledge in the non-empirical way described by the classi-
cal theory.
Rationalism and empiricism
Before we consider Mill’s thesis in detail, we should contrast it, from the 
most general epistemological point of view, with that of Kant and other ratio-
nalists to get a better sense of what is at stake in the controversy between 
rationalism and empiricism. Kant’s position on the truths of reason might 
be called rationalist, Mill’s empiricist. These terms are used too variously to 
make precise definition wise. Very roughly, however, rationalism in episte-
mology takes reason to be far more important in grounding our knowledge 
than empiricism allows, and rationalists virtually always assert or imply that, 
in addition to knowledge of analytic truths, there is knowledge of synthetic 
a priori truths. Very roughly, empiricism in epistemology takes experience, 
most notably sensory experience, to be the basis of all of our knowledge 
except possibly that of analytic propositions, understood as including purely 
logical truths, such as the truth that if all whales are mammals and no fish 

Reason I  117
are mammals then no whales are fish. (For both empiricists and rationalists, 
analytic propositions are typically taken to include logical truths.)19
One might wonder why some empiricists grant that analytic truths may 
be a priori. The central point (though an empiricist might not put it this way) 
may be seen if we use the terminology of the classical theory: even if such 
logical propositions are not true by virtue of containment relations between 
concepts, their negations formally entail contradictions, for instance that 
some vixens are and are not female foxes. They are therefore paradigms of 
truths of reason; for the use of logic alone, which is perhaps the purest use of 
reason, can show that they can be false only if a contradiction is true—which 
is absolutely impossible. This is another reason why, as noted above, analytic 
propositions are sometimes given a broader characterization than I have 
proposed and are taken to be those whose negations entail a contradiction.20
Some empiricists do not allow that any knowledge, even of so-called 
analytic propositions, is genuinely a priori. A radical empiricist, such as 
Mill, takes all knowledge to be grounded in experience. A radical rationalist 
(which Kant was not) would take all knowledge to be grounded in reason, for 
instance to be intuitively grounded in a grasp of self-evident propositions or 
deductively based on inference from a priori truths that are intuited.21
Empiricism and the genesis and confirmation of arithmetic 
beliefs
Empiricism about what are called the truths of reason is most plausible for 
the apparently synthetic a priori ones, so let us sketch it with reference to 
an apparently synthetic kind of a priori proposition that has been much in 
dispute. Mathematical truths, particularly truths of simple arithmetic, are 
often regarded as synthetic a priori. Consider the proposition that 7 + 5 = 12 
(Kant’s example, also found in Plato’s Theaetetus). It is easy to say that one 
just knows this, as one knows that nothing is red and green all over at once. 
But how does one know it?
Here we cannot readily find a good analogy for the simple exclusion rela-
tion we apparently grasp in the case of red and green. Could it be that from 
experience with objects, say with counting apples, then combining two sets 
of them, and recounting, we learn our first arithmetic truths and then use 
reason to formulate general rules, such as those for calculating larger sums?
Viewed in this way, arithmetic develops rather as scientific hypotheses 
are often thought to, with observations crucial at the base, generalizations 
formulated to account for them, and broader generalizations postulated to 
link all the observations and the narrower generalizations together. And do 
we not first learn to add by counting physical things, or by counting on our 
fingers?22
To be sure, we perhaps cannot imagine how the number 7 added to the 
number 5 could fail to equal the number 12. But that is not a point about 
the behavior of objects in the physical world. The physical world could go 

118  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
haywire so that when (for instance) five apples and seven oranges are physi-
cally combined, the result of counting the new set is always eleven. If that 
happened pervasively, might we not begin to think that arithmetic must be 
revised, just as Einstein’s work showed that the physics of “the incompa-
rable Sir Isaac Newton” needed revision? Perhaps the crucial epistemological 
consideration is what overall account of our experience is most reasonable; 
and if the best overall account should require rejecting a proposition now 
considered a priori and necessary, so be it.
The classical view provides for several critical responses. One concerns 
the distinction between two quite different things: the genesis of one’s 
beliefs—what produces them—and their justification, in the sense of what 
justifies them. A second point concerns whether arithmetical propositions 
can be tested observationally. A third focuses on the possibility of taking 
account of what looks like evidence against arithmetical truths, so that even 
if one’s final epistemological standard for judging a proposition is its serving 
the demands of the best overall account of experience, these truths can be 
preserved in any adequate account. Consider these ideas in turn.
First, granting for the sake of argument that our arithmetic beliefs arise 
from counting physical objects, is the experience that produces them what 
justifies them? The genesis of a belief—what produces it—is often different 
from what justifies it. The testimony of someone I realize is unreliable might, 
when I am off guard, produce my belief that different brands of aspirin do 
not, apart from additives, differ chemically. My belief would at that point 
be unjustified; but it might become justified later when I learn that aspirin 
is simply acetylsalicylic acid. Moreover, regardless of what produces our 
arithmetic beliefs initially, when they are justified in the way my belief that 
7 + 5 = 12 now is, experience does not appear to be what justifies them. For 
my part, I do not see precisely how the truth of the proposition might be 
grounded in the behavior of objects when they are combined; and I would 
not try to justify it, as opposed to illustrating it, by citing such behavior.
This brings us to the second point: it is doubtful that the proposition that 
7 + 5 = 12 is (empirically) testable, say by examining how objects combine, 
though it is exemplifiable in that way. The empiricist might reply that this 
by no means shows that the proposition is, as the classical view insists, nec-
essarily true rather than contingent and empirical. Indeed, it does not. But 
let us look closely at the idea that it could be tested, and could thereby be 
disconfirmed by discovering that when groups of five objects are combined 
with groups of seven, we find just eleven.
This brings us to a third response. How might one deal with repeated and 
systematic counter-evidence? Classical theorists will argue that it is possible 
for the world to alter in such a way that this combination procedure results 
in one item’s disappearing, or in our failing to see it, or in our misremem-
bering how many items entered the mix before our re-counting. They will 
also argue that the unexpected realization of such possibilities would be a 
better interpretation of the strange cases described—hence of our overall 

Reason I  119
experience—than saying that it has turned out to be false that 7 + 5 = 12. 
Thus, instead of saying that an arithmetical principle has been falsified, we 
would say that the world no longer uniformly exemplifies it.
One consideration favoring the classical view is that it is at best difficult 
even to understand how the purely arithmetical principle could be false. The 
number 7 plus the number 5 apparently equals the number 12, regardless of 
how apples and oranges behave. For the arithmetic statement is apparently not 
about apples and oranges, though (so far as we know) their behavior exempli-
fies it. For the classical view, at least, it is about numbers, which, unlike the 
arabic or roman or other numerals we use to represent them linguistically, 
are abstract and non-physical. If a proposition is not about concrete objects, 
facts about their behavior are not a test of its truth.
Notice something else. In order to gather purportedly significant counter-
evidence to the arithmetic proposition in question, one would have to rely, 
as already noted, not only on memory and perception (both highly fallible 
sources) but also on simple arithmetic: one would have to count disconfirm-
ing cases. A single apparent instance, say of seven and five things brought 
together and not adding up to twelve, would not be significant, and one 
must keep track of how many anomalies there are, relative to confirmatory 
instances in which the expected sum is counted out. It is not normally rea-
sonable to give up a good theory on discovering a single apparent counter-
instance. It appears, then, that in order to take seriously empirical evidence 
that would undermine arithmetic, we must trust perception in our counting, 
arithmetic itself in our summing, and memory in our overall judgment.
One might think it is enough simply to have a significant number of such 
disconfirming cases. But this is not so. One must be justified in believing 
that the number is significant. And how could one achieve this if one either 
made no count or—in any case—could not rely on one’s count of single cases 
to sum to a significantly large number? If it need not be true that 7 + 5 = 12, 
why should 1 + 1 + 1 disconfirming instances necessarily sum to 3? And 
would anything less than a huge number of apparently disconfirming cases 
be evidentially decisive against such a proposition of simple arithmetic? A 
single disconfirming instance would surely seem just an anomaly; there must 
be a significant number. One would, then, have to rely on some arithme-
tic propositions, such as that 1 + 1 + 1 disconfirmations = 3 (a minimally 
significant number, perhaps), in order to mount an effective challenge to 
the (necessary) truth that 7 + 5 = 12. Given the interconnections among 
arithmetic propositions, it is not clear that one could consistently (or at least 
with any plausibility) maintain the needed disconfirmatory propositions 
while denying that 7 + 5 = 12. Still another obstacle to recognizing apparent 
counter-evidence as genuine is the dependence on memory to keep track of 
disconfirming instances. The fallibility of memory would defeat confidence 
that one had adequately tracked apparent disconfirmations.
There may be a way around these objections, but even finding it would 
leave one far from a strong case for the contingent or empirical status of 

120  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
arithmetic truths.23 Even if one appealed, not to apparent counter-instances 
to the proposition that 7 + 5 = 12, but to a well-confirmed theory to argue 
that it could be false, one would need to do at least some counting of one’s 
confirmatory data regarding that theory (not to mention other ways in which 
theory confirmation relies on arithmetic, perception, and memory).
None of these points requires us to deny that there is a similar, contingent 
arithmetic proposition about apples and oranges, namely that when we count 
five of the first and place them next to the result of counting seven of the 
second, we can count twelve all told. This proposition may easily be confused 
with its pure mathematical counterpart. The former is clearly contingent and 
empirical, but its being so does not show that the purely arithmetic proposi-
tion is also. The distinction between pure and applied mathematics can also 
be brought to bear on geometry.24
There is a related metaphysical dimension of the question of the status 
of arithmetic truths. By contrast with at least one form of the classical view, 
radical empiricism denies that there are abstract entities and so, believing that 
mathematical propositions are about something concrete, radical empiricists 
naturally view them as generalizations about the behavior of physical objects. 
We need not accept the empiricist view to grant that if physical things did not 
exemplify the proposition that 7 + 5 = 12, the proposition would be of far 
less value to us even if necessarily true. If the physical world went haywire, 
it could turn out to be false that when seven apples are placed together with 
five more and the total collection is counted, the count yields twelve. This 
chaotic situation would falsify the physical principle already contrasted with 
the arithmetic one in question. But the physical principle is not, and does not 
even follow from, the purely mathematical proposition we are discussing.
Empiricism and logical and analytic truths
The empiricist view of the a priori can also be applied to analytic proposi-
tions and even to self-evident logical truths, and it may indeed appear more 
plausible in that case. Suppose that through scientific investigation we dis-
cover that vixens have certain characteristics we think of as male, such as 
certain hormones. Imagine that gradually (perhaps because of chemicals in 
the environment) these discoveries mount up so that the female foxes in our 
laboratory begin to seem more aptly classified as male than as female. Could 
not a time come when we begin to doubt that vixens are female after all?
And what about the logical principle of the excluded middle, which says 
that every proposition is either true or false? Consider the proposition that 
Tom is bald. Must this proposition be either true or false no matter what 
the quantity or distribution of hair on his head? Surely the proposition is an 
appropriate counter-example to the principle of the excluded middle.25
The classical view can offer its own account of these examples. For one 
thing, particularly over a long time, we can begin to use a term in a sense 
different from the one it now has. Thus, the discoveries about vixens could 
result in our someday using ‘vixen’ to mean not ‘female fox’, but ‘fox with 

Reason I  121
female external sexual characteristics and of the anatomical kind K’ (where 
K is the kind of animal we have in our laboratory). Then, when we utter 
such words as ‘Vixens are not really female’, we are not denying the analytic 
proposition now expressed by ‘All vixens are female’. We have confirmed 
something else, rather than disconfirming this.
In this way, then, our experience might result in our someday no longer 
assertively uttering ‘Vixens are female’ to say anything that we believe. This 
certainly does not show that experience might falsify the proposition we now 
affirm when we assertively utter that. Given what we now mean by ‘vixen’, in 
saying that all vixens are female we do not rule out that those ‘vixens’ in the 
lab could have internal biological and chemical characteristics in the light of 
which they ultimately need not be considered female.
Regarding the principle of the excluded middle, I would stress that 
Aristotle plausibly argued against it, and some contemporary philosophers 
of logic do, too. The main reasons for doubting it, moreover, do not depend 
on empiricism. Let us explore some of them.
Consider again the vague statement that Tom is bald. It may certainly be 
argued that this need not be either true or false. It is not as if ‘bald’ meant, 
say, ‘having fewer than 500 hairs on the top of one’s head’. It does not. And if 
it did, the term ‘top’ would still be vague and would cause the same trouble: 
it would be unclear in what area we must find 500 hairs. If the middle pos-
sibility—neither truth nor falsity—is to be ruled out, it must be by a better 
argument. The principle of the excluded middle, though often used to sug-
gest that even logical truths are not necessarily true, is controversial among 
rationalists and empiricists alike. The principle is a poor example to support 
the empiricist case against the necessity of logical truths.
When, by contrast, standard examples of simple logical truths are used, the 
effect seems very different. Consider the proposition that if Ann is coming 
by bus or she is coming by plane, and it is false that she is coming by bus, then 
she is coming by plane (which exemplifies the general logical truth that if at 
least one of two propositions is the case and the first is false, then the second 
is true). Is there any plausibility in the view that this might be false? I find 
none; and while nothing said here proves that the empiricist account of the a 
priori is mistaken, it appears less plausible than the classical account.
If what we have seen so far is accepted, the classical view of the truths of 
reason is quite defensible and the empiricist critique of it fails. But we have 
not yet adequately taken into account the ways in which knowledge of those 
truths might depend on language. This is an important topic particularly 
given the extent to which understanding the a priori is connected with under-
standing language. The next chapter will consider this topic in some detail.
Notes
	 1	 Adequacy of understanding of a proposition cannot be merely partial 
understanding, and it is more than simply getting the general sense of 
a sentence expressing it, as where one can analyze the grammar of the 

122  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
sentence, indicate something of what it means through examples, and 
perhaps translate it into another language one knows well. Adequacy 
here implies not only seeing what the proposition says but also being 
able to apply it to (and withhold its application from) an appropriately 
wide range of cases. This matter is treated in some detail in my ‘Self-
Evidence’, Philosophical Perspectives 13 (1999), 205–28. Note also that 
there is no appeal here to understanding or positing the necessity of the 
propositions (though the characterization lends itself to taking them to 
be necessary). In this respect my notion of the self-evident is simpler 
and more moderate than the traditional one common in much of the 
literature. See, for example, Laurence BonJour, ‘Toward a Moderate 
Rationalism’, Philosophical Topics 23, 1 (1995), 47–78, esp. section 3.
	 2	 For a helpful discussion of obviousness related to (but quite different 
from) the one in my ‘Self-Evidence’ and connected with the theory of 
the a priori in general, see Robin Jeshion, ‘On the Obvious’, Philosophy 
and Phenomenological Research 60, 2 (2000), 333–55.
	 3	 Two points are appropriate here. (1) A fourth case is one in which a 
concept is not only exercised in a belief but explicitly figures in it, as 
when one believes that the concept being taller than is instantiated by the 
spruce and the maple. (2) The analogy between perception and concep-
tion I am developing is meant to leave open what concepts are and what 
it is to understand one. As will later be apparent, philosophers differ 
in their understanding of the truths of reason in part because of their 
different understandings of the nature of concepts.
	 4	 One reason for the normality qualification is to make room for the pos-
sibility that one can consider and adequately understand a self-evident 
proposition yet fail to believe it. Brain manipulation might cause such 
failure. We should also make room for the possibility that, especially 
with more complex self-evident propositions—say that if p entails q and 
q entails r and r entails s, and s is not true, then p is false—it may take a 
person time to form the belief.
	 5	 Temporal immediacy, unlike epistemic immediacy, is a property not 
primarily of beliefs as such but of their formation. A belief is tempo-
rally immediate when its formation occurs “without delay” upon the 
person’s considering the proposition in question (or encountering the 
situation, such as the sight of a lightening bolt, that gives rise to the 
belief). One could also say that propositions are temporally immediate 
in a derivative sense when they are so obvious that one normally believes 
them immediately on (comprehendingly) considering them. Many self-
evident propositions are like this. But when I consider some self-evident 
propositions, such as that if there never have been siblings, then there 
never have been first cousins, it may or may not take me a moment to see 
their truth. Still, when one does see such a truth, the belief one forms will 
(at least normally) be epistemically immediate, not inferential. So, this 
proposition and my coming to believe it may or may not be temporally 

Reason I  123
immediate. By contrast, the proposition that I am now seeing print is 
temporally immediate (for me) but is not self-evident. It is evident not in 
itself, but through what I see.
	 6	 Kant’s most detailed presentation of his views on these matters is in 
his Critique of Pure Reason (first published in 1781), but a short pre-
sentation is provided in the Preamble to his Prolegomena to Any Future 
Metaphysics (1783). Kant’s conception of the analytic is quite reminiscent 
of Aquinas’s idea that the self-evident has “its predicate contained in the 
notion of the subject” (Summa Theologiae, Question 94, Article 2).
	 7	 There has long been controversy about whether such thought is possible 
without using language, or at least having a language. Donald Davidson 
is among those to argue for a strong dependence of thought on language. 
See, for example, his Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1984). Relevant critical discussion of Davidson 
is provided by Ruth Barcan Marcus in ‘Some Revisionary Puzzles about 
Belief and Believing’, Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, supple-
ment to vol. 50 (1990), 133–53, which brings out serious problems for 
the view that beliefs must have sentence-like objects. There is no need to 
take a stand on this issue for my main purposes in this book.
	 8	 One way to conceive this is as follows: if the concept of F is part of the 
concept of G, then having the property (of) F is self-evidently entailed 
by having the property (of) G. I do not accept this overall conception of 
conceptual containment but do believe that the entailment holds (even if 
not self-evidently).
	 9	 This is plausible if (1) the correct analysis of a key concept in an analytic 
proposition, say that of a vixen, is discoverable, without reliance on any-
thing beyond understanding that concept, by anyone with an (adequate) 
understanding of the proposition, and (2) given a correct analysis of that 
concept, the truth of the analytic proposition is appropriately evident. 
However, some analytic propositions are not understandable in this 
way; some might be provable only by a lengthy process from one that 
is (a notion discussed on page 113). Further, it is by no means clear that 
every analytic proposition is self-evident in the very common sense that 
implies a fairly high degree of obviousness. If, as seems plausible, the 
self-evidence of a proposition simply implies that some kind of adequate 
understanding is sufficient for justification for believing it, then we 
might plausibly distinguish between the immediately and the mediately 
self-evident and allow that the latter propositions may be understand-
able (to normal persons) only on the basis of considerable reflection. Cf. 
Thomas Aquinas’s view (which Kant might have known) that:
Any proposition is said to be self-evident in itself, if its predicate 
is contained in the notion of its subject . . . Man is a rational being, 
is, in its very nature, self-evident, since he who says man says a 
rational being; and yet to one who does not know what a man 

124  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
is, this proposition is not self-evident . . . some propositions are 
self-evident only to the wise, who understand the meaning of the 
terms of the propositions.
(Summa Theologiae, Question 94, Article 2)
	
	 This seems to anticipate Kant’s containment notion of the analytic and 
largely accords with the conception of the self-evident I have introduced.
	10	 There are philosophers who regard colors as subjective in a way that 
might seem to undermine the example here. I do not see that taking 
the proposition that nothing is red and green all over at once to be 
necessary, synthetic, and a priori entails any particular analysis of color 
properties, and I doubt that the example fails. If the example should 
depend on a mistaken realist account of color and for that reason fail, 
anti-realism about shape properties is less plausible, and the proposition 
that nothing is round and square might serve as well. For accounts of 
the status of color see C.L. Hardin, Color for Philosophers, Unweaving 
the Rainbow (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1988), and Edward Wilson Averill, 
‘The Relational Nature of Color’, Philosophical Review 101 (1992), 
551–88. For a detailed discussion of color properties, with application 
to the apparently synthetic a priori proposition that nothing is red and 
green all over at once and with a defense of the view that color proper-
ties supervene on (and so are determined by) dispositional properties of 
physical objects, see Colin McGinn, ‘Another Look at Color’, Journal of 
Philosophy 93, 2 (1996), 537–53.
	11	 This allows that such propositions can also be known empirically, say 
through testimony, though there are restrictions (discussed in Chapter 
7) on how this may occur. The characterization suggests that an a priori 
proposition is knowable non-inferentially even if only on the basis of 
considerable reflection, but the exact mode of the appropriate reflec-
tion is not something that need be settled here. A full account of this 
conception of the a priori would explicate the kind of possibility of 
knowledge in question; it is presumably not mere logical possibility in 
the sense that no contradiction is formally entailed by the occurrence 
of the relevant knowledge, but a conceptual possibility, roughly in the 
sense that such knowledge is provided for by the concept of the relevant 
kind of knowledge: the kind grounded in understanding propositions 
of the sort in question. My preference is to characterize the a priori in 
terms of self-evident propositions and leave open what kind of possibil-
ity there has to be of the sort of understanding that grounds justification 
for believing those propositions. For a valuable treatment of possibility 
and necessity arguing that such modal notions are irreducible, see Scott 
A. Shalkowski, ‘Conventions, Cognitivism and Necessity’, American 
Philosophical Quarterly 33 (1996), 375–92.
	12	 Kant’s section 2b of his Preamble to the Prolegomena to any Future 

Reason I  125
Metaphysics (trans. by Lewis White Beck, New York: Liberal Arts Press, 
1950) opens with ‘The Common Principle of All Analytical Judgments 
is the Law of [non]Contradiction’ and almost immediately continues: 
“For the predicate of an affirmative analytical judgment is already con-
tained in the concept of the subject, of which it cannot be denied without 
contradiction.”
	13	 There is a subtlety here that needs comment. Imagine that a self-evident 
axiom, A, self-evidently entails a theorem, t, which in turn self-evidently 
entails a second theorem, t′. Self-evident entailment (as opposed to 
entailment in general) is not transitive: A can self-evidently entail t and 
t can self-evidently entail t′ without A’s self-evidently entailing t′. Here 
one could understand the conditional proposition that if A then t′ quite 
adequately without thereby having justification for believing it. One 
might need the intermediate step, t, to achieve that justification, and it 
need not be discerned simply in adequately understanding the condi-
tional itself. This possible limitation does not preclude there being some 
kind of understanding of that conditional and related concepts, such as 
a perfectly omniscient being might have, in virtue of which the proposi-
tion that if A then t′ can be seen to be true. This shows that—as Aquinas 
saw in the quotation from him in note 9—there is a related notion—self-
evidence for a particular person (or mind)—which must be distinguished 
from self-evidence in its basic, non-relativized form, making reference 
only to anyone’s understanding. Still, even if what is self-evident for God 
might not be self-evident for us, some propositions are unqualifiedly 
self-evident. The case also shows that not every proposition provable 
by individually self-evident steps from a self-evident premise may be 
assumed to be a priori in the (moderately) broad sense of being self-
evidently entailed by a self-evident proposition; for (as just explained) 
such a proposition might not be self-evidently entailed by a self-evident 
proposition.
	14	 In a broader usage, a falsehood can be called an a priori proposition pro-
vided it is an a priori truth that it is false. This less common usage raises 
no special problems but presents a terminological complication I ignore 
in the text.
	15	 There is much difference in judgment about how to classify the ana-
lytic. It might be considered a semantic concept by those who think 
of it as truth by virtue of the meanings of the relevant terms. It might 
be regarded as ontological by those who think such truths are basic to 
the structure of reality. For epistemology, the notion of the a priori 
is the more important of the two. For an immensely influential paper 
arguing that neither notion is clear see W.V. Quine, ‘Two Dogmas of 
Empiricism’, in his From a Logical Point of View (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1953). Among the widely noted replies is H.P. 
Grice and P.F. Strawson, ‘In Defense of a Dogma’, Philosophical Review 

126  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
55 (1956), 114–58. For more recent discussion of these issues see Gillian 
Russell, Truth by Virtue of Meaning: A Defense of the Analytic/Synthetic 
Distinction (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008).
	16	 Critical discussion of the question whether the a priori must be necessar-
ily true is provided in my ‘Skepticism about the A Priori: Self-Evidence, 
Defeasibility, and Cogito Propositions’, in John Greco (ed.), The Oxford 
Handbook of Skepticism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008).
	17	 See Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1912), Chapters 8–10 (these chapters are reprinted in 
Huemer, Epistemology).
	18	 See especially J.S. Mill, A System of Logic (first published in 1843), par-
ticularly Book II, Chapters 5–7. For a much more sophisticated critique 
of apriorism in mathematics and an empiricist account of mathematical 
truths, see Philip Kitcher, Mathematical Knowledge (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1984).
	19	 Granting it is at best not obvious how logical truths are knowable by any 
analysis that reveals containment relations, their negations can be clearly 
seen to entail contradictions.
	20	 How broad this is depends on the notion of entailment used. I have in 
mind a notion for which the negation of a proposition entails a contradic-
tion provided that the use of formal logic, supplemented only by (cor-
rect) definitions, renders a contradiction deducible.
	21	 Someone might think all truth is a priori on the ground that it is true a 
priori that (1) God exists; (2) a certain universe specifiable in every detail 
is the best of all possible universes; and (3) God creates the best of these 
universes. Then, with sufficient intellectual power, one could (arguably) 
reason one’s way to any truth. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716) 
has been read as holding a view close to this (but there are reasons to 
doubt that he did, including considerations about divine freedom).
	22	 Cf. W.D. Ross, explicating how Aristotelian intuitive induction can yield 
a priori knowledge: “We find by experience that this couple of matches 
and that couple make four matches . . . and by reflection on these and 
similar discoveries we come to see that it is of the nature of two and two to 
make four” (The Right and the Good [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1930], p. 32).
	23	 The proposition that 1 + 1 + 1 = 3 might be held to be more intuitive 
than the proposition that 7 + 5 = 12. But, first, in practice we might 
need to rely on less intuitive or much more complicated arithmetic to 
get a good case for the possible falsehood of the original proposition; 
second, and more important, the simpler proposition that 1 + 1 + 1 = 3 
will also do as a case of a necessary mathematical truth.
	24	 For discussion of the status of the a priori in connection with geom-
etry, see the Appendix to Laurence BonJour, In Defense of Pure Reason 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998). That book is also of 

Reason I  127
interest for its criticism of Kant, who in BonJour’s view is less a ratio-
nalist about—and less plausible concerning—the a priori than is often 
thought.
	25	 For discussion of vagueness and its bearing on epistemological matters 
(as well as references to his own and others’ earlier work on vagueness) 
see Timothy Williamson, Vagueness (London: Routledge, 1994) and 
Knowledge and its Limits (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000).


6	
Reason II
Meaning, necessity, and provability
•	
The conventionalist view of the truths of reason
Truth by definition and truth by virtue of meaning
Knowledge through definitions versus truth by definition
Conventions as grounds for interpretation
•	
Some difficulties and strengths of the classical view
Vagueness
Meaning change and falsification
The possibility of empirical necessary truth
Essential and necessary truths
Necessity, apriority, and provability
•	
Reason, experience, and a priori justification
A priori beliefs
Loose and strict senses of ‘a priori justification’ and ‘a priori knowledge’
The power of reason and the possibility of indefeasible justification

6	
Reason II
Meaning, necessity, and provability
The radical empiricist critique of rationalism is neither the only kind empiri-
cists can mount nor the only plausible source of objections to it. Another 
important approach to understanding the truths of reason and our justifi-
cation and knowledge builds on the undeniable connections between how 
we use our language—specifically, on our linguistic conventions—and our 
knowledge of truths expressible in that language.
The conventionalist view of the truths of reason
We have seen the importance of analyses for understanding the a priori. 
Definitions of certain kinds may be considered linguistic counterparts of 
analyses. On one view, analytic truths may be better seen as definitional than 
as “analytical.” This idea needs examination.
Truth by definition and truth by virtue of meaning
To see how this approach goes, suppose that analytic propositions may be 
said to be true by definition. On the assumption that the truth or falsity of 
definitions turns on linguistic conventions, one can now make moves parallel 
to the classical ones that are expressed in terms of concepts. Thus, ‘vixen’ is 
definable as meaning (the same thing as) ‘female fox’; ‘female’ is part of this 
phrase; hence, by grasping a definition (even if we do not call it to mind) we 
can see how the proposition that all vixens are female is true. The predicate, 
‘is female’, expresses part of the meaning of the subject, ‘vixen’, just as the 
concept of being female is part of the content of the concept of a vixen. Thus, 
according to conventionalism, by appeal to the definition of ‘vixen’ as having 
the same meaning as ‘female fox’, we can also show that the proposition that 
all vixens are female expresses an analytic truth.
The conventionalist may grant that in the case of synthetic truths of 
reason, for instance the truth that nothing is red and green all over at once, 
we cannot make the same moves. For the relevant color terms are indefinable, 
or in any case not definable in the needed way. But we can still speak of truth 
by virtue of meaning or at least convention, in the limited sense that it seems 

Reason II  131
to be a matter of the meanings of, or conventions governing, say, the terms 
‘red’ and ‘green’, that if one of the terms applies to a surface at a time and 
place, the other does not. Why else would someone who sincerely denies that 
nothing is red and green all over at once seem to exhibit an inadequate under-
standing of at least one crucial term used in expressing that proposition?
What terms mean is a matter of convention. It depends entirely on agree-
ment, usually tacit agreement, among the users of the relevant language, 
concerning the proper application of the term. We could have used ‘vixen’ 
differently; we in fact would have done so if the history of our language hap-
pened to differ in a certain way. Moreover, even now we could decide to use 
‘vixen’ differently and proceed to do so.
The suggested account of the truths of reason—conventionalism—
grounds them in conventions, especially definitional conventions, regarding 
meaning. Secondly, and related to this basic claim, it conceives our knowledge 
of them as based on our knowing those conventions. Since knowledge of 
conventions is reasonably taken to be empirical knowledge based on suitable 
observations of linguistic behavior, conventionalism (on this interpretation) 
turns out to be a kind of empiricism regarding the truths of reason, and it 
has been held by some philosophers in the empiricist tradition. The claim is 
not that these truths are about words, but that knowledge of them is based on 
empirical knowledge of linguistic usage.
Knowledge through definitions versus truth by definition
Some of the points made by conventionalism are quite plausible. In grasping 
the definition of ‘vixen’ as meaning the same thing as ‘female fox’, perhaps we 
can see that all vixens are female; and under certain conditions, by appeal to 
the definition we perhaps can show that this truth holds. But do these points 
undercut the classical view? If the points hold, that may well be because of 
something non-linguistic: perhaps, in grasping the definition we understand 
the concepts involved and thereby see a containment relation between the 
concept of a vixen and that of being female. In this or some other way, under-
standing definitions might be a ladder by which we climb to an understand-
ing of concepts. 
Furthermore, as a proponent of the classical account might also note, it 
seems possible to grasp the relevant conceptual relations, and thereby already 
know the analytic truth, even if one does not know any such definition. 
Indeed, it might be only on the basis of the analytic truths one knows—such 
as that all vixens are female, and that all female foxes are vixens—that one 
is able to construct a definition of ‘vixen’—with its present meaning—in the 
first place. The definition would reflect what is already true in virtue of how 
the concepts in question are related; the concepts are not themselves created 
by or grounded in linguistic conventions.
Contrary to conventionalism, then, the knowledge of analytic truths 
would be essential in one’s route to the definitional knowledge, not the other 

132  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
way around. Understanding the relations between the concepts expressed 
by the words in question would be the basis for judging the definitions of 
those words; it would not be through first knowing the truth of those defini-
tions that one understands the conceptual relations or knows the analytic 
truth. Hence, knowledge of analytic truths apparently does not depend on 
knowledge of definitions or conventions, even if the former can sometimes 
be gained through the latter.
The more general important point implicit here is that conventionalism 
fails to give a good account of what grounds the truth, as distinct from our 
knowledge—or some of our knowledge—of analytic propositions. It is not 
because ‘vixen’ means the same thing as ‘female fox’ that all vixens are female. 
For, as we saw in assessing the empiricist view, this analytic truth does not 
depend on what ‘vixen’ means. This truth holds whether there is such a word 
or not. It could be expressed in some other language or by other English 
terms. It could be so expressed even if the word ‘vixen’ never existed.
There is another way to see limitations on what we can learn merely from 
definitions. Suppose that, although ‘vixen’ had always meant the same thing 
as ‘female fox’, both terms had meant something else, for example ‘wily 
creature’. In that case, ‘All vixens are female’ would still have expressed an 
analytic truth, but not the one it now does. It would have meant what we now 
mean by ‘All wily creatures are wily creatures’.
Moreover, although one can come to know that all vixens are female 
through understanding definitions of terms that now express this truth, one 
cannot know it wholly on the basis of the truth of those definitions. A route 
to a foundation is not itself a foundation.1 To know that all vixens are female 
by virtue of knowing that, say, ‘vixen’ has the same meaning as ‘female fox’, 
we need a bridge between knowledge of linguistic convention and knowledge 
of vixens. Consider one thing such a bridge requires. We must be justified in 
believing a general principle something like this: that a proposition expressed 
by a subject–predicate sentence such as ‘All vixens are female’ is true if its 
predicate term—here ‘female’—expresses something contained in the con-
cept designated by its subject term, here ‘vixen’. But this bridge principle 
is a good candidate for an analytic truth. If it is analytic, then, on pain of 
generating an infinite regress, one can know an analytic truth by knowing 
conventions only if one assumes some other analytic truth.
Moreover, to know, in the light of this bridge principle, that all vixens are 
female, we must take the relevant sentence, ‘All vixens are female’, to be the 
kind of thing the principle applies to, that is, to be a sentence with a predicate 
that expresses something contained in the concept designated by its subject. 
We are in effect using logic as well as knowledge of meaning to discern some-
thing about a particular sentence and to bring that sentence under a gen-
eralization about sentences. But how can conventionalism account for our 
knowledge (or justified belief) of the logical truths we thereby depend on, 
such as that if all sentences of a certain kind express truths, and this sentence 
is of that kind, then it expresses a truth?

Reason II  133
The conventionalist cannot respond by doing the same thing all over again 
with this logical truth; for that would presuppose logic in the same way, and 
the procedure would have to be repeated. The problem would arise yet again. 
No finite number of steps would explain our justification, and an infinite 
number would not be possible for us, even if it would help. We could thus 
never account for knowledge of a given logical truth without presuppos-
ing knowledge of one. Since conventionalism presupposes (at least) logical 
truths of reason, in order even to begin to account for analytic ones, it cannot 
show—and provides no good reason to believe—either that every truth of 
reason is grounded in convention or even that all knowledge of such truths is 
grounded in convention.
Conventions as grounds for interpretation
These criticisms should not be allowed to obscure a correct point that emerges 
from reflecting on conventionalism. The meaning of ‘vixen’ is crucial for 
what proposition is expressed by the sentence ‘All vixens are female’, that is, 
for what one is asserting when (in the normal way) one uses this sentence to 
make an assertion. Thus, if ‘vixen’ came to mean the same as ‘wily creature’, 
that sentence would express a falsehood, since there are plenty of wily males. 
But from the fact that change in what our terms mean can result in our saying 
different things in uttering the same words, nothing at all follows regarding 
whether what we say in using these words is necessarily true, or true at all. 
Those matters depend on what it is that we say.
There are, however, insights underlying conventionalism: truths of reason 
are associated with meanings; they can be known when meanings are ade-
quately understood; and they can sometimes be shown through pointing out 
relations of meanings. Moreover, without conventions, our “words” could 
not be said to have meanings: strictly speaking, we would have no words and 
could not plausibly call anything true by virtue of meaning.
Important as these points about conventions are, they do not support 
the conventionalist view that the truths of reason themselves, or even our 
justification or knowledge regarding those a priori propositions, are based 
on what words mean or on our conventions for using them. For all that these 
points establish, our understanding of word meanings (including sentence 
meanings) is simply a route to our grasping of concepts and shows what it 
does about the truths of reason only because of that fact.
Some difficulties and strengths of the classical 
view
Of the accounts just considered, then, the classical view of the truths of 
reason and our knowledge of them apparently stands up best. But there are 
other accounts and many variants on the ones discussed here. Moreover, I 

134  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
have sketched only the main lines of the classical view and only some of the 
challenges to it. There are still other difficulties for it.
Vagueness
Recall the problem of vagueness. Perhaps the concept of being red, as well as 
the term ‘red’, is vague. Is it, then, an a priori truth that nothing is red and 
(any shade of) orange all over? And how can we tell?
One answer is that although words are by and large vague, concepts are 
not, and what is red (i.e., what instantiates the concept of redness) is never 
orange even though we have no non-arbitrary way of precisely specifying 
the limits of colors. Thus, we might confront a sentence, say ‘That painting 
has a patch that is at once red and orange’, which we cannot assess until we 
see whether it implies the necessary falsehood that the patch is two different 
colors all over at once or, because of the vagueness of its terms, expresses 
(say) the possible truth that the patch has a single color that can be consid-
ered red just as appropriately as orange.
This answer is only the beginning of a solution to the problem of how to 
deal with vagueness and is less plausible for highly complex concepts such as 
that of a work of art. The more vague our terms, the harder it is to discern 
what propositions are expressed by sentences using those terms, and thus the 
harder it is to decide whether these sentences express truths of reason. None 
of this implies, however, that there are no clear cases of synthetic a priori 
truths. Perhaps the proposition that nothing is round and square, taken to 
belong to pure geometry, is an example. (There may also be examples in the 
moral domain, an important possibility considered in Chapter 12.)
Meaning change and falsification
A related problem for the classical view emerges when we consider the close 
connection (which some regard as an equivalence) between what a term 
means and the concept it expresses. With this connection in mind, notice too 
that meaning can change gradually, as when we discover things about vixens 
a little at a time and thereby almost imperceptibly come to mean something 
different by ‘vixen’. A point may then come at which it is unclear whether the 
term ‘vixen’ expresses the concept it now does or not and, correspondingly, 
whether or not what is then expressed by ‘All vixens are female’ is analytic.
This unclarity about what concept ‘vixen’ expresses need not give us reason 
to doubt, regarding the proposition which that sentence now expresses, that 
it is analytic; but it does show that it may be difficult to decide whether or 
not an utterance or sentence we have before us expresses an analytic proposi-
tion. That difficulty may drastically limit the usefulness of the notion of the 
analytic in understanding philosophical and other problems.
It might be argued, moreover, that on reflection the distinction between 
meaning change (semantic change) of the kind illustrated and falsification 

Reason II  135
of the proposition we started with does not hold. This point is likely to be 
pressed by those who think that the basic epistemological standard, the 
fundamental standard for judging whether a belief is justified or constitutes 
knowledge, is what is required for an overall account of experience. This 
broad standard is compatible both with many versions of empiricism and 
with some versions of rationalism.
To understand the difference between meaning change in a sentence and 
falsification of what the sentence is used to assert, it is helpful to contrast two 
cases. Compare (1) scientists’ discovering that despite appearances vixens 
have such significant male characteristics that they are not really female—an 
outcome the classical theory says is, on the face of it, impossible—and (2) 
scientists’ making discoveries about vixens so startling that we come to use 
‘vixen’ in a new sense, one such that, although scientists deny that ‘vixens’ in 
this new sense are always female, what they are thereby saying provides no 
reason to doubt that what we now mean by ‘All vixens are female’ is true. Is 
there really a clear difference between (1) and (2)—roughly, between falsifi-
cation of the belief about vixens we now hold and a change in the meaning of 
the terms we use to express it?2
Classical theorists take (2) to be possible and tend to hold that it is only 
because possibilities like (2) are not clearly distinguished from (1) that 
(1) seems possible. They regard the difference between (1) and (2) as clear 
enough to sustain their view and tend to conclude that what may seem to be 
a falsification of an analytic proposition is really only a change in meaning 
that leads us to substitute, for an analytic truth, what looks like a proposition 
inconsistent with it, yet is actually compatible with it. Other philosophers 
think that the difference is not clear at all and that future discoveries really 
can weigh against what the classical view calls analytic propositions.3
It is difficult to doubt, however, that there are some truths of reason, such 
as elementary logical principles, and such simple analytic propositions as that 
all vixens are female, that are both a priori and necessarily true.
Whether some truths of reason are also synthetic rather than analytic is 
more controversial, but it looks as if some of them are. Whether, if some of 
them are, those synthetic truths are also invariably necessary is also very 
controversial. I see no good reason to deny that they are necessary, but there 
may be no clearly decisive argument to show this.
If synthetic truths of reason are necessary, perhaps one must simply see 
that this is so by reflecting on the examples. In any case, our capacity of 
reason, our rational intuition, as it is sometimes (perhaps misleadingly) 
called, is a source of beliefs of simple truths of reason, such as the self-evident 
truth that if the spruce is taller than the maple then the latter is shorter than 
the former. We can know the truth of these intuitively, on the basis of under-
standing them rather than on the basis of premises for them or perceptual 
experience, even if more is required to know their status as, say, necessary 
or contingent, a priori or empirical. Moreover, reason, applied in our con-
templating or reflecting on certain a priori truths, can yield both situational 

136  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
justification—hence justification for holding beliefs of them—and actual 
justified beliefs of them. Clearly, reason can also yield knowledge of them.
The possibility of empirical necessary truth
It is one thing to say, with the classical view, that every a priori truth is neces-
sary; the thesis that every necessary truth is a priori is less plausible. Consider 
the truth that sugar is soluble in water. Ordinarily this is thought to be a law 
of nature and as such something that must (of necessity) hold. Yet it is not 
self-evident and apparently not even broadly a priori: one could adequately 
understand it without thereby being justified in believing it, nor does it seem 
to follow self-evidently from anything self-evident. Indeed, it seems to be the 
kind of truth that can represent an empirical discovery. Proponents of the 
classical view would maintain that the necessity in question is not “logical” 
in the sense of absolutely precluding falsehood, but nomic (from the Greek 
nomos, for law), in roughly the sense characterizing laws of the natural world 
as opposed to every possible world or situation.
It does appear that we can clearly conceive of a lump of sugar’s failing to 
dissolve in water, whereas we cannot clearly conceive of something that is 
(in overall shape) both round and square (if this is conceivable at all). But 
perhaps once the idea of solubility in water is properly qualified (in ways 
sketched in Chapter 12), there may no longer seem to be any more than a 
difference of degree between the two cases. I doubt that the difference is only 
one of degree, but let us leave the matter open and proceed to cases that pose 
a greater challenge to the classical view.
The truth that gold is malleable is arguably more basic to what gold is 
than solubility in water is to what sugar is. Is it even possible for something 
to be gold without being malleable? Compare the question whether a vixen 
could turn out to be male. This also seems impossible, but one difference is 
that whereas there are good ways of identifying specimens of gold without 
selecting them partly on the basis of malleability, there are no comparably 
good ways of identifying vixens without selecting them partly on the basis of 
being female. Still, even classical theorists grant that taking the proposition 
that gold is malleable to be necessary does not self-evidently commit one to 
considering it analytic. Critics of the classical view will maintain that it is not 
obvious that a specimen of gold could turn out to lack malleability, yet it is 
equally far from obvious that adequately understanding the proposition that 
gold is malleable is sufficient to justify it.
If we move to a theoretical identification statement, such as that water is 
H2O, it seems even less likely that we have a proposition that is contingent 
rather than absolutely necessary, yet it also appears that the proposition is 
not a priori. The basis of our knowledge of it is confirmed scientific theory, 
not understanding. To be sure, there is “heavy water,” but its existence bears 
on the kind of hydrogen atom, not on whether water of the everyday kind 

Reason II  137
is necessarily H2O. In any case, a different kind of example also strongly 
supports this conclusion that some necessary truths are empirical. This time 
we turn to the domain of biology.
Essential and necessary truths
As the identity of human beings is normally understood, who they are is 
essentially tied to their parents. Is it possible that I might have had (biologi-
cally) different parents? Surely anyone otherwise like me but born of differ-
ent parents is only a fortuitously identical “twin.” Here, then, is an empirical 
proposition (that I am the son of R and E) which is apparently necessary.
Notice, however, that the proposition that I have the parents I do is singu-
lar and existential, implying the existence of the particular thing it concerns 
(me), whereas the clear cases of necessary truth we have considered are all 
general and non-existential. To say that nothing is both round and square, 
for instance, does not entail that there is anything round or square: it says 
roughly that anything which is round is non-square (and vice versa), and it 
would be true even if all the round and square things in the universe had been 
destroyed (and presumably even if there never had been any except perhaps 
in the mind of someone contemplating creating them).
What a proponent of the classical view might say of the parentage case is 
that the proposition that I have the parents I do is an essential truth—one 
attributing to a thing a property absolutely essential to it, roughly in the 
sense that it could not exist without it—but not a necessary truth. The idea 
is roughly this: a necessary truth holds in any possible world or situation; an 
essential truth holds in, but only in, those possible worlds or situations in 
which what it is about exists.4
One trouble with this view is that even in a world without water, we 
could speak of water and H2O as we can of what is round or square. Perhaps 
the best the classical view can do here is, first, to distinguish between two 
kinds of necessary truth, those applicable to entities that must exist, such as 
(arguably) numbers, and those applicable to entities that need not exist, and 
second, to argue that the former truths are a priori. The idea might be that 
necessary truths are grounded in the nature of things, and that the nature of 
the kinds of things that must exist is knowable through the use of reason. 
The nature of water must be discovered by scientific inquiry; that of the 
abstract property of roundness is apparent to adequate reflection.
The idea that necessary truths are grounded in the nature of (the relevant) 
things has some plausibility. At best, however, it does not in any obvious way 
apply to purely formal necessary truths, such as that if some As are Bs, then 
some Bs are As, where A and B are variables and do not stand for anything 
in particular (they figure in indicating the form of the truth in question but 
provide no content).

138  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
Necessity, apriority, and provability
There is, moreover, a further objection to extending the idea to imply the 
apriority of all necessary truths. A theorem (in one sense of the term) 
might follow from a necessarily true proposition and thereby be a necessary 
truth—as what follows from a necessary truth is itself necessarily true—yet 
not be a priori because there is no way to know it simply through adequately 
understanding it or through adequately understanding its entailment by 
self-evident steps from something that is self-evident. We must not simply 
assume that every such theorem is self-evidently entailed by a self-evident 
proposition, or that some proof of it must proceed by self-evident steps from 
a self-evident proposition. This assumption is far from obvious and not self-
evident, and the classical view must establish it by argument. It is not clear 
that a cogent one can be found.
It should be stressed, however, that although a provable proposition need 
not be self-evident, a self-evident proposition may be provable. Self-evident 
propositions are knowable without proof, on the basis of adequately under-
standing them, and hence are not, as are many theorems, premise-dependent. 
But many can be proved, and some may need proof in order to be accepted 
by some people.5
Moreover, even apart from those points, the only possible proof by self-
evident steps from a self-evident axiom might be long; this would put the 
theorem a long inferential distance from the self-evident axiom(s). Granted, 
such a theorem would still be provable from what is self-evident. But simply 
being thus provable (yet not self-evident) entails only being what I call ulti-
mately a priori. That status is consistent with the possibility that, for finite 
minds, knowledge of the proposition depends on memory. The status is thus 
not sufficient for an uncontroversial kind of apriority.
It appears, then, that there can be necessary truths knowable only through 
the work of empirical investigation or of arduous mathematical proof of a 
kind that cannot ground what we might call strictly a priori knowledge. 
Those truths, to be sure, might be both provable and knowable just on the 
basis of a use of reason—though knowledge based on a long proof also seems 
to depend on memory. Not just any use of reason, however, qualifies knowl-
edge reached through it as a priori.
From the falsity of the classical thesis that every necessary truth is a priori, 
it does not follow, of course, that the classical view is mistaken in positing 
synthetic a priori knowledge or in claiming that every a priori proposition 
is necessary. (See Figure 6.1 for a brief representation of the classical and 
revised views of the a priori.)
Reason, experience, and a priori justification
Reason—conceived roughly as our mental capacity of understanding, espe-
cially in conceptual reflection or in inference—is a basic source of belief, 
justification, and knowledge. Like introspective consciousness and unlike 

Reason II  139
perception and memory, it is an active capacity, in that we can, within limits, 
employ it successfully at will. I can, simply because I want to, reflect on 
logical and mathematical propositions. But although I can look around me 
just because I want to, whether I perceive anything depends on there being 
something there: trees and roses and books are not available to the eye in 
the same unfailing way that concepts and numbers are available to the mind. 
Through reflection on the huge range of objects of thought, we can acquire a 
vast amount of justified belief and significant knowledge.
To maintain that there is a priori knowledge and justification does not 
commit one to denying that reason has a genetic dependence on experience. 
Reason yields no knowledge or justified belief until experience, whether 
perceptual, reflective, or introspective, acquaints us with (or develops in 
us) concepts sufficient for grasping a priori propositions. But despite this 
genetic dependence of reason on experience, in one way reason may be an 
even firmer basis of justification and knowledge than experience. If experi-
ence is the ground from which reason grows, it is not the sole determinant of 
the range or power of reason. The view from the top of the tree may be more 
comprehensive than the view on the ground.
A priori beliefs
The notion of the a priori is not commonly applied to beliefs, but it should 
be clear from what has been said not only that it has a significant applica-
tion to them but also that apriority on the part of a belief tends to indicate 
Figure 6.1  The a priori, the analytic, and the necessary.

140  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
some degree of justification. The following plausible principle of justification 
for a priori belief is a partial indication of the justificatory power of reason: 
normally, if a rational person believes a proposition solely on the basis of (ade-
quately) understanding it—believes it in a strictly a priori way—this belief is 
prima facie justified.6 In the typical cases in which this applies, the proposi-
tion, upon comprehending consideration by a rational person, will intuitively 
seem to the person to be true. Such an intuitive seeming—which for some 
philosophers is the primary element designated by ‘intuition’—is a source 
of prima facie justification. We may leave open whether this, rather than the 
understanding in question, is the main source of the person’s justification 
when the proposition in question is not self-evident. Plainly, however, the 
intuitive seeming presupposes at least a minimally adequate understanding 
of the proposition.7
There is a counterpart plausible epistemic principle—call it a principle of 
knowledge for correct a priori beliefs—to the effect that normally, if a rational 
person believes a true proposition in the a priori way just described, this 
belief constitutes knowledge. Believing in this a priori way is appropriate 
to (and typical for) beliefs of a priori propositions (though they may also be 
believed on the quite different basis of testimony), but it does not entail that 
the object even of a true a priori belief is a priori or a necessary truth.
It may also be true that normally, if one believes a proposition solely on 
the basis of one or more premises that self-evidently entail it and are them-
selves believed in the a priori way just described, this belief is prima facie 
justified. Again, such a proposition need not be a priori, but this principle is 
highly appropriate to what is a priori in the broad or the ultimate sense—not 
self-evident but either self-evidently entailed by something that is, or prov-
able by self-evident steps from a self-evident proposition. What the principle 
expresses is the idea that normally self-evident entailment transmits the kind 
of justification that is based solely on understanding: specifically it carries 
that justification across a self-evident entailment. Hence, normally, if you 
believe a proposition on the basis of believing, with this kind of justification, 
a second one which self-evidently entails the first, then your belief of the first 
is also justified.
If these principles seem too permissive, note that we do not normally 
believe propositions in the strictly a priori way in question unless they are a 
priori and thus can be known on the basis of understanding them. We nor-
mally have no tendency whatever to believe, solely on the basis of understand-
ing them, propositions indicating the state of the weather or describing the 
objects in our environment or the well-being or plans of others. Philosophers 
commonly say of such propositions that we cannot “determine a priori” (or 
tell or know a priori) whether they are true, and here ‘a priori’ designates an 
a priori way of believing rather than the status of the propositions in ques-
tion. Compare how much we believe on the basis of perception, memory, 
and introspection; not only is this far more than is normally believed on the 

Reason II  141
basis of conceptual understanding, it is also quite different in the kind of 
grounding of the resulting beliefs.8
Loose and strict senses of ‘a priori justification’ and ‘a priori 
knowledge’
So far, I have been speaking of knowledge and justification arising from 
believing in a strictly a priori way. This is not necessarily a priori knowledge 
or a priori justification, just as not everything perceptually believed is per-
ceptual knowledge or perceptually justified. When knowledge or justification 
that arises from believing in an a priori way is not strictly speaking a priori, 
one might still call it a priori knowledge or a priori justification in the loose 
sense. Let us consider justification first.
Consider the proposition that people tend to feel offended when they are 
insulted. This is vague, but not too vague to enable us to see that it is not 
an a priori truth (it seems empirically true or false, since it concerns what 
psychological reaction a kind of conduct in fact tends to elicit). Still, imag-
ine someone who thinks that insulting someone self-evidently entails being 
offensive to the person and that feeling offended is necessarily appropriate 
to what is offensive and tends to occur when one is insulted. Such a person 
might argue that, on the basis of understanding it, we can believe the propo-
sition that people tend to feel offended when insulted, and that we may, on 
this basis, be justified in believing that. If one might be so justified, then 
we might speak of a priori justification in the loose sense. We may also say 
that the belief itself is a priori in the loose sense, since it is grounded in an a 
priori way: if it is not grounded in the strictly a priori way (based solely on an 
adequate understanding of the proposition), the belief is at least held in an a 
priori way—it is based solely on an understanding of the proposition. Just as 
a perceptual belief can be justified and false (as when one first sees a straight 
stick half submerged in water and thinks it is bent), this belief can be also.
Another case of a priori justification in the loose sense can occur when, 
although one believes a proposition that is a priori, one believes it on the 
basis of an inadequate understanding of it. This is still believing it in an a 
priori way, however, as the basis of one’s belief is one’s understanding of the 
content of the proposition. But it is not believing in a strictly a priori way, as 
that requires adequate understanding. One might, for instance, overlook a 
subtlety or confuse one notion with a similar one, such as believing a proposi-
tion and being disposed to believe it. Suppose that, on the basis of my under-
standing of it, I believe a mathematical theorem that is a priori in the broad 
sense. Suppose further that this understanding, although inadequate, is not 
unreasonable (say because it represents a plausible though subtly misguided 
interpretation of the theorem). Then my belief may be justified. This is a 
second case of a belief held in an a priori way and exhibiting a priori justifica-
tion in the loose sense. Here the proposition is a priori, but the justification, 

142  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
though based on a reasonable understanding, is defectively grounded. In the 
other case of a priori justification in the loose sense, the belief is also held in 
an a priori way, but the proposition is not a priori.
If a belief that is a priori justified in the loose sense could constitute 
knowledge, we might speak of a priori knowledge in the loose sense. But  
as both our examples of such justification exhibit a defective (though 
reasonable) understanding in the basis of the justification, they are not plau-
sibly considered instances of knowledge. Beliefs resting on a basis embody-
ing conceptual error are not plausibly taken to constitute knowledge, even if 
the conceptual error is justified.
Suppose, however, that I believe a mathematical theorem on the twofold 
basis of a self-evident axiom (which I adequately understand) and the justi-
fied true belief that the theorem is entailed by the axiom (we may assume 
the second belief to be grounded wholly in my mathematical knowledge and 
understanding). Suppose further that the theorem is entailed, but not self-
evidently entailed or self-evident.9 It is not self-evidently entailed because 
adequately understanding the conditional proposition that if the axiom holds 
then the theorem does is not sufficient to justify believing this conditional. 
To see the truth of this conditional proposition, I must note several inter-
mediate steps from the axiom to the theorem, so that I do not see its truth 
(or the entailment it expresses) on the basis of adequately understanding the 
proposition. Still, the entailment is provable, and by proving it I may know 
the theorem. This is surely a broadly a priori way of knowing it, and the 
proposition itself is, in my terminology, ultimately a priori. Correspondingly, 
we may speak of a priori knowledge in the loose sense here. The knowledge is 
not a priori in the strict sense because the theorem is not a priori, even in the 
indirect sense. By valid deduction, I can prove it using the a priori procedures 
illustrated, but such provability of a proposition is not sufficient for its being 
self-evident or even knowable a priori in the strict sense of that phrase.
By contrast, a priori knowledge in the strict sense is not only more than 
true belief held in a strictly a priori way; it is also more than knowledge of 
an a priori proposition. I could know a simple logical truth on the basis of 
testimony, even if it can be known on the basis of understanding alone. This 
would be knowledge of an a priori proposition that is not even a priori knowl-
edge in the loose sense. Its grounding (wholly) in testimony does not prevent 
its being knowledge, but testimonial grounding of a belief does preclude its 
constituting a priori knowledge of any sort. Again, the analogy to perception 
is helpful. Just as perceptual knowledge is knowledge based on perception 
and thus more than knowledge about a perceptible, a priori knowledge is 
knowledge based on understanding and thus more than knowledge of an a 
priori proposition.
To achieve a more specific characterization of a priori knowledge we do 
well to begin with a crucial constituent of it—a priori justification. In the 
strict sense (the sense that mainly concerns us), this is justification based 

Reason II  143
directly or indirectly on understanding a self-evident proposition (the justi-
fication will be only situational if the person in question does not believe the 
proposition). A priori justification (in the strict sense) thus divides into two 
kinds, depending on whether it is directly or indirectly based on understand-
ing some self-evident proposition. (1) A priori justification for believing a 
proposition is based directly on such understanding when the justification 
depends only on understanding that proposition itself. This is a priori justifi-
cation in the strict and narrow sense. (2) A priori justification for believing a 
proposition is based indirectly on such understanding when the justification 
depends on also understanding a self-evident entailment of that proposition 
by some self-evident proposition. This is a priori justification in the strict but 
broad sense.10
If this outline is correct then a priori knowledge, in the strict sense, might 
be plausibly taken to be knowledge that is based, directly or indirectly, in the 
way just indicated, on understanding one or more self-evident propositions. 
There is, then, in addition to a division between a priori justification and a 
priori knowledge in the strict and loose senses, a division between direct and 
indirect (non-inferential and inferential) a priori justification, and direct and 
indirect a priori knowledge, in both senses.11 (Figure 6.2 represents the four 
dimensions of the a priori we have been exploring.)
The power of reason and the possibility of indefeasible 
justification
We have seen that, and perhaps to some extent how, the justificatory and 
epistemic power of reason enables it to ground a priori knowledge and a priori 
justified beliefs of a priori propositions. We have also seen its power to pro-
vide such knowledge and justification, in loose senses of ‘a priori knowledge’ 
and ‘a priori justification’, for propositions that are not a priori but invite 
belief on the basis of their conceptual content. These senses are especially 
appropriate for propositions that are provable from what is a priori. Is the 
power of reason such that it provides for something that even introspective 
experience apparently does not—indefeasible justification? It will help to 
focus on a concrete example.
There may be truths of reason that are so simple and luminously self-
evident that they cannot be unjustifiably believed, at least at a time when one 
comprehendingly considers them. Could one comprehendingly consider, yet 
unjustifiably believe, that if Shakespeare is identical with the author of Hamlet 
then the author of Hamlet is identical with Shakespeare? This is doubtful. 
One could perhaps believe it partly on the basis of a bad argument; if one did, 
there would be something unjustified in the way one believes it. But if one 
believes it, one has some understanding of it, and if one understands some-
thing this simple to the extent required for believing it, it is at best difficult 
to see how one could fail to have an understanding of it adequate to yield 

144  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
justified belief of it, at least at a time when one comprehendingly considers 
it. Perhaps, then, a belief held under these conditions would be—or at least 
could be—indefeasibly justified.
If there are propositions like this then there can apparently be indefea-
sible justification: justification so secure that those possessing it cannot be 
Figure 6.2  Outline of a four-dimensional conception of the a priori.

Reason II  145
unjustified in believing the proposition in question.12 But not all a priori 
justification (even in the strict sense) should be considered indefeasible. 
Justification for believing even certain logical truths can be defeated by plau-
sible skeptical arguments.
Perhaps, moreover, not all presumptively indefeasible justification need 
be a priori. Consider my justification for believing that I exist, a proposi-
tion that is neither a priori nor necessary but is arguably such that I cannot 
unjustifiably believe it. If there is indefeasible justification, this is important 
in dealing with skepticism (as Chapter 13 will), but plainly such justification 
is not a characteristic mark of either a priori or empirical justification. If, on 
the other hand, there is no indefeasible justification (something I leave open 
here), at least our understanding of simple self-evident truths of reason gives 
us both very secure justification for believing those truths and, when we do 
believe them on the basis of adequately understanding them, knowledge of 
them.
In summarizing some apparently warranted conclusions regarding the truths 
of reason, we might focus on how much seems plausible in the classical view 
that the a priori is coextensive with the necessary but includes the analytic as a 
subcategory: that any proposition that is a priori is necessary and conversely, 
but not every a priori proposition is analytic. Apparently, it is true that not 
all propositions knowable on the basis of adequately understanding them are 
analytic. The classical view seems correct in its claim that not everything a 
priori is analytic. It seems mistaken, however, in the idea that every necessary 
proposition is a priori, though probably not in the plausible idea that every a 
priori proposition is necessary.
More positively, in addition to our having a priori knowledge of self-evident 
propositions, on the basis of such knowledge we may know many truths that 
are at least ultimately a priori: not themselves self-evident but self-evidently 
entailed by, or provable by self-evident steps from, some proposition that is. 
Many of our beliefs, most clearly certain logical and mathematical ones, are 
grounded in understanding of their content. Reason, then, as manifested in 
our capacity for understanding, is one of the basic sources of belief, justifi-
cation, and knowledge; and, in a way that the other three sources we have 
explored do not, it enables us to know truths that hold not only in the world 
of our experience but also in any circumstances whatever.
Notes
	 1	 At least in his classic ‘Two Dogmas of Empiricism’, in his From a Logical 
Point of View (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1961), W.V. 
Quine sometimes talks as if he thinks that a knowledge of synonymy 
(sameness of meaning) of words is necessary for any possible knowl-
edge of analytic propositions. See, for example, section 4, on semantical 
rules. One important comment is that “definition turned out to be a 

146  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
will-o-the-wisp, and synonymy turned out to be best understood only 
by dint of a prior appeal to analyticity.” In the overall context, the sug-
gestion may be that only an independent conception of synonymy would 
clarify analyticity.
	 2	 Cf. W.V. Quine’s remark that “truth in general depends on both language 
and extra-linguistic fact. The statement ‘Brutus killed Caesar’ would be 
false if the world had been different in certain ways, but it would also be 
false if the word ‘killed’ happened rather to have had the sense of ‘begat’ ” 
(‘Two Dogmas’, section 4). Compare saying that the sentence ‘Brutus 
killed Caesar’ would have expressed a different, and false, proposition 
(which is what defenders of the classical view would likely say). Has 
Quine provided any reason to think that the statement in question—
understood as the historical truth we express using the sentence—would 
have been false if the English word ‘killed’ had meant ‘begat’?
	 3	 For a valuable discussion of the notion of the analytic in relation to the 
conceptual, see M. Giaquinto, ‘Non-Analytic Conceptual Knowledge’, 
Mind 105, 418 (1996), 249–68. One of his major conclusions bears on the 
status of such cases as the proposition that all vixens are female: 
What the liberated position [Quine’s, freed of behaviorism] main-
tains is that any belief may be rationally rejected in the light of 
future findings; what it has to accommodate is that some beliefs 
may be rationally retained even when their customary linguis-
tic expressions become unacceptable. These [positions] are not 
inconsistent.
(p. 266)
	 4	 The terminology of possible worlds traces especially to Gottfried 
Wilhelm Leibniz and has been influentially discussed in relation to a 
number of the issues concerning necessity and the a priori by Saul Kripke 
in Naming and Necessity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1980). Kripke offers a different kind of example of empirical necessities: 
true identity statements formed using proper names, as in ‘Hesperus  
is identical with Phosphorus’ (both being names of Venus). He also 
argues, using the example of the standard meter stick in Paris, that an 
a priori truth, say that the length of the standard meter stick in Paris 
at time t is 1 meter, may not be necessary. This is a highly controversial 
example (more often attacked than defended), which I cannot discuss 
here. For detailed criticism, see Albert Casullo, ‘Kripke on the A Priori 
and the Necessary’, Analysis 37 (1977), 152–9. Casullo also usefully dis-
tinguishes knowledge of the truth value (truth or falsity) of a proposition 
from knowledge of its modal status (its being necessarily true or false, 
or contingently true or false), and argues that the classical view could 
be mistaken in holding that the truth value of necessary propositions is 

Reason II  147
always knowable a priori yet correct in holding that their modal status is 
knowable a priori.
	 5	 Many philosophers have taken self-evident propositions to be unprov-
able, e.g. W.D. Ross (The Right and the Good, Chapter 2), apparently 
following G.E. Moore and others. A simple counter-example is the 
proposition that if p entails q and q entails r, then p entails r.
	 6	 Two comments are needed here. First, it might be desirable to widen 
the characterization to allow beliefs based at least predominantly on 
understanding the proposition in question (which requires understand-
ing the concepts figuring in the proposition); but I want to avoid here the 
complications that arise from considering multiple bases; thus I shall not 
generally qualify ‘based on’ and similar terms. The main points in ques-
tion will hold if it is taken as equivalent to ‘essentially based on’. Second, 
although the relevant beliefs might be thought to be always prima facie 
justified, there is at least one difficulty with this: perhaps there could be 
an abnormal case of a kind that prevents any justification from arising. 
This is not obviously possible, since if understanding is a sufficient basis 
for the belief, that might arguably carry some degree of justification. In 
any case, the normality formulation is significantly strong.
	 7	 The view that phenomenal seemings (including perceptual as well as 
intuitive seemings) suffice for justification is commonly called phenom-
enal conservativism. The position is defended by, e.g., Michael Huemer 
in Skepticism and the Veil of Perception (Lanham, MD: Rowman and 
Littlefield, 2001). For critical discussion of the view see Matthias Steup, 
‘Internalist Reliabilism’, Philosophical Issues, 14 (2004), 403–24.
	 8	 The quantitative comparison may be challenged by those who think we 
have infinite sets of mathematical beliefs (e.g. that 2 is even, 4 is even, 
etc.) and beliefs based on others by trivial operations, such as forming 
new beliefs by adding an ‘or’, as when, given my belief that I am seated, 
I form the belief that either I am seated or I am flying to the moon. That 
this conception of belief is mistaken will be argued in Chapter 9, which 
also notes relevant literature. In any case, the contrast I am drawing here 
would be adequately strong even without its quantitative dimension.
	 9	 As indicated in explicating self-evidence, self-evident entailment (as 
opposed to entailment simpliciter) is not transitive. If it were then if an 
axiom, A, self-evidently entailed a theorem, which self-evidently entailed 
another, and this held for 100 steps to theorem T, the proposition that 
if A, then T would have to be self-evident. But reflection on axiomatic 
systems shows that this is not so.
	10	 This implies that even if one justifiedly believed, and knew, an a priori 
proposition on the basis of a self-evident axiom, but not on the basis 
of a self-evident entailment of the former by the latter (say, by a chain 
of non-self-evident but valid inferences instead), the justification and 
knowledge would still not be a priori in the strict sense—though they 
might be very close to it.

148  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
	11	 Three comments are needed here. First, for one’s justification to be a 
priori, at least in the strict sense, it must not depend (epistemically) on 
memory. Thus, suppose there are too many self-evident premises for 
me to hold in mind at the same time as I understand the proposition 
that my conclusion follows from them. Or, suppose there are so many 
self-evident steps linking a single self-evident premise to a conclusion 
that I cannot hold them all in mind in a way that assures understand-
ing the ultimate entailment of that conclusion by the premise. Then my 
justification for believing this conclusion is not a priori (though I may 
be able to prove the conclusion). Second, and related to this, so long as 
there can be a mind sufficiently capacious to understand the entire set of 
propositions in question (the premises and the proposition that if they 
are true, then the conclusion is also) without dependence on memory, 
a priori justification for someone’s believing the conclusion is possible. 
Third, as in this book generally, I regard the justification referred to as 
defeasible (a notion considered in this chapter and again in Chapter 11) 
unless otherwise specified.
	12	 It might be argued, however, that if one believed such a simple self-
evident proposition essentially on the basis of a bad argument, one would 
not justifiedly believe it, though, by virtue of adequately understanding 
it, one would still have a justification for believing it which simply fails 
to serve as a sufficient ground of one’s belief. I leave open whether one 
could believe such a proposition both fully comprehendingly and essen-
tially on the basis of a bad argument (as opposed to one’s being only 
influenced by such an argument).

7	
Testimony
The social foundation of knowledge
•	
The nature of testimony: formal and informal
•	
The psychology of testimony
The inferentialist view of testimony
Inferential grounds versus constraints on belief-formation
The direct source view of testimony
Testimony as a source of basic belief
•	
The epistemology of testimony
Knowledge and justification as products of testimony
Testimony and memory compared
The twofold epistemic dependence of testimony
•	
The indispensability of testimonial grounds
Conceptual versus propositional learning
Testimony as a primeval source of knowledge and justification
Non-testimonial support for testimony-based beliefs

7	
Testimony
The social foundation of knowledge
If our only sources of knowledge and justified belief were perception, con-
sciousness, memory, and reason, we would be at best impoverished. We do 
not even learn to speak or think without the help of others, and much of what 
we know depends on what they tell us. Children in their first years of life 
depend almost entirely on others for their knowledge of the world.
If perception, memory, consciousness, and reason are our primary indi-
vidual sources of knowledge and justification, testimony from others is our 
primary social source of them. This is why it is a primary concern of social 
epistemology. The distinctive situations in which testimony yields knowl-
edge and justification are social: in each case one or more persons convey 
something to one or more others. There are various kinds of testimony, 
however, and there are many questions about how one or another kind yields 
knowledge or justification.
The nature of testimony: formal and informal
The word ‘testimony’ commonly evokes images of the courtroom, where 
formal testimony is given. Someone sworn in testifies, offering informa-
tion supposed to represent what the person knows or believes. Often such 
testimony recounts what was witnessed first-hand, but testimony can be an 
expression of what we believe about something we did not witness, such as 
the implications of a scientific theory or the potentials of human character.1
Formal testimony differs from the informal kind in the conditions under 
which it is given, but not necessarily in being more credible. Testimony of the 
informal kind—roughly, saying something in an apparent attempt to convey 
(correct) information to someone else—plays a very large role in our lives 
and raises the question of the importance of testimony for knowledge and 
justification.2
 For the informal giving of information, for instance in telling someone 
where one was last night, ‘testimony’ is too heavy a word. We could speak 
of ‘informing’, but this is too narrow, both in suggesting a prepared message 
(as in ‘Yesterday she informed me of her plan to attend’) and in (normally) 

Testimony  151
implying that what is conveyed is true. We might regard all testimony as a 
kind of saying. But not all saying—even apart from what is said in fiction—is 
testimony. Someone who says, ‘Ah, what a magnificent tree!’ is expressing 
a sense of the magnificence of the tree, but not giving testimony that it is 
magnificent, as when an arborist cites features of shape and color in support-
ing a claim that the tree is magnificent and worth the high cost of pruning.
For much conveyance of information it can help to speak of attesting. This 
covers both formally testifying that something is so and simply saying, in 
the relevant informational way, that it is so, for instance telling someone 
the time. Testimony is always given to one or more persons (to oneself, per-
haps, in the limiting case). It may be actual or, in some cases, hypothetical, 
as when a diarist describing atrocities for posterity does not know whether 
anyone will read the testimony. In any event, what we must understand here 
is the role of testimony of all these kinds—roughly, of people’s telling us 
things—in accounting for our knowledge and justification. I begin with the 
psychological question of how testimony yields belief. The psychology of 
testimony is both intrinsically interesting and epistemologically important.
The psychology of testimony
If we start thinking about testimony by focusing on formal cases, we might 
conclude that as a source of belief, testimony is quite unlike perception in 
that testimony produces in us only inferential beliefs of what is said, whereas 
perception produces non-inferential beliefs about what is perceived. The idea 
that beliefs based on testimony arise by inference from one or more premises 
is probably a natural result of concentration on formal testimony. When I 
hear courtroom testimony, I appraise the witness, place the testimony in the 
context of the trial and my general knowledge, and accept what is said only if, 
on the basis of this broad perspective, it seems true. I do not just believe what 
I hear, as I may just believe that a bat flew by if I see one zigzag across the 
evening sky. Sometimes it is like this: given the premises that (for example) 
the witness seems credible and that the statement in question—say that the 
accused dined in a certain restaurant on New Year’s Eve—fits what I know, 
I may thereby come to believe this statement. Let us assess the idea that 
testimony-based beliefs in general arise in this inferential way.
The inferentialist view of testimony
If this inferentialist picture of testimony is correct, then testimony is a sig-
nificantly less direct source of belief than perception: it yields belief only 
through both the testimony itself and one or more premises that support the 
proposition attested to or the attester’s credibility. If that is so, testimony 
is also not as direct a source of knowledge or justification; for one would 
know, or be justified in believing, what is attested only if one knows, or is at 

152  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
least justified in believing, one’s premise(s). One could not know simply from 
testimony, but only from premises about it as well.
There is a different, and I think more plausible, account that can also 
explain the psychological role of certain background beliefs. On this 
account, beliefs about the credibility of the attester and beliefs pertinent 
to the attested proposition may play a mainly filtering role. These beliefs 
(among other filters) prevent our believing testimony that does not “pass,” 
for instance because it seems insincere. But if no such difficulty strikes us, 
we “just believe” (non-inferentially) what is attested. These filtering beliefs 
(which are common but not necessarily elements in the mind of everyone 
who forms beliefs from testimony) are like a trapdoor that shuts only if trig-
gered. Its normal position is open, but it stays in readiness to block what 
should not enter.3
The open position of our natural testimonial filter is a kind of trust. Trust 
is indeed apparently the evolutionary default position: without a significant 
degree of trust in others, children could not, without extraordinary luck, 
reach adulthood and our species would likely not have survived. The absence 
or laxity of filtering beliefs yields credulity; the presence of excessively rigor-
ous ones yields skepticism. Intellectual virtue—and epistemic responsibility 
conceived as a kind of virtue—are attained when we achieve a reasonable 
“mean” between excessive credulity and unwarranted skepticism.
It could very well turn out that, in different circumstances, each of 
these accounts—the inferentialist account and the non-inferential filtering 
account—applies to the formation of beliefs of what we are told. The psycho-
logical possibilities here are numerous, and it should be stressed that beliefs 
are not the only filtering elements that can non-inferentially guide formation 
of testimony-based beliefs. An intuitive sense of plausibility may also serve 
to filter. Fortunately, we need not describe all the possible filters. For now, it 
is enough to see that we need not consider belief properly said to be based on 
testimony to be inferential, say grounded in a further belief that the attester 
has spoken plausibly.
In the case of informal testimony—the most common kind—the beliefs 
it produces in the hearer are surely not inferential. Certainly when trusted 
friends speak to us on matters we have no reason to think are beyond their 
competence, we normally “just believe” what they tell us. Indeed, if I am 
trusting of people’s word, then normally, when people tell me something, 
my belief system stands ready to be stocked. I hesitate or draw cautionary 
inferences only if (for instance) a would-be new belief conflicts with one 
or more beliefs already in my inventory. If you look vigorous and tell me 
you once swam the English Channel, I may readily believe you, whereas 
without special evidence I would not believe someone claiming to have 
climbed Mount Everest without using rope. For on the basis of my relevant 
background beliefs about climbing, I take that feat to be impossible. I have 
filtering-beliefs that prevent the testimony’s passing into my belief system.

Testimony  153
Inferential grounds versus constraints on belief-formation
These points about how testimony produces belief need expansion. Just as it 
is misleading to try to build an account of the psychology of testimony from 
the formal cases, it is a mistake to take a static view of how testimony pro-
duces belief. Our beliefs and even our belief-forming processes may change 
in the course of our receiving testimony. I meet someone on a plane. She tells 
me about a conference in which a speaker I know lost his temper. Initially, I 
suspend judgment about whether he did so, as the incident is of a rare kind 
and I do not know her. Then, as she describes the conference further, other 
details begin to fit together very well, and she gives information I already 
know, such as who was there. Soon I am listening in an accepting attitude, 
forming beliefs of each thing she says as fast as she proceeds. At the end, I 
find that I now believe that the speaker did in fact lose his temper.
Even at the beginning, I need not have inferred that I should suspend 
judgment on the initially unlikely statement about the speaker. Suspending 
judgment may be a non-inferential response to the constraints set by my 
independent beliefs or my sense of plausibility. Moreover, her testimony is 
blocked, but not overridden, by my antecedent beliefs and impressions. That 
is, they prevent my believing what she attests to, but do not lead me to dis­
believe it. They do not overturn a testimonially grounded belief I formed and 
then gave up because of what I later came to believe, as when I discover it is 
inconsistent with apparent facts.
What happens is apparently this. As her narrative progresses, the con-
straints set by my independent beliefs relax, and, regarding each statement 
she makes, I form beliefs not only non-inferentially, but also even spontane-
ously, in the sense that any constraints that might have operated do not do so. 
Her statements no longer have to be tested by under the gaze of my critical 
scrutiny, nor are they filtered out by the more nearly automatic checking the 
mind routinely does when people offer information.
The most difficult thing to explain here is why, at the end, I believe the 
proposition on which, at the beginning, I suspended judgment. One might 
posit an unconscious inference, say from the general credibility of her 
account to the conclusion that this proposition, as an essential part of it, 
is true. But in what sense can an inference, as a mental process, be uncon-
scious? This is far from clear. In any case, perhaps the cognitive influence of 
my standing beliefs, such as a newly formed belief that she is credible, need 
not proceed through an inference from them. It might be like this: even apart 
from my forming beliefs about her credibility, her eventually becoming, in 
my eyes, quite credible can in some fairly direct way produce in me a general 
disposition to believe her. This disposition is strengthened as she speaks  
with an evident credibility; and at the end it overcomes the resistance to 
belief which was exercised earlier by my constraining beliefs. On the subject 
she is addressing, I have come to trust her. The case shows, moreover, that 
trust can be retroactive as well as retrospective.

154  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
The direct source view of testimony
There are still other possibilities that support the conclusion that the infer-
entialist view of testimony is too narrow. Perhaps people (or some of us) 
have a credibility scale on which attesters acquire—commonly without our 
conscious attention to the matter—a place that can change, also without our 
conscious attention. This is an interesting empirical hypothesis that I cannot 
pursue, but all that is crucial here is that we see how beliefs grounded in testi-
mony—testimony-based beliefs—can be constrained by other beliefs without 
being inferentially based on them and how beliefs based on testimony can be 
formed later than the attestation that is their ultimate source.
Perception, too, can produce belief after it has begun or, indirectly and 
with the help of memory, even after it has ceased. One may look at a shape 
for a long time before believing that it is a tree stump and not a stroller who 
stopped to gaze at the night sky. This same belief could also arise much later, 
from vividly recalling the image a day later when one is questioned about the 
scene. The connection in virtue of which a belief is based on a source need 
not be direct or simultaneous or a result of inference from premises.
Is the analogy with perception sufficient to warrant concluding that, like 
perception, testimony is a basic source of belief, in the sense, roughly, that 
it can produce belief without the cooperation of another source of belief? 
Consider perception. If I see a tree, this can produce in me a belief that there 
is a tree before me without my having a potentially belief-producing experi-
ence of any other sort, such as a separate consciousness of an image of a 
tree.4 But I cannot form a testimony-based belief unless I hear (or otherwise 
perceive) the testimony. Perception is crucial for the formation of testimony-
based beliefs in a way that no other belief source is crucial for the formation 
of perceptual beliefs.5
Granted, perception does not produce belief without appropriate back-
ground conditions, nor does its being a basic source of belief imply that ante-
cedent beliefs are irrelevant. Suppose I firmly believe I am hallucinating the 
moon. Then, even if I actually see it, I may withhold judgment on whether 
it is out. A basic source does not derive its generative power from another 
source, but it need not operate in complete independence of other sources 
or their outputs. It can yield belief without the help of another source; but 
it may also cooperate with other sources in producing belief, and they may 
suppress some of its would-be products or may undermine the justification 
of some of the beliefs it does produce.
Testimony as a source of basic belief
Given that testimony-based beliefs are not inferential, and so need not 
be grounded on a belief that the attester is sincere or even on a belief that 
someone is speaking to one (though one must be at least disposed to believe 

Testimony  155
this), one may be puzzled by the point that testimony is not a basic source 
of belief. The puzzlement may arise from failing to see that perception itself 
is required for the formation of belief based on testimony, even if perceptual 
belief is not a requirement.
To be sure, I may have to be disposed to believe someone has said that the 
speaker lost his temper to acquire a testimony-based belief of this statement; 
but that seems to be only because I must have comprehendingly perceived this 
being said; it does not imply that I have formed the belief that it was said, just 
as perception of a sentence in a convincing article one is reading can produce 
belief of what it says without one’s forming the belief that the sentence says 
that. There is no reason to think the mind must keep such semantic double 
books. It is my perception of what is said, typically my hearing or reading it, 
that is required for formation of a testimony-based belief of the proposition 
attested to. There is a sense in which I must know—having taken in—what 
was said; but this is a kind of understanding and does not require forming 
such specific beliefs as that Juan said that Jane is reliable. We could speak of 
recognitional knowledge here: a kind of knowing what. Such knowledge need 
not be expressed in beliefs.
There is also a positive point here. Testimony can be a source of basic 
beliefs, in the sense of beliefs not based on one or more other beliefs. The beliefs 
testimony evokes need not be based on premises at all, much less on premises 
grounded in another belief source. The kind of non-inferential belief that 
testimony typically produces, the kind I am calling testimony-based belief, 
can also be basic knowledge if it meets the conditions for non-inferential 
(hence non-premise-based) knowledge. It can certainly be basic for a person 
in the everyday sense of being central in the person’s life.
A major epistemological point that the case of testimony shows here is 
that a basic belief—roughly, one basic in the order of one’s beliefs, and so not 
premise-dependent—need not come from a basic source of belief: roughly, 
one basic in the order of cognitive sources and so not source-dependent. A 
belief that is not based on, and in that sense does not depend on, another 
belief may come from a source of beliefs that does depend on another source 
of them.
The epistemology of testimony
In the light of what has emerged about how testimony produces belief, we are 
now in a good position to ask two further questions. How does testimony 
yield knowledge and justification, and does it ever yield basic knowledge or 
basic justification in the way perception and reflection, for instance, appar-
ently do? The case of knowledge is in some ways easier to deal with here 
than that of justification, and I will start with knowledge. As with perceptual 
knowledge and justification, testimony-based knowledge and justification 
turn out to differ.

156  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
Knowledge and justification as products of testimony
Testimony gives knowledge to its hearers only under certain conditions. If I 
do not know that the speaker at yesterday’s conference lost his temper, then 
you cannot come to know it on the basis of my attesting to it.6 This is obvious 
if I am mistaken and he in fact did not lose his temper. But suppose I make a 
lucky guess and am right. Then I give you correct, conjectured information 
which I do not know; but you are also lucky to be correct and also do not 
know that he lost his temper. It is a fluke that I get it right; it is even more 
of a fluke that you get it right, since in your case there are, in addition to the 
chance I have taken of making a mistake, the other liabilities you escape: of 
my having distorted the truth, of your having misheard me, of your adding a 
false detail to what you take from my testimony, and so forth.
There is a more common defect in testimony that prevents its producing 
knowledge in the hearer. Imagine that I do not guess at, but incautiously 
accept, the proposition that the speaker lost his temper, from someone I 
know often lies about others. Again, I lack knowledge that he lost his temper, 
even if this time the proposition is true; and again, you cannot know it on the 
basis of my testimony, which is now ill-grounded in another way.
The case with justification is quite different. Even if I am not justified in 
believing that the speaker lost his temper, I can be credible to you in such a 
way that you can become justified in believing this on the basis of my attest-
ing it to you. To see this, consider the two facets of testimonial credibility: 
the sincerity dimension, concerning the attester’s honesty, and, second, the 
competence dimension, concerning the attester’s having experience or knowl-
edge sufficient to make it at least likely that if the attester holds a belief of the 
proposition in question or of closely related ones, then they are true. Surely 
you can justifiedly regard me as credible on the topic of whether the speaker 
lost his temper if you have good reason to believe that I am honest, possess 
normal acuity and memory, and was present and reasonably attentive on the 
occasion.
Consider a further asymmetry: I cannot give you testimony-based knowl-
edge that something is so without having knowledge that it is so, yet I can 
give you justification for believing this without having such justification. 
This asymmetry is important but can mislead. In both cases my credible 
report (my testimony) is your basis: of your justification for believing what I 
attest to and (when I know it) of your knowledge of it. But whereas I transmit 
to you my knowledge that the speaker lost his temper (when I know this), 
when I do not have justification for it I do not transmit to you justification for 
believing this—I do not have that justification to transmit. Rather, the way I 
attest to the proposition, together with your background justification regard-
ing me and the circumstances, gives you this justification, independently of 
whether I have it. This illustrates non-transmissional grounding of justifica-
tion, where testimony-based knowledge is transmissionally grounded.
Thus, in normal cases in which you credibly attest to something you 

Testimony  157
know, you do not give me justification in the way you give me knowledge. 
Testimony-based knowledge is received by what it is natural to call trans-
mission and so is dependent on whether the attester knows the truth of the 
proposition in question—call it p. By contrast, recall the speaker who attests 
to p, which the person obviously knows, in a tense way that betrays anxiety, 
which p does not mention. It is natural to say that you here gain knowledge of 
the anxiety through the testimony, whereas you would gain knowledge that p 
on the basis of the testimony. In the first case, the knowledge has no essential 
relation to what is attested to—which has no connection with anxiety—and 
is not testimony-based.
 Testimony that p, then, can convey the attester’s knowledge that p; it 
can produce in the hearer a justification for believing p, and it can even yield 
knowledge (whether of p or of some other proposition) without that knowl-
edge being based on it. But testimony that p does not convey the attester’s 
justification for believing p—the attester need not even have such justifica-
tion. My testimony that p, then, does not give recipients justification in the 
way it gives them knowledge.
This contrast between conveying knowledge and providing justification 
helps to explain the original asymmetry: if I do not know that a proposition 
is true, my attesting to it cannot transmit to you testimony-based knowledge 
that it is so (I have no knowledge to give here); but even if I am not justified 
in believing it, my attesting to it can give you justification for believing it, 
through providing the main materials for your becoming justified in believ-
ing it.7 One might claim that this is still not testimony-based justification, 
but I think it can be, in the clearest sense in which there is such a thing. To 
see this, let us compare testimony with memory.
Testimony and memory compared
The contrast between how testimony produces knowledge and how it pro-
duces justification in the recipient is reminiscent of a contrast applicable to 
memory (drawn in Chapter 3). Just as we cannot know that p from memory 
unless we have come to know it in another way, say perceptually, we cannot 
know that p on the basis of testimony unless the attester (or someone from 
whom the attester comes to know it) has come to know it (at least in part) in 
another way; whereas we can become justified in believing p through memory 
impressions, whether or not p is true or known,8 and we can become justified 
in believing p on the basis of testimony, whether or not the attester has true 
belief or knowledge of it or even justification for it.
With testimony-based knowledge, as with memorial knowledge, there 
must apparently be a certain kind of unbroken chain from the belief con-
stituting that knowledge to a source of the knowledge in some other mode, 
such as seeing; but with testimony-based justification, as with memorial 
justification, what is essential is apparently a matter of the present epistemic 
situation of the subject or recipient, such as the contents of apparently 

158  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
memorial consciousness and the content and justifiedness of background 
beliefs. Memory and testimony can each generate justification (though in 
different ways); but they are not generative with respect to knowledge: char-
acteristically, the former preserves knowledge, the latter transmits it.9
There is another way in which justification and knowledge apparently 
differ in their relation to testimony. Suppose I am justified in believing p, but 
you have no justification of your own for believing p or for taking me to be 
credible on the topic. To vary the conference example, imagine that in pass-
ing, and without giving evidence, I say that three speakers lost their tempers, 
and your background information neither disconfirms nor supports this 
claim or my credibility in the matter. Here justification follows your lights 
rather than mine: my would-be contribution to justifying you in believing 
p is undermined by your lack of justification for thinking my testimony is 
credible or for believing p on some other basis. Receptivity to testimony-
based justification sometimes requires already having some measure of jus-
tification: for believing the attester credible or for believing p, or for both.
Knowledge is different on this score: to know something through my 
attesting to it in expression of my own knowledge, you do not have to know 
that I am credible; it is quite enough that you have some reason to believe I 
am and no reason to doubt it. It is normally enough that you presuppose it 
and have no reason to doubt it. Surely you can know that it is nine o’clock 
on the basis of my knowing this and telling it to you, even if you simply find 
me a normal-seeming person with a normal-looking watch and take me to be 
credible.10 And why indeed must you meet any more than a negative condi-
tion: not having reason to doubt my credibility? After all, we are talking 
about a case in which I know that it is nine o’clock, attest to this from my 
knowledge of it, and thereby produce your (true) belief that it is nine. There 
is, then, a kind of unbroken chain from the fact that it is nine to your true 
belief that it is.
A natural objection to this credible-unless-otherwise-indicated view of 
testimony as a ground for knowledge is that in our example one’s evidence 
is so scanty that one would at best have only some reason to believe it is 
nine o’clock. But is this true? Granted, my having some reason to believe 
the proposition may be all I can show from my evidence or from what I feel 
certain of. Still, on the assumption that I in fact do know the time and sin-
cerely tell it to you, it would seem that you can thereby know this proposi-
tion. That appears to hold even when you simply have no reason to doubt my 
credibility.11
These points suggest a principle of testimony-based justification: At least 
normally, a belief based on testimony is thereby justified (i.e., justified on 
the basis of the testimony) provided the believer has adequate (situational) 
justification for taking the attester to be credible regarding the proposition 
in question. There is no easy way to specify the conditions for adequacy here. 
What we may say is that in everyday life people who do not often find people 
speaking falsely to them will have adequate justification for taking testimony 
they receive to be credible in the absence of special reason to doubt it.

Testimony  159
We might formulate a similar principle for knowledge. To see its content let 
us speak of undefeated testimony when testimony occurs in the absence of at 
least the following common and probably most characteristic defeaters, i.e., 
factors that preclude testimony’s giving the recipient knowledge: (1) internal 
inconsistency in what is affirmed, as when an attester gives conflicting dates 
for an event; (2) confused formulation, a kind that will puzzle the recipient 
and tend to produce doubt about whether the attester is rightly interpreted or 
even has a definite belief to communicate; (3) the appearance of insincerity, 
as when the attester seems to be lying; (4) conflict with apparent facts evident 
in the situation in which the testimony is given, as when a person shoveling 
earth over smoking coals says there has been no campfire; and (5) conflict 
with what the recipient knows, justifiedly believes, or is justified in believing 
(has justification for believing). These conditions may occur separately or 
together; the more of them an attestation satisfies, the more clearly defeated 
it is, other things being equal. Trust in testimony, I take it, frees us from 
drawing justificatory inferences whenever we receive testimony. But if we do 
not have justified trust—or at least justification for having trust—then we 
should not believe the attester and will not be justified in believing p if we do.
In this light, it is plausible to hold the principle of testimony-based knowl-
edge: A belief based on undefeated testimony normally constitutes knowledge 
provided that the attester knows the proposition in question and the believer 
has no reason to doubt either this proposition or the attester’s credibility 
regarding it.12 Neither this principle nor the justification principle is unquali-
fied, but there may be only a very few cases in which abnormal conditions 
prevent testimony from yielding justification or knowledge (or both) when 
the specified conditions are met.
The twofold epistemic dependence of testimony
Whatever we say about the exact conditions under which testimony grounds 
knowledge or justification in its recipient, we have so far found no reason to 
doubt that under many conditions testimony is a source of both knowledge 
and justified belief on the part of its recipient. It has seemed so far, however, 
that testimony cannot be a basic source of knowledge, since one cannot know 
something on the basis of testimony unless the attester knows it. This is why 
testimony does not, as such, generate knowledge though it may be described 
as transmitting it.
Testimony may, of course, generate knowledge incidentally, as when, by 
attesting in a surprised tone that it is 4 a.m., I give a fellow insomniac knowl-
edge that I am awake. This knowledge is grounded not on my testimony but 
on the mere hearing of it. That kind of knowledge could as easily have been 
conveyed without testimony, by rising from my chair.
Testimony, like inference, can exist in indefinitely long chains. An attester 
might know that p on the basis of a third person’s testimony, and the third 
might know it on the basis of testimony by a fourth, rather than from a gen-
erative source such as perception. But how far can this go, with each attester 

160  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
informed by a previous one? There is surely some limit or other in each situa-
tion, as opposed to an infinite regress (difficulties with infinite regresses will 
be pursued in Chapter 9).
That brings us to a second respect in which testimony cannot be a basic 
source of knowledge. Surely if no one knew anything in a non-testimonial 
mode, no one would know anything on the basis of testimony either. More 
specifically, testimony-based knowledge seems ultimately to depend on 
knowledge grounded in one of the other sources we have considered: per-
ception, memory, consciousness, and reason. To enable others to know 
something by attesting to it, I must know it myself; and my knowledge must 
ultimately depend at least in part on someone’s non-testimony-based knowl-
edge, such as knowledge grounded in seeing that the clock says four.
One might try to reinforce this view as follows. Even if someone had pre-
viously attested to a proposition, I would have to perceive this and to know 
some supporting proposition, say, that someone had credibly said it is four. 
But this claim is mistaken. The required kind of perceiving does not entail 
forming a belief of this sort, perhaps not even the specific perceptual belief 
that someone said it is four. The case shows, then, only that testimony is 
operationally dependent on perception, not that it is inferentially dependent 
on perceptual belief. It requires perceptual raw materials, but not beliefs of 
premises about those materials.13
If, as seems to be the case, testimony-based knowledge and justification 
do not depend on premises that support the testimony-based belief—say, 
premises confirming the credibility of the attester—this explains how such a 
belief can be basic. Testimony as a source of knowledge and justification need 
not be basic relative to other sources of knowledge and justification in order 
for beliefs grounded in it to be basic in the order of beliefs.
The point that testimony-based beliefs can be basic is entirely consistent 
with the point (made earlier) that the attester’s knowledge that is the ground 
of the hearer’s (potentially basic) knowledge cannot ultimately be based on 
testimony. Knowledge that is directly and wholly based on testimony for the 
recipient cannot be ultimately based wholly on testimony for the giver. The 
first would have no “right” to transmit it to the second, just as I would have 
no right to give someone what I had merely borrowed from someone else, 
who had merely borrowed it from a third person, and so on to infinity.
The point that testimony-based beliefs can be non-inferential and in that 
way not dependent on premises is important. But the operational dependence 
of testimony has both epistemological and conceptual significance. For if one 
did not have perceptual grounds for knowledge, or at least for justified belief, 
that someone has attested to the proposition in question, one could not know 
it on the basis of the testimony. This is an epistemic dependence not paral-
leled in the case of perception.14 It shows that even if testimony-based knowl-
edge need not inferentially depend on having knowledge grounded in another 
mode, it does epistemically depend on having grounds, from another mode, 

Testimony  161
grounds for knowledge in that other mode. Testimony-based knowledge thus 
depends on—and in this sense presupposes—the availability, or one might 
say the potential cooperation, of another source of knowledge, even if such 
knowledge does not require the actual operation of that source in yielding 
beliefs of the premises it stands ready to supply.
The case with justification is similar on this point. I cannot acquire justi-
fication for believing something on the basis of testimony unless I have justi-
fication for believing that the testifier is credible, as well as for certain other 
propositions, such as that I heard the testimony correctly. This justification 
cannot come entirely from testimony. Suppose Jane assures me about Bert, 
but I am not justified in taking Jane to be credible. Juan now tells me that 
Jane is utterly reliable. But how can this help unless I am justified in trusting 
Juan? Non-testimonial grounds of justification, such as perception of Juan’s 
conduct or a memory of his guiding me in the past, must at least tacitly play 
some role in justifying my believing him. This role need not, however, be 
inferential: they need not produce in me beliefs of premises from which I 
infer that he is credible; they simply give me a justification that I can appeal 
to in framing such premises if I need them.
It may help to describe one of my overall conclusions—that testimony 
is not a basic source of knowledge or justification—as reflecting a dispar-
ity between the superficially simple psychology of testimony and its even 
more complex epistemology. Often, when we hear people attesting to various 
things, we just believe these things, non-inferentially and even unreservedly. 
But this natural psychological process yields knowledge and justification in 
the recipient only when certain epistemic conditions are met. In the case of 
testimony-based knowledge, there must be knowledge, even if not necessar-
ily justification, on the part of the attester, whereas in the case of testimony-
based justification there must be justification, even if not knowledge, on the 
part of the recipient. The first requirement concerns the attester’s epistemic 
situation with respect to the proposition attested to; the second concerns the 
recipient’s epistemic situation with respect to the attester, or the proposition, 
or both.15 
The indispensability of testimonial grounds
The epistemic dependence of testimony on other sources of belief must be 
squared with the fact that tiny children learn from what others tell them even 
before they are properly said to be justified (or unjustified) in believing what 
they do. Consider teaching color words. After a time, the child learns that 
the sofa, say, is red. But the tiny child has no concept of credibility or other 
notions important in gaining justification from testimony and, initially, 
insufficient experience to be justified in believing that its adult teachers are 
credible. On the view developed here, however, this point is quite compatible 
with the child’s acquiring certain kinds of knowledge.

162  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
Conceptual versus propositional learning
The first thing to note in explaining this compatibility is that there are at 
least two ways to learn from testimony: one can learn (in the sense of coming 
to know) the content attested to, and one can learn something shown, but 
not stated, by the testimony itself. The first case is learning that, specifically, 
that something is so. The second is learning of or about something (and may 
extend to learning how to do something). A tiny child just learning the basic 
colors is not, primarily, learning that (say) the sofa is red, but, above all, 
becoming aware of redness as the color of the sofa. This is learning colors 
and may be learning at least something about them.
In introducing the word ‘red’, then, the parent is only incidentally attest-
ing to the proposition that the sofa is red. The point is to pair the word with 
an instance of what it stands for, with the aim of teaching that word (or, say, 
what the color red is), and the child can learn the main lesson without con-
ceptualizing the sofa as such at all (something required for propositionally 
believing that the sofa is red). The former case of attestation—the proposi-
tional testimony—commonly results in propositional knowledge; we would 
thus have propositional learning. The parental introduction of vocabulary 
by attestation—demonstrative testimony—commonly results in conceptual 
learning.
It is important to see that the success conditions for the introductory func-
tion of language apparently require that for the most part the attestations be 
at least approximately true. A child cannot learn ‘red’ unless, in teaching the 
child English, a goodly proportion of the samples to which ‘red’ is applied 
are in fact red.16 This does not of course show that most testimony is true, 
but it does imply that if communication is occurring when testimony is given 
to children, then one may reasonably assume that both attester and recipient 
have at some point benefited from a background in which a substantial pro-
portion of attestations of a certain sort were true. How else can children be 
plausibly thought to have learned the language in which the communication 
occurs? This in turn supports the reasonableness, in everyday communica-
tive situations, of taking testimony to be normally credible.17
At the time concepts are initially grasped in childhood, it may not be nec-
essary that (propositional) belief and knowledge are acquired in every case. 
Conditions sufficient for conceptual learning may not be automatically suffi-
cient for propositional learning. Belief and knowledge are, however, normally 
acquired at the time that concepts are initially grasped, even if conditions 
for mere conceptual learning are not necessarily sufficient for propositional 
learning.18 Testimony easily produces both together. But if it cannot produce 
the conceptual learning without propositional learning, it can produce the 
latter without the former. It can be concept-producing, belief-producing 
(where some of the beliefs constitute knowledge), or both. The former case 
seems to be the more primitive, and the conditions for its possibility should 
not be taken as sufficient for the possibility of the latter.

Testimony  163
It is very difficult to say when a child begins to form beliefs, as opposed to 
mimicking its elders by uttering things that, in adults, would express beliefs. 
Let us suppose both that belief-formation comes very early in life and that 
many of the first beliefs formed are based on what adults tell the child is the 
case. The child’s defenseless credulity is a precondition for learning. Must 
this pose a problem for the epistemology of testimony suggested here?
Testimony as a primeval source of knowledge and 
justification
Very early in their lives we speak of babies and children as knowing things. 
One might object that this kind of talk is simply projective: we would know 
in their situation if we behaved in the relevant way, so why not say the child 
does? This is a defensible response, but suppose that at least by the time 
children begin to talk they do know certain things. We may surely speak of 
their learning—that the milk spills when tipped, that the stove is hot, and so 
on—and learning (in general) implies knowledge. At about the same time, 
children begin learning on the basis of testimony, say that steaming tea is hot 
and that when the doorbell rings, someone is outside.
If, as seems a reasonable assumption, gaining testimony-based knowl-
edge requires only having no reason to doubt the credibility of the knowing 
attester, then the view proposed above encounters no difficulty. If a tiny child 
perhaps can have no reason for doubt, at least the child has none; nor need 
there be any reason, since much testimony is both undefeated and unassail-
ably credible.
Suppose, however, that a stronger requirement must be met: that the 
child must have (possibly in a preconceptual way) some ground for taking 
the speaker to be credible, for instance a series of experiences repeatedly 
corresponding to what the speaker says. Perhaps we could sketch a case of 
having such a correlational ground that would be elementary enough to fit 
the rudimentary character of the child’s knowledge. I doubt, however, that 
such a ground is required for testimony-based knowledge.
With justification, there may be greater difficulty in accounting for the 
case of tiny children. But the first thing to notice is that we do not use the 
vocabulary of justification, as compared with that of knowledge, for concep-
tually undeveloped creatures. For a child to be justified in believing that the 
sofa is red, the child would have to be capable not only of having a ground 
for believing this but also, correspondingly, of failing to have one and yet 
believing this proposition anyway, thereby being unjustified.
It is arguable that by the time we may properly speak of children in this 
two-sided way as justified and also as unjustified—which is sometimes not 
long after they can speak—they do have a sense of the track record of adults 
in giving them information that their experience confirms. They have learned 
that if parents say it is cold outside, it is; and so forth. Children do not use 
the notion of credibility; but they can comprehend related concepts, such as 

164  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
those needed for understanding that Mommy is right about things and baby 
brother must be corrected.
With testimony-based knowledge, by contrast, not even such unselfcon-
scious justification seems required. The conditions by which knowledge is 
testimonially transmitted seem not to depend on justification in the recipient 
in the same way as does testimony-based justification. To be sure, testimony 
may be epistemically defeated—prevented from giving the recipient knowl-
edge—by justified beliefs of some proposition contrary to the one attested 
to. But in the absence of defeaters, the recipient acquires testimony-based 
knowledge.
The acquisition of testimony-based justification seems to come later than 
that of testimony-based knowledge. One possibility for explaining how, 
very early in life, children may acquire an elemental kind of justification for 
accepting testimony is that at a very early stage they acquire a sense that 
they themselves generally give information only when they have gotten it 
themselves, as when they see that it is snowing or they feel hungry. For mis-
information, we commonly and sometimes sternly correct children, whereas 
we patiently instill habits of correct reporting. This correlational sense that 
children apparently develop might provide a kind of analogical justification 
for taking others to be providing, when they give testimony, information they 
have obtained. A related and complementary hypothesis is that children have 
a rudimentary understanding of others in terms of what apparently explains 
their observed behavior. And what would explain Mommy’s saying that it is 
snowing outside as well as her having seen that it is?
None of this is to say just when knowledge or justification enters the 
scene in human development, whether through the basic sources or through 
testimony. These are psychological questions; a philosophical theory need 
only leave room for plausible answers to them. The theory given here sug-
gests that knowledge may arise before justification, but it does not entail even 
that. Moreover, it has at least this much harmony with the most familiar data 
about human development: the more natural it is, and the less figurative it 
seems, to speak of growing children as acquiring knowledge and justification 
based on testimony, the easier it is to find some elementary way in which 
they can satisfy the epistemic and justificational conditions set out above, 
such as making discriminations that enable them to assess what they are told 
and gaining some sense of the track record of those around them who offer 
information.
To say that testimony is not a basic source of justification or knowledge 
is not to imply that it is any less important in normal human life than a basic 
source. A source of knowledge and justification can be indispensable in life 
even if it is not basic. It may be that no normal human being would know any-
thing apart from dependence on receiving testimony.19 If there is no innate 
knowledge, and if we know nothing before learning a language (something I 
here assume for the sake of argument but wish to leave open), then unless we 
could acquire linguistic competence without the help of others, they would 
be essential in our coming to know anything at all.

Testimony  165
If we try to imagine what would be left if we gave up all the knowledge and 
beliefs we have acquired on the basis of testimony, we would be quite unable 
to accomplish the sorting in the first place. But even beginning the task of 
trying to put aside what one knows on the basis of testimony suggests that 
one would at best be thrust back to a primitive stage of learning. I want to 
pursue this idea in relation to David Hume.
Non-testimonial support for testimony-based beliefs
If one ponders Hume’s view of testimony as capable of grounding knowl-
edge only on the basis of a kind of validation by other sources, one may 
want to know to what extent testimony-based knowledge and justification, 
even taken item by item, can be backed up by other kinds. For Hume, our 
“assurance” in any matter depending on testimony “is derived from no other 
principle than our observation of the veracity of human testimony, and of the 
usual conformity of facts to the reports of witnesses.”20
Let us ask whether, for each proposition one justifiedly believes (wholly) 
on the basis of testimony, one has a justification from other sources. Call this 
the focal justification question for testimony-based beliefs. We must immedi-
ately acknowledge a complicating factor. These other sources would include 
propositions one justifiedly believes on the basis of memory; and although 
one’s justification for these propositions would not depend on the testimony 
needing support, one’s beliefs of them might have been originally based on 
testimony. Much of what is stored in memory we came to believe through 
what others have told us in person or in writing. Still, we might be memori-
ally justified in holding the beliefs in question even if we have forgotten their 
testimonial origin. Suppose, however, that we reasonably believe—as we 
should—that many of these beliefs have arisen through testimony. Then if 
we do not generally trust testimony, that reasonable belief might reduce our 
justification for the beliefs in question. For all that, if what we are memori-
ally justified in believing, together with other justified beliefs we hold on 
the basis of our non-testimony-based experiences, can justify believing 
numerous propositions we find affirmed in testimony, then perhaps we do 
have some independently grounded justification for everything we justifiedly 
believe on the basis of testimony.
Given that memory is a basic source of justification, then, we might have 
memorial justification for beliefs which only seem to be grounded in actual 
past experience. In any case, many of our beliefs about conditions under 
which people are credible are preserved in, or at least justified by, our memo-
ries. Thus, even if I have no evidence regarding p I may have reason to think 
the attester’s affirming it is some reason to believe it.
To be sure, some of the memorially justified beliefs in question would not 
be justified unless I had been at some point justified in believing something 
on the basis of testimony, as when I believe one person’s testimony, remem-
ber the proposition attested to, and use it in checking on another person’s 
testimony. There may be a kind of circularity here, since testimony plays a 

166  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
role in checking on the credibility of testimony. But notice two points. First, 
there are two attestations, normally by different attesters. Second, it might 
be argued that since memory is a basic source of justification, it may yield 
justification that supports testimony but is not testimony-based. Even if a 
memorially justified belief is originally justified on the basis of testimony, it 
may later be justified without dependence on that initial justification.
To illustrate some of these points about justifying a belief based on testi-
mony, take a case regarding a country I do not know first-hand. Consider a 
radio news program announcing an earthquake in Indonesia. I have—though 
I may never have articulated it—a sense of the track record of the network 
in question and of the geology of Indonesia, a sense of how often errors of 
that kind are made, and so forth. One could always say that this yields a very 
weak justification, especially since I rely on some beliefs acquired through 
testimony (though that testimony may be independent of the credibility of 
the network in question). Certainly such a justification is far from conclusive. 
But there is still no good reason to think it must be inadequate.
It is natural here to raise a further question, a global justification question: 
Could one fashion an overall justification of the entire set of the propositions 
one believes on the basis of testimony? There are at least two questions one 
could be asking here. If the reference is to all the propositions one believes 
conjoined together—to the “long” proposition consisting of the first and the 
second and the third item, etc.—then one cannot even imagine contemplat-
ing such a monstrosity, much less justifying it. If, however, the reference is 
to the set of one’s testimony-based beliefs considered in the abstract, it is 
still not clear how to conceive justifying it. Suppose we take it to be a matter 
of showing that “by and large” testimony-based beliefs are justified. If we 
do not allow some testimony-based beliefs to justify others and we try to 
suspend judgment on all such beliefs we hold (assuming such massive suspen-
sion of judgment is even possible), I do not see that this corporate global 
justification project would work.21 Let me explain.
Whatever might be possible in principle, it is doubtful that we can always 
avoid relying on testimony, at least indirectly, in any actual appraisal of 
testimony. Even one’s sense of an attester’s track record, for instance, often 
depends on what one believes on the basis of testimony. Think of how one 
news source serves as a check on another: in each case, testimony from one 
source is tentatively assumed and checked against testimony from another. 
How, then, can we globally justify testimony if we can never rely on it in the 
process?
There seems, moreover, not to be any general procedure by which one 
can produce a global justification for the proposition that the whole set of 
one’s testimony-based beliefs (or even a major proportion of its elements) is 
justified. Fortunately, that project of global justification is not one we need 
attempt, and the epistemology of testimony I have sketched implies on this 
matter at most that justified testimony-based beliefs are, to some degree, 
individually justifiable for the believer in terms of the basic sources of belief.22
Some are thus justifiable, even if it turns out that not all of them are. 

Testimony  167
Sometimes one person can confirm another’s testimony simply by observing 
the scene described in the testimony. Indeed, the reliability of testimony, 
whether on a particular occasion or in a general way, can be checked through 
the basic sources. This is significant, for it appears that no parallel point 
holds for the basic sources. For instance, I cannot check on the reliability 
of perception, either in a particular instance or, especially, in a general way, 
without appealing to that very source, as when I look at something again in 
better light to check my color judgment. (One can use data from one sensory 
mode to justify a belief arrived at in another, but this is still relying on one 
perception to check on the reliability of perception.) Nor can I check on the 
reliability of memory, say by revisiting the scenes of past experiences, with-
out presupposing that I remember the original judgments I seek to confirm 
by my visitation. Similar points hold for self-consciousness and (intuitive) 
reason. This contrast is one reason testimony is not fully on a par with the 
basic sources: we can confirm or disconfirm testimony without relying on it, 
whereas we cannot confirm a deliverance of a basic source without relying on 
(at least) that very source. The contrast does nothing, however, to suggest 
that in human life as we know it, testimony is not essential for at least a huge 
amount of what we know.
Testimony is a pervasive and natural source of beliefs. Many testimony-based 
beliefs are justified or constitute knowledge. They may even constitute basic 
knowledge or basic belief, both in the sense that they are not grounded in 
premises and in the sense that they play a pivotal role in the life of the believer. 
We might thus say that testimony-based beliefs not only constitute some of 
our basic knowledge but also are psychologically and existentially basic.
These beliefs are, however, not unqualifiedly basic epistemically. They are 
basic only in the sense that they are not inferentially dependent on knowl-
edge or justified belief of prior premises. They are epistemically dependent, 
in a way perceptual beliefs are not, on one’s having grounds for knowledge or 
justification, and they are psychologically dependent on one’s having some 
ground—such as hearing someone speak—in another, non-testimonial expe-
riential mode. Testimony-based beliefs, then, are not premise-dependent but 
do depend, for their epistemic or justificational status, on the basic experien-
tial sources of knowledge and justification considered in Chapters 1–6. As a 
source of knowledge and justification, testimony depends both epistemically 
and psychologically on these other sources. This is entirely consistent, how-
ever, with its playing an incalculably important role in the normal develop-
ment of our justification and knowledge.
Notes
	 1	 For a wide-ranging, historically informative account of what constitutes 
testimony for and numerous epistemological problems surrounding it 
see C.A.J. Coady, Testimony (Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1992).
	 2	 Not all testimony is verbal, much less oral. Consider someone’s asking 

168  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
of a person who requested testimony on a crime, ‘What did he say?’ A 
perfectly good answer would be ‘That Mack the Knife did it’, even if this 
was affirmed by sadly nodding when asked whether Mack is the one who 
did the deed. The concept of testimony allows numerous ways of telling 
people things; certainly any symbolic behavior rich enough to count as 
affirming a proposition can serve.
	 3	 Thomas Reid spoke eloquently on this topic; he said, for example, “The 
wise author of nature hath implanted in the human mind a propensity 
to rely upon human testimony before we can give a reason for doing so. 
This, indeed, puts our judgment almost entirely in the hands of those 
who are about us in the first period of life.” See ‘Essay on the Intellectual 
Powers of Man’ in Thomas Reid’s Inquiry and Essays, ed. by Ronald 
Beanblossom and Keith Lehrer (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1983), p. 281.
	 4	 Granted, I must have (and so must memorially retain) a concept of a tree; 
but this merely conceptual memorial state is not a potential source of 
belief (which is not to deny that it can play any other kind of causal role 
in belief-formation).
	 5	 Three points may help here. First, telepathic or otherwise strange recep-
tion of testimony may, at least for our purposes, be construed as some 
kind of perception. Second, granting that one cannot form perceptual 
beliefs without having whatever additional beliefs may be needed to pos-
sess the concepts required to understand what is believed perceptually—
in my example, for instance, the concept of a star-gazing stroller—this 
does not imply the kind of dependence on any other belief source exhib-
ited by that of testimony upon perception. One can perceive, though 
not interpret, such a stroller without having these concepts; one cannot 
even receive testimony, and so cannot begin to interpret or learn from it, 
without perceiving it. Third, supposing perception cannot occur without 
some manifestation in consciousness (which is itself a source of beliefs), 
here consciousness is an element in perception in a way that perception 
by an audience is plainly not an element in testimony.
	 6	 You might come to know it on the basis of something about my testi-
mony: perhaps, for example, I give it nervously and you know that the 
nervousness is an after-effect of my being shaken by the fit of temper 
which I have since half forgotten and might even deny. This would be a 
case of belief caused by testimony but not based on it (not an easy dis-
tinction to explicate; but it was illustrated in Chapter 3 in showing how 
a belief that a past event occurred need not be a memory belief even if 
caused by that event; and it will be developed further in Chapter 10). One 
requirement for a belief to be based on testimony is the believer’s holding 
the proposition because it was attested to, as opposed, for example, to 
holding it because of how or from what motive it was attested to. There 
have, however, recently been challenges to the idea that testimony-based 
belief constitutes knowledge only if the attester knows the proposition in 

Testimony  169
question. Some of these are cited and briefly answered in my ‘Testimony, 
Credulity, and Veracity’, in J. Lackey and E. Sosa (eds.), The Epistemology 
of Testimony (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006).
	 7	 The qualifier ‘testimony-based’ is crucial: suppose I attest, in a bari-
tone voice, that I have a baritone voice, but do not know this because 
I falsely believe I have a tenor voice; then you come to know, from my 
testimony, but not on the basis of it (its content), that the proposition 
to which I attest is true. The same point holds for justification in place 
of knowledge. One might also say that you come to know it through my 
testimony in a weak sense of ‘through’ not implying that the content of 
what I attest is crucial. It is also possible that the content, but not my 
attesting it, is essential, as when I present an argument you know I barely 
understand, and you come to know its conclusion, not because I attest to 
it or to the premises, but on the basis of yourself realizing, by bringing 
to bear your background knowledge, that they are true and entail the 
conclusion. This would be knowledge based on the content of testimony, 
but it would not be what we call ‘testimony-based knowledge’.
	 8	 I develop and defend this contrast in ‘Memorial Justification’, 
Philosophical Topics 23 (1995), 251–72. Particularly interesting from 
the point of view of the thesis that the attester must know that p are 
examples given by Peter Graham, ‘Conveying Information’, Synthese 
123 (2000), 365–92 and Jennifer Lackey, ‘Testimonial Knowledge and 
Transmission’, Philosophical Quarterly 49 (1999), 471–90. I will mention 
just one of hers. A teacher who disbelieves the theory of evolution but 
teaches it conscientiously tells his students, on the basis of his correct 
reading of the theory and his observation of a fossil, that there were 
Homo sapiens in the place in question. Since we may suppose he is giving 
his students correct information on a sound basis, we may tend to con-
clude that testimony-based belief (theirs) can be knowledge without the 
attester’s knowing the proposition in question. This is an interesting 
case, since the hearers do have a testimony-based true belief that seems 
well grounded. But is it knowledge, if the teacher would have taught a 
false theory in the same way, had his job required it? Even if the theory 
itself is (an item of) “knowledge” (as some would say if it is known), 
he isn’t a reliable link in the chain from the fossil through the theory, 
since he neither knows it nor even believes it on the kind of ground that 
would protect him from error in the way the (truth-conducive) grounds 
of knowledge do. It isn’t that the theory he uses just happens to be true, 
but—from the point of view of genuine evidence—he just happens to use 
it. If, on the other hand, we suppose that the school would not require 
teaching a theory that is not well evidenced, and that the students believe 
something to this effect, then perhaps an essential part of their basis 
for believing him is that background belief. Their belief would then be 
bolstered by background beliefs rather than a genuinely testimony-based 

170  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
one. It would be as if they had to believe something to the effect that this 
is what the school is teaching in order to believe what he says. Chapter 
10 will discuss knowledge in a way that supports this analysis.
	 9	 I leave open whether knowledge transmitted by testimony can be as well 
grounded as that of the attester (though I am inclined to think it can be, 
say when the attester is “absolutely” reliable, a property that in principle 
could perhaps belong to memory in some cases). By contrast, so far as 
knowledge goes, “a testimonial chain is no stronger than its weakest 
link,” as Alvin Plantinga puts it in Warrant and Proper Function (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1993), p. 84. He is speaking of what he calls 
warrant, which he views as roughly what makes true belief knowledge; 
and if, as I suspect, the point holds there too, then justification contrasts 
with warrant on this score as it does with knowledge. It should be added 
that if knowledge cannot be stronger than its weakest link, it probably 
need not be any weaker.
	10	 If this is so, it may show something else: on the assumption that you 
cannot know a proposition on the basis of premises you do not also 
know, this case would show that your testimony-based knowledge is not 
inferential, since the would-be credibility premise is not known but only 
permissibly assumed.
	11	 One possibility raised here is that of knowledge without justification. 
This will be considered in some detail in Chapter 10.
	12	 These principles are formulated cautiously in several ways: for instance, 
they allow for abnormal circumstances to provide exceptions; they allow 
that the resulting justification not be strong but only “adequate” for 
reasonable belief; they allow, but do not entail (what I think plausible 
but leave open), that the testimony-based belief always acquires prima 
facie justification from the testimony; and they permit the recipient to 
have justification or knowledge of the proposition in question from some 
other source as well. The epistemic principle might well be broadened by 
specifying that the recipient has no overall reason for doubt, but I offer 
that as a suggestion without adopting it.
	13	 Here I differ from Elizabeth Fricker, who (in one place) maintained that 
the recipient must perceptually believe “that the speaker has made an 
assertion with a particular content . . . capable of being knowledge . . . I 
have been convinced by John McDowell’s contention that hearers’ per-
ceptions of speakers’ utterances are . . . a case of perceptual knowledge.” 
See ‘The Epistemology of Testimony’, Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society 61 (1987), 70. The reference to McDowell is to ‘Anti-realism 
and the Epistemology of Understanding’, in H. Parret and J. Bouveresse 
(eds.), Philosophical Subjects (Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1980).
	14	 John Greco (in correspondence) has raised the question why conscious-
ness is not related to perception as perception is to testimony. The begin-
ning of an answer may be that (1) (sensory) consciousness of a ground 
for p is a constituent in perception that p, whereas no ground for p is a 

Testimony  171
constituent in testimony that p; (2) perceptual justification and knowl-
edge entail and depend on having consciousness of the perceptual object 
which the justification or knowledge concerns; whereas (3) testimony-
based justification and knowledge do not entail or depend on percep-
tion regarding what the justification or knowledge concern—namely, 
the proposition attested to (or even its subject matter, with which the 
recipient may have no relevant experience). Testimony-based justifica-
tion, moreover (though not testimony-based knowledge), also normally 
depends on perception (or at least on sensory experience) separate from 
that required to receive the testimony; for (on the view taken in this 
chapter) justification for accepting the credibility of the testimony nor-
mally requires perception (or at least sensory experience) as part of the 
background one needs to acquire testimony-based justification. (Note 
19 indicates why the normality qualification is needed here.)
	15	 The epistemology of testimony suggested here may perhaps be more 
stringent than that of Thomas Reid. For an interpretation and defense 
of the apparently Reidian view that testimony-based beliefs need not 
depend even for their justification on other sources of justification see 
Mark Owen Webb, ‘Why I Know about as Much as You: A Reply to 
Hardwig’, Journal of Philosophy 90 (1993), 260–70.
	16	 Strictly, the samples need only look red, as when white objects are flooded 
by red light; and arguably, one could even teach ‘red’ by producing only 
hallucinations of the color.
	17	 It can be connected with arguments such as we find in Donald Davidson’s 
work for the conclusion that most of our beliefs must be true, but it 
does not imply that stronger conclusion. For discussion of this and 
other Davidsonian hypotheses, see Coady, Testimony, esp. Chapter 9. 
Cf. Tyler Burge’s view that “We are a priori prima facie entitled to accept 
something that is prima facie intelligible and presented as true.” See 
his ‘Content Preservation’, Philosophical Review 102 (1993), 472. Some 
explication and discussion of this view is provided in my ‘Testimony, 
Credulity, and Veracity’, cited above.
	18	 It is difficult to see how one could, through testimony, produce con-
ceptual learning without producing some belief. Could a child become 
acquainted with what redness is in connection with being told the sofa is 
red, yet not acquire a belief of some sort, for example objectually believ-
ing the sofa to be red? There is no need to settle this matter here; nor 
can I pursue related questions concerning conceptualization in higher 
animals.
	19	 One reason this point is restricted to normal human beings is that it 
seems possible for a human being to be created, as a full-blown adult, 
artificially, in which case much knowledge of abstract propositions and 
perhaps of other sorts, such as knowledge of the perceptible external 
environment in which the person is made, can occur before any testi-
mony enters the picture. The story of Adam and Eve is a theological 

172  Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
version of creation at the adult stage. There are also evolutionary concep-
tions of how knowledge first arises in human history, but these genetic 
questions would take us too far from our main questions.
	20	 An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, ed. by L.A. Selby-Bigge 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1888), section 88.
	21	 We would certainly not be able to appeal to any significant segment of 
scientific knowledge, for there we are heavily dependent on testimony, 
written and oral. A plausible case that this dependence is even greater 
than it seems is made by John Hardwig in ‘Epistemic Dependence’, 
Journal of Philosophy 82 (1985), 693–708.
	22	 For supporting considerations favoring the possibility of the local 
justification and opposing that of a global one, see Elizabeth Fricker, 
‘Telling and Trusting: Reductionism and Anti-Reductionism in the 
Epistemology of Testimony: C.A.J. Coady’s Testimony: A Philosophical 
Study’, Mind 104 (1995), 393–411.

Part Two
The structure and growth of 
justification and knowledge


8	
Inference and the extension of 
knowledge
•	
The process, content, and structure of inference
Two related senses of ‘inference’
Reasoned belief and belief for a reason
Two ways beliefs may be inferential
The basing relation: direct and indirect belief
•	
Inference and the growth of knowledge
Confirmatory versus generative inferences
Inference as a dependent source of justification and knowledge
Inference as an extender of justification and knowledge
•	
Source conditions and transmission conditions for  
	
inferential knowledge and justification
Deductive and inductive inference
Subsumptive and analogical inference
The inferential transmission of justification and knowledge
Inductive transmission and probabilistic inference
Some inferential transmission principles
Deductive transmission of justification and knowledge
Degrees and kinds of deductive transmission
•	
Memorial preservation of inferential justification and  
	
inferential knowledge

8	
Inference and the extension of 
knowledge
As I sit reading, I hear knocking. I wonder whether someone is at the door. 
I then hear extended, very rapid knocking. It now occurs to me that it is a 
pecking sound, and I conclude that there is a woodpecker nearby. This way 
of coming to believe something differs from the way I came to believe there 
was a knocking in the first place. That belief was perceptual; it arose from 
my hearing the knocking. My belief that there is a woodpecker nearby is not 
perceptual. It arises not from, for instance, seeing the bird, but from a further 
belief: that the rapid knocking sounds like the pecking of a woodpecker. I 
hear the rapid knocking, recognize its character, and come to believe that 
it sounds like the pecking of a woodpecker. On the basis of this belief, I 
naturally conclude that there is a woodpecker nearby.
Some beliefs, then, arise from other beliefs and are based on them rather 
than directly on the sources described in Part One: perceptual, memorial, 
introspective, rational, and testimonial. This occurs with abstract matters as 
well as with perceptibles. Take mathematical proof; on the basis of knowl-
edge of an axiom, we may infer a theorem. An inference—which we may 
think of as a kind of reasoning—may also proceed by way of something gen-
eral to something quite specific. Studying a speech, one may determine that 
it is largely copied from someone else; given the standing knowledge that 
so representing another’s work as one’s own is plagiarism, one reluctantly 
concludes that this speech is plagiarized.
If we had only the beliefs arising directly from perception, memory, 
self-consciousness, reflection, and testimony, we could not build theories to 
explain our experience or our own view of the world. It is largely because we 
can inferentially build on what we already believe, that there is no limit to the 
richness and complexity of the ideas and theories we can construct.
The nature of the inferential processes in which one belief is formed on the 
basis of other beliefs is a major question in the philosophy of mind and the 
psychology of cognition. The way those processes can extend justification 
and knowledge is a major question in epistemology. Not just any inference 
that begins with truth must end with truth; some inferences embody poor 
reasoning. We can best pursue the second, epistemological question—how 

Inference and the extension of knowledge  177
inference extends knowledge and justification—by starting with the first, 
concerning the nature of inferential belief.
The process, content, and structure of inference
What sort of process is it by which my belief that there is a woodpecker 
arises from my belief that there is a knocking which sounds like its pecking? 
One clue is the naturalness of saying that on the basis of my belief that the 
knocking sounds like such a woodpecker’s pecking, I conclude that there is a 
woodpecker nearby. I infer that there is one nearby from what I believe about 
the knocking: that it sounds like the pecking of a woodpecker. In inferring 
this, I conclude something on the basis of something else.
What I conclude—the conclusion I draw—I in some sense derive from 
something else I believe. The concluding and the beliefs are mental. But nei-
ther what I conclude, nor what I believe from which I conclude it, is mental: 
these things are contents of my beliefs, as they might be of yours. They are 
not properties of anyone’s mind, as in some sense beliefs themselves are. Such 
contents of beliefs—also called objects of beliefs—are commonly thought 
to be propositions (or statements, hypotheses, or something else that can 
be considered to be true or to be false but is apparently not itself a mental 
entity).1
Two related senses of ‘inference’
There are, then, two sorts of things involved when I draw a conclusion. One 
is the mental process of my concluding it on the basis of one or more of my 
beliefs or assumptions, as when I conclude that Alberto has been bitten by a 
deer tick on the basis of my belief (just acquired) that he has Lyme disease 
and my background belief that this is caused by deer tick bites. The other 
element in my drawing a conclusion is the set of two or more propositions 
which are my conclusion and my ground for it. Call the first element the 
inferential process; it is a mental episode of reasoning. Call the second its 
inferential content; it is abstract and not a process.
The inferential content indicates what is inferred from what—a conclu-
sion from one or more premises. Specifying the content of an inference 
makes it obvious that inferences drawn by different people can have the same 
content. My inferring that there is a woodpecker nearby is drawing the same 
inference as you would make if you inferred this from the proposition that 
there is knocking which sounds like that of a woodpecker. Our inferrings are 
two different processes, one in me and one in you. But their content is the 
same. Sometimes ‘inference’ is used for the content of an inferential process. 
I want to talk about inference in both of these senses: as a process and as an 
argumental structure consisting of propositions.
If inferring is a process corresponding to a conclusion and one or more 

178  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
premises for it, should we then suppose that in drawing my inference I said 
to myself something like, “Those knocks sound like a woodpecker’s; hence, 
there is a woodpecker nearby”? This might apply to someone learning to 
recognize woodpecker knocking and reasoning self-consciously, but not to 
me. I do not need to concentrate on the proposition that there are those 
sounds, much less to say to myself something like “hence there is a wood-
pecker.” I quickly realize, through hearing the sounds—and knowing from 
memory how woodpeckers sound—that they are its sounds; and on the basis 
of believing this proposition, I draw my conclusion without signposting my 
doing so by a silent ‘hence’.
Reasoned belief and belief for a reason
My drawing the inference is something I do; it is a kind of reasoning. But it is 
not necessarily self-conscious, as is some reasoning done in order to prove a 
theorem from axioms. We need not introspect or even be focally conscious of 
our reasoning. We may instead simply draw our conclusion when our ground 
for it registers in our consciousness in an appropriate way. Thus, in response 
to wondering what I hear, I conceive the sounds as a pecking, and I then 
infer that there is a woodpecker. My resulting belief that there is one is, then, 
arrived at by reasoning and based on it. The belief may on that ground be 
called a reasoned belief; but we should also speak of a reasoned belief when 
such a reasoning process becomes the same kind of basis for a previously 
held belief. Thus, a belief arising non-inferentially, say from intuition or even 
guesswork, can later become reasoned.
Compare this with a case in which, as I am reading on an unusually still 
morning, a vehicle backfires in the distance. I go on reading without thinking 
about the noise, though I do have the thought that someone drove by. Have I 
inferred, while reading, that someone drove by, say on the basis of believing 
that I heard a vehicle backfire? Surely I need not have. I am not like someone 
who must think about whether the sound had certain qualities and, only after 
determining that it does, concludes that a vehicle passed. Being familiar with 
backfires, I might simply have recognized the sound as a backfire and, on the 
basis of this together with my standing belief that backfires are from (driven) 
vehicles, automatically formed the belief that someone drove by. The former 
belief (at least in relation to the two taken together) expresses my reason for 
holding the latter, which is thus a belief for a reason. It is not also a reasoned 
belief, however, because it is not arrived at by a process of reasoning. A rea-
soned belief is always held for a reason—one expressed by the premise(s) 
of the reasoning—but a belief (held) for a reason need not be a reasoned 
belief—one that is also arrived at by reasoning.2
This contrast between a belief for a reason and a reasoned belief may lead 
to the objection that I did not even form the belief that a vehicle backfired 
but only automatically believed, upon hearing the noise, that a vehicle passed. 

Inference and the extension of knowledge  179
This is a possible case, and it lies at the other end of the spectrum from the 
case in which one cautiously forms the belief that the noise is a backfire, and 
then self-consciously infers that a vehicle passed. But my case is intermediate: 
I am neither so familiar with backfiring vehicles that I “just hear” vehicles 
pass when I hear those sounds, nor so unfamiliar with backfires that I must 
go through a process of inferring that conclusion when I hear the sounds.
Similarly, suppose we are presented with premises that obviously imply a 
conclusion and left to infer or, on the other hand, “just see” it, as the case may 
be. In Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar we have the lines:
Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look.
He thinks too much, such men are dangerous.
	
(Act 1, scene ii)
If we simply see and accept the implication that Cassius is dangerous, we 
acquire a belief for a reason, but it is not reasoned. If we need to consider 
these premises and then draw the conclusion as they lead one to it, we have a 
reasoned belief. In both cases one belief is based on another; but this occurs 
in different ways, both for different people and for the same person at dif-
ferent times.
People differ in the background knowledge and belief they bring to their 
experiences, and this in turn influences how those experiences produce new 
beliefs in them, say directly versus inferentially. Thus, in the very same situa-
tion, one person’s inference may be another’s perception. In literary interpre-
tation or in art criticism, for instance, what the novice must discover through 
drawing inferences, the professional can “just see.” A similar point may apply 
in moral interpretation; a sensitive may literally see an injustice.3
It is an important point in the psychology of cognition that what one 
person believes only inferentially another believes directly, say perceptu-
ally. Both cases may be almost instantaneous, and their difference is easily 
missed. It is in part the failure to distinguish the cases that apparently leads 
some people to think that perceptual belief as such is inferential.
In seeing the difference between reasoned belief and (non-reasoned) belief 
held for a reason, it may help to notice that the contexts of the backfire and 
woodpecker noises differ significantly. The backfire is a kind of noise that 
can make it obvious that someone is driving by, whereas the pecking, far 
from coinciding with a flutter of wings that clearly mark the presence of a 
bird, is an isolated stream of sounds in the quiet of the afternoon, and it can 
be associated with many sources, natural and mechanical. Certainly there is 
an event of belief-formation when I hear the bang and come to believe that 
someone drove by. The point is that such a belief need not be reasoned: one 
need not form it by drawing an inference.
The contrast between a reasoned belief and a belief for a reason must not 
be allowed to obscure something important that is shared by the two. In both 

180  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
cases, I believe one thing on the basis of another thing I believe; for instance, 
I believe that someone drove by on the basis of believing that a vehicle back-
fired. In both instances, then, there is an inferential (roughly, argumental) 
structure corresponding to my beliefs. It consists of a proposition we might 
think of as a conclusion and at least one we might think of as a premise from 
which the conclusion is drawn. This similarity helps to explain why there 
is an inclination to regard my coming to believe that someone drove by as 
somehow inferential.4
Two ways beliefs may be inferential
There is a way to describe our two examples that helps to remind us of both 
their similarities and their differences. Call my reasoned belief that there is 
a woodpecker nearby—considered at the time I form it—episodically infer-
ential, since (at the time) it arises from a process or episode of inferring, of 
explicitly drawing a conclusion from something one believes. Call my belief 
that someone drove by (also considered at the time I form it) structurally 
inferential, because, though it is not episodically inferential, it is nonetheless, 
as a belief for a reason, based on another belief in much the way one belief is 
based on a second when the first does arise from the second by inference. 
The first belief’s being structurally inferential implies (among other things) 
that my holding the second belief, the basis belief (or premise belief), is at 
least part of what explains why I hold the first (presumably in a causal sense 
of ‘explain’).5
In short, episodically inferential beliefs—which are at the time reasoned—
are beliefs for a reason and hence are inferential, but not every belief for a 
reason is episodically inferential. Beliefs for a reason are, however, roughly 
equivalent to those that are structurally inferential. Reasons, one might say, 
can lead to inferential belief by two different paths, one requiring reasoning, 
the other not.6
In both instances there is an inferential structure (which is no doubt 
reflected in the brain) corresponding to my beliefs: I believe the conclu-
sion because I believe the premise(s), even though the beliefs are related by 
an inferential episode in one case and by an automatic process of belief- 
formation in the other. In the first case, I do something—I infer a conclusion. 
In the second, something happens in me—a belief arises on the basis of one or 
more other beliefs I hold. The resulting structure is much the same. Hence, 
a belief that is episodically inferential at the time it is formed will become 
structurally inferential when it is retained after the inference is drawn if, as 
is common, it remains based on the reason expressed by the premise(s). The 
difference is that the two beliefs arise in different ways. Only the belief that 
there is a woodpecker nearby, which arises by reasoning in response to curi-
osity, is (at the time it is formed) episodically inferential.7

Inference and the extension of knowledge  181
The basing relation: direct and indirect belief
We can also see how a belief can be inferentially based on a second with-
out being episodically inferential if we consider a case—a kind especially 
important in understanding knowledge and justification—in which one first 
believes something perceptually and then the belief comes to be based on a 
premise. Suppose you see someone you take to be Alasdair. You do not get 
a good look, but believe in any case that it is Alasdair. When a friend says 
that she has just met Alasdair’s wife at the train station, you now believe (in 
part) on the basis of her information that you saw him. But you need not, 
at any point, have inferred this from her information. The testimony-based 
belief—or indeed any new belief you form that expresses evidence that it was 
Alasdair you saw—can become a structurally inferential basis of your belief 
without your using it as a premise by drawing an inference. It is like an addi-
tional pillar that is placed beneath a porch after it is built and is unobserved 
by anyone who stands on the porch: the pillar adds support but otherwise 
leaves the porch as it is. The addition of this support can justify the belief 
it supports. If you are already justified in holding that belief, you are now 
doubly so. If the belief was not previously justified, it may now be justified or 
even constitute knowledge.
Another way to bring out what the two kinds of inferential belief have in 
common is to call them indirect. For in each case we believe one thing on the 
basis of, so in a sense through, believing another. Indirect beliefs are medi-
ated by other beliefs, whether through inference or not. I refer, of course, to 
particular beliefs held by specific people at particular times. People differ in 
their inferential patterns, and these may change over time. Like backfires, 
woodpecking could become so familiar that, on hearing it, one just believes 
(non-inferentially) that it is occurring, rather as, on seeing grass, I may just 
believe, perceptually, that there is grass before me. That case illustrates per-
ceptual basing, as opposed to the inferential kind we have been discussing. 
The former has been partly explicated in relation to the many instances of it 
described in Chapters 1 and 2, and the next chapter will clarify both kinds 
further.
The effects of increased familiarity show that one person’s indirect belief 
may be another’s direct belief, just as one person’s conclusion may be anoth-
er’s premise. Similarly, my conclusion at one time can later become a basic 
premise, or vice versa: a proposition I believe indirectly at one time I may 
believe directly at another, as when I forget the premise I originally had, but 
I retain the proposition in memory.
There is a wide-ranging point illustrated here that is important for epis-
temology, psychology, and the philosophy of mind: we cannot in general 
specify propositions (if there are any) which can be believed only inferen-
tially or only non-inferentially—intrinsically basic propositions.8 Nor can 
we determine whether a person’s belief is inferential by considering just the 

182  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
proposition believed.9 To be sure, it would be abnormal to believe (wholly) 
inferentially that if some dogs are pets, then some pets are dogs—in part 
because one would not normally believe, on the basis of a premise, what is 
luminously self-evident—or to believe (by sight) non-inferentially that there 
are seventeen cats eating scraps of beef in the backyard, since normally one 
would have to arrive at this on the basis of counting.10 But strange cases like 
these are possible.
Inference and the growth of knowledge
The examples I have given represent one way we learn through using our 
senses in combination with our rational powers. Through making inferences 
and through forming beliefs that are reason-based but not episodically infer-
ential, we acquire not only new beliefs, but also new justified beliefs and new 
knowledge. Indeed, much knowledge and a great many justified beliefs arise 
in this way. The woodpecker case illustrates how this process works. In a 
single moment I come to believe, among other things, that no one is at the 
door and that there is a woodpecker nearby.
This is a common pattern in life: through the joint work of perception 
and our rational powers, particularly our inferential capacities, we acquire 
new beliefs, our justification is extended, and we gain new knowledge. We 
also forget, cease to be justified in believing certain things when we acquire 
disconfirming evidence, and sometimes infer conclusions we are not entitled 
to infer. But let us first concentrate on the way belief, justification, and 
knowledge develop.
Confirmatory versus generative inferences
Inference is typically a source of new beliefs. But as we have seen, it need 
not be. Recall the backfire, and suppose I am so familiar with such sounds 
that categorizing them is not necessary for me to recognize them. Then I 
may well directly—i.e., non-inferentially—believe that a vehicle backfired. 
But now imagine that, realizing firecrackers have lately been set off nearby 
in honor of Guy Fawkes Night, I wonder whether the sound might perhaps 
have been that of a firecracker. Still, I do not give up, but only reconsider, 
my belief that it was a backfire. I recall the sound, remember that it had a 
muffled, not a popping, quality, and infer from its having that quality that 
it was indeed a backfire. Here I infer something I already believe. It is as if 
you arrived at a place without noticing your route and, wanting to be sure 
of where you are, you consider what route you must have taken. Finding a 
plausible route can confirm our sense that all is well, whether or not it is the 
route we in fact took.
My inference, then, is not a source of new belief, though it does in a way 
alter my belief that the sound was a backfire; the belief now becomes infer-
ential. This is a change not in its content, but in its basis. The inference does 

Inference and the extension of knowledge  183
not produce a new belief but instead adds to my belief system a new ground 
for something I already believe. The inference is confirmatory, but not, as 
in typical cases, generative. Like an inference drawn in doing certain logic 
book exercises, it is not a belief-forming inference; but unlike many such cases 
(which often concern fictitious people or places), it has a conclusion that is 
already believed.
Inference as a dependent source of justification and 
knowledge
Even when inference is not generative and hence is not a source of belief, it 
may still be a source of both justification and knowledge. Again, suppose I 
know that lately there have been firecrackers exploding nearby. I now might 
not know, or be justified in believing, that there was a vehicle backfire, until 
I recall the quality of the sound, rule out its being that of a firecracker, and 
infer in this light that a vehicle backfired. I might thus have neither justifica-
tion for believing a vehicle backfired, nor knowledge that it did, until I draw 
the inference. Similarly, scientists who believe a hypothesis might not come 
to know it until, through investigating and ruling out certain alternatives, 
they reason their way to it, thereby inferring it, from new premises.
On the other hand, suppose I am unjustified in believing that the muffled 
sound in question represents a backfire. My situation might be this: in my 
whole life I have heard only one backfire; I have, however, heard many fire-
crackers with that sort of sound; and my belief that this sound represents a 
backfire is based on testimony from someone I think is usually unreliable. 
Here I do not become justified, inferentially or testimonially, in believing 
that there was a backfire. For a crucial premise of my inference—that this 
kind of noise represents a backfire—is one I am unjustified in believing. The 
same would hold if I had been unjustified in believing my other premise: that 
there was a muffled sound.
Now imagine a different case, this time regarding knowledge. Suppose I 
am justified in believing my premise that the muffled sound is from a back-
fire, as my previous experience adequately justifies my believing this. But 
suppose that, through no fault of my own, I have failed to discover that some 
common firecrackers sound precisely the same. Then, although I am still cor-
rect in believing my conclusion—that there is a backfire—I am mistaken in 
believing, and so do not know, my premise that this muffled sound represents 
a vehicle backfire. For it might just as well represent a firecracker. Thus, I 
infer a true conclusion, but from a premise that, though I justifiedly believe 
it, is false. This example shows something important: that I may be justified 
(and even correct) in believing that there was a vehicle backfire, yet not know 
that. My would-be knowledge that there was a backfire might be said to be 
defeated by my false premise, though my justification for believing this is not 
defeated.
 This last case is not typical. Perhaps more often than not, inference 

184  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
on the part of rational persons is a source of beliefs that are both justified 
and constitute knowledge. If inference is often a source of justification and 
of knowledge, is it a basic source? Our example suggests it is not. If, for 
instance, I am not justified in believing my premises that there was a muffled 
sound, and that such a sound represents a backfire, then my inferring that 
there was a backfire does not yield justification for my believing this conclu-
sion, and I do not justifiedly believe it. Apparently, my inference justifies me 
in believing my conclusion only if I am justified in believing its premise (or 
premises). And apparently (though this is a controversial point to be exam-
ined in Chapter 9) that belief is justified only if it is grounded directly or 
indirectly in a basic source.
Inference as an extender of justification and knowledge
Points like this suggest that inference is not a basic source of justification 
or knowledge, but rather transmits and thereby extends them, in appropriate 
circumstances, from one or more premises to the conclusion inferred from 
them. We can extend our justification and knowledge by inference, but it 
appears that if we have none to start with, inference, unlike perception, can 
give us none. Even amply justified inferences—roughly, inferences we are 
amply justified in drawing given the assumption of true premise(s)—do not 
create justification or knowledge when, because we neither know nor have 
justification for our premise(s), there is none to start with.11
Our examples show two kinds of inferential enhancement of knowledge 
and justification. The first kind is acquisition of new knowledge and new 
justified beliefs, say the knowledge that Cassius is dangerous; the second 
is increase in our justification for believing something we already hold or a 
buttressing of our knowledge of it, as when we infer that a vehicle backfired 
from a newly discovered premise to the effect that no firecrackers exploded. 
The first kind of inferential enhancement—inferential extension—yields an 
increase in the content of what we know or are justified in believing. The 
second kind—inferential strengthening—yields an increase in the quantity 
of our justification regarding the same content, or in the strength of our 
grounds for knowledge regarding the same content.
There is a third kind of enhancement of justification and knowledge that 
can be a variant of either sort. Consider a belief that arises by inference from 
two or more independent sets of premises, such as evidence of Cassius’s being 
dangerous presented at the same time by two independent observers. Here 
we get new content by two or more pathways. In the same way, we may also 
acquire more justification (or stronger grounds) for what we already believe 
or know, as when we believe a vehicle backfired. Thus, we might have better 
justification for believing (or better grounds for our knowledge of) what the 
witnesses jointly attest to than we have for believing that on the basis of the 
evidence of any one of them alone.
Moreover, our experience often leads to inferential enhancement of all 

Inference and the extension of knowledge  185
three sorts without our making any particular effort to draw inferences. For 
the formation of structurally inferential beliefs, and even of many episodi-
cally inferential beliefs, occurs quite frequently and often spontaneously. As 
a timber can be silently and unobtrusively placed beneath a porch in a way 
that supports it, one belief can, without our noticing it, provide support for 
another that is already in place, or even lead to the formation of a belief we 
did not previously hold.
Source conditions and transmission conditions for 
inferential knowledge and justification
If inference is not a basic source of justification and knowledge, but transmits 
it, it must meet two kinds of conditions. One kind concerns the premise(s) of 
the inference—its foundations, so to speak—the other concerns the relation 
of the premise(s) to the conclusion—how well those evidential pillars sup-
port what is built on them, for instance whether or not they express strong 
evidence for believing it. Let us take these in turn.
First, there are source conditions, as our examples show: one needs justifi-
cation or knowledge in the first place. To see what the second kind of condi-
tion is, suppose I do know that the muffled sound I hear represents a vehicle 
backfire and I infer that a truck backfired. But imagine that I really cannot 
tell the difference between car and truck backfires. Then I do not know, in 
virtue of my inference, that a truck backfired. I started with knowledge, but 
it was not transmitted to my belief of my conclusion, as the premise from 
which I inferred that conclusion did not adequately support it. There was, 
we might say, no evidentially adequate pillar to ground my conclusion in my 
premises.
There are, then, transmission conditions, as well as source conditions, 
that an inference must satisfy in order to yield knowledge of its conclusion. 
Chapters 1 through to 7 in effect deal with source conditions in some detail, 
for example with how perception yields non-inferential knowledge that can 
provide premises for inference. Thus, I say little here about source conditions 
and concentrate on transmission conditions.
Deductive and inductive inference
We can best understand transmission conditions if, as is common in dis-
cussions of logic, we divide inferences into two categories, deductive and 
inductive. The usual basis of this division is an interpretation of the character 
of the inferential structure underlying the process of inference, or at least a 
choice of the kind of standard appropriate for assessing that structure. We 
can simplify matters by calling these structures arguments, even though they 
need not represent anyone’s actually arguing for something or with anyone.
In this abstract sense of ‘argument’, an argument is discernible even when, 
simply to assure myself that I was correct in believing that there was a vehicle 

186  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
backfire, I inferred, after reconsidering the kind of noise I heard, that there 
was indeed a backfire. I relied on the argument from propositions about the 
character of the noise to the conclusion that a backfire occurred, even though 
I already believed this conclusion. We use arguments not only to produce 
belief but also to justify something we already believe. I did this by tapping 
a justified source that transmitted its justification to my belief that a vehicle 
backfired. A natural interpretation of the case is this: I reasoned from the 
premises that (1) the noise represented a backfire and (2) if it did represent 
that, then there was a vehicle backfire, to the conclusion that (3) there was a 
vehicle backfire.
My argument here, and hence my reasoning—from the premises of the 
argument to its conclusion—is (deductively) valid; that is, it is absolutely 
impossible (in a logical sense) for the premises, (1) and (2), to be true and 
the conclusion, (3), false. In short, the premises of a valid argument, or of 
valid reasoning (logically), entail its conclusion. It is of course not in general 
impossible for the premises of valid deductive arguments to be false, and many 
such arguments have premises that are false. But it is absolutely impossible 
that the premises be true and the conclusion false.12
In the most careful terminology, ‘valid’ applies only to deductive argu-
ments and, correspondingly, to valid deductive reasoning (the kind of 
reasoning whose essential content is a valid argument). We might conceive 
deductive reasoning as the sort that “aims” at validity, in the sense that it is 
of a kind best evaluated as valid or invalid. Thus, even though the argument 
from hallucination (discussed in Chapter 2) is invalid, the philosophical rea-
soning that employs it seems meant to be valid and is appropriately assessed 
as deductive.
By contrast, much reasoning that is not valid is simply not meant to be 
deductive in the first place. Suppose, for instance, that my reasoning had run 
(1) the noise sounds like that of a backfire; (2) the likeliest explanation of the 
noise is that a vehicle backfired; probably, then, (3) a vehicle backfired. As 
‘probably’ signals, I do not take my reasoning to be valid or to be deductive 
at all: I simply take its premises to provide some reason to believe its conclu-
sion. Even if I had not used ‘probably’, it would be inappropriate to consider 
this reasoning deductive. For obviously even the likeliest explanation need 
not be true; it would thus be a mistake to regard such reasoning—or the 
person using it—as aiming at validity.
We could call such probabilistic reasoning ‘inductively valid’, meaning 
roughly that relative to its premises there is a high probability that its conclu-
sion is true. High probability is usually taken to be such that it is reasonable 
to accept a proposition having it. But to avoid confusion I simply term rea-
soning of that sort ‘inductively good’ (or ‘inductively strong’).
Moreover, it is reasoning processes and not abstract structures that I call 
deductive or inductive. I do not take arguments, as abstract structures, to be 
intrinsically of either kind, though we speak of them as deductive or induc-
tive so far as they seem best assessed by deductive or inductive standards. 

Inference and the extension of knowledge  187
(The intentions of those presenting them are one among many other factors 
determining the appropriate standards for classifying reasoning processes.)
I want to stress in passing that we should not conceive deductive and induc-
tive reasoning as they have often been characterized. Deductive reasoning 
has been described as “going” from the general to the particular, say from (1) 
all human beings are mortal and (2) Socrates is a human being to (3) Socrates 
is mortal. But our deductive backfire case, embodying the valid argument 
from (1) and (2) to (3), is different; it is about only particular things. Even in 
the classical example about Socrates, one premise is particular, in the sense 
that it concerns a single individual.
Subsumptive and analogical inference
Even those who take deductive reasoning to go from the general to the par-
ticular should recognize that the reasoning from (1) all humans have fears 
and (2) all who have fears are vulnerable to (3) all humans are vulnerable is 
deductive (and valid). Perhaps they focus on cases in which we draw a conclu-
sion about something or someone, say Socrates, by subsuming the person 
or thing under a generalization about similar entities, say people. Call such 
inference subsumptive reasoning—or instantial reasoning, since Socrates is 
supposed to instantiate the truth that all humans are mortal. Not all deduc-
tive reasoning is subsumptive.
As for inductive reasoning, it has often been said to “go from” the par-
ticular to the general, as when one infers that everyone has fears from the 
enumerative premises that Abe does, Beatrice does, Carl does, Donna does, 
and so on. This characterization is good so far as it goes. But it does not 
apply to reasoning—sometimes called abductive—from a premise stating the 
likeliest explanation of a presumed fact, to the conclusion that the proposi-
tion expressing that explanation is true; for instance, from the premise that 
the noise is best explained by a vehicle’s backfiring, to the conclusion that the 
noise represents such a backfire. Nor does the characterization do justice to 
certain reasoning by analogy, such as my concluding that a plant probably has 
a property, say hardiness, because it is much like (analogous to) another plant 
that has that property.
It is better, then, to think of inductive reasoning as reasoning that, first, 
“aims” at providing good grounds for its conclusion, but not at validity, and, 
second, is best evaluated in terms of the degree of probability of its conclu-
sion relative to its premises. This conception has the further advantage of 
applying to all three main kinds of inductive reasoning: generalizational, 
explanational (abductive), and analogical.
The inferential transmission of justification and knowledge
We are now in a position to explore the conditions for transmission of justi-
fication and knowledge.

188  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
Clearly the success of transmission is partly a matter of the status of the 
underlying argument: the one whose premise or premises are one’s basis for 
the belief in question. The natural thing to say initially is that justification 
and knowledge are transmitted in deductive inference only if the underlying 
argument is valid and, in inductive inference, only if the underlying argument 
is (inductively) good (I use ‘inference’ rather than ‘reasoning’ here because 
the former is preferable for the wide range of contexts we are exploring). But 
these principles, though probably correct, need clarification. Let us consider 
the cases of inductive and deductive transmission separately.
Suppose Luigi hastily infers from the propositions (1) all opera lovers 
appreciate The Magic Flute and (2) Wilhelm appreciates The Magic Flute that 
(3) Wilhelm is an opera lover. This is invalid deductive reasoning and, even 
with true premises that Luigi is justified in believing, it would not transmit 
either justification or knowledge from his beliefs of them to his belief of 
its conclusion. Bad reasoning cannot realize the evidential potential of good 
premises.
 Suppose Luigi then produces the better argument from (1) all opera lovers 
appreciate The Magic Flute and (2) Wilhelm appreciates it in the way one 
would expect of an opera lover, to (3) Wilhelm is an opera lover. Suppose 
we conceive his reasoning as deductive, say because Luigi’s underlying prin-
ciple—roughly, the one by which his reasoning is actually guided—is not the 
expected inductive one—that if all As are Bs and x is a B of a kind that might 
well be expected to be an A then probably x is an A—but the false principle 
that if all As are Bs, and x is a B of a kind that might be expected to be an A, 
then x is (certainly) an A. Then we must also say that transmission is blocked 
because his reasoning is invalid. He adheres to a mistaken (deductive) logical 
standard and hence does not acquire a justified belief through his inference.
Apparently, then, deductive transmission of knowledge or justifica-
tion requires validity. Specifically, the argument underlying an inferential 
belief—i.e., the argument whose premise(s) constitute(s) what that belief is 
inferentially based on—must be valid if knowledge or justification is to be 
deductively transmitted to that belief from the premise belief(s) it is based 
on. To be sure, I could have independent grounds, such as testimony about 
Wilhelm, on which I know my conclusion. But if I do not have such grounds, 
then I cannot come to know this conclusion through deductive transmission 
of my knowledge from premises I have for it if those premises do not entail it, 
and hence the argument from them to it is invalid. We cannot build anything 
as solid as knowledge on weak supports, even if they themselves rest on a 
good foundation; the structure is still defective. (The case with justification 
is more complicated.)
Inductive transmission and probabilistic inference
The case with inductive reasoning is more complicated. For one thing, the 
notion of good inductive reasoning is highly vague. It might seem that we 

Inference and the extension of knowledge  189
could simply define it as reasoning with premises that render its conclusion 
more likely than not to be true. But this will not do, though such reasoning 
may be called probable to indicate that it has this specific merit: formally, that 
of having a probability greater than ½. Two points are important here.
First, a probability of just over 0.50 (indicating just over a fifty-fifty chance 
of truth) allows that even given the truth of the premises, the falsehood of 
the conclusion is almost as likely as its truth (since probabilities range from 0 
to 1, with 0.50 [taken to represent ½] indicating the same likelihood of truth 
as of falsehood on the part of the proposition in question). One would not 
want to describe reasoning as good when its premises give its conclusion a 
probability of truth of just over 50 percent.
Second, judging how good one’s inductive reasoning is may require assess-
ing one’s justification for the conclusion in relation to more than the premises 
from which one infers it. This holds, at least, when we are viewing the rea-
soning as occurring in a context in which various kinds of information are 
accessible to the reasoner. Relative just to the premise that Dave has a certain 
kind of cancer, the probability of the conclusion that he will die of it may be 
0.60, as 60 percent of its victims do; but relative to his youth, vigor, and good 
medical treatment, the probability of his death from it may be 0.08. Thus, 
one’s inductive reasoning from the premise that he has the particular cancer 
to the conclusion that he will die of it ignores relevant evidence and is not 
good, even though the conclusion has a probability of more than 0.50 relative 
to its premise.
Given the way in which such inductive reasoning can be negatively 
affected by new information it is sometimes called defeasible reasoning. By 
contrast, the entailment relation between the premise(s) of valid (deductive) 
reasoning and its conclusion is invariant: no additional information affects 
the entailment. In probabilistic language, the probability of its conclusion 
given its premises must be 1 even if further information is added, whereas 
adding information to the premise(s) of inductive reasoning can render its 
conclusion improbable relative to the new set of premises, hence defeat the 
original reasoning, as shown by the cancer case.13
Suppose we assume for a moment that good inductive reasoning has prem-
ises taking account of all the relevant evidence. May we then conclude that 
justification and knowledge are inductively transmitted only by inductive 
reasoning that is good in this comprehensive sense? This view is too strong. 
For often some of the relevant evidence is not needed for such inductive 
justification of one’s belief because one’s premises already contain sufficient 
evidence. Evidence may be relevant to a belief without being needed for its 
justification, as when testimony from a twelfth witness who agrees with the 
rest is unnecessary though perfectly relevant. The point is important; for 
even if we can understand the notion of all the relevant evidence, we at best 
rarely have all the evidence relevant to a belief and we may not need it all if 
we do.
Is good inductive reasoning simply the kind of inductive reasoning that is 

190  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
sufficient to transmit justification? This is a promising characterization for 
single pieces of inductive reasoning, those using a set of premises directly 
for one conclusion. But inductive reasoning can occur in chains, with the 
conclusion of the first piece of reasoning serving as a premise in the second 
piece, and the conclusion of that serving as a premise in the third, and so on. 
Unfortunately, in an inductive chain that is extended, over time, through 
many inferences, justification may not be transmitted from the conclusion 
of the first to the conclusion of the last, even if each piece of reasoning has 
premises giving high probability to its conclusion. To see why, notice first 
that the degree of justification inductively transmitted from one’s premises 
to one’s conclusion may drop, even if nothing new enters the picture, such as 
someone’s challenging one’s conclusion the moment one draws it.
If the degree of probability repeatedly drops, the degree of justification 
may drop drastically. To see this, notice that even if one starts with excellent 
justification for one’s premises, if they give a probability of only, say, 0.75 to 
one’s conclusion, one will have much weaker justification for the conclusion 
than for the premises, if they are one’s only basis for it. (I am assuming, 
somewhat artificially, that justification admits of degrees in the numerical 
way probability does.) Roughly, one should take the chance that the conclu-
sion is true to be only 75 percent of the chance that the premises are true.
 Suppose that I know that Tom said that the weather forecaster predicted 
rain. If the chance that Tom (who is biased by optimism and may have mis-
heard the forecast) is right is only 75 percent and the chance that the fore-
caster’s prediction is right is, say, 60 percent, then my warrant for believing 
it will rain is presumably just 75 percent of 60, i.e., 45 percent. (The idea is 
that the probability that the forecast was even made is only 75 percent, and 
we would then have a 60 percent probability of rain; the multiplication takes 
account of both probabilities.) Such chains of inference can be indefinitely 
long, as when I must rely on hearsay I take to be less than 100 percent likely 
to be right for my belief that Tom said the forecaster predicted rain. This 
allows for the occurrence of even more reduction of one’s justification for 
believing one’s conclusion.
These points should make it apparent how it is possible for good inductive 
reasoning, carried out through a series of inferences, to fail to transmit justi-
fication from its initial premises to its final conclusion. Even if the probabil-
ity that the initial premises give to the first conclusion is 0.9, if one went on 
inferring further conclusions, each being a premise for the next conclusion, 
then even with the same degree of probability in each case, one could eventu-
ally infer a conclusion for which one has less justification than 0.5. With each 
case, the likelihood that one’s conclusion is true would be 10 percent less 
than (90 percent of) the likelihood of the truth of one’s previous conclusion, 
which is serving as one’s premise.
In some respects, knowledge differs from justification in relation to trans-
mission conditions. Since knowledge does not admit of degrees (at least not 
in the way justification does), it might be transmitted across an inductive 

Inference and the extension of knowledge  191
inference without diminution in degree even if such transmission does imply 
some reduction in one’s justification (other things being equal).14 If, for 
instance, you know that the weather is bad and you inductively infer that 
Jane, who is driving, will be late, presumably you could know the latter prop-
osition on the basis of the former even though there is some chance that she 
left early and compensated for the weather: the probability of this is above 
zero. Your grounds for your conclusion may not be as good as your grounds 
for your premise, which may render the conclusion only very probable, rather 
than entailing it; but you may still unqualifiedly know your conclusion. This 
knowledge may not be as good, say as securely grounded, as your knowledge 
of the premises; for instance, it might not be as nearly certain. But it can still 
be knowledge.
Although there are kinds of knowledge, then, apparently a belief either 
constitutes knowledge or falls short of that, as opposed to constituting 
knowledge to a degree. This point applies to testimonial chains as well as 
to inductive inference. On the view taken in Chapter 7, testimony-based 
knowledge is non-inferential; hence, even the tenth (or indeed nth) recipient 
of testimony that p can know that p on the basis of testimony if each previous 
attester did.
It can happen, however, that knowledge is not transmitted even across 
an inductive inference whose premises give its conclusion extremely high 
probability. For example, you might know that you hold just one out of 
a million coupons in a fair lottery, which will have one winner. You may 
inductively infer, with very high probability, 0.999999, that you will lose, as 
999,999 of the million coupons will lose. But surely you do not know you will 
lose—though, to be sure we can imagine contexts in which one would not be 
opposed for saying this.15 You might be lucky. Moreover, you have as good 
a chance to be lucky as any other holder of a single coupon—including the 
possessor of the winning one. If we said, on this basis alone, that you know 
you will lose, how could we avoid having to say it of everyone else—in which 
case we would be wrong, since someone wins in this kind of fair lottery? 
Your knowledge of your premises, then, is not inductively transmitted to 
your conclusion. Granted, if we change the example so that you deduce the 
qualified statement that the probability of your losing is 0.999999, you may 
know that. But that is a very different conclusion.16
Some inferential transmission principles
We have seen some important points. Inference transmits justification 
and knowledge; it is not a basic source of them. It can generate them only 
derivatively, by transmission, from knowledge and justification already pos-
sessed. Inference can originate knowledge or justified belief in the sense that 
the beliefs in question are new to the believer, but apparently not—as the 
basic sources of knowledge and justification can—from something other 
than belief, such as perception. Deductive transmission apparently requires 

192  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
validity; and inductive transmission apparently requires an inductive coun-
terpart of validity, something like a strong relation of support between 
premises and conclusion. But even when the support is strong, the degree of 
justification may drop in a way that it need not drop in the deductive case.
As our examples show, to understand the transmission of justification and 
knowledge we must consider two sorts of conditions: necessary conditions 
for transmission of knowledge and justification, conditions such that trans-
mission occurs only if they are met by an inference; and sufficient conditions, 
those such that if they are met by an inference, then transmission occurs.
It is by and large even harder to specify sufficient conditions than neces-
sary ones. For a sufficient condition must “cover” all the necessary ones: if 
it does not imply that each of them holds, it leaves out something necessary, 
and so is not sufficient.17 Let me simply suggest the sort of thing we must add 
to what we so far have in order to arrive at sufficient conditions for inferential 
transmission.
It will help to begin with inductive cases. Might we accept the following 
inductive transmission principle: If, by good inductive reasoning, one infers 
something from premises which take account of all the relevant evidence, 
then if one is justified in believing those premises, one is justified in believing 
the conclusion? Even in the lottery case, in which one holds only one of a mil-
lion coupons, this condition is plausible for justification. For instance, one 
may be justified in believing one will lose. Knowledge, however, is different 
in this respect. For as the lottery example shows, even when the probability 
is very high, the counterpart of this condition, with knowledge substituted 
for justification, does not hold.
A different example will show something else about the inductive trans-
mission of justification. Recall the case of a chain of two or more instances 
of inductive reasoning. Imagine that I enter my house and find evidence of a 
burglary, such as ransacked drawers. I infer that valuables are missing. From 
that I infer that the $20 in my daughter’s piggy bank is gone. And from that 
in turn I infer that my daughter will be upset. At each point I am justified 
in believing my premise and, apparently make a good inductive inference 
from it. In most such cases, my justification carries right down the inductive 
chain from my initial premise to my final conclusion. But it need not. There 
is a chance that the bank was overlooked and a chance that my daughter will 
be calm, if only because she is so grateful that important things, such as the 
teddy bears, are undisturbed. Could it not be that at each step my justifica-
tion for my conclusion drops in such a way that, unlike my inference that I 
will lose the lottery, my last inference fails to produce a justified conclusion?
The general point here is that as inductive inference proceeds, the crucially 
relevant evidence, the evidence one must take into account, may mount up or 
at least change. For instance, by the time I get to the question of whether my 
daughter will be upset about the piggy bank, it becomes relevant to note that 
the teddy bears are unharmed before inferring that she will be upset, whereas 
this information would not have been relevant if the disappearance of the 

Inference and the extension of knowledge  193
piggy bank were the only potential disturbance in the house. We find, then, 
that the appraisal of inductive chains cannot be accomplished by any simple 
application of the single inference standard.
But how should we decide what is relevant to drawing a conclusion? And 
how is one’s justification for believing a conclusion affected by ignoring only 
some of what is relevant? These are hard questions, which I can only partially 
answer. One positive point is this: whether we are inferentially justified in 
holding a conclusion we draw depends on many factors, including some not 
expressed in our premises. My believing the premises of an inference may 
be the origin of my belief and a source of my justification. But there are 
other relevant factors—such as what I know, or should know, about what will 
preoccupy the child upon discovering the burglary.
My justification, then, ultimately depends on complex relations among all 
the relevant factors. We might say that although justification may emerge 
from a straight inferential line, it will do so only if the line figures in the right 
kind of pattern of related beliefs and available relevant information. Some 
patterns contain obstacles on the would-be path to justification; others have 
clear, straight passageways.
By contrast with induction, deduction is more straightforward: if p entails 
q (i.e., q is deducible from p) and q entails r, then p entails r; but if we put 
‘probabilistically implies’ in place of ‘entails’, we do not get a principle that 
is invariably true. Suppose the tossing of a weighted (unfair) coin proba-
bilistically implies—i.e., makes more likely than not—the coin’s landing 
heads (toward which the coin is biased); assume that the probability of heads 
given a toss is just over ½. Second, suppose that the coin’s landing heads 
probabilistically implies (also with a probability of just over ½) that (since 
he will win enough money) Slim will buy a football ticket. It does not follow 
that his flipping the coin probabilistically implies his buying the ticket. For 
one thing, the probability of the two independent events, his winning and 
his buying a football ticket with the money, is the probability of the first 
times that of the second, hence less than ½ (it would be so even if each had 
a probability as high as 0.70 since 0.70 × 0.70 is only 0.49). If, moreover, we 
allow for the passage of time, as is inevitable with a person’s drawing two or 
more inferences, then we cannot rule out that intervening factors (such as 
his detection of the coin’s bias as it is tossed) will make it very unlikely that 
he will accept the money. He may cancel the bet immediately on discover-
ing the unfairness of the coin. These points do not in the least imply that 
non-entailing grounds for a proposition can never render it highly probable 
or yield a justified belief of it. The point simply expresses a limitation on 
inductive principles and chains.
Deductive transmission of justification and knowledge
Let us turn now to deductive transmission. One might think that valid deduc-
tive inference is sufficient as well as necessary for transmitting justification 

194  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
and knowledge. Certainly it commonly does transmit them, for instance 
when we learn theorems by validly deducing them in doing geometrical 
proofs.
I am not implying that whenever, in the abstract, there is a valid infer-
ence, in the sense of ‘a set of propositions constituting a valid argument’, 
from something one believes to a conclusion, then one “implicitly” knows 
the conclusion, or even has situational justification for believing it. If that 
were so, then simply by knowing the axioms of Euclidean geometry (which, 
like the parallel axiom—that for any line and any point not on that line, 
there is exactly one line parallel to the first and passing through the point—
are quite simple), one might implicitly know, and be justified in believing, 
all its theorems, including theorems too complex for one to understand.)18 
For the theorems include all the propositions the axioms entail (an infinite 
set), and some of those will not even be intelligible to everyone who knows 
or justifiedly believes the axioms. The main issue here is the transmission 
of justification and knowledge in two ways: first, from justified beliefs, or 
from beliefs constituting knowledge, to other beliefs arrived at by inference; 
second, from such beliefs to situational justification for propositions that we 
could infer from those we know or are justified in believing.
Even if we restrict attention to transmission of knowledge across infer-
ence processes, it is at least not obvious that knowledge is always transmitted 
across valid deductive inferences.19 Recall the backfire. Suppose I am suf-
ficiently acquainted with the sound to know that it is a backfire. Then, from 
what I know, it follows that it is not the sound of a firecracker with a similar 
muffled sound. Imagine that, aware that this follows, I infer that the sound 
is not that of a firecracker. Do I know this? What if I have no evidence that 
there is no one around setting off such firecrackers? Perhaps I then do not 
know this. It may be that from my general experience, the most I am justified 
in believing is that this alternative explanation of the sound is so improbable 
that it is irrelevant. But it is still not clear that I know there is no one around 
setting off such firecrackers.20
Thus, it is not clear that we should accept what might be called the simple 
deductive transmission principle for knowledge: that if (at a given time) you 
validly infer a proposition from an inferential ground you know (and believe 
it on that ground), then you know this proposition (say that the sound is 
not that of a firecracker with a similar muffled quality). One might now say 
that if I do not know my inferred conclusion here, this just shows that I did 
not know in the first place that a vehicle backfired (my premise). But must 
we say this? It may be equally plausible to say that because one now realizes 
that one’s basis for believing this might not have been decisive, one no longer 
knows it, yet did know it in the first place. If that is so, it shows something 
important: that sometimes reflection on our grounds can bring into our 
purview considerations that weaken our justification for our grounds, or 
eliminate our knowledge of them, or at least weaken their power to justify 
our drawing inferences from them.

Inference and the extension of knowledge  195
Degrees and kinds of deductive transmission
Consider a different case. I add a column of fifteen figures, check my results 
twice, and thereby come to know, and to be justified in believing, that the 
sum is 10,952. As it happens, I sometimes make mistakes, and my wife 
(whom I justifiedly believe to be a better arithmetician) sometimes corrects 
me. Suppose that, feeling unusually confident this time, I now infer that if 
my wife says this is not the sum, she is wrong. From the mathematical truth 
that the sum is 10,952, it certainly follows that if she says it is not, she is 
wrong. If it is the sum, then if she denies that, she is wrong. But even though 
I know and am justified in believing that this is the sum, can I, on the basis 
of my grounds for this belief, automatically know or be justified in believing 
that if she says it is not the sum, she is wrong? (I am assuming that I have no 
other basis for holding this belief, such as a calculator result that coincides 
with mine.) That is far from self-evident. To see why, let us focus mainly on 
the principle as applied to justification—the simple deductive transmission 
principle for justification: If one is justified in believing p, then one is also 
justified in believing any proposition (within one’s understanding) that fol-
lows from it.21
The force of the case is best appreciated if we suppose that my checking 
just twice is enough to give me only the minimum basis for justified belief 
and knowledge here (the minimum for knowledge seems higher, but that will 
not affect what follows). Surely I would then not have sufficient grounds 
for believing that if she says the answer is wrong, she is wrong. Given my 
background justification for believing that she is the better arithmetician, 
the justification-threatening prospect this proposition puts before me seems 
to demand that I have more justification than the minimum I do have for my 
sum, if I am to be justified in believing that if she says the sum is not 10,952, 
she is wrong.
One way to interpret the example is this. To be justified in believing the 
proposition that if she says the sum is not 10,952, she is wrong, or to know or 
justifiedly believe this about her, I need grounds for believing this proposi-
tion that are good enough not to be outweighed by the supposition that she 
(the better arithmetician) says that 10,952 is not the sum. In inferring that if 
she says this is not the sum, she is wrong, I am making the supposition that 
she says it. Of course, I need not believe she will say it; but because I am sup-
posing she will (and in a sense envisaging this in considering the proposition 
that if she says it, she is wrong), I am justified in believing that if she does, 
she is wrong, only if my justification for believing that the sum is 10,952 
is good enough to withstand the supposition that she denies it is the sum. 
My supposing this may also be regarded as implicit in my holding the belief 
that if she says this, she is wrong, whether I form that belief by inference or 
not. In either case, under the specified conditions, her justification seems 
good enough to reduce mine below the threshold of justification, which it 
just barely reaches.

196  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
One might now object that I really do not have justification in the first 
place for believing that the sum is 10,952. Depending on my arithmetic skills, 
that might be true if I have checked my sum only once. But suppose that 
carefully checking three or four times is required to reach the threshold of 
justification and that I have done this. For any reasonable standard of jus-
tification or knowledge, there will be a point at which I just meet, and do 
not exceed, that standard, and (again assuming I am justified in believing 
her to be the better arithmetician) I will then not know or be justified in 
believing the proposition that if she says the sum is wrong, then she is wrong. 
(This point concerns situational justification. It is also true that if I infer this 
further proposition without first getting additional grounds for my answer, 
I would not know it or justifiedly believe it, i.e., have a justified belief of it.)22
The example can be varied to make the same point in a different way. If 
the sum is 10,952, then even if there are two mistakes in my calculations I 
made, it is still 10,952. This may sound strange, but suppose the mistakes 
cancel each other: one yields a 9 instead of the correct 7, and the other yields 
a 6 instead of the correct 8. Then an excess of 2 is offset by a shortage of 2.
Now imagine that I again justifiedly believe that the sum is 10,952 and 
know this. I have been careful enough and have not actually made errors. 
Still, I have checked only the minimum amount necessary for justification. 
Perhaps simply to test my intuitions about deductive transmission, I might 
infer that (even) if there are two errors in my calculation leading to the 
answer, 10,952, the sum is 10,952. Surely I am not justified in believing this 
and—assuming that the same minimum of checking is sufficient for knowl-
edge—I do not know it (if more checking is required, then the same point 
will hold for knowledge if we build in the assumption that I just reached 
the required minimum). My original, minimal justification does not give me 
situational justification for believing what I infer or adequate grounds for 
knowledge of that proposition. If I had done extra checking, say enough to 
be adequately justified in believing (or to know) that I made no mistakes, it 
might be otherwise; but that is not my case.
Still another way to conceive the example is this. One might think of (1) 
‘If she says the sum is not 10,952, then she is wrong’ as equivalent to (2) 
‘Either she doesn’t say this or she says it and is wrong’. Thus, if I am justi-
fied in believing (or I know) (2), I am (arguably) justified in believing (or I 
know) (1). It may seem that I would be justified in believing (2), since such 
justification can occur in any of these three cases: through my being justified 
in believing (a) that she will not say this, or (b) that she says it and is wrong, 
or (c) that at least one of those two things is true. Am I, however, justified in 
believing any of (a)–(c)? Let us consider them in order.
My justification for believing that the sum is 10,952 is (chiefly) my rea-
sonably careful calculations’ indicating that it is. That justification does not 
extend to justifying my believing that (a) my wife will not say that this is 
false; and it surely does not extend to my believing that (b) she (whom I 
justifiedly believe to be the better arithmetician) says it is false and is wrong. 

Inference and the extension of knowledge  197
Thus, it seems at best unlikely that I should be justified in believing that (c) 
at least one of these two things is the case.
 It is important not to take this cautionary conclusion to be more nega-
tive or restrictive than it is. Nothing I have said requires denying that in the 
imagined case I may also have some reason to believe that if she says the sum 
is not 10,952, she is wrong. But the point is that I would not have enough 
justification for this to know or have a justified belief of it, as I did know and 
have a justified belief that the sum is 10,952.23
Cases of this sort strongly argue for at least two points. First, justification 
and knowledge need not be transmitted through valid inference from known 
or justifiedly believed premises to belief of a conclusion inferred on the basis 
of them. Second, situational justification is not automatically transmitted 
even to propositions clearly entailed by those we are justified in believing—
hence the deductive transmission of justification principle is not true.
These negative points should be balanced by another. Some degree of 
(situational) justification—what we might loosely call some reason for believ-
ing—may automatically transmit: it is not as though I have nothing in the 
way of reason to believe that if she says the sum is not 10,952 then she is 
wrong; for instance, I did check my calculation with some care. Still, merely 
having some reason to believe does not imply being (unqualifiedly) justified 
in believing, any more than one piece of evidence for a proposition need suf-
fice for knowledge of it.
The sort of failure of transmission I have noted is probably not common 
for inferences rational persons normally draw, and I stress it because such 
failure has often been held to be impossible (and is important in dealing with 
skepticism, as Chapter 13 will show). A qualified deductive transmission prin-
ciple for justification apparently holds: typically, valid reasoning from justified 
beliefs transmits justification to its conclusion belief (this holds for overall 
justification as well as for some degree of justification, though it allows that 
there be some degree of diminution in justification across the inference). 
Similarly, we may apparently affirm a qualified deductive transmission prin-
ciple for knowledge: typically valid reasoning from known premises transmits 
knowledge to its conclusion (where the conclusion belief is based on the prem-
ise belief(s), as would be normal). These principles are of major importance 
in epistemology. It is difficult to say under just what conditions deductive 
transmission does not occur, but one can see what some of them are from the 
points that have emerged here. The general conclusion to draw, however, is 
that whether one is justified in believing something, or knows it, depends not 
only on one’s specific evidence for it but also on a pattern of factors including 
one’s relation to the proposition itself and one’s particular circumstances.
Memorial preservation of inferential justification 
and inferential knowledge
We should now consider a further point that applies to both deductive and 
inductive inferential transmission. Imagine that you learn something, say a 

198  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
theorem, by validly inferring it from something you know, say an axiom. 
You may remember the axiom as your ground; then your memory preserves 
both your premise and your conclusion. But eventually you may forget your 
ground, for instance how you proved, and even how to prove, a theorem. 
Similarly, you may forget the testimony or book from which you learned 
(perhaps by inductive inference partly based on the premise that the book 
is reliable) that the Battle of Hastings was in 1066. Can you still know and 
justifiedly hold these now premise-less beliefs?
The answer in both cases is surely that you can. Memory can retain beliefs 
as knowledge, and as justified beliefs, even if it does not retain the original 
grounds of the relevant beliefs. But because in these instances it does not 
retain the inferential grounds (or other such as testimonial ones), and no new 
grounds need be added, it does not necessarily retain the beliefs as inferen-
tial (or testimony-based). Moreover, when the grounds are not retained and 
none are added, one might find it at best difficult to indicate how one knows, 
beyond insisting that, say, one is sure one remembers, perhaps adding that 
one surely did have grounds in the past. So long as one did have adequate 
grounds and does remember the proposition, surely one can know that prop-
osition. (Theories that explain this will be discussed in Chapters 10 and 11). 
One can also justifiedly believe it, provided one has an appropriate memory 
of it, say the sense of memorial familiarity that goes with many of the beliefs 
memory preserves.
This example is another illustration of the point that a belief which is 
inferential at one time may be non-inferential at another. This may happen 
repeatedly with the same belief. Long after a belief—for instance, of a theo-
rem—has ceased to be inferential, one could acquire new grounds for it, such 
as that one has a clear recollection of a mathematical friend’s affirming the 
theorem. One could later forget the new grounds also, and simply remember 
the theorem or indeed find an altogether new proof of it.
Suppose, however, that one’s memory of the theorem is very weak and 
one has no confidence that one has it right. The result might be that one 
has merely a belief which not only does not constitute knowledge but also 
is only weakly justified, if justified at all. It will certainly not be justified if 
one acquires new evidence that clearly counts strongly against it and nothing 
happens, such as one’s getting new information, to neutralize this hostile 
evidence. Often, however, the new beliefs, justification, and knowledge 
we acquire through inference may be retained even when their inferential 
grounds are long forgotten.
At any given moment in waking life, we have some operative basic source 
of belief, if only the stream of our own consciousness. As we experience 
the world around us and our own interactions with it, new beliefs arise, 
both directly from basic sources and inferentially. As rational beings, we 
are almost constantly forming beliefs on the basis of other beliefs. We may 
form these through a process of inference or only through acquiring beliefs 

Inference and the extension of knowledge  199
that are only structurally inferential: based on other beliefs and so held for 
a reason, though not reasoned, since they do not arise from other beliefs 
(nor are grounded in them) by a process of inference. Both deductive and 
inductive inferences are common. Both transmit justification and knowledge 
when they give rise to beliefs on the basis of an inference which meets the 
appropriate deductive, inductive, and evidential standards.
Among the transmission principles that have emerged as plausible are these 
two broad ones. First, knowledge and justification are inferentially transmit-
ted only if the underlying argument is good. If we start with false or unjusti-
fied premises or we unreasonably infer a conclusion from them (i.e., infer it 
invalidly or in an inductively inadmissible way), it is not to be expected that 
a belief based on the argument in question constitutes knowledge or is even 
justified. (This does not, of course, prevent it from having an independent 
sound basis.) Second, at least typically, if the argument is good, (1) situ-
ational justification is transmitted and (2) belief justification and knowledge 
are transmitted provided the subject believes the proposition in question (the 
conclusion of the inference) on the basis of its premises (the underlying ones).
The kinds of transmission described in the second principle seem to occur 
quite often, and abnormal conditions such as those described in the column 
of figures case are apparently not common. Given a normally retentive 
memory, we have not only a vast store of direct (non-inferential) knowledge 
and directly justified beliefs, but also a huge variety of indirect knowledge 
and indirectly justified beliefs. False and unwarranted beliefs arise from 
some inferences. But from many inferences we learn something new; and in 
making inferences to propositions that we think best explain something that 
we take ourselves to know already, we sometimes learn truths that are both 
new and important. Through inference, then, we often enlarge, strengthen, 
and develop our body of knowledge and justified beliefs.
Notes
	 1	 Two points may add clarity here. (1) I am talking about beliefs that 
(propositional, not objectual, beliefs). (2) It is perhaps misleading to 
call propositions objects of beliefs, if only because they can express the 
content of beliefs—their primary role here—whether or not believing 
is a relation to a proposition conceived as an object. It could instead be 
something like a “contentful” property of persons.
	 2	 Two points deserve emphasis here. First, I take a belief arrived at by 
reasoning to be at the time grounded in that reasoning; but it should 
be noted that the belief can be retained in memory after the premises 
of the reasoning are forgotten, and in that case we should speak of a 
belief that is only a formerly reasoned belief. (It is also possible for a 
belief not arrived at through reasoning to be later grounded in it, as when 
one at last finds premises to support what one has believed on the basis 

200  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
of a “hunch.”) Second, one might object to my main distinction here 
that, from my recognition of the backfire, I must have inferred, hence 
reasoned to the conclusion, that someone drove by. Granted, this recog-
nition is a ground of my belief that someone drove by. Still, I need not 
do anything that qualifies as drawing a conclusion from the recognition. 
I did not even stop reading to think about the noise, whereas, in the case 
of the woodpecker, I focused on the question of whether someone was at 
the door and, on hearing the distinctive rapid knocking, inferred that it 
was that of a woodpecker.
	 3	 An account of moral perception and its relation to non-moral perception 
is provided in my ‘Moral Perception and Moral Knowledge’, Proceedings 
of the Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume 84 (2010), 79–97.
	 4	 Granted, the notion of a process of inference is not sharp; sometimes we 
cannot get enough information about how a belief was formed even to 
make an educated guess about whether or not it arose from an inference.
	 5	 One may wonder what to call an episodically inferential belief just after it 
is formed but when it is held in mind and occurrent. Normally, it would 
now be in a category to which many beliefs belong: structurally inferen-
tial though, unlike most such beliefs, occurrent (it would not have to be 
structurally inferential since it is possible that it ceases to be based on the 
premise(s) from which it inferentially arises).
	 6	 The notion of a reason is here understood broadly, so that even a “bad 
reason” counts. Thus, one could have a belief for a reason even if the 
reason is a false proposition or one the person is unjustified in believing. 
Anyone who finds this usage too broad can substitute the notion of a 
reason or apparent reason. A defense of the broad terminology is given 
in Chapter 2 of my Architecture of Reason (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2001). If the terminology is too broad, then an episodically infer-
ential belief need not be one held for a reason; for people can draw infer-
ences from propositions that, in the narrow terminology, provide at best 
an apparent rather than a “real” reason for believing what they believe on 
the basis of them.
	 7	 The distinction between episodically and structurally inferential beliefs 
and the notion of one belief’s being based on another are discussed in 
detail in my ‘Belief, Reason, and Inference’, Philosophical Topics 14, 1 
(1986), 27–65, reprinted in my collection, The Structure of Justification 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993).
	 8	 Critics of foundationalism (such as Richard Rorty) have thought that 
foundationalism is committed to positing intrinsically basic proposi-
tions; but we have already seen why even self-evident propositions need 
not be intrinsically basic, and Chapter 9 will bring out why foundation-
alism need not posit the latter.

Inference and the extension of knowledge  201
	 9	 Bertrand Russell is among a number of philosophers who have at least 
implicitly denied this: “our knowledge of the physical world is not at first 
inferential, but that is because we take our percepts [roughly sense-data] 
to be the physical world . . . adults have got used to the idea that what is 
really there can only be inferred from what they see.” See An Outline of 
Philosophy (London: Allen & Unwin, 1927), chapters 12–13. This is the 
kind of view criticized by J.L. Austin in Sense and Sensibilia (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1962), esp. chapter 10. Austin subjects A.J. 
Ayer to criticism on similar counts, especially in the passages reprinted 
in Huemer, Epistemology. Chapter 9 will show that the foundationalism 
introduced there need not deny the point.
	10	 There is no one way to arrive at a suitable premise, but a typical way 
would be to count the cats individually up to seventeen, checking to 
be sure of overlooking none, and to believe on that basis that one has 
arrived at a total of seventeen cats. There may be ways, however, of pass-
ing non-inferentially from counting n things of a kind K to the belief 
that there are n Ks. There are certain premises from which one may infer 
that if some pets are dogs, then some dogs are pets, e.g. that if, for any A 
and B, if some As are Bs, then some Bs are As; but no one who can reason 
thus would find it natural to believe the former on the basis of the latter. 
On the plausible view we might call epistemic particularism, moreover, 
the former kind of proposition is epistemically prior to the latter, at least 
in the sense that justification for the former kind is presupposed by jus-
tification for the latter kind, but not conversely.
	11	 I say this appears to be so because it is controversial. The issue will be 
discussed in Chapter 9.
	12	 This is a permissive and formal sense of ‘valid’ and ‘entail’, because both 
apply when the premise set is contradictory or the conclusion is a neces-
sary truth (a truth whose falsity is impossible). For it is impossible that 
a contradiction be true, hence impossible for a contradictory premise set 
to be true and the conclusion false; and this is also impossible if the con-
clusion is a necessary truth and so cannot be false. Usually, we deal with 
arguments valid in a narrower sense, their premises being both mutually 
consistent and relevant in subject matter to their conclusion. But nothing 
said in this book should turn on our using the broad, permissive notion 
of validity that is standard in formal logic.
	13	 The language of probability seems preferable here to that of defeasibil-
ity. For the latter normally implies a liability to loss of justification or 
knowledge or both, and on that point deductive and inductive reasoning 
do not differ. If we conjoin to a premise in a valid deductive argument 
the negation of that premise, the argument and the reasoning expressing 

202  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
it are still valid (logically indefeasible, one might say); but its premises 
cannot all be known nor (presumably) justifiedly believed, and in any 
case they cannot provide good reason to believe the conclusion. They 
would be further from doing so than in the case of a weak inductive 
argument. (I thank Claudio de Almeida for questioning the text in a way 
that brought out this kind of problem.)
	14	 For an informative discussion of knowledge ascriptions highly pertinent 
to whether knowledge admits of degrees and supportive of the view 
suggested here, see chapter 2 of Jason Stanley, Knowledge and Practical 
Interest (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2005).
	15	 Note that the claim that one would not know here is most plausible when 
‘know’ is stressed; this is one reason for the plausibility of contextual-
ism about claims to know. For extensive discussion of lottery cases, see 
John Hawthorne, Knowledge and Lotteries (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2004). Contextualism will be discussed in Chapter 10.
	16	 The point here is associated with what is called the lottery paradox, 
introduced into the literature by Henry E. Kyburg, Jr. and widely dis-
cussed. See his Epistemology and Inference (Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press, 1983).
	17	 Since a sufficient condition implies all of the conditions that are mini-
mally necessary, i.e., are the (possibly complex) conditions individually 
necessary and jointly sufficient for the phenomenon to occur, some have 
wondered how a sufficient condition can fail to be a necessary one as well. 
The answer is that it can imply something more that is not necessary. For 
instance, taking a letter to the postbox by car, although sufficient for 
getting it there, is not necessary for this, since it implies something not 
necessary for getting it there—driving.
	18	 I am assuming that being justified in believing p entails being able to 
understand it. This is not to deny that one could have justified beliefs, 
say of a set of axioms, that are a justification for a proposition, p, which 
one does not understand, so that someone who had the same justified 
axiomatic beliefs and understood p would be justified in believing p. The 
distinction, then, is between possessing a set of beliefs, or being in a 
state, that is a justification for p, and being justified in believing p in 
the usual sense. Some who speak of propositional justification may not 
observe this distinction. I thank Scott Hagaman for calling my attention 
to a usage that does not observe the distinction.
	19	 I mean, of course, the non-trivial kind of valid inference, having con-
sistent premises none of which is equivalent to the conclusion. From 
inconsistent premises anything may be validly derived. If, for example, 
we start with a premise consisting of (1) some proposition, p, and its 
negation, not-p (i.e., start with a contradiction), we may infer that (2) 

Inference and the extension of knowledge  203
either p or q, for any proposition q we like (on the ground that if p holds, 
then either it or anything whatever holds). But we may now bring in (3) 
not-p (since we have it as well as p as one conjunctive element in our 
premise); and not-p, together with (2), entails q. Our arbitrarily chosen 
proposition, q, is thus validly derived.
	20	 On some views, a central feature of knowledge is that the belief in ques-
tion is justified in a way that allows one to rule out, or itself in some way 
rules out, relevant alternatives. Valuable discussion of this issue is pro-
vided by Alvin I. Goldman, ‘Discrimination and Perceptual Knowledge’, 
Journal of Philosophy 73 (1976), 771–91. The issue is addressed, some-
times indirectly, in Chapter 10.
	21	 This principle should be qualified if the idea is to be maximally plausible. 
It is not obvious what the best formulation might be, but we should at 
least specify that the person in question can understand the entailment 
from p to the proposition for which the person has justification by trans-
mission. There is no reason to think that because I am justified in believ-
ing p I should be justified in believing q, which it entails, when I cannot 
for the life of me understand how the former entails the latter. I am also 
for the most part simplifying by speaking only of transmission of situ-
ational justification as opposed to belief justification. For transmission 
of that, as of knowledge, it is presumably required that the person believe 
the entailed proposition on the basis of the entailing one.
	22	 This column of figures example has generated considerable discussion in 
the literature. For detailed critical discussion of my case see Catherine 
Canary and Douglas Odegard, ‘Deductive Justification’, Dialogue 28 
(1989), 305–20; Richard Feldman, ‘In Defense of Closure’, Philosophical 
Quarterly 45 (1995), 487–94; and Peter D. Klein, ‘Skepticism and 
Closure: Why the Evil Demon Argument Fails’, Philosophical Topics 
23, 1 (1995), 213–36. For my replies published to date see ‘Justification, 
Deductive Closure, and Skepticism’, Dialogue 30 (1991), 77–84; and 
‘Deductive Closure, Defeasibility, and Skepticism: A Reply to Feldman’, 
Philosophical Quarterly 45 (1995), 494–9. (This paper discussed the 
example construed as appealing to a subjunctive such as ‘If she were 
to say the sum is not n, she would be wrong’.) For related treatments 
of the transmission problem see Fred Dretske, ‘Epistemic Operators’, 
Journal of Philosophy 67 (1970), 1007–23; Robert Nozick, Philosophical 
Explanations (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1981), chapter 
3; Gilbert Harman, Change in View (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1986), 
esp. chapters 1–4; and Marian David and Ted A. Warfield, ‘Knowledge-
Closure and Skepticism’, in Quentin Smith (ed.), Epistemology: New 
Essays (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008).

204  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
	23	 No precise notion of justified belief fits all the contexts in which we 
speak of it; but when we speak of justification unqualifiedly we usually 
have in mind a kind and degree such that it is reasonable, overall, for the 
person to hold the belief. This is perhaps a kind and degree such that, 
if the proposition in question is true (and there are no special problems 
of the kind to be considered in Chapter 10), then the belief constitutes 
knowledge. Even this high degree of justification, of course, is still best 
conceived as prima facie rather than indefeasible or in any sense absolute.

9	
The architecture of knowledge
•	
Inferential chains and the structure of belief
Infinite inferential chains
Circular inferential chains
•	
The epistemic regress problem
Infinite epistemic chains
Circular epistemic chains
Epistemic chains terminating in belief not constituting knowledge
Epistemic chains terminating in knowledge
•	
The epistemic regress argument
•	
Foundationalism and coherentism
•	
Holistic coherentism
Patterns of justification
A coherentist response to the regress argument
•	
The nature of coherence
Coherence and explanation
Coherence as an internal relation among cognitions
Coherence, reason, and experience
Coherence and the a priori
Coherence and the mutually explanatory
Epistemological versus conceptual coherentism
Coherence, incoherence, and defeasibility
Positive and negative epistemic dependence
•	
Coherence and second-order justification
The process versus the property of justification
Beliefs, dispositions to believe, and grounds of belief
Justification, knowledge, and artificially created coherence
•	
Moderate foundationalism
The role of coherence in moderate foundationalism
Moderate foundationalism and the charge of dogmatism

9	
The architecture of knowledge
On the mountain in the distance before me, I see the huge oak and tulip trees 
swaying, with their leaves turned upward revealing the lighter green of their 
undersides. Waves of green, light and then dark, seem to cross the surface of 
the upper region from west to east as the leaves show the colors of their inner 
and outer sides. Parts of the hillside seem almost to breathe in and out as the 
trees bend away from me and back. It is a familiar sight, and I immediately 
realize that there is a wind. My belief that there is a wind is based on my belief 
that the trees are swaying. It is also justified on the basis of that belief. And if 
I know that there is a wind, I know it on the basis of my belief that they are 
swaying. In each case, one belief is inferentially based on another.
To what extent does this relation in which one belief is based on another 
represent the structure of our belief systems as a whole? The question is espe-
cially pertinent to epistemology as applied to the common cases in which 
our beliefs constitute knowledge. Might perceptual beliefs, for instance, be 
a foundation on which many others are inferentially built? Or are percep-
tual beliefs just a stopping place on the way to something yet more basic, 
or perhaps merely a place where we usually stop pursuing further premises, 
though we might go on seeking them and find deeper grounds that support 
perceptual beliefs?
These questions represent perennial issues, and we shall see many versions 
of the foundationalist view—the classical position on them—and various 
opposing theories. The questions also lead us, as often happens in epistemol-
ogy, into questions about the nature of mind as well as questions directly 
about justification and knowledge. This is to be expected when the central 
topic is the structure of knowledge and justification; for knowledge is appar-
ently constituted by belief, and, in epistemology, justification is important 
chiefly in connection with belief. It is appropriate, then, to begin an explora-
tion of the structure of knowledge and justification with some major points 
about the structure of a person’s body of beliefs.
Inferential chains and the structure of belief
As in discussing inference, it is useful to call the kind of inferential belief, 
justification, and knowledge just illustrated indirect. For one has such beliefs, 

The architecture of knowledge  207
justification, and knowledge only on the basis of, and thereby through, other 
beliefs, justification, or knowledge. By contrast, my belief that the trees are 
swaying is direct. I believe this simply because I see it, not on the basis of 
something else I believe.
Infinite inferential chains
The natural picture just sketched can be challenged. Perhaps all our beliefs 
could be indirect. If they could be, could not all justification of belief, and 
all our knowledge, be indirect? An adequate epistemology requires answers 
to these questions about the structure of a body of belief, justification, or 
knowledge. In exploring them, I will talk above all about knowledge and 
justification, and especially about knowledge. But what we know (propo-
sitionally) we believe; and the kind of justification epistemology is chiefly 
concerned with is that of belief. The structure of my knowledge and justifica-
tion, then, is chiefly that of a certain body of my beliefs.
I am not talking about knowledge in the abstract, as we sometimes do. 
We speak, for instance about the extent of “human knowledge.” Some of this 
knowledge is solely in books, and not remembered by anyone. Thus, some 
scientific knowledge might be constituted by propositions no one actually 
believes: they are available to us if we need them, but not objects of actual 
belief. They might be accessible to us by our simply consulting, or drawing 
straightforward inferences from, scientific literature. We can talk about the 
structure of such knowledge in the abstract, say about whether all the propo-
sitions of scientific knowledge can be systematized by certain basic laws of 
physics and chemistry treated as explaining or entailing (or both) the others. 
Then these basic laws would be something like geometrical axioms, and the 
other laws, like theorems, would be derivable from the basic laws. But that is 
not our topic here (though it will be discussed in some detail in Chapter 12). 
We are here exploring how people’s beliefs may actually be structured.
Consider a simple example. When I am being very cautious, my belief that 
the trees are swaying could be based on my belief that I have a visual impres-
sion of swaying. Could the latter belief also be based on another one? What 
might that be? Might I now believe that it seems to me that I have a visual 
impression of swaying, and base my belief that I have that impression on 
this new belief? This is doubtful. I cannot base one belief on another simply 
because I want to.
This example shows that the view that what we believe, and certain rela-
tions between our beliefs, are entirely under the direct control of our wills—
a strong version of doxastic voluntarism (voluntarism about belief)—is a 
mistake. Suppose, for instance, that I want to believe someone’s testimony. 
If it seems false, I cannot make myself believe it just by willing myself to 
believe it. Similarly, I generally cannot, at will, change relations among beliefs 
I hold. I lack, for instance, direct voluntary control over what my beliefs are 
based on; if I already know first-hand, from my sense of weakness, that I am 
gravely ill, I cannot, simply by willing it, base my belief of this on someone’s 

208  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
testimony that it is so. This holds even if I believe the testimony and take it 
to be confirmatory.1
Even if one cannot base one belief on another at will, it might still seem 
that a sequence of beliefs, each based on the next, could go on without limit. 
But could I, for instance, believe what seems the next proposition in the evi-
dential series, the involuted proposition that it appears to me that it seems to 
me that I have a visual impression of swaying? I suppose I could (though not 
simply at will). Still, I do not see that I would now come to hold anything on 
the basis of believing this strange proposition.
Suppose, however, that I did come to hold, on the basis of this involuted 
proposition, that it seems to me that I have an impression of swaying. I cannot 
in this way manufacture an inferential chain of beliefs—a chain in which each 
belief is based on the next—running to infinity. Nor do I already have an 
infinite set of appropriate beliefs as raw material waiting to be brought to 
consciousness—if indeed I can have an infinite number of beliefs (particu-
larly outside mathematics, in which it may seem that I can have an infinite 
number corresponding to the series 2 is even, 4 is even, 6 is even, etc.).2
Circular inferential chains
So far, however, I have ignored another way in which it might be thought to 
be possible that every belief is indirect: by virtue of lying not at the origin 
of an infinite chain, but instead in a circular chain. Imagine that I could hold 
one belief on the basis of a second and a second on the basis of a third, and so 
on, until we come full circle and get to a belief I hold on the basis of the first. 
Then all my beliefs would be indirect, yet I need not have infinitely many. To 
assess this, recall my belief that there is a swaying. Might there be a circular 
chain of beliefs here? For instance, could my belief that it appears to me that 
it seems to me that I have a visual impression of swaying be based on my 
belief that there is a swaying? This is far from clearly possible.
Suppose for the sake of argument that I do have a circular chain of beliefs, 
each based on the next. This raises a problem. First, there is good reason to 
think that (a) one belief is based on a second only if the second is at least 
in part causally responsible for (one’s holding) the first. For instance, if I 
believe there is a wind, on the basis of my believing that the trees are sway-
ing, then I believe that there is a wind, at least in part because I believe that 
the trees are swaying. Second, there is good reason to think that (b) if one 
thing is in part causally responsible for a second and the second is in part 
causally responsible for a third, then the first is in part causally responsible 
for the third. But together these two points imply that (c) in a circular chain 
of beliefs, each based on the next, every belief is in part causally responsible 
for, and thus a partial cause of, itself. That seems impossible. To see why, let 
us explore how such a circle might go in a simple case.
Imagine a circle of three beliefs, each based on the next. (1) I believe there 
is a wind. I believe this on the basis of (2) my believing there is a swaying of 

The architecture of knowledge  209
the trees; I believe that there is this swaying, on the basis of (3) my believing 
I have an impression of such swaying; and, coming full circle, I believe that 
I have this impression, on the basis of believing there is a wind. This case 
would be a circular causal chain, one whose last link is connected to its first 
in the same way that each is connected to its successor. For, given point (a), 
belief (1) is in part causally responsible for belief (3), and, given point (b), (3) 
is in part causally responsible for (1). This implies, however, given (b), that 
(1) is in part causally responsible for itself. That is apparently impossible. The 
belief would be holding itself up by its bootstraps.
If we accept the lesson of this bootstraps problem (as perhaps some will 
not) we must conclude that circular causal chains of this kind are not possible 
and so there cannot be a circular chain of beliefs each based on the next. For 
on the highly plausible assumptions, (a) through (c), this would have to be a 
circular causal chain. (We have not assumed that the imagined chain implies 
that some belief must be based on itself, only that such chains imply a belief’s 
being in part causally responsible for itself; the basis relation implies more 
than a causal connection.)
It might seem that a wheel is a model of a circular causal chain of the rel-
evant kind and that something must therefore be wrong with the reasoning 
just noted. Consider a wheel standing on the ground in a line running east 
and west, and imagine the wheel having eight equal sections and an axle, each 
section consisting of a pie-slice segment with its apex at the axle. Does each 
section not support the next, so that each rests on the others and ultimately 
(in the eighth link) on itself?
If we distinguish between the relation of being connected with and that of 
supporting, the answer no longer seems clear. Granted that if one section is 
connected to a second, it will support the second (to some degree) if a force is 
applied to the second in the direction of the first. But a wheel with eight such 
connected sections can exist in empty space with no such forces acting on it. 
Mere connectedness between segments does not imply any actual support 
relations, only a readiness to enter them.
Consider, then, the realistic case in which the wheel is on the ground. 
Gravity exerts a downward force on the entire wheel. Here, however, the 
ground supports the entire wheel, and each segment of the wheel that has a 
segment above it supports that segment, with the two top sections (whose 
common seam, we may assume, runs straight up from the center of the 
wheel to its highest point) being the only ones plausibly said to support each 
other directly. But notice that each of the top sections supports the other 
with respect to a different force. There is a westward force in the case of the 
western section’s support of the eastern one (which would fall backwards to 
the east if disconnected from its western counterpart because all the seams 
become unfastened); and there is an eastward force in the case of the eastern 
section’s support of the western one (which would fall backwards to the west 
if disconnected from its eastern counterpart because all the seams become 
unfastened).

210  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
Each top section of the wheel, then, pulls on the other in the opposite 
direction, with the result being a balance. In no case do we get a force in one 
direction that goes fully around the circle with the result that any section 
supports itself in that same direction. The forces on the two top sections are, 
as described in physics, equal and opposite.
Returning to the case of belief, there the support in question—the kind 
of cognitive support given by one belief to a second that is based on it—is 
also in one direction. It is, in good part, support with respect to three dimen-
sions: conviction, explanation, and memory. Consider this cognitive force 
in relation to a common case, that of a conclusion belief being based on a 
belief of a premise, such as a point made by a respected friend in favor of the 
conclusion. My premise belief tends to increase or buttress my conviction in 
my conclusion belief, to explain (in part and in some broadly causal way) why 
I hold that belief, and to help me remember my conclusion. Even if one takes 
circular causation to be possible, one should grant that this is not the kind of 
support relation that a belief may be plausibly thought to bear to itself.
Self-support on the part of beliefs might also seem possible if one conceives 
self-evident propositions as “self-justified” and takes their self-justification 
to be a kind of self-support. One might think, for instance, that a belief of a 
self-evident proposition can be in part causally responsible for itself and in 
that way support itself. But ‘self-justified’ is misleading: a self-evident propo-
sition is not justified simpliciter; propositions are justified or not for some-
one, and self-evident ones are justified for those who adequately understand 
them and on the basis of that understanding. To call a belief of a self-evident 
proposition self-justified seems at best an inaccurate way of saying that such 
a proposition is not normally believed because one believes something else. It 
is of course also not believed because one believes it. Normally, one believes 
it because one grasps the appropriate conceptual relation(s) it expresses. In 
any case, our concern is beliefs in general, not just beliefs of self-evident 
propositions.
On balance, then, it is reasonable to conclude not only that we have direct 
beliefs, such as beliefs ascribing colors to things before us and beliefs of self-
evident propositions, but also that we could not have only indirect beliefs. 
Apparently, neither infinite nor circular chains of indirect beliefs are possible 
for us.
The epistemic regress problem
Is knowledge like belief in this, so that some of it is direct, or could all our 
knowledge be indirect, that is, based on other knowledge we have? It may 
seem that this is possible, and that there can be an infinite epistemic regress—
roughly, an infinite series of knowings each based on the next.
It is especially likely to appear that indirect knowledge need not always 
be based on direct knowledge, if one stresses that, very commonly, ‘How 
do you know?’ can be repeatedly answered, and one then supposes that we 

The architecture of knowledge  211
stop answering only for practical reasons having to do with our patience or 
ingenuity. Let us explore this issue by assuming for the sake of argument that 
there is indirect knowledge and seeing what this implies.
Assume that a belief constituting indirect knowledge is based on knowl-
edge of something else, or at least on a further belief. The further knowledge 
or belief might be based on knowledge of, or belief about, something still 
further, and so on. Call this sequence an epistemic chain. It is simply a chain 
of beliefs with at least the first constituting knowledge, and each belief linked 
to the previous one by being based on it.
It is often held that there are just four possible kinds of epistemic chain. 
Two kinds are unanchored and do not end; two kinds are anchored and do 
end. First, an epistemic chain might be infinite, hence entirely unanchored. 
Second, it might be circular, hence also unanchored. Third, it might end with 
a belief that is not knowledge, and thus (figuratively speaking) be anchored 
in sand. Fourth, it might end with a belief that constitutes direct knowledge, 
and thus be anchored in bedrock. Our task is to assess these chains as pos-
sible sources of knowledge or justification. This is a version of the epistemic 
regress problem.
Infinite epistemic chains
The first possibility is difficult to appreciate. Even if I could have an infinite 
number of beliefs, how would I ever know anything if knowledge required 
an infinite epistemic chain? To know, and thus to learn, the simplest kind of 
thing, such as that there is a green field before me, I would apparently have to 
know an infinite number of things.
It is doubtful that, given our psychological make-up, we can know, or even 
believe, infinitely many things. It might seem that we can have an infinite 
set of arithmetical beliefs, say that 2 is larger than 1, that 3 is larger than 2, 
and so forth. But surely for a finite mind there will be some point or other at 
which the relevant proposition cannot be grasped (the limiting point might 
be different for different people or even the same person at different times). 
Imagine the “largest” proposition a supercomputer could formulate after 
years of work. It could easily be too complex to understand or so cumber-
some that one could not even take in a formulation of it. One would be unable 
to remember enough about the first part of it when one gets to the end; one 
could thus never understand the whole thing. What we cannot understand we 
cannot believe; and what we cannot believe we cannot know.3
Even if we could have infinite sets of beliefs, however, infinite epistemic 
chains apparently could not account for all, and probably not for any, of our 
knowledge. In the case of some beliefs, such as the belief that if some dogs 
are pets, some pets are dogs, I cannot even find any belief I hold that yields 
another link (a belief this one seems to be based on). The proposition is lumi-
nously self-evident, and it is difficult even to imagine a further proposition 
I would consider a good premise on the basis of which I would believe it if I 

212  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
thought I needed a premise for it. Thus, I find it unclear how this belief could 
be grounded, as knowledge, by any epistemic chain, much less by an infinite 
one.
In any event, how might infinite epistemic chains help us account for any 
other knowledge (or justified belief)? Notice that many kinds of infinite 
chain are possible. No one has provided a plausible account of what kind 
might generate justification or knowledge. But some restrictions are badly 
needed. For any proposition, an infinite chain can be imagined (in outline) 
that may be claimed to provide support for the proposition. Thus, even for 
a proposition one believes to be obviously false, one would find it easy to 
imagine beliefs to back it up; and though one could not continue doing this 
to infinity, one could nonetheless claim that one has the infinite set required 
to support the original belief.
Take the obviously false proposition that I weigh at least 500 pounds.  
I could back up a belief of this by claiming that if I weigh at least 500.1 
pounds, then I weigh at least 500 (which is self-evident), and that I do weigh 
at least 500.1 pounds. I could “defend” this by appeal to the propositions that 
I weigh at least 500.2 pounds, and that if I do, then I weigh at least 500.1. And 
so forth, until the challenger is exhausted. A chain like this can be infinite; 
hence, no matter how ridiculous a proposition I claim to know, there is no 
way to catch me with a claim I cannot back up in the same way. Given such 
resources, anything goes. But nothing is accomplished.
Circular epistemic chains
The possibility of a circular epistemic chain as a basis of knowledge has been 
taken more seriously. It might seem that if there cannot be a circular causal 
chain of indirect beliefs, each based on the next, then there cannot be a cir-
cular epistemic chain either. But perhaps knowledge can be based on prem-
ises in a way that differs from the way belief is based on them; perhaps, for 
instance, my knowledge that there is a wind could be somehow based on my 
belief that the leaves are swaying, even though my belief that there is a wind 
is not based on any further belief. We would then have a circle of knowledge, 
but not of belief, and no causal bootstraps problem. If this is possible, it may 
turn out to be important. But how realistic is it?
Does any of our knowledge really emerge from circular epistemic chains? 
Let us try to go full circle. I know there is a wind. I know this on the basis 
of the swaying of the trees. Now I think I know they are swaying because I 
see them sway. But it might be argued that my seeing this is only the causal 
basis of my belief that they are swaying, and I just do not notice that it is only 
on the basis of, say, my knowledge that I have a visual impression of swaying 
that I know they are swaying. Perhaps. But how far can this go?
I do not see how to go full circle, unless I think up propositions I do not 
originally believe, hence do not originally know. If I do not originally believe 

The architecture of knowledge  213
them, then I (originally) have no justified belief or knowledge of the premise 
they constitute, and thus no belief appropriate to serve as a link in the epis-
temic chain or play any supporting role toward my original knowledge.
Suppose, however, that I do think up a suitable set of evidential propo-
sitions, come to know them, and make my way full circle. Suppose, for 
instance, that I get as far as knowledge that it seems to me that I have a visual 
impression of swaying. Might I know this on the basis of knowing that there 
is a wind (the first link)? How would knowledge that there is a wind justify 
my belief that it seems to me that I have a visual impression of tree sway-
ing? I apparently know introspectively, not perceptually or inferentially, that 
I have the impression of swaying. Other difficulties also beset the circular 
approach. But these problems alone cast sufficient doubt on it to suggest that 
we consider the remaining options.
Epistemic chains terminating in belief not constituting 
knowledge
The third possibility for the structure of epistemic chains, that an epistemic 
chain terminates in a belief which is not knowledge, can be best understood 
if we recall that in discussing the transmission of knowledge, we noted both 
source conditions and transmission conditions. If the third possibility can 
be realized, then knowledge can originate on the basis of a belief of a prem-
ise that is not known. On the basis of believing that there is a swaying, for 
example, I might know that there is a wind, even though I do not know that 
there is a swaying. The regress is thus stopped by grounding knowledge on 
something else, but not in the way it is normally grounded in experience or 
reason.
Is this possible? In one kind of case it is not. Suppose that (in foggy condi-
tions) I simply guess that what I see is a swaying of trees, but happen to be 
right. Might I then know there is a wind anyway, provided there is? Surely 
not; knowledge cannot be grounded in such guesswork, even when the guess 
is correct.
Imagine, however, that although I do not know there is a swaying, I do 
hear some sounds that might indicate swaying, and I make an educated guess 
and am thereby justified, to some significant degree, in believing that there 
is. If, on the basis of this somewhat justified belief that there is a swaying, I 
now believe that there is a wind, and there is, do I know this?
The answer is not clear. But that would be no help to proponents of the 
third possibility, who claim that knowledge can arise from belief which does 
not constitute knowledge. For it is equally unclear, and for the same sort of 
reason, whether my guess that there is a swaying is sufficiently educated—say, 
in terms of how good my evidence is—to give me (a weak kind of) knowledge 
that there is a swaying. If it is clear that my guess is not sufficiently educated 
to yield this knowledge, then I also do not know there is a wind. If it is clear 

214  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
that the guess is educated enough, I apparently do know that there is a wind, 
but my knowledge would be based on other knowledge, hence would not 
realize the third possibility.
Notice something else. In the only cases in which the third kind of chain 
is at all likely to ground knowledge, there is a degree—perhaps a substantial 
degree—of justification. If there can be an epistemic chain which ends with 
belief that is not knowledge only because the chain ends, in this way, with 
justification, then it appears that we are at least in the general vicinity of 
knowledge. We are at most a few degrees of justification away. The sand has 
turned out to be rather firm; it is at least close to being firm enough to sup-
port knowledge.4
Epistemic chains terminating in knowledge
The fourth possibility is the one apparently favored by common sense: epis-
temic chains end in direct knowledge—in the sense that they have direct 
knowledge as their last link. That knowledge, in turn, is apparently grounded 
(anchored, if you like) in experience or in reason, and this non-inferential 
grounding explains how it is (epistemically) direct: it arises, directly, from 
perception, memory, introspection, or reason (or indeed from testimony, 
provided this has an appropriate ultimate grounding in at least one of the 
first four).
The ground-level knowledge just described could not be inferential; other­
wise the chain would not end without a further link. To illustrate, normally 
I know that there is a swaying just by seeing that there is. Hence, the chain 
grounding my knowledge that there is a wind is anchored in my perception.
Such experientially or rationally grounded epistemic chains may differ in 
many ways. Here are four. They differ in composition, in the sorts of beliefs 
constituting them. They differ in the kind of transmission they exhibit; it 
may be deductive, inductive, or combine both deductive and inductive links. 
Epistemic chains also differ in their ultimate grounds, the anchors of the 
chains, which may be experiential or rational; and epistemic chains may vary 
in justificational strength, the degree of justification they give to the initial 
belief.
Different proponents of the fourth possibility have held various views 
about the character of the foundational knowledge, that is, of the beliefs con-
stituting the knowledge that makes up the final link of the epistemic chain 
that is anchored in experience or reason. Some philosophers, for instance, 
have thought that the appropriate beliefs must be infallible, or at least inde-
feasibly justified. But this is not implied by anything said here. All that the 
fourth possibility requires is direct knowledge, knowledge not based on other 
knowledge (or on justified belief).
Direct knowledge need not be of self-evident propositions, or constituted 
by indefeasibly justified belief. Introspective beliefs illustrate this. The prop-
osition that I am now thinking about knowledge is not self-evident. It is not 

The architecture of knowledge  215
even self-evident to me. First, it is evident to me, not in itself, as is the propo-
sition that if some dogs are pets then some pets are dogs, but on the basis 
of my conscious experience. Second, since I realize that my reflections can 
sometimes merge into daydreaming, I do not even consider it rock-solidly 
true in the way I do self-evident propositions. But surely I do have direct 
knowledge of the proposition.
The epistemic regress argument
What we have just seen suggests a version of the epistemic regress argument. It 
starts with the assumption that:
	 1	 If one has any knowledge, it occurs in an epistemic chain.
Epistemic chains are understood to include the special case of a single link, 
such as a perceptual belief, which constitutes knowledge by virtue of being 
anchored directly (non-inferentially) in one’s experience.5
The argument then states that:
	 2	 The only possible kinds of epistemic chain are the four mutually exclusive 
kinds just discussed: the infinite, the circular, those terminating in beliefs 
that are not knowledge, and those terminating in direct knowledge.
Its third, also restrictive, premise is that:
	 3	 Knowledge can occur only in the fourth kind of chain.
And the argument concludes that:
	 4	 If one has any knowledge, one has some direct knowledge.6
A similar argument was advanced by Aristotle, and versions of this regress 
argument have been defended ever since.7
As proponents of the argument normally understand (1), it implies that 
any given instance of indirect knowledge depends on at least one epistemic 
chain for its status as knowledge. So understood, the argument clearly 
implies the further conclusion that any indirect knowledge a person has epis-
temically depends on, and cannot be knowledge apart from, an appropriate 
inferential connection, via some epistemic chain, to some direct knowledge 
that the person has.
Given this dependence assumption, the regress argument would show 
not only that if there is indirect knowledge, there is direct knowledge, but 
also that if there is indirect knowledge, that very knowledge is traceable to 
some direct knowledge as a foundation for it. One could trace an item of 
indirect knowledge to some premise for it, and, if there is a premise for that, 

216  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
to the next premise, and so on, until the chain is anchored in a basic source 
of knowledge.
A similar argument applies to justification. We simply speak of justifica-
tory chains and proceed in a parallel way, substituting justification for knowl-
edge; and we arrive at the conclusion that if one has any justified beliefs, 
one has some directly justified beliefs. Similarly, if one has any indirectly 
justified belief, it exhibits justificational dependence on an epistemic chain 
appropriately linking it to some directly justified belief one has, that is, to a 
foundational belief.
Foundationalism and coherentism
These two sets of conclusions constitute the heart of the position called 
epistemological foundationalism. The first set, concerning knowledge, may 
be interpreted as the thesis that the structure of a body of knowledge (such 
as yours or mine) is foundational, in which this is taken to imply that any 
indirect (hence non-foundational) knowledge there is depends on direct (and 
thus in a sense foundational) knowledge. The superstructure, one might say, 
rests on the foundations. The second set of conclusions, regarding justifica-
tion, may be interpreted as the thesis that the structure of a body of justified 
beliefs is foundational, where this is taken to imply that any indirectly (hence 
non-foundationally) justified beliefs there are depend on directly (thus in a 
sense foundationally) justified beliefs.
In both cases, different foundationalist theories may diverge in the kind 
and degree of dependence they assert. A strong foundationalist theory of 
justification might hold that indirectly justified beliefs derive all their justifi-
cation from foundational beliefs; a moderate theory might maintain only that 
the former would not be justified apart from the latter, and the theory might 
grant that other factors, such as coherence of a belief with others one holds 
that are not in the chain, can add to its justification.
None of the foundationalist theses I have stated says anything about the 
content of a body of knowledge or of justified belief, though proponents of 
foundationalism usually specify, as René Descartes does in his Meditations 
on First Philosophy (first published in 1641), what sorts of content they think 
appropriate. Foundationalism, as such, thus leaves open what, in particular, 
is believed by a given person who has knowledge or justified belief and what 
sorts of propositions are suitable material for the foundational beliefs. I want 
to talk mainly about foundationalism regarding knowledge, but much of 
what I say can be readily applied to justified belief.
Foundationalism has been criticized on a number of points. Let us focus 
on the most important objections that stem from the most prominent alter-
native theory of the structure of knowledge, coherentism. There are many 
versions of coherentism, including some that seem to be based mainly on the 
idea that if an epistemic circle is large enough and sufficiently rich in content, 
it can generate justification and account for knowledge. But we have seen 

The architecture of knowledge  217
serious difficulties besetting circular chains. I therefore want to formulate a 
more plausible version of coherentism.
The central idea underlying coherentism is that the justification (justified-
ness) of a belief depends on its coherence with other beliefs one holds. The 
unit of coherence—roughly, the range of the beliefs that must cohere in order 
for a belief among them to derive justification from their coherence—may be 
as large as one’s entire set of beliefs (though of course some may figure more 
significantly in producing the coherence than others, say because of differing 
degrees of closeness to one another in their subject matter).
The variability of the unit of coherence would be accepted by a proponent 
of the circular view, but the thesis I want to explore differs from that view in 
not being linear: it does not construe justification or knowledge as emerging 
from an inferential line going from premises to that conclusion, and from 
other premises to the first set of premises, and so on, until we return to the 
original proposition as a premise.
On the circular coherentist view, no matter how wide the circle, there is a 
line from any one belief in a circular epistemic chain to any other. In practice 
we may never trace the entire line, as by inferring one thing we know from a 
second, the second from a third, and so on, until we re-infer the first. Still, 
on this view, for every belief that constitutes knowledge, there is such a line, 
however long it may be. Thus, the kinds of problems we encountered earlier 
regarding circular epistemic chains must be resolved (as I doubt they can be) 
if the view is to be sustained.
Holistic coherentism
Coherentism need not be linear. It may be holistic. To see how a holistic 
theory of knowledge (and justification) works, consider a question that 
evokes a justification. John wonders how I know, as I sit reading, that the 
wind is blowing. I say that the leaves are rustling. He then asks how I know 
that Sally is not just making this noise by walking in the high grass. I reply 
that the high grass is too far away. He now wonders whether I can distin-
guish rustling leaves from the sound of a quiet car on the pebbled driveway. I 
reply that what I hear is too much like a whisper to be the crunchy sound of 
pebbles under tires.
Patterns of justification
In giving this kind of justification, I apparently go only one step along the 
inferential line: just to my belief that the leaves are rustling. For my belief 
that there is a wind is based on this belief about the leaves. After that, I do not 
even mention anything that this belief, in turn, is based on. Rather, I defend 
my beliefs as appropriate in terms of an entire pattern of mutually coher-
ing beliefs I hold. And I may cite many different parts of the pattern. For 
instance, I might have said that walking through high grass sounds different 

218  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
from windblown leaves. On the coherentist view, then, beliefs representing 
knowledge do not have to lie in a grounded chain; they fit a coherent pattern, 
and their justification emerges from their fitting that pattern in an appropri-
ate way. If this justificational fittingness seems like a kind of foundation for 
justification, that is because in a structural sense it is; but coherentists hold 
that it differs from classical foundations in being a property of the belief 
system rather than something, such as perception, that is outside it.
Consider a different sort of example. A gift is delivered to you with its 
card apparently missing. The only people you can think of who send you 
gifts at this time of year live in Washington and virtually never leave, but this 
is from Omaha. That origin does not cohere well with your hypothesis that 
it was sent by your Washington benefactors, the Smiths. Then you open it 
and discover that it is frozen steak. You realize that this can be ordered from 
anywhere. But it is not the sort of gift you would expect from the Smiths. A 
moment later you recall that you recently sent them cheese. You suppose that 
they are probably sending something in response. Suddenly you remember 
that they once asked if you had ever tried frozen gourmet steaks, and when 
you said you had not, they replied that they would have to give you some one 
of these days.
You now have a quite coherent pattern of beliefs and might be justified in 
believing that it was they who sent the package. If you come to believe this 
on the basis of the pattern, you presumably have a justified belief. When you 
at last find their card at the bottom of the box, then (normally) you would 
know that they sent the package.
The crucial things to notice here are how, initially, a kind of incoherence 
with your standing beliefs prevents your justifiedly believing your first 
hypothesis (that the box came from the Smiths) and how, as relevant pieces 
of the pattern developed, you became justified in believing, and (presumably) 
came to know, that the Smiths sent it. Arriving at a justified belief, on this 
view, is more like answering a question in the light of a whole battery of 
relevant information than like deducing a theorem by successive inferential 
steps from a set of luminous axioms.
A coherentist response to the regress argument
It is important to see how, using examples like those just given, holistic 
coherentism can respond to the regress argument. It need not embrace the 
possibility of an epistemic circle (though its proponents need not reject that 
either). Instead, it can deny the premise that there are only the four kinds 
of possible epistemic chains so far specified. There might be a fifth: a chain 
terminating with belief that is psychologically direct, yet epistemically indirect 
(or, if we are talking of coherentism about justification, justificationally indi-
rect). This in effect grants foundationalists that they are right about human 
psychology, while insisting that they are wrong about epistemology. Let me 
explain.

The architecture of knowledge  219
The idea is that although a terminal, direct belief is not psychologically 
based on any other, as when it is inferentially grounded on another, its  
justification nonetheless is based on other beliefs. Hence, the last link is, 
as belief, direct, yet, as knowledge, indirect, not in the usual sense that it is 
inferential but in the broad sense that the belief constitutes knowledge only 
by virtue of receiving support from other knowledge or belief. This belief 
is psychologically foundational but epistemically dependent. Its justification 
depends on a pattern of supporting beliefs.
To illustrate all this, consider again my belief that the trees are swaying. It 
is psychologically direct because it is grounded, causally, in my vision and is 
not inferentially based on any other belief. Yet (the coherentist might argue) 
my knowledge that there is such a movement is not epistemically direct. It 
is epistemically, but not inferentially, based on the coherence of my belief 
that there is a rustling with my other beliefs, presumably including many 
that represent knowledge themselves. It is thus knowledge through, but not 
by inference from, other knowledge—or even through justified beliefs. The 
knowledge is therefore epistemically indirect. Hence, it is at best misleading 
to call the knowledge, as opposed to the belief expressing it, direct at all.
This coherentist view grants, then, that the belief element in my knowl-
edge is non-inferentially grounded in perception and is in that sense direct. 
But this is just a kind of psychological directness: there is no belief through 
which I hold the one in question in the way that I hold a conclusion belief 
on the basis of premise beliefs. But there are beliefs through which the 
belief constitutes knowledge: those with which it coheres even though it is 
not based on them. The basis relation between beliefs and the counterpart 
premise–conclusion relation between propositions are simply not the only 
producers of coherence.
One could insist that if a non-inferential, thus psychologically direct, 
belief constitutes knowledge, this must be direct knowledge. But the coher-
entist would reply that in that case there will be two kinds of direct knowl-
edge: the kind the foundationalist posits, which derives from grounding in 
a basic experiential or rational source, say perception or reflection, and the 
kind the coherentist posits, which derives from coherence with other beliefs 
and not from being based on those sources. Why not classify the directness 
of knowledge in terms of what it evidentially depends on and the direct-
ness of belief in terms of what it psychologically depends on? This is surely a 
plausible response.
Is the holistic coherentist trying to have it both ways? Not necessarily. 
Holistic coherentism can grant that a variant of the regress argument holds 
for belief, as the only kind of belief chain that it is psychologically realistic 
to attribute to us is the kind terminating in direct (non-inferential) belief: 
there are no infinite or circular belief chains in any finite mind. But even on 
the assumption that knowledge is constituted by (certain kinds of) beliefs, it 
does not follow that direct belief which is knowledge is also direct knowledge.
Thus, the coherentist is granting psychological foundationalism, which 

220  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
says (in part) that if we have any beliefs at all, we have some direct ones, yet 
denying epistemological foundationalism, which says that, assuming there is 
any knowledge at all, there is knowledge which is epistemically (and normally 
also psychologically) direct. Holistic coherentism may grant experience and 
reason the status of psychological foundations of our entire structure of 
beliefs. But it gives them no place, independently of coherence, in generating 
justification or knowledge.8
The idea that a belief might be psychologically direct (so non-inferential) 
but epistemically indirect is not the only basis on which coherentists and 
others can challenge the idea that knowledge occurs only in epistemic chains 
terminating in knowledge. It might also be held (even apart from coherent-
ism) that knowledge might occur in a chain that is indirect in both ways and 
even terminates in a belief that is not knowledge. Imagine a sister and brother, 
Carla and Jan, who believe Santa Claus brings Christmas presents. Aware of 
their having been threatened with a bad report to Santa Claus, Carla asks 
Jan whether there will be presents this Christmas. He truly replies, “Yes, 
Mama said Santa will bring them.” If there will be presents, we might sup-
pose that he knows this. But his premise is false given that the presents will 
be provided by his parents, not Santa. He appears, then, to have knowledge 
based on a false belief—though a useful falsehood—one in which indeed the 
epistemic chain terminates.9
Here a defender of the regress argument might appeal to the distinction 
made above between the basis of a belief that constitutes knowledge and the 
basis of the knowledge it constitutes. The coherentist may hold that the latter 
basis is coherence with other beliefs even if the knowledge is constituted by 
a non-inferential belief; by contrast, the defender of the regress argument 
may hold that even if the belief constituting knowledge is inferential the 
knowledge it constitutes need not be inferential. We would thus have direct 
knowledge that p as the terminal link in an epistemic chain, even though the 
belief that p is inferential.
How might that be? One plausible hypothesis is that although the boy’s 
belief that there will be presents is inferential, being based on his believing 
Mama said that Santa will bring them, his knowledge that there will be is non-
inferential. He knows it because his belief that there will be is appropriately 
grounded in a fact that guarantees its truth: it is produced (in part) by her 
intention to give the presents, which in turn produces her testimony that 
Santa would bring presents, which in turn produces his belief that there will 
be presents. The crucial point is that his belief that there will be presents 
derives from a fact that guarantees there will be and does so in such a way 
as to make the mistaken premise—mistaken only as to who will bring the 
presents—epistemically harmless.
In Chapters 10 and 11 more will be said about the conception of knowl-
edge that makes this foundationalist response plausible, but here I am mainly 
concerned with the epistemological resources of foundationalism and coher-
entism. Supposing the regress argument is sound, either view can deal with 

The architecture of knowledge  221
useful falsehood in question by using the distinction between the basis of 
a belief that constitutes knowledge and the basis of the knowledge it con-
stitutes. The hypothesis suggested here favors a kind of foundationalism, 
but it should not be assumed that coherentists cannot provide an alternative 
hypothesis to account for the children’s knowledge.
The nature of coherence
As I have described holistic coherentism, it avoids some of the major prob-
lems for linear coherentism. But there remain serious difficulties for it. First, 
what is coherence? Second, what reason is there to think that coherence alone 
counts toward the justification of a belief, or toward its truth, as it must in 
some way if it is to give us the basis of a good account of knowledge?
It turns out to be very difficult to explain what coherence is. It is not mere 
mutual consistency, though inconsistency is the clearest case of incoherence. 
Two propositions having nothing to do with each other, say that 7 + 5 = 12 
and that carrots are nourishing, are mutually consistent but do not exhibit 
coherence.
Coherence and explanation
Coherence is sometimes connected with explanation. Certainly, if the Smiths’ 
sending the package explains why the card bears their names, then my belief 
of the first proposition coheres with my belief of the second (other things 
being equal). What explains something makes it understandable; and making 
understandable is a coherence-generating relation between propositions (as 
well as between other kinds of things).
Probability is also relevant to coherence. If the probability of the proposi-
tion that the Smiths sent the steaks is raised in the light of the proposition 
that I sent them cheese, this at least counts in favor of my belief of the first 
cohering with my belief of the second. But how are we to understand the 
notions of explanation and of probability? Let us consider these questions 
in turn.
Does one proposition (genuinely) explain another so long as, if the first 
is (or at least is assumed to be) true, then it is clear why the second is true? 
Apparently not; for if that were so, then the proposition that a benevolent 
genie delivered the box explains why it arrived. In any event, if that propo-
sition did explain why the box arrived, would I be justified in believing it 
because my believing it coheres with my believing that I know not what other 
source the box might have come from? Surely not.
Even if we can say what notion of explanation is relevant to understand-
ing coherence, it will remain very difficult to specify when an explanatory 
relation generates enough coherence to create justification. For one thing, 
consider cases in which a proposition, say that Jill hurt Jack’s feelings, would, 
if true, very adequately explain something we believe, such as that Jack is 

222  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
upset. Believing Jill did this might cohere well with his being upset, but that 
would not, by itself, justify our believing it. There might be too many pos-
sible competing explanations we might just as well accept. There might also 
be far better ones, such as that his computer has been stolen.
Similar points hold for probability. Not just any proposition I believe 
which, if true, would raise the probability of my hypothesis that the gift 
is from the Smiths will strengthen my justification for believing that it is. 
Consider, for example, the proposition that the Smiths send such gifts to all 
their friends. Suppose I have no justification for believing this, say because 
I have accepted it only on the basis of testimony which I should see to be 
unreliable. Then, although the proposition, if true, raises the probability of 
my hypothesis (since I am among their friends) and (let us assume) coheres 
with what I already believe, I am not thereby entitled to believe it, and my 
believing it will not add to my justification for believing that the Smiths sent 
the box.
It might be replied that this belief about the Smiths’ habits does not cohere 
well with all that I believe, such as that people do not generally behave like 
that. But suppose I believed nothing about the Smiths’ or anyone’s habits of 
gift-giving that conflicts with the Smiths’ being so generous, and—unjusti-
fiedly—I believed the Smiths to be both generous and rich. Then there might 
be a significant degree of coherence between my belief that the Smiths send 
gifts to all their friends and my other beliefs; yet my forming the belief that 
they give gifts to all their friends still would not strengthen my justification 
for my hypothesis that the steak is from them.
Coherence as an internal relation among cognitions
These examples suggest the second problem. So far as we do understand 
coherence, what reason is there to think that by itself it generates any justi-
fication or counts toward truth? Whatever coherence among beliefs is, it is 
an internal relation: whether it holds among beliefs is a matter of how those 
beliefs (including their propositional content, which is intrinsic to them) are 
related to one another. It is not a matter of anything outside one’s system of 
beliefs, such as one’s perceptual experience. Now why could there not be 
numerous equally coherent systems of beliefs that are mutually incompat-
ible, so that no two of them can be without falsehood? If there can be, why 
should my having one of these coherent systems provide any reason to think 
my beliefs, rather than those of someone with one of the “opposing” systems, 
are justified or represent knowledge?
This is part of what might be called the isolation problem: the problem 
of explaining why coherent systems of beliefs are not readily isolated from 
truth, and thus do not contain knowledge, which implies truth. There is also 
a problem of explaining why there is not a similar isolation from justification, 
which seems in some way to point toward truth, roughly in the sense that 
what justifies a belief “indicates” its truth, and indicates it in proportion to 

The architecture of knowledge  223
the degree of justification. Why should coherence by itself imply that any of 
the cohering beliefs is justified or constitutes knowledge, when both justifi-
cation and knowledge point toward truth as something external to the belief 
system? It is not as though coherentists could count on the implication’s 
being guaranteed by God; and nothing else seems to assure us of it.
Consider a schizophrenic who thinks he is Napoleon. If he has a fully 
consistent story with enough interlocking details, his belief system may be 
superbly coherent. He may even be able to explain quite coherently why 
there are coherent belief systems that conflict with his, such as those of his 
psychiatrists. If coherence alone generates justification, however, we must 
say that each system is equally well justified—assuming their belief systems 
are exactly as coherent as his. We need not attribute knowledge to any of the 
systems; any of them might contain only falsehoods.
But is it plausible to say that a system of beliefs is highly justified even 
when there is no limit to the number of radically different yet equally jus-
tified belief systems—even on the part of other people with experience of 
many of the same things the beliefs are about—that are incompatible with it 
in this thoroughgoing way? The question is especially striking when we real-
ize that two equally coherent systems, even in the same person at different 
times, could differ not just on one point but on every point: each belief in one 
system might be opposed by an incompatible belief in the other.10
To see the significance of the possibility of multiple coherent mutually 
incompatible systems of belief, recall the plausible assumption that a well-
justified belief may reasonably be considered true. If, however, the degree of 
justification of a belief is entirely a matter of its support by considerations of 
coherence, no degree of justification by itself can carry any greater presump-
tion of truth than is created by the same degree of support from coherence 
on the part of a belief of the contradictory proposition. Thus, if “Napoleon” 
(unlike his historical namesake) has a sufficiently coherent set of beliefs 
yielding justification of his belief that he won the Battle of Waterloo, this 
belief may be as well-justified as his psychiatrists’ belief that he was not even 
born at the time.
If this coherentist picture of justification is correct, is there any reason to 
think that a belief supported solely by considerations of coherence is true or 
even justified? And if “Napoleon’s” and the psychiatrists’ belief systems are 
equally coherent, how can we justify our apparently quite reasonable ten-
dency to regard their belief systems as more likely to represent truths, and on 
that count more likely to contain knowledge, than his?
Granted, the psychiatrists’ belief that he was born long after the battle 
coheres with our beliefs. But why should our own beliefs be privileged over 
equally coherent conflicting sets? And why should agreement even with 
nearly everyone’s beliefs, say about Napoleon’s being dead, be a factor, unless 
we assume that some element other than coherence, such as perception or 
memory, confers justification without drawing on coherence? If coherence 
is the only source of justification, it is not clear how perception or memory 

224  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
or introspection contributes to justification. Even what seems the highest 
degree of justification, such as we have for beliefs of luminous self-evident 
truths and for simple introspective beliefs, provides us no presumption of 
truth or knowledge.
Coherence, reason, and experience
This brings us to a third major problem for coherentism: how can it explain 
the role of experience and reason as apparent sources of justification and 
knowledge? Certainly experience and reason seem to be basic sources of 
them. Coherentists themselves commonly use beliefs arising from these 
sources to illustrate coherent bodies of beliefs that are good candidates for 
knowledge. How can holistic coherentism explain the relevance of these 
sources to justification or knowledge?
Why is it, for instance, that when I have a vivid experience of the kind 
characteristic of seeing a green field, I am apparently justified (though prima 
facie, rather than indefeasibly, justified), simply by that experience, in believ-
ing that there is a green field before me? And why do I seem so very strongly 
justified, simply on the basis of my rational grasp of the proposition that if 
some dogs are pets then some pets are dogs, in believing this?
One thing a coherentist might say here is that in fact many of our beliefs 
are causally and non-inferentially based on perception or reason; and given 
these similarities of origin, it is unsurprising that they often cohere with one 
another. Hence, although we do not, and need not, infer propositions like 
those just cited from any others that might provide evidence for them, they 
do cohere with many other things we believe, and this coherence is what 
justifies them.
Coherence and the a priori
This response by way of associating the coherence of beliefs with their 
causal basis is more plausible for perceptual beliefs than for beliefs of simple 
self-evident a priori truths, at least if coherence is construed as more than 
consistency and as related to explanation, probability, and justification. For 
notice that, unlike the proposition that there is a green field before me, the 
proposition that if some dogs are pets then some pets are dogs can be justified 
for me even if it does not explain, render probable, or justify anything else 
I believe. Nor is it obvious that anything else I believe need explain, render 
probable, or justify my believing this proposition. Why is coherence required 
for my justification? I may have other beliefs that cohere with this one, but 
my justification for it does not seem to derive from such coherence. Yet my 
belief of this proposition is justified to about as high a degree as is any belief 
I have.
By contrast, the proposition that there is a green field before me perhaps 
does cohere, in a way that might serve coherentism, with other things I 

The architecture of knowledge  225
believe: that there is grass there, that I am on my front porch, and so on; 
and there seem to be some explanatory and probability relations among 
these propositions. For instance, that there is a green field before me adds 
to the probability that I am on my porch; and that I am on that porch partly 
explains why I see a green field.
A coherentist might respond to the difference just indicated by qualifying 
the coherence view, applying it only to beliefs of empirical, rather than a 
priori, propositions.11 This move could be defended on the assumption that 
propositions known a priori are necessarily true and hence are not appropri-
ately said to be made probable by other propositions, or to be explained by 
them in the same way empirical propositions are explained. In support of this 
it might be argued that although we can explain the basis of a necessary truth 
and thereby show that it holds, still, since it cannot fail to hold, there is no 
explaining why it, as opposed to something else, holds.
This is plausible but inconclusive reasoning. We may just as reasonably 
say that we can sometimes explain why a necessary truth holds and in doing 
so explain why a contrasting proposition is false. Imagine that someone mis-
takenly takes a certain false proposition to be a theorem of logic and cannot 
see why a closely similar, true proposition is a theorem. If we now prove the 
correct one step by step, with accompanying examples, we might thereby 
explain why this theorem, as opposed to the other proposition, is true.
So far as explanation is central to coherence, then, coherentism appar-
ently owes us an account of knowledge of at least some necessary truths. But 
suppose that it can account for knowledge of some necessary truths. There 
remain others, such as simple, luminously self-evident ones, for which it 
cannot offer anything plausibly said to explain why they hold, or any other 
way of accounting for knowledge of them as grounded in coherence.
Consider how one might explain why, if it is true that Jane Austen wrote 
Persuasion, then it is not false that she did. If someone did not see this, it 
would probably not help to point out that no proposition is both true and 
false. For if one needs to have the truth of such a clear and simple instance of 
this general truth explained, one presumably cannot understand the general 
truth either. But suppose this is not so, and that one’s grasp of the general 
truth is somehow the basis of one’s seeing the particular truth that instanti-
ates it. Then the same point would apply to the general truth: there would 
apparently be nothing plausibly said to explain to one why it is true.
Coherence and the mutually explanatory
It might now be objected that the general truth that no proposition is both 
true and false, and the instances of it, are mutually explanatory: its truth 
explains why they hold, and their truth explains why it holds; and this is the 
chief basis of their mutual coherence. But is it really possible for one proposi-
tion to explain another and the other to explain it? If what explains why the 
grass is wet is that there is dew on it, then the same proposition—that there is 

226  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
dew on it—is not explained by the proposition that the grass is wet (instead, 
condensation explains why it is dewy).
Reflection on other purported examples of mutual explanation also sug-
gests that two propositions cannot explain each other. It might seem that 
a man could say something because his wife did, and that she could say it 
because he did. But notice how this has to go to make good sense. One of 
them would have to say it first to cause the other to. But then we would have 
a case in which something like this occurs: her saying it explains why he says 
it, later (this could be so even if her saying it is explained by her believing he 
thinks it). His saying it earlier than she does might still explain her saying it. 
But then the fact that he says it at a given time does not both explain and get 
explained by her saying it at some particular time.
When we carefully specify what explains something, we seem to find that 
the latter, carefully specified, does not explain the former. In the case in which 
she says something because he did, earlier, and he says it because she did, 
earlier than he did, we would have a kind of reciprocal explanation, wherein a 
kind of thing, here spousal affirmation, explains and is explained by another 
thing of the same kind. But this is not a mutual explanation, wherein the very 
same thing explains and is explained by a second thing.12
Perhaps mutual explanation of the kind the coherentist apparently needs—
as opposed to reciprocal explanation and other sorts involving two-way rela-
tions—is somehow possible. But until a good argument for it is given, we 
should conclude that even if an explanatory relation between propositions 
is sufficient for a belief of one of the propositions to cohere with a belief of 
the other, coherentism does not provide a good account of knowledge of 
self-evident truths.
If coherentism applies only to empirical beliefs, however, and not to 
beliefs of a priori propositions, then it is not a general theory of justification 
or knowledge and leaves us in need of a non-coherentist account of a priori 
justification (and knowledge). In any case, it would be premature to conclude 
that coherentism does account for empirical justification. Let us return to the 
perceptual case.
Epistemological versus conceptual coherentism
It might seem that we could decisively refute the coherence theory of justi-
fication by noting that one might have only a single belief, and that this lone 
belief might still be justified. For there would be a justified belief that coheres 
with no other beliefs one has. But could one have just a single belief? Could I, 
for instance, believe that there is a green field before me, yet not believe, say, 
that it has any vegetation? It is not clear that I could; and foundationalism 
does not assume this possibility, though the theory may easily be wrongly 
criticized for implying it.
Foundationalism is in fact consistent with one kind of coherentism, 
namely, a coherence theory of the acquisition, function, and nature of 

The architecture of knowledge  227
concepts—for short, the coherence theory of concepts, on which concepts are 
what they are partly in relation to one another, and a person acquires concepts, 
say of (physical) objects and shapes, and of music and sounds, only in rela-
tion to one another and must acquire an entire set of related concepts in 
order to acquire any concept. The concept of an object in some way includes 
that of shape (if only the notion of something bounded), as that of music 
includes the concept of sound. This may be why any object must have some 
shape or other, and why anything that makes music produces some sound. 
One cannot (fully) acquire object concepts without acquiring some shape 
concepts, or (fully) acquire the concept of music without acquiring that of 
sound.
If the coherence theory of concepts is sound, foundationalists must 
explain how it squares with their epistemology. The central point they may 
appeal to is a distinction between (justificatory) grounding conditions for 
belief and possession conditions for it. What grounds a belief in such a way as 
to justify it or render it an item of knowledge is largely independent of what 
other beliefs one must have, and what concepts one must have, to be able 
to hold the first belief. Perhaps I cannot believe that music is playing if I do 
not have a concept of sound; I may even have to believe sounds with a cer-
tain structure to be occurring. And perhaps I could not have acquired these 
and other relevant concepts one at a time. Indeed, it may be (as suggested in 
Chapter 7) that at least normally we cannot acquire concepts without acquir-
ing some knowledge or justified belief. Still, what it is that justifies a belief 
can be a matter of how the belief is grounded; it need not be a matter of the 
coherence conditions required for having the belief.
If, however, coherence relations are essential for holding a belief at all, 
they are on that ground necessary for, and—in ways that will soon be appar-
ent—important in understanding, the belief’s being justified. The point here 
is simply that we cannot treat conditions for having a belief at all as doing 
the more specific job of grounding its justification. By and large beliefs can 
be possessed without being justified, and there is usually a good distance 
between meeting the conditions for simply having a belief and meeting the 
standards for justification in holding it.13
Coherence, incoherence, and defeasibility
We must directly ask, then, whether my justification for believing that there 
is a green field out there (when I experience its presence) derives from the 
coherence of the belief with others. Let us first grant an important point by 
focusing on a line of reasoning that may lead many philosophers to think it 
does derive from coherence. Suppose this visual belief turns out to be inco-
herent with a second belief, such as that one is standing where one seems to 
see the field around one yet feels no grass on the smooth ground beneath one 
and can walk right across the area without feeling any. Then the first belief 
may cease to be justified. Incoherence, then, defeats my justification.

228  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
This defeating role of incoherence is important, but it shows only that 
our justification is defeasible—liable to being outweighed (overridden) or 
undermined—should sufficiently serious incoherence arise. It does not show 
that justification is produced by coherence in the first place, any more than 
a wooden cabin’s being destroyed by fire shows that it was produced by the 
absence of fire. Where I feel no grass beneath my feet, then, the justification 
of my visual belief is outweighed: my better justified beliefs, including the 
conviction that a field must have a certain texture, make it more reasonable 
for me to believe that there is not a field here.
A major lesson that emerges here is that we cannot tell what the basis of 
something is just from the range of things that outweigh it, much less con-
clude that this basis is the absence of the things that destroy it. Incoherence 
is absent when there are mutually irrelevant beliefs as well as when there 
are mutually coherent ones. Mutual irrelevance between two sets of beliefs 
certainly does not make one of them a justificational or epistemic basis for 
the other.
Two important questions arise here. First, could incoherence outweigh 
justification of a belief in the first place if we were not independently justi-
fied in believing something to the effect that a proposition incoherent with 
certain other ones is, or probably is, false? Second, are the other relevant 
propositions not precisely the kind for which, directly or inferentially, we 
have some degree of justification through the basic experiential and rational 
sources? Foundationalists are likely to answer the first negatively and the 
second affirmatively.
There is also a different kind of defeat of justification: our justification can 
be simply undermined. We can cease to be justified in believing a proposition, 
though we do not become justified in believing it false, as one does when 
counter-evidence demands a contrary belief. Suppose I cease to see a bird 
on a branch when, without obscuring my line of sight to the bird, I move six 
feet to my left. This could justify my believing that I might be hallucinating. 
This belief is incoherent with, and thereby undermines the justification of, 
my visual belief that the bird is there, though it does not by itself justify my 
believing that there is no bird there.
Again, I am apparently justified, independently of coherence, in believ-
ing that my seeing the bird there is incoherent with my merely hallucinating 
it there. It seems that coherence has the role it does in justification largely 
because some beliefs are justified independently of it.
Positive and negative epistemic dependence
Examples like these show that it is essential to distinguish negative epis-
temic dependence—which is a form of defeasibility—from positive epistemic 
dependence—the kind beliefs bear to the sources from which they derive any 
justification they have or, if they represent knowledge, derive their status 
as knowledge. The defeasibility of a belief’s justification by incoherence 

The architecture of knowledge  229
does not imply, as coherentists have commonly thought, that this justifica-
tion positively depends on coherence. If my well is my source of water, I 
(positively) depend on it. The possibility that people could drain it does not 
make their non-malevolence part of my source of water, or imply a (positive) 
dependence on them, such as I have on the rainfall. Moreover, it is the rainfall 
that explains both my having the water and its level. Its not being drained 
does not explain this.
So it is with perceptual experience as a source of justification. Founda­
tionalists need not claim that justification does not depend negatively on 
anything else, for as we have seen they need not claim that justification 
must be indefeasible. Its vulnerability to defeat can be construed as a kind 
of dependence. A belief’s justification is, then, not completely independent of 
the justification of other beliefs, actual or hypothetical. But negative depen-
dence does not imply positive dependence. Justification can be defeasible by 
incoherence, and thus outweighed or undermined should incoherence arise, 
without owing its existence to coherence in the first place.
Coherence and second-order justification
There is something further that may be considered supportive of coherentism, 
and assessing it will clarify both coherentism and justification. If we set out 
to show that a belief is justified, we have to cite propositions that cohere with 
the one in question, say the proposition that there is a green field before me. 
In some cases, these are not even propositions one already believes. Often, in 
defending a belief, one forms new beliefs, such as the belief one acquires, in 
moving one’s head, that one can vividly see the changes in perspective that go 
with seeing a bird on a branch.
The process versus the property of justification
More importantly, these new, back-up beliefs are especially appropriate to 
the process of justifying one’s belief; and the result of that process is (a kind 
of) showing that the original belief is justified, together (in typical cases) 
with one’s forming a certain second-order belief—so called because it is a 
belief about a belief (such as a perceptual one) which is not itself about any 
other belief. In this case the second-order belief is to the effect that the first-
order belief is justified. Thus, coherence is important in showing that a belief 
is justified and is in that sense an element in a typical kind of process of 
justification.
The moment we reflect on this point, however, we may wonder why the 
beliefs appropriate to showing that a belief is justified are required for its 
being justified in the first place. There is no good reason to think they are. 
Indeed, why should our simply having a justified belief imply even that we 
are (situationally) justified in holding beliefs appropriate to showing that it 
is justified? It would seem that just as we can be virtuous even if we do not 

230  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
know how to defend our good character against attack or even show that we 
have good character at all, we can have a justified belief even if, in response to 
someone who doubts that we do, we could not show that we do.
Justifying a second-order belief is a sophisticated process. The process is 
particularly sophisticated if the belief concerns a special property such as the 
justification of the original belief. Simply being justified in a belief about the 
color of an object is a much simpler matter.
Confusion is easy here because of how we often speak of justification. 
Consider the question of how a simple perceptual belief “is justified.”  
The very phrase is ambiguous. For all it tells us, the question could be  
‘By what process, say of reasoning, might the belief be justified?’ or, by 
contrast, ‘In virtue of what is the belief justified (possessed of the property 
of justifiedness)?’ These are very different questions. But much talk about 
justification makes it easy to conflate them. A belief said to be “justified” 
could be one that has justification or one that has been justified; and asking 
for someone’s justification could be either a request for justifying factors or 
an invitation to recount the process by which the person has in fact justified 
the belief.
Does coherentism have any plausible argument, not grounded in the 
mistakes just noted, for (positive) dependence of perceptual justification on 
coherence? I do not see that it does, though given how hard it is to discern 
precisely what coherence is, we cannot be confident that no direct argument 
is forthcoming. One could, for instance, point to the oddity of saying things 
like, ‘I am justified in believing that there is a green field there, but I cannot 
justify the belief’. Coherentists might think this is odd because they tend 
to hold that if one has a justified belief, one can justify it by appeal to other 
beliefs one holds that cohere with it. But look closely. Granted that, com-
monly, in asserting something I suggest that I can justify it in some way or 
other (particularly if the belief I express is not grounded in a basic source), 
here it could well be my asserting that my belief is justified, rather than its 
being so, that gives the appearance that I must be able to give a justification 
for the belief if it is justified. In asserting that I am justified, after all, I have 
not, or not merely, expressed a first-order belief, something a normal child 
of three can do; I have ascribed first-order justification to my belief. That 
requires some sophistication. More important, even foundationalists who 
hold that we are typically directly justified in, say, perceptual beliefs may 
deny that normally we are directly justified in these sophisticated ascriptions 
of justification. To hold that there are non-inferentially justified beliefs does 
not in the least commit one to holding that ascriptions of justification itself 
are thus justified.
Beliefs, dispositions to believe, and grounds of belief
To be sure, when I say that there is a green field before me, I (as an educated 
adult) can give a justification: that I see it. But first, giving a justification is 

The architecture of knowledge  231
not equivalent to claiming that one has it. The first cites a justifier and need 
not employ the concept of justification; the latter employs that sophisticated 
concept and need not cite a justifier. Second, note that before the question of 
justification arises I need not even believe that I see the field. That question 
leads me to focus on my circumstances, in which I first had a belief solely 
about the field, not about my own perceptual relation to it.
To be sure, when I said there is a green field before me, I did have a disposi-
tion, based on my visual experience, to form the belief that I see the field, 
and this is largely why, in the course of justifying that belief, I then form the 
further belief that I do see it. But a disposition to believe something does not 
imply one’s already having a dispositional belief of it: here I tend to form the 
belief that I see the field if, as I view it, the question whether I see it arises; 
yet I need not have subliminally believed this already.
Thus, the justification I offer for my belief that there is a green field before 
me is not by appeal to coherence with other beliefs I already hold—such as 
that I saw the field and heard the swishing grass beneath my feet—but by 
reference to a basic source, sensory experience. It is thus precisely the kind 
of justification that foundationalists are likely to consider appropriate for a 
non-inferential belief. Indeed, one consideration favoring foundationalism 
about both justification and knowledge, at least as an account of our justi-
ficational practices in everyday life (including much scientific practice), is 
that typically we cease offering justification or defending a knowledge claim 
precisely when we reach one or more of the basic sources.14
Suppose, however, that I would be dumbfounded if asked, in clear daylight, 
what justifies me in believing there is a green field before me. Would it follow 
that I am not justified? No, for I might be simply unable to marshal my quite 
ample justificatory resources. Coherentism offers no good argument to show 
that being justified requires being able to show that one is, any more than 
having good character entails being able to show that one has it.
Justification, knowledge, and artificially created coherence
There is one further point here. If coherentism regards justification as deriv-
ing from coherence alone, then it accords no justificatory weight to experi-
ential or rational grounding except insofar as they contribute to coherence. 
Our examples cast much doubt on this view.
Consider a related implication of coherentism. If I seek the best justified 
body of beliefs possible—surely a rational goal—then I am free to consider 
adopting, or to manipulate my brain to cause my forming, an entirely new 
system of beliefs. Would its coherence alone guarantee that it contains justi-
fied beliefs? It might contain none of the experiential and a priori beliefs I 
now have; and for all coherence requires it may entirely lack beliefs based on 
experience or reason.
A superbly coherent system of beliefs I might acquire could even run 
counter to my experience. Even if I see a square field of green grass before 

232  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
me, I might coherently believe that there is an oval field of brown shrubbery 
there, since my other beliefs might support this. I could, for instance, coher-
ently believe that when I seem to see green grass I am having a hallucination 
caused by brown shrubbery. There is no limit to the number of beliefs for 
which I might be able thus to rationalize away the states and events that it is 
natural to call the evidence of the senses.
We are apparently incapable of changing our belief systems in this way. 
But suppose that we could do so by properly setting a neurological machine 
to instill an optimally coherent set of beliefs and remove the rest. Would that 
be rational from the point of view of maximizing the justification of one’s 
beliefs? I doubt this, particularly if, in seeking justification, we aim, as we 
normally do, at discovering or retaining truths.
A coherentist might reply that if we are talking not only about justifica-
tion but also about knowledge, then we must give some special role to beliefs 
(and perhaps dispositions to believe) grounded in experience and reason, for 
if we ignore these sources we cannot expect our justified beliefs to be true, 
hence cannot expect them to constitute knowledge.15 Now, however, we face 
an artificial separation between what justifies a belief and what is plausibly 
taken to count toward its truth. If, because it implies truth, knowledge must 
in some way reflect experience or reason, should not justification, which also 
seems to count toward truth, also reflect them? May we plausibly suppose 
that what justifies a belief may in no way count towards its truth?
It is not reasonable to separate justification and knowledge in this way 
(even though in some ways they are very different); nor have coherentists 
generally thought that it is (though some have held a justification-based 
coherence theory of truth of a kind to be discussed in Chapter 11). Often, 
what motivates asking for a justification of a belief is doubt that it is true; 
and if so, then the view that what justifies a belief has no tendency whatever 
to count toward its truth seems plainly mistaken. Moreover, if we can know 
a priori, as I believe may be possible (and will explore in Chapter 13), that 
perceptual and rational grounding of beliefs count, in some way, toward their 
truth, why may we not know equally well that they count toward justifying 
beliefs?
Moderate foundationalism
There is far more to say about both foundationalism and coherentism. But if 
what has emerged here is on the right track, then the problems confronting 
coherentism are more serious than those confronting foundationalism. The 
most serious problems for foundationalism are widely taken to be, first, the 
difficulties of specifying source conditions for justification and knowledge 
and, second, of accounting, on the basis of those sources and plausible trans-
mission principles, for all that we seem to know. The first of these problems 
is addressed in Part One, which describes the basic sources and illustrates 
how they generate direct—though not indefeasible—knowledge, and direct 

The architecture of knowledge  233
(though again not generally indefeasible) justification. The second problem 
is treated in Chapter 8, which indicates how, even without actual infer-
ences, knowledge and justification can be transmitted from beliefs which are 
justified, or represent knowledge, by virtue of being grounded in the basic 
sources, to other beliefs. Both problems are difficult, and neither has been 
completely solved here. But enough has been said to clarify along what lines 
they can be dealt with.
The role of coherence in moderate foundationalism
Still another problem for foundationalism is the difficulty of accounting for 
the place of coherence in justification. But this is not a crippling difficulty 
for the kind of foundationalism I have described, which need not restrict the 
role of coherence any more than is required by the regress argument. Indeed, 
although (pure) coherentism grants nothing to foundationalism beyond per-
haps its underlying psychological picture of how our belief systems are struc-
tured, foundationalism can account for some of the insights of coherentism, 
for instance the point that we need a coherence theory of the acquisition and 
function of concepts.
More positively, foundationalism can acknowledge a significant role for 
coherence in relation to justification and can thereby answer one traditional 
coherentist objection. I have in mind a kind of moderate foundationalism: 
a foundationalist view of knowledge or justification which (1) takes the 
justification of foundational beliefs to be at least typically defeasible; (2) is 
not deductivist, that is, does not demand that principles governing the infer-
ential transmission of knowledge or justification be deductive (i.e., require 
entailment as opposed to probability as a condition for transmission); and 
(3) allows a significant role for coherence by requiring, not that inferentially 
justified beliefs derive all their justification from foundational ones, but only 
that they derive enough of it from the latter to remain justified if any other 
justification they have were eliminated.16 Some versions are more moderate 
than others, but the most plausible ones give coherence at least two roles.
The first role moderate foundationalism may give to coherence, or strictly 
speaking to incoherence, is negative: incoherence may defeat justification or 
knowledge, even of a directly justified (foundational) belief, as when my jus-
tification for believing I may be hallucinating prevents me from knowing, or 
even remaining justified in believing, that the green field is before me. (If this 
is not ultimately a role for coherence itself, it is a role crucial for explaining 
points stressed by coherentism.)
Second, moderate foundationalism can employ a principle commonly 
emphasized by coherentists, though foundationalists need not grant that the 
justification or truth of the principle is based on coherence and will tend to 
treat it as a transmission principle accounting for generation of inferential 
justification or as a combinatorial principle applying to the simultaneous tes-
timony of sources of non-inferential justification. I refer to an independence 

234  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
principle: that the larger the number of independent mutually consistent 
factors one believes (with some justification) to support (or to constitute evi-
dence for) the truth of a proposition, the better one’s justification for believ-
ing it (other things being equal). This principle can explain, for instance, 
why my justification for believing that the box of steaks is from the Smiths 
increases as I acquire new beliefs, each of which I believe independently sup-
ports that conclusion.17 In part, the idea is that evidential relations generate 
coherence; hence by giving the former a justificatory role, foundationalism 
can account for a good many of the cases in which coherence appears to yield 
justification. That appearance may be due not to coherence itself, but to its 
basis in the kinds of elements foundationalism takes to ground justification.
Similar principles consistent with foundationalism can accommodate 
other cases in which coherence enhances justification, say those in which a 
proposition’s explaining, and thereby cohering with, something one justifi-
ably believes tends to confer some degree of justification on that proposition.
Moderate foundationalism and the charge of dogmatism
Moderate foundationalism contrasts with strong foundationalism, which, 
in one form, is deductivist, takes foundational beliefs as indefeasibly justi-
fied, and allows coherence at most a minimal role. To meet these conditions, 
strong foundationalists may reduce the basic sources of justification to 
reason and consciousness. The easiest way to do this is to take the skeptical 
view (considered in Chapter 13) that our only justified beliefs are either a 
priori or introspective.
Moreover, since strong foundationalists are committed to the indefeasi-
bility of foundational justification, they would not grant that incoherence 
can defeat the justification of foundational beliefs. They would also refuse to 
concede to coherentism, and hence to any independence principle they rec-
ognize, any more than a minimal positive role, say by insisting that if a belief 
is supported by two or more independent cohering sources, its justification 
is increased at most incrementally, that is, at most by bringing together the 
justification transmitted separately from each relevant basic source.18
By contrast, what moderate foundationalism denies regarding coherence 
is only that it is a basic source of justification: coherence by itself is not suf-
ficient for justification. Thus, the independence principle does not apply to 
beliefs or other sources that have no justification. At most, it allows coher-
ence to raise the level of justification originally drawn from other sources to 
a level higher than it would have if those sources were not mutually coherent.
Similarly, if inference (at least valid or inductively strong inference) is a 
basic source of coherence (as some coherentists seem to have believed), it 
is not a basic source of justification. It may lead to justification, as when 
one strengthens one’s justification for believing someone’s testimony by 
inferring the same point from someone else’s. But inference alone does not 
generate justification: I might infer any number of propositions from several 

The architecture of knowledge  235
I already believe merely through wishful thinking; yet even if I thus arrive at 
a highly coherent set of beliefs, I have not thereby increased my justification 
for believing any of them. My premises, based in the way they are on desire, 
are ill-grounded.
At this point it might occur to one that the main problems faced by coher-
entism could be solved by taking coherence with experience to be required 
by coherentism as a condition for the coherence of a body of beliefs of the 
kind we normally have. This is, to be sure, not how coherence is character-
istically understood by coherentists; they typically take it to be a relation 
among beliefs or their propositional contents or other items that may be said 
to be true or false, or some combination of these.19 Might it be, however, that 
leading coherentists misrepresent the resources of their own theory? Could 
they claim, for instance, that if my visual experience contains an appearance 
of a printed page, then my believing there is one before me coheres with my 
experience and is thus justified?
If we think this, we must ask how a coherentist view that gives a crucial 
epistemological role to coherence of beliefs with experience differs from a 
moderate foundationalism. One would, after all, be insisting that in order 
to contain justified beliefs about the world, a person’s belief system would in 
some sense depend on experience. This gives an essential role to foundations 
of justification (or knowledge)—grounds of belief that are not true or false 
and do not themselves admit of justification. It is true that the view would 
also require coherence among beliefs as an essential element; but a moderate 
foundationalist could agree that coherence is necessary within a body of jus-
tified beliefs such as normal people have, yet insist that this coherence is not 
a basic source of justification rather than, chiefly, a product of the elements, 
such as grounding in experiential and rational sources, that are basic.
If coherentists cannot show that coherence among beliefs is a basic source 
of justification—as it is far from clear they can—then requiring coherence 
with experience to make their theory plausible yields a view that is appar-
ently at least compatible with a moderate foundationalism and may well be a 
version of that view. This may be a welcome conclusion for epistemologists 
uncommitted on the foundationalism–coherentism issue, but it would be 
unwelcome to philosophers in the coherentist tradition.20
Suppose, however, that moderate foundationalism is correct. We must not 
suppose that this theory leads easily to an adequate, detailed picture of a 
typical body of knowledge or justified belief. Moderate foundationalism as 
so far described—mainly structurally—tells us only what sort of structure 
a body of knowledge or of justified belief has. It says that if one has any 
knowledge or justified belief, then one has some direct knowledge or directly 
justified belief, and any other knowledge or justified belief one has is trace-
able to those foundations. A belief direct and foundational at one time may 
be indirect and non-foundational at another; it may gain or lose justification; 
it may have any kind of content; and some foundational beliefs may be false 
or unjustified or both.

236  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
By leaving this much open, however, moderate foundationalism avoids a 
narrow account of what is needed for knowledge and justification and allows 
many routes to their acquisition. For similar reasons, it avoids dogmatism, 
in the sense of an attitude of self-assured certainty, especially concerning 
claims that are neither self-evident nor obvious. In addition to avoiding this 
attitudinal dogmatism, it rejects, for the same sorts of reasons, at least one 
version of epistemological dogmatism—the version ascribing to us indefea-
sible justification, epistemic certainty, or the like, where these attributions 
are unwarranted by our evidence. For moderate foundationalism allows 
alternative kinds of foundational beliefs for different people and under dif-
ferent circumstances; and, by acknowledging the imperfect reliability of the 
experiential sources and of many inferences from the beliefs they generate, it 
also explains why it is so difficult to know that one has knowledge or justified 
belief, and hence important to be open to the possibility of mistakes.
Moderate foundationalism even allows that a person may not always be 
able to see the truth of a self-evident proposition. One might, for instance, 
lack conceptual resources for adequately understanding it. This point should 
induce humility about how extensive our knowledge is even regarding what 
is in principle readily known. Ignorance can occur where one would least 
expect it. Moderate foundationalism also treats reason as a fallible source 
of belief: we can easily take a false proposition to be true on the basis of a 
specious sense of its being a priori. This should induce humility about how 
confident we are entitled to be. Error can occur where it might seem impos-
sible. Foundationalism is committed to unmoved movers; it is not committed 
to unmovable movers. It leaves open, moreover, just what knowledge is, and 
even whether there actually is any. These questions must still be faced.
Notes
	 1	 Clearly, there could be devices or strategies by which one can manipulate 
one’s beliefs; what I deny is that we can control belief “at will” (simply by 
willing it) the way we can normally raise an arm at will. The point is not 
that the will has no power over belief. For wide-ranging critical discus-
sion of doxastic voluntarism see William P. Alston, ‘The Deontological 
Conception of Epistemic Justification’, Philosophical Perspectives 2 
(1983), 257–99; my ‘Doxastic Voluntarism and the Ethics of Belief’, 
Facta Philosophica I, 1 (1999), 87–109, reprinted in Matthias Steup (ed.), 
Knowledge, Truth, and Duty (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001); 
and, for critical discussion of Alston’s position, Steup’s contribution to 
that collection, ‘Epistemic Duty, Evidence, and Internality’. Detailed 
treatment of our control of our grounds for belief and of their relation to 
our beliefs they support is provided in my ‘The Ethics of Belief: Doxastic 
Self-control and Intellectual Virtue’, Synthese 161 (2008), 403–18.
	 2	 There is dispute about whether people can have infinite sets of beliefs. 

The architecture of knowledge  237
I have offered some reasons for doubting this (and cited some of the 
relevant literature) in ‘Dispositional Beliefs and Dispositions to Believe’, 
Noûs 28 (1994), 419–34.
	 3	 Granted, one could look at the formulation, say by tracing it along a 
mile-long print-out, and believe that it expresses a truth; but the point 
is that one could not grasp, and so could not believe, the truth that it 
expresses. Of course, if we are talking about infinity, the relevant for-
mulations would approach an infinite number of miles in length. For an 
extensive discussion of the prospects for epistemological infinitism, see 
Peter D. Klein, ‘Human Knowledge and the Infinite Regress of Reasons’, 
Philosophical Perspectives 13 (1999), 297–325.
	 4	 A highly instructive paper by Peter Klein indicates apparent exceptions. 
Suppose the trustworthy department secretary told me, last Thursday 
(and knew), that I have an appointment this coming Monday. Now, 
asked whether I am free at the relevant time Monday, I say ‘No, the 
secretary told me on Friday that I have an appointment then’. Plainly, 
I can know I have the appointment, though the belief I express now as 
a basis is false, since I have the wrong day. See ‘Useful False Beliefs’, in 
Quentin Smith, Epistemology: New Essays, (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2008). Note three points. (1), on my account of testimony-based 
knowledge (Chapter 7), I would know that I have the appointment 
non-inferentially. The false belief that she told me on Friday is offered 
as a ground of my belief that I have the appointment on Friday, but the 
ground on which I know that is her attesting to it. (2) Suppose my state-
ment ‘She told me on Friday that I have an appointment Monday’ does in 
a way express my ground. The ground may be that she told me that I have 
an appointment then, with ‘on Friday’ functioning like a parenthesis, 
such as ‘and by the way it was on Friday’. Then I do know my ground. (3) 
What if I have forgotten her testimony, am told that she gave it on Friday, 
and infer, apparently from this falsehood, that I have the appointment? 
Now we need a theory. One move is to make a distinction, useful in any 
case, between the ground’s being, as in (2), that she told me that I have 
an appointment then, and its being, by contrast, something like: It was 
on Friday that she told me that I have an appointment then (in which 
the time is important in my thinking). In the latter case I would not 
know; in the former I presumably would. I thank Claudio de Almeida 
for introducing this problem to me in a draft (‘Knowledge and Benign 
Falsehoods’) written in reference to Klein’s paper but long before its 
publication.
	 5	 An item of knowledge can occur in more than one epistemic chain, as 
when you have two entirely independent sets of premises showing the 
same conclusion. The regress argument requires one chain, but it allows 
more than one.
	 6	 We may also draw the more general conclusion that if there is any knowl-
edge, there is some direct knowledge. This more general conclusion 

238  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
follows only on the assumption that if there is any knowledge, then there 
is at least one knower who has it. This is self-evident for the main sense 
of ‘knowledge’; but if we think of certain books as containing knowledge 
and then imagine the possibility that all knowers cease to exist while the 
books live on, it may then seem that there would be (residual) knowledge 
without there being any knowers (though even here there would have 
been knowers). Such unpossessed knowledge is discussed in some detail 
in Chapter 12.
	 7	 See Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics, Books I and II. His argument is 
importantly different in at least one respect: he spoke of the founda-
tional items as “indemonstrable,” which implies that there cannot be any 
deeper foundations. The regress argument as stated here implies only 
that one’s foundational knowledge is of something that (at the time) one 
has not demonstrated. This leaves open that one might later demonstrate 
it by appeal to something “deeper.”
	 8	 The possibility of combining psychological foundationalism with epis-
temological coherentism seems quite open to Wilfrid Sellars, widely 
considered a leading coherentist. See, for example, his ‘The Structure 
of Knowledge’, in Hector-Neri Castañeda (ed.), Action, Knowledge, and 
Reality: Essays in Honor of Wilfrid Sellars (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 
1975).
	 9	 This case is styled after one of Klein’s; see esp. ‘Useful Falsehoods’, 
36–40, cited above. His treatment of it differs from the one suggested 
here but may be consistent with that.
	10	 The point here does not presuppose the mistaken idea that coherence is 
closed under negation, in the sense that if a set of propositions is coher-
ent, so is the set whose members are their negations. Consider the set 
consisting of p, q, and p explains q. Negating these need not yield a coher-
ent set. This is one way coherence differs from mere consistency.
	11	 This is the position taken by Laurence BonJour in The Structure of 
Empirical Knowledge (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1985). It should perhaps be noted that he has rejected the coherentist 
epistemology of this book in, e.g., ‘The Dialectic of Foundationalism 
and Coherentism’, in John Greco and Ernest Sosa (eds.), The Blackwell 
Guide to Epistemology (Oxford: Blackwell, 1999).
	12	 Recall the wheel described in discussing circular causation above. Does 
the fact that the topmost eastern section is in place not explain why 
the topmost western section, which is contiguous with it, is in place, 
and isn’t the converse also true? Only, I suspect, if this comes to saying 
that given these facts we can infer that each is in place. Why each is in 
place is explained by the same thing: the overall pattern of forces includ-
ing the support provided by the ground. Each is in place because the 
gravitational force pulling it backward and downward is matched by a 
gravitational force pulling it forward and holding it up: both phenomena 
are indeed explained by the “same thing”—the qualitatively identical 

The architecture of knowledge  239
forces—but not by the same thing in the sense of the other, qualitatively 
identical phenomenon. Explanation by two phenomena that are “exactly 
alike” exhibits a kind of mutuality, but it is not the same as explanation 
of each of two exactly similar phenomena in terms of the other.
	13	 As suggested in our discussion of self-evidence, there are some beliefs, 
say that if x = y then y = x, and that I exist, which it is plausible to think 
cannot be unjustifiedly held.
	14	 On the topic of practices of justification, Ludwig Wittgenstein’s On 
Certainty (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1969) is a valuable source. He is 
often cited as stressing that there comes a point at which one says: My 
spade is turned (a foundationalist metaphor).
	15	 This line of thought is suggested by what Laurence BonJour, in The 
Structure of Empirical Knowledge, calls “the observation requirement.” 
For extensive discussion of his theory there and of coherentism in 
general, especially that of Keith Lehrer, see John W. Bender (ed.), The 
Current State of the Coherence Theory (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989).
	16	 A slightly different formulation may be required if, for the sorts of 
reasons to be given in Chapter 10, knowledge does not entail justifica-
tion; but the formulation given will serve here. Here and elsewhere the 
reference to foundational beliefs is to those that are justified; I also omit 
an other-things-equal clause appropriate after the ‘if’ in clause (3). For 
a highly detailed statement of a moderate foundationalism, see Paul K. 
Moser, Knowledge and Evidence (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1989).
	17	 The independence principle cited here is not the only one that seems 
sound. For instance, it is plausible to hold that one’s justification for a 
proposition also rises (other things being equal) the larger the number of 
factors one is appropriately aware of that do support it, whether or not 
one believes them to do so. If the independence principle were weakened 
by eliminating the requirement that one has some justification for taking 
the relevant sources to support the belief in question, we may certainly 
say that more justification is conferred (other things equal) by factors 
justifiedly taken to support the belief than by those unjustifiedly taken 
to do so.
	18	 It is a strong foundationalism, especially the kind found in Descartes’ 
Meditations, that is influentially criticized by Richard Rorty in Philosophy 
and the Mirror of Nature (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1979). Many of Rorty’s criticisms do not hold for the moderate founda-
tionalism developed in this chapter. His doubts about the very idea that 
the mind is a “mirror of nature,” however, may cut against at least the 
majority of plausible epistemological theories, depending on how much 
is built into the metaphor of a mirror. This book as a whole can be seen as 
a case for a version of realist epistemology, and some aspects of Rorty’s 
challenge are treated at least implicitly in Chapters 12–14 and in parts of 
other chapters, such as the sections on phenomenalism and truth.

240  The structure and growth of justification and knowledge
	19	 Keith Lehrer provided an influential statement of this view in Knowledge 
(Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1974): having said that “complete jus-
tification is a matter of coherence within a system of beliefs” (p. 17, 
emphasis mine), he added, “There is no exit from the circle of ones [sic] 
own beliefs from which one can sally forth to find some exquisite tool 
to measure the merits of what lies within the circle of subjectivity” (pp. 
17–18). Such sensory states as an impression of green grass are among the 
excluded tools. Further indications of why a coherentist view disallows 
appeal to experiential and other non-truth-valued states as justificatory 
are given by Wilfrid Sellars, ‘The Structure of Knowledge’, in Castañeda, 
Action, Knowledge, and Reality, cited above; and Donald Davidson, ‘A 
Coherence Theory of Truth and Knowledge’, in Dieter Hendrich (ed.), 
Kant oder Hegel (Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, 1983). It should be noted that 
Davidson has written an afterword to this paper. Here he says, regarding 
“The main thrust of ‘A Coherence Theory’,” that “the important thesis for 
which I argue is that belief is intrinsically veridical.” See ‘Afterthoughts, 
1987’, in Sven Bernecker and Fred Dretske (eds.), Knowledge: Readings in 
Contemporary Epistemology (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), 
p. 427. This view bears a foundationalist interpretation: beliefs, being 
intrinsically veridical, are as such prima facie justified, even if weakly; 
hence they are defeasibly foundational. Incoherence would defeat them; 
but particularly if, as Davidson says here, “Coherence is nothing but 
consistency” (p. 427), it would not be plausible to take coherence to be a 
basic source of justification.
	20	 The idea of enriching coherentism by making coherence with experience 
an essential element in coherentist justification is proposed and defended 
by Jonathan L. Kvanvig and Wayne D. Rigg, ‘Can a Coherence Theory 
Appeal to Appearance States?’, Philosophical Studies 67 (1992), 197–217. 
This paper deserves study. Here I raise just one difficulty. Although they 
grant that “coherentism arises historically because of dissatisfaction with 
the foundationalists’ picture” (p. 199), they characterize a foundational-
ist warranting relation in a way that does not distinguish it from the 
relation coherentists take to confer justification.
One such account could claim that a belief is foundationally 
warranting just in case the evidence for it is an appearance state 
involving the same content as that of the belief. For example . . . 
perhaps my belief that something is red is intrinsically warranting 
because it appears to me that something is red.
(p. 199)
	
	 A foundationalist need not take an appearance state, such as a sensory 
impression of red, to have the same content as a belief (at least a propo-
sitional belief, the kind apparently in question here): a propositional 
content in virtue of which the belief is true or false, e.g. “that something 

The architecture of knowledge  241
is red.” Rather, the experiential content is qualitative, roughly a matter 
of what properties one is sensorily acquainted with in having the expe-
rience; that content may correspond to certain propositions but is not 
itself truth-valued. Such a content might be an appearance of red but 
not the proposition that “it appears to me that something is red.” The 
latter is a candidate to enter into a coherence relation with beliefs or 
their contents. Perhaps Kvanvig and Rigg are thinking of experiential 
justification of belief as possibly working through beliefs or other states 
which have propositional content and truth value; this could explain 
why they find such justification available to coherentism. If, however, 
experiential justification could work that way, then one could still have 
a coherent system of beliefs (perhaps even objectual beliefs) that goes 
against experience. Beliefs about one’s states—such as the (appearance) 
“belief that something is red”—would have to play a role, but those 
states would not be any kind of bedrock grounding these beliefs, even 
if the beliefs happened to be based on them. The problem, then, is that 
either the coherence-with-experience approach assimilates coherentism 
to a kind of foundationalism or it fails to capture the role of experience, 
which seems essential for a body of justified beliefs about the world.


Part Three
The nature and scope of 
justification and knowledge


10	 The analysis of knowledge
Justification, certainty, and reliability
•	
Knowledge and justified true belief
•	
Knowledge conceived as the right kind of justified true  
	
belief
Dependence on falsehood as an epistemic defeater of justification
Knowledge and certainty
Knowing and knowing for certain
Knowing and making certain
•	
Naturalistic accounts of the concept of knowledge
Knowledge as appropriately caused true belief
Knowledge as reliably grounded true belief
Reliable grounding and a priori knowledge
•	
Problems for reliability theories
The specification problem
Reliability and defeat
Reliability, relevant alternatives, and luck
Relevant alternatives and epistemological contextualism

10	 The analysis of knowledge
Justification, certainty, and reliability
Knowledge arises in experience. It emerges from reflection. It develops 
through inference. It has a distinctive structure. The same holds for justified 
belief. But what exactly is knowledge? If it arises and develops in the way I 
have described, then knowing that something is so is at least believing that it 
is. But clearly it is much more. A false belief is not knowledge. A belief based 
on a lucky guess is not knowledge either, even if it is true.
Can something be added to the notion of true belief to yield an analysis 
of what (propositional) knowledge is, that is, to provide a kind of account 
of what constitutes knowledge? Plato addressed a similar question. He for-
mulated an account of knowledge (though in the end he did not endorse it) 
which has sometimes been loosely interpreted as taking knowledge to be 
justified true belief.1
For Plato, ‘belief’ would represent a grade of cognition lower than knowl-
edge. But if we substitute, as most interpreters of Plato would have us do, 
some related term for ‘belief’, say ‘understanding’, then the account may be 
nearer to what Plato held and would be closer to some of the historically 
influential conceptions of knowledge. In any case, the notion of belief is wide 
and subtle; and one or another form of the justified true belief account pre-
vailed during much of this century until the 1960s.2 What can be said for it?
Knowledge and justified true belief
What is not true is not known. When we claim we know something and 
later discover that it is false, we sometimes say things like ‘Well, I certainly 
believed it’; but we do not seriously maintain that we knew it. One might say 
‘I just knew it’, but this is usually taken to exhibit an inverted commas use of 
‘know’, a use in which ‘know’ stands in for something like ‘was certain’. If we 
seriously claimed we knew it, others would likely conclude that (for instance) 
we do not really believe that it is false, or perhaps are using ‘I knew’ to mean 
‘I felt great confidence’, as in ‘I just knew I’d win—I still can’t really believe 
I lost’. In cases like the commonsense ones just described, when truth is sub-
tracted from what appears to be knowledge, what remains is not knowledge 
but belief.

The analysis of knowledge  247
These points suggest that knowledge is at least true belief. Admittedly, 
people who feel certain of something, for instance that a friend is angry, may 
say that they do not believe it, but know it. This is best understood, however, 
to mean that they do not merely believe it, but know it.
Similarly, it may be misleading to say “I believe he’s angry” when I think 
I also know it—unless I intend, for instance, to indicate caution or perhaps 
polite disagreement. But it is often misleading to say less than one is fully 
entitled to say.3 My saying that I believe he is angry may be misleading pre-
cisely because I am expressing only part of what I am fully entitled to express: 
that I know he is. For I am thereby suggesting that I do not know, or perhaps 
even doubt, that he is. If this point is what explains why my statement is 
misleading, that confirms that knowing implies believing.
Does knowing something also imply justifiedly believing it? If it does, 
that would explain why a true belief based on a lucky guess is not knowledge. 
If, from a distance, I see Jim walk hurriedly down the hall and simply guess 
that he is angry, I am not justified in believing that he is angry. If my belief 
turns out to be true, it still does not constitute knowledge, and its lacking 
justification apparently explains why not. Now suppose I go by his office and 
see him briskly shuffling papers and angrily mumbling curses. At this point 
I might come to know that he is angry; and my acquiring knowledge that he 
is can be explained by my having acquired evidence which justifies my true 
belief that he is.
Still, could a true belief that is not justified constitute knowledge? Suppose 
I simply see Jim briskly shuffling papers as I pass his office, but do not hear 
any curses. A bit later, I see him walk hurriedly down the hall. Given that I 
know his fiery temperament, I might have just enough evidence to give me 
some reason to believe he is angry, even though I am not quite justified in 
believing this. Might I now have a kind of low-grade knowledge that he is 
angry? This is doubtful. My evidence for believing this is not strong. But the 
case does show this much: that as our evidence for a true belief mounts up in 
a way that brings us closer to justification for holding it, we also tend to get 
closer to knowledge. These and similar points support the view that justified 
belief is an element in knowledge. This view is highly plausible, and—for 
now—I want to assume it.
We are, then, on the way toward an analysis of knowledge. For it looks as if 
we have a very substantive threefold necessary condition for (propositional) 
knowledge: it seems that knowledge is at least justified true belief—that we 
know something only if we believe it, it is true, and our belief of it is justified. 
Still, a correct, illuminating analysis, one that provides a good account of the 
nature of what is being analyzed, must also provide sufficient conditions. It 
might be true that I know something only if I justifiedly and truly believe it, 
yet false that if I justifiedly and truly believe something, I know it.
 It apparently is false that if we have a justified true belief, we (always) have 
knowledge. Suppose that when I first visit the Wallaces I have no idea that 
they have a photographic collection which includes realistic, life-size pictures 

248  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
of themselves. When I approach the doorway to their living room down a 
long hallway, I see, just twelve feet before me, and constituting all I can see 
through the doorway, a life-size picture of Jane, standing facing me and smil-
ing like the good hostess she is, with the background in the picture looking 
just like the living room’s rear wall. I say ‘hello’ before I get close enough to 
realize that I see only a photograph of her taken against the background of 
that very wall. I discover that the picture is so lifelike that this happens to 
everyone who knows Jane and enters unaware of the photograph. I might 
thus be quite justified, momentarily, in my belief that Jane is opposite me. As 
it happens, however, Jane is standing opposite me—in the next room, right 
behind the wall on which the picture is hung. My belief that she is opposite 
me is thus true, as well as justified. But I do not know that she is opposite 
me.4
This example shows that if we analyze knowledge as justified true belief, 
our analysis is too broad. How might we improve it? If taking justification to 
be crucial is on the right track, we can restrict the kind or degree of justifica-
tion involved. We might, however, suspect that justification is not central 
after all, but only correlated with something that is. We might then seek an 
account of knowledge in which justification is not central to understanding 
knowledge. There are many approaches of both kinds. I want to consider two 
of each, starting with the “justificationist” accounts.
Knowledge conceived as the right kind of justified 
true belief
In the photographic case, something seems wrong with the kind of justifica-
tion I have. It is sometimes said to be defeated—alternatively, defective—
where this is not to say that it is undermined or overridden, as in the more 
common cases of defeated justification we have so far noted, but rather (in 
part) that it is prevented from playing what seems to be its normal role in 
such a case, namely, rendering a true belief knowledge. Contrast this kind of 
defeat of justification with the common kind that undermines or overrides 
justification—as when one discovers a witness one had believed was lying 
and is thus no longer justified in believing the testimony. Call the former 
epistemic defeat: it eliminates the power of the justification to turn a true 
belief that acquires that justification into knowledge. In that sense, it vitiates 
the justification, eliminating its characteristic power to raise the status of 
a merely true belief to that of knowledge. Perhaps, then, with epistemic as 
opposed to justificational defeat in mind, knowledge might be analyzed as 
undefeatedly justified true belief.5 This idea is worth exploring.
Dependence on falsehood as an epistemic defeater of 
justification
How is (epistemic) defeat to be characterized? One natural view is that the 
justification of a belief is defeated provided the belief depends on a falsehood. 

The analysis of knowledge  249
A dependence on falsehood is a bad thing from the point of view of the can-
didacy of a belief to constitute knowledge. This is in part because, even when 
a belief which depends on falsehood is true, that may be just by good luck. It 
is good luck that Jane happens to be standing straight in front of me.6 But as 
our lifelike photograph example shows, a belief true just by good luck does 
not constitute knowledge.
There are at least two ways in which a belief might depend on falsehood. 
First, it might depend on a falsehood in the sense that it would not be justified 
except on the basis of one’s being (situationally) justified in believing a false-
hood about the subject in question (say, Jane). This is a kind of justificational 
dependence (dependence for justification), which I will call presuppositional 
dependence. In the photographic case, my belief that Jane is opposite me 
depends presuppositionally on the falsehood that I am seeing her directly (or 
at least in a way that does not misrepresent her location).
The point is not that in order to know she is opposite me I would have to 
believe the false proposition that I am seeing her directly; rather, my belief 
that she is opposite me epistemically depends (depends for its claim to be 
knowledge) on this proposition. Not only does it seem to be because this 
proposition is false that I do not know Jane is opposite me; it is also the kind 
of proposition whose truth is central for grounding my would-be knowledge 
and whose falsity I would tend to be surprised to discover.
The second case of dependence on falsehood is psychological dependence: 
a belief might psychologically depend on a falsehood in the causal sense that 
one has the belief by virtue of holding it on the basis of believing a falsehood. 
In this kind of case my would-be knowledge is sustained by a false belief, 
which is a kind of inadequate foundation. My belief about Jane would psy-
chologically depend on falsehood if, say, I knew about the Wallaces’ life-size 
photographs, yet trusted my vision and believed that Jane was opposite me 
on the basis of concluding that this time I was viewing her directly. I am not 
viewing her directly, so my underlying belief is false.
Unfortunately, the appeal to a false presupposition, or even to other kinds 
of dependence on falsehood, does not always explain why a justified true 
belief is epistemically defeated and fails to constitute knowledge. Recall the 
lottery with a million coupons. You might have a justified true belief that you 
will lose, but you do not know that you will. You might possibly win. What 
falsehood defeats your justification here? You are not making any mistake, 
but simply do not have the right kind of positive ground for knowledge.
It might seem that your belief that you will lose the lottery depends on 
the false proposition that the outcome of a chance process can be known 
beforehand by merely calculating odds. But does your belief depend on this? 
You might reject this and still believe—even justifiedly—that you will lose, 
whereas I could not reject the false presupposition that I see Jane directly and 
still believe (justifiedly, at least) that she is in front of me.
We should not hold, then, that in the lottery example either your belief 
or its justification depends on the falsehood about foreknowledge of chance 
outcomes. Points like these do not show that no version of the undefeatedly 

250  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
justified true belief analysis of knowledge will work. One might, for instance, 
try to explain why justification is epistemically defeated in the lottery case 
even though it is based on as high a probability as one likes. This effort may 
lead in the direction of the next justificationist account of knowledge I want 
to consider.
Knowledge and certainty
The lottery example suggests that knowledge requires one’s possessing con-
clusively justified true belief, belief justified in such a way that its truth is 
guaranteed by what justifies it. For we may plausibly claim that if the evi-
dence guarantees that you will lose, say because it includes knowledge of the 
lottery being fixed in favor of someone else, then you would know you will 
lose. Moreover, conclusive justification is presumably not liable to defeat (a 
point that a defeasibility view of knowledge can also make use of).
Different theories offer different accounts of a guarantee of truth (as will 
be apparent when we discuss skepticism in Chapter 13). The lottery example 
supports the view that the right kind of guarantee is not simply a matter of 
high probability. After all, we can have as many tickets as we like and you 
would still not know yours will lose. Thus, in this kind of case, no matter 
how probable it is that you will lose, your justification is not sufficient for 
knowledge.7 This approach to conclusive justification would not entail that 
extremely high probability could never suffice for knowledge, say when it 
represents the likelihood of there being print before us given our present 
experience of reading this; but in that kind of case there is apparently no ran-
domizing process whose outcome determines whether our beliefs are true. 
That kind of randomness, then, might be said to rule out conclusive justifica-
tion. There are other disanologies between the perceptual and lottery cases 
(more than can be even noted here). As I look at this print, for instance, I 
may assume that there is not (and perhaps never has been) someone in exactly 
the same evidential position—assuming we can determine that—who is mis-
taken in an exactly similar belief that there is print.
Another reason to think that knowledge requires conclusive justification 
is that knowing is often closely associated with certainty. When I wonder if 
I know, I may ask myself how I can be certain. I also sometimes wonder if 
what I believe is certain. Particularly in the latter case, I am thinking of the 
status of the proposition in question, not of psychological certainty, which is, 
roughly, great confidence of the truth of what one believes. If I am confident 
enough that (some proposition) p is true, I am (psychologically) certain that 
it is and certain of it; and if I am certain of it, I am supremely confident that 
it is so and certain that it is so.
Given that there are two kinds of certainty, it is important to see that 
the question ‘How can I be certain?’ does not concern only psychologi-
cal certainty. It typically means something like ‘How may I justifiedly be 

The analysis of knowledge  251
(psychologically) certain?’ and there it may be intended to ask whether prop-
ositional certainty is possible. If, however, I say, not that I am not certain but 
that it is not certain, that your ticket will lose, I am referring to propositional 
certainty, roughly, the certainty a proposition has when there are extremely 
strong grounds for it, grounds that guarantee its truth.
I want to leave two things open: first, what kinds of grounds guarantee 
truth; second, how readily available the grounds of propositional certainty 
must be, if readily available at all, for instance whether ordinary reflection on 
what evidence one has would reveal them. Saying that something is certain 
surely implies that one thinks sufficient grounds are in some sense available, 
even if only by a careful study of the matter and perhaps consulting others 
about it or otherwise getting new information. But for a proposition just to 
be certain, the kind of availability (if any) is more difficult to assess.
Given these connections between knowledge and certainty, one might 
hold that knowledge is constituted by conclusively justified true belief, 
meaning that (1) the believer may justifiedly be psychologically certain of the 
true proposition in question and (2) this proposition is so well-grounded as 
to be itself propositionally certain. Knowledge constituted by such a justified 
belief may be (and has been) considered a case of epistemic certainty.8
An analysis of knowledge as constituted by a belief exhibiting epistemic 
certainty seems too narrow. It would, for instance, apparently rule out most 
knowledge based on testimony. If Jane tells me that she wants to meet to 
discuss something, and I know her well and have no good reason to doubt 
her word, may I not know that she wants to meet with me? Yet I do not 
have conclusive justification, nor does her testimony render it certain that 
she wants to meet with me. Unlikely though it is, error is barely possible; she 
could act out of character and deceive me (or herself).
Knowing and knowing for certain
Does knowing imply, if not conclusive justification of the belief constituting 
knowledge, then at least the certainty of the proposition known (epistemic 
certainty)? In the case described, I doubt that it is propositionally certain 
that Jane wants to meet with me (but the notion of propositional certainty is 
vague, and it is often difficult to tell whether it applies). My knowledge here 
is apparently not knowledge of something that is certain.
Indeed, we sometimes speak of knowing something for certain, implying 
a contrast with simply knowing. Imagine that Tom tells me that Emma has 
left town, but I believe him to be mistaken and say so. Someone probing my 
grounds for saying Tom is mistaken might ask if I know this for certain. This 
might be asked not from doubt about whether I know, but to find out if the 
proposition that he is mistaken is certain, perhaps because much hangs on 
it, as in a criminal trial, where I must testify. It might also be asked from a 
desire to determine what kind of basis I have for my claim. An answer would 

252  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
be that I just took her from the station to her hotel and I can’t imagine her 
having already left when she’s on the conference program. The existence of 
such cases suggests that what is not known for certain still can be known.
It is interesting to compare knowing and knowing for certain with simply 
knowing someone and knowing the person for a practical joker. We can know 
a person who is a practical joker without knowing, or in any way taking, 
the person to be a joker. If the parallel holds, it suggests we can know that p 
without knowing it for certain.
Perhaps, however, what can be known at all can always be known for cer-
tain, as I might come to know for certain—provided I do enough checking 
into her motivation—that Jane wants to meet with me. But even if what is 
knowable can be known for certain, it is doubtful (as examples to be given 
will also suggest) that everything that is known is certain. Still, is it even 
true that whatever is known must at least be such that it can be certain? Our 
example suggests that knowledge need not meet this standard: I might know 
that Jane wanted to meet even if she has just died and there are no additional 
evidences—such as recollections by third parties, letters by her—on the 
basis of which this can be certain.
One might reply that knowledge is always of the sort of proposition that 
can be certain. But consider propositions about the past, such as that a ship 
sank in a certain lonely region in the Pacific Ocean. Perhaps these may be 
knowable, yet not even be the sort of thing that can (for human beings, at 
least) be certain (the evidence of its apparent traces at the bottom is good 
enough for knowledge, but no further evidence, such as eye-witness accounts, 
can be obtained regarding where it sank).
Knowing and making certain
Perhaps, however, these points show only that I cannot make certain that 
Jane wants to meet with me. There might still be a basis for this proposition 
which renders it (propositionally) certain. I will continue to leave open the 
question of whether what is known is the sort of thing that can be certain, 
since knowledge, not certainty, is my main concern here. But it will help, in 
that connection, to explore how an understanding of the notion of making 
certain may bear on the view that knowledge requires conclusive justification.
If, when we already know something, we can make certain that it is so, 
then there is reason to think that conclusive justification is not required for 
knowledge. Suppose I lock the back door and, as I drive off, clearly recall 
doing so. Still, if someone asks me if I am sure I did, I may truly believe 
I know I did, yet still check to make certain I did. Now when we need to 
(or even can) make certain of something we know, it would appear that it 
need not be either certain or conclusively justified for us. Getting conclusive 
justification seems to be the main point of making certain, though on some 
views the latter may be weaker, in that there may be cases in which we make 
certain of something but still lack utterly conclusive justification for it.

The analysis of knowledge  253
It might be replied that in the case in which making certain consists of 
getting further evidence, ‘make certain’ means not ‘make it certain’ but, 
roughly, ‘make sure it is certain’, and that if I really knew it, it was certain 
in the first place. Let us assume for the sake of argument that ‘make certain’ 
means ‘make sure it is certain’. Now suppose I do not make certain that I 
locked the door, because it begins to hail and I must leave before I can check 
the door. This does not show that I do not know I locked the door; and, on 
later finding that it was locked, I could be correct in saying that I was right 
all along to think I knew. So, even if making certain were a matter of making 
sure the proposition is certain, it does not seem either that one needs to do 
this in order to know the proposition, or even that the proposition must be 
certain, in order to be known.
Moreover, supposing I did know all along that the door was locked, it 
does not follow that this was certain all along. I had good reason, at least at 
the time when I could not check, to think it was not certain. All things con-
sidered, the possibility of making certain of what we already know suggests 
that knowing a proposition does not entail its being certain. Further, if, as it 
seems, we can know something, yet make certain it is so, then apparently we 
can also know it without being conclusively justified in believing it.
Notice that similar points apply to what we know from memory. Even on 
topics with respect to which our memory is highly reliable, the justification 
our memory beliefs have is generally not conclusive. Even if I can recite a 
stanza from memory, my justification for believing I have it right need not 
be conclusive. Yet I may well know that I have it right, and confirm that I do 
when I look it up to make certain I do and I find that it reads just as I thought.
Naturalistic accounts of the concept of knowledge
Perhaps we should consider a quite different approach. Must we appeal to 
the notion of justification to understand knowledge? Suppose we think of 
knowing as registering truth, somewhat as a thermometer registers tempera-
ture. Knowledge, so conceived, results from the successful functioning of 
our epistemic equipment, which consists above all of finely tuned perceptual, 
memorial, introspective, and rational instruments.
The thermometer analogy holds not just for propositional knowing but 
also both for simple knowing—knowing, by acquaintance as opposed to 
description, persons and objects—and for objectual knowing, which is know-
ing something to be a certain way. But propositional knowing is my main 
topic here; and, from a study of the chapters on perception, one could largely 
adapt to the other cases what emerges about propositional knowledge.9
The view that knowledge consists in suitably registering truth goes well 
with the idea that we are biological creatures with sense receptors that gather 
information and with mental capacities that integrate it. Perhaps, then, 
knowledge can be analyzed naturalistically, that is, using only the kinds of 
concepts the sciences, especially the natural sciences, use in understanding 

254  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
things. These prominently include “observation concepts,” such as those 
of color and shape, height and weight, number and motion. A naturalistic 
account appeals not to normative notions—“value-laden” notions, in one 
terminology—like that of justification, but (largely) to physical, chemi-
cal, biological, and psychological properties, together with causal relations 
among these.
I want to consider two naturalistic approaches. The first emphasizes the 
role of causation in producing our knowledge, as with perceptual beliefs 
caused by the perceived object. The second approach stresses the reliability 
of the processes, such as seeing, through which knowledge arises.
Knowledge as appropriately caused true belief
On the causal theory, knowledge is true belief caused by something connected 
with its truth in a way that makes it plausible to call the belief knowledge. 
Roughly, knowledge is appropriately caused true belief, in which appropriate 
(causal) production of a belief is production of it in which the fact, object, 
event, or other thing in virtue of which the belief is true plays a certain role 
in generating or sustaining the belief.
In the examples of knowledge that best support the view, the belief in 
question is apparently a case of knowledge because it is caused in a way 
that guarantees its truth. Thus, I know that there is a green field before me 
because the field itself plays a major part, through my vision, in causing me 
to believe there is a green field before me. I know that Jane wants to meet 
with me because her wanting to do so plays a major part in causing her to say 
she does, and thereby in causing me to believe that she does. I know that the 
stanza I recite from memory has four lines because its having them is a major 
causal factor, operating through my memory, in my believing that it does.
The causal view can even accommodate knowledge of the future. I know 
that I am going to continue thinking about knowledge for a long time. That 
truth (about the future) does not cause me to believe this; but that truth 
is causally connected with my belief, and in a way that suggests why the 
belief may be expected to be true. For what causally explains both why the 
proposition I believe about the future is true and why I believe it is the same 
element: my intending to continue thinking about knowledge. Here my 
future-directed belief is knowledge, but not by virtue of being produced by 
the thing it is about—my future thinking—for that has not occurred.
Does this view of knowledge of the future show that as the relevant facts 
lie in the future, knowledge need not represent “the facts,” as the common-
sense view has it? The case need not be so interpreted. Representing facts 
does not require being caused by them. Recall my belief about the future. 
This belief constitutes knowledge, but not because what the belief is about 
is the way the belief represents it and causes the belief, as when the green 
field’s being before me causes me to believe that it is before me. Rather, such 
a future-directed belief correctly represents what it is about in part because 
the belief itself causes that state of affairs.

The analysis of knowledge  255
Moreover, the causal theory is right about this much: my belief that I will 
continue thinking about knowledge is caused by something—my intention 
to continue thinking about it—of a kind that makes it at least likely that 
I will be as the belief represents me. Roughly, not only can knowledge be 
produced by things that are known, as in perceptual cases, so that knowledge 
is related to what is known as effect to cause; both knowledge of certain facts 
and the facts known can also be common effects of the same causes, as in the 
case of knowledge of the future.
There are, however, serious troubles for the theory that knowledge is 
appropriately caused true belief. One problem is how to apply the basic idea—
that what underlies the truth in question is a causal factor in the grounding 
of the belief of that truth—to a priori knowledge. How might what underlies 
the truth that if one tree is taller than another then the second is shorter than 
the first be causally connected with my believing this truth? This truth is not 
(in general) perceptually known, nor is its status dependent on any particular 
object in the world, as is the case with the (empirical) knowledge to which 
the causal theory best applies.
It may be that the only way a truth can be causally connected with a belief 
so as to render it knowledge is through a connection with something in the 
world that does at least partly cause (or is at least partly an effect of) the 
belief. The truth that there is a green field before me is about an object that 
produces visual impressions in me. But the strictly a priori knowledge just 
cited does not depend on trees in that way. It does not even depend on there 
ever being any trees. It seems to be based simply on a grasp of the concepts 
involved, above all that of a tree and that of height. My having this grasp does 
not appear to imply causally interacting with those concepts (supposing it is 
even possible to interact causally with concepts).10 This is not to say that the 
belief has no causal ground, such as the understanding or the comprehend-
ing consideration of the relevant proposition. The problem is that a belief 
constituting a priori knowledge that p seems to lack the kind of ground the 
causal theory requires: the a priori fact that p does not cause it, nor are this 
belief and that fact common effects of the same causes.
Knowledge as reliably grounded true belief
There is another serious problem concerning the causal account, this time in 
relation to empirical beliefs. When we understand it, we can see the rationale 
for a different way of understanding knowledge. As in many instances, the 
trouble arises from examples of justified true beliefs that do not constitute 
knowledge.
Consider a case in which something causes me to have a true belief, 
yet that belief is not knowledge. Suppose Tom tells me, on the basis of his 
knowing it, that Jim is angry, and as a result of his testimony I believe this. 
My belief might be justified and true. But imagine that, although I have no 
reason whatever to believe this about Tom, he is in general highly unreli-
able, and sometimes lies, in what he says about Jim. The mere fact of Tom’s 

256  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
unreliability precludes my knowing through his testimony that Jim is angry. 
Even if Tom knows Jim is angry, and knows it because he observes Jim acting 
angrily, his knowledge is not transmitted to me. For he might well have said 
this even if Jim had merely acted, say, hurriedly, and was not angry. (This 
shows that even if, as held in Chapter 7, testimony transmits knowledge to 
a belief based on it only if the attester knows the proposition in question, it 
need not do so even when the attester does know it.)
It is important to see that although the causal connections here seem to be 
what they usually are in testimony cases, I do not acquire knowledge from 
Tom’s testimony. Jim’s anger causes Tom to believe him angry; Tom’s belief 
(partly) causes his telling me that Jim is angry; his telling me this causes me 
to believe it. But, though I have a justified true belief that Jim is angry, I do 
not know it. For while Tom has it right this time, he is in general unreliable 
regarding Jim.
The testimony example brings out something very revealing. It suggests 
that the reason I do not know on the basis of Tom’s testimony is that it is 
not reliable. By contrast, perception normally is reliable: normally, at least, 
we may justifiedly count on the beliefs it typically produces, such as beliefs 
based on touch or vision, to be true. We may also presume that perception 
is also reliable in the sense that the vast majority of beliefs it produces are in 
fact true. When there is a photograph that we are unaware of, however, what 
we apparently see through it is typically not a reliable indication that this 
very thing is before us. Cases of these sorts suggest that we might plausibly 
analyze knowledge as reliably grounded true belief.11
Reliable grounding and a priori knowledge
To see how this approach works, recall Tom’s testimony about Jim. Suppose 
that Tom is only very occasionally mistaken about Jim. Might I then acquire 
knowledge on the basis of Tom’s testimony? A crucial question is how reliable 
a belief-producing process, such as testimony, must be to yield knowledge. 
The theory gives us no precise way to answer this.
The theory can be defended on this point, however, by noting that the 
concept of knowledge is itself not precise. Thus, there may be times when, no 
matter how much information we have, we cannot be sure whether someone 
knows or not, just as, because the term ‘bald’ is vague, we cannot always be 
sure whether it applies, no matter how much information we have (including 
the number of hairs on the person’s head). It might be added that as the 
reliability of Jim’s testimony goes up, so does our inclination to say that I 
know on the basis of it. This proportionality seems to confirm the reliability 
theory.
Even a priori knowledge might well be accommodated on this view. For it 
is at least normally produced by grasping concepts and their relations, or by 
certain simple valid inference on the basis of beliefs grounded in such a grasp; 
and these processes of producing belief seem reliable. Consider the a priori 

The analysis of knowledge  257
proposition that every sphere encloses a space. Suppose that understanding of 
abstract entities and their relations—say of spheres, spaces, and the inclusion 
relation between them—entails a kind of direct contact with these entities, a 
kind such that the entities form an essential part of the very content of that 
understanding. Then they play an indispensable if indirect role in sustain-
ing beliefs which, on the basis of this understanding, are justified a priori or 
constitute a priori knowledge. These beliefs, then, have understanding as a 
causal sustaining ground; the relevant understanding in a sense contains the 
abstract facts that ground the truths known; and by virtue of this apprehen-
sional causal grounding of the beliefs, they are reliably based on the facts 
they represent. It appears, then, that in both the empirical and a priori cases, 
when we know, we have reliably registered the truth.
Problems for reliability theories
The reliability theory apparently does receive support from the kind of cor-
relation illustrated above: the tendency to count my true belief about Jim as 
knowledge apparently varies with the tendency to regard the belief’s testi-
monial basis as reliable. But perhaps our underlying thought in so speaking 
about the belief is that the more reliable Tom is, the better is my justification 
for believing what he says. If so, then the reliability theory might give the 
right results here because it draws on the role of justification as a constituent 
in knowledge.
To be sure, neither reliabilists nor their justificationist critics need hold 
that I must believe anything specific about Tom’s reliability in order to 
acquire justified beliefs from his testimony. But it might be argued that my 
knowledge has a presuppositional dependence on the proposition that he is 
sufficiently reliable to justify my accepting his testimony, and that it is either 
because this presupposition is false, or because I lack justification for believ-
ing it, that my justification for believing his testimony is defeated in the first 
place. Thus, it might be argued that even if the reliability account is correct 
about the conditions a belief must meet to constitute knowledge, its success 
may be due to its tacit dependence on the justificationist concepts it seeks to 
abandon.
The specification problem
There is a different kind of problem that must also be faced by the reliabil-
ity theory. This difficulty seems deeper than the question of how reliable a 
process has to be in order to ground knowledge. It concerns how to specify 
what is reliable in the first place. It will not do to say, for instance, simply 
that the reliable processes we are talking about are mainly those by which 
the experiential and rational sources of knowledge produce belief. This is not 
obviously wrong, but it leaves too much undetermined.
Consider vision. Its reliability varies so much with conditions of observation 

258  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
that it would be wrong to say without qualification that it is a reliable belief-
producing process. It might seem that we may say this. It is reliable in pro-
ducing beliefs in good light with the object of vision near enough relative 
to the visual powers of the perceiver. But this claim will not do without 
qualification either. It does not rule out external interferences like deceptive 
photographs, such as the one of Jane. It also fails to rule out internal interfer-
ences such as hallucinogenic drugs. These interferences might produce false 
beliefs about objects that we in fact see and about which we also have many 
true beliefs, as when, after brain damage, we hallucinate a dark blight on a 
green tree which we otherwise see plainly as it is.
There are, moreover, so many possible factors that affect reliability that it 
is not clear that we can list them all without using blanket terms such as ‘too 
far away’ as applied to the object, and ‘insufficiently attentive’ or ‘not acute 
enough’ as applied to the perceiver. These terms are not only quite vague; the 
more important point is that they may be argued to come to something like 
‘too far to be reliably (or justifiedly) judged’, ‘too inattentive to form reliable 
(or justified) beliefs’, and ‘not acute enough for reliable (or justified) judg-
ment of the features of the object’. If so, their interpretation may well depend 
on our already having a good philosophical understanding of reliability (or 
justification), and they are thus unlikely to help us much in clarifying reli-
ability; or if they do, it is because we are relying on a different theory.
Suppose we can devise a vocabulary that overcomes these problems. A 
related difficulty may persist. Belief production might be reliable described 
in one way and unreliable described in another. Hence, even if we are able to 
specify what, in general, a reliable belief-producing process is, we need a way 
of deciding what reliable-process description to use in order to understand a 
particular case. Recall my seeing Jane in the photograph and thereby believ-
ing that she is opposite me. Suppose we say—what seems correct—that my 
belief arises from a process of seeing someone in a photograph that (at the 
time and in the physical in question) accurately shows the person’s features 
and general location. If this kind of basis suffices for knowledge, then my 
belief presumably should constitute knowledge. For the picture shows her to 
be where she is: opposite me.
Suppose, on the other hand, we say something else that applies to the 
grounding of my belief that Jane is opposite me: that the belief-producing 
process is one of seeing a woman in a picture which gives the false impression 
that she is directly in front of one. Then my belief arising from the process 
is clearly not reliably produced—since usually in such cases the person is 
not opposite one at all—and the belief should thus not be knowledge. The 
trouble is that both descriptions apply to the production of my belief. Using 
one description, the theory apparently implies that I know; using the other, 
it implies that I do not.
How can the theory enable us to choose between the two correct reliable-
process descriptions, or justify our choosing whatever kind of description it 
accepts? Call this the specification problem (or description problem; it is also 

The analysis of knowledge  259
called the generality problem, since a major issue is how general the descrip-
tive terms should be). If we first have to decide whether I know that Jane is in 
front of me by relying on some quite different understanding of knowledge 
and only in that light can we frame a description, the theory would seem 
to give us very limited help in understanding knowledge. For the theory 
itself can apparently be put to work only insofar as, in the light of some 
alternative account of knowledge, we already understand knowledge at least 
well enough to be in a position to tell systematically, for a vast range of true 
beliefs, whether or not they constitutes knowledge.12
This point, however, might be said to be at best exaggerated and to show 
no more than that to use the reliability view we need a good intuitive grasp 
of the concept of knowledge. That is plausible. Let us accept it for the sake 
of argument.
The deeper point is that if we seek to clarify knowledge (or justification) 
by appeal to reliable belief-grounding processes naturalistically understood, 
then we need a way of explaining what those processes are without inad­
missibly appealing, in our explanation, to the concept of knowledge (or 
justification). A belief that is knowledge should be such because it is reliably 
grounded true belief; a reliable belief-grounding process should not be char-
acterized as the kind that yields, say, perceptual knowledge.13
Similarly, if we have to find the right reliable-process description in terms 
of what I am justified in presupposing, say that I have direct visual access to 
what is before me, then the theory works only insofar as it can exploit some 
justificationist principles. In that case, it would be more accurately described 
as a reliabilistic justification theory.
Reliability and defeat
Even when the degree of reliability of a belief-grounding process or state 
seems very high and the process or state is normal, there can be a defeat 
of would-be knowledge. On this score, the lottery example also challenges 
reliability theories of knowledge, as it does justificationist theories, and it, 
too, illustrates the specification problem. Granted, we can characterize the 
process grounding my belief that I will lose as one in which chance is crucial, 
and thus claim that the process is not reliable. But as I hold just one out of a 
million coupons, we might also truly describe it as a process that yields true 
beliefs virtually 100 percent of the time—and we can get as high a percentage 
as we like by increasing the number of coupons. Under this description, the 
process sounds very reliable indeed; yet it does not produce knowledge.
Moreover, suppose something like the former description of the belief-
grounding process, say, ‘process in which chance is crucial in determining 
the truth of the belief’, is what reliabilism would use to rule out true beliefs 
that might otherwise seem to be knowledge. Why should chance not play a 
role in grounding knowledge? A good answer cannot be that unless we call a 
belief-grounding process in which chance plays a role unreliable, we cannot 

260  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
account for knowledge; for that would just assume the reliabilist view that 
knowledge must be reliably grounded.
In any event, even in perceptual knowledge chance may play a role. It 
might be by chance that I see you on a passing train: you just happened to be 
visible to me at the window as the train rushed past. This role of chance leaves 
untouched whatever it is by virtue of which my vision yields knowledge. So 
how should we specify just what kind of role chance can play in the ground-
ing of knowledge? It may help to say that it can be by chance that we know 
something but not by chance that, given our grounds for believing p, it is 
only by chance that we are correct. The first is knowing by chance: fortunate 
knowledge. The second is being right by chance: fortunately true belief. This 
distinction is helpful, but still leaves open the question of just what consti-
tutes chance.
There could well be a way around these problems. For one thing, we 
might say that we often acquire knowledge when the belief constituting it is 
acquired by chance, as when we just happen to be reminded of something that 
enables us to finish a crossword puzzle or as in the case of seeing someone 
on a passing train; but if you know that p, it cannot be just a matter of chance 
that, given your believing p on the basis you have, it is true, as when we make 
a lucky guess. Moreover, we might also point out that in the photographic 
case my belief about Jane’s location does not causally depend on where she is, 
since I would believe she is before me even if she were not behind the picture. 
But this is only the beginning of a solution. For suppose I see her in a mirror, 
again without knowing that I am not seeing her directly, perhaps because I 
do not realize that there are trick mirrors at the yard party I am attending. 
Imagine that she happens to be opposite me, behind the mirror in which I see 
her, and is reflected into it by other mirrors I do not see (and have no reason 
to think are there). Here my belief about where she is would depend on where 
she is, since her movements would be reflected in the mirror in which I see 
her; yet I would still not know that she is opposite me. The kind of causal 
dependence in question, then, even if necessary for a true belief’s knowledge, 
is not a sufficient condition for that.
The case of my belief that I will lose the lottery is similar. This belief 
depends on my beliefs about, and in that way may indirectly depend on, 
the mechanisms that actually result in my losing; but still the belief is not 
knowledge. The dependence is of course not of the required kind. But now 
we have another specification problem: how to describe the right kind of 
dependence, sometimes called a functional dependence, but perhaps better 
called a discriminative dependence, since one’s belief-forming tendencies are 
sensitive to fine differences in visual stimuli. If there is a straightforward and 
illuminating way to specify the right kind of dependence, it is not obvious 
what it is. A useful metaphor for capturing it, however, is tracking. As we 
track a person in the snow, causally guided by the path, our belief system can 
be sensitive to the changing evidences that indicate the truth.14

The analysis of knowledge  261
Reliability, relevant alternatives, and luck
Even when the appropriate dependence is present just as it normally is, our 
would-be knowledge can be defeated. To see this, we can alter the deceiving 
portrait case so that my justified true belief that Jane is before me does have 
the normal kind of dependence on her location, yet I still do not know she is 
before me. Imagine that I do directly see her standing twelve feet before me 
and find her looking just as she always does, but this time her identical twin, 
of whose existence I had no inkling, is a few feet to her right and walking 
toward the very spot where I see Jane. If I have not learned to tell them apart 
and would have taken Jane’s sister to be Jane had I been ten seconds later, 
then I surely do not know that Jane is before me.
One way to see that I do not know it is Jane before me is to say that 
when one knows something, it cannot be just good luck that one is right in 
believing it, as it is here. But it is not easy to say what constitutes good luck 
without resorting to something like the notion that you do not have a true 
belief by mere good luck when your belief is reliably produced—or, perhaps, 
sufficiently reliably produced, or undefeatedly justified. Any of these ways of 
solving the problem will take us back to problems not yet solved.
Some philosophers have dealt with such cases by arguing that the problem 
in the identical twin case is the existence of a relevant alternative to the situ-
ation in which there is something, such as Jane’s being straight in front of 
me, that in fact renders one’s belief true, an alternative such that one cannot 
discriminate between the truth of the proposition in question (here, that Jane 
is before me) and the alternative situation (her sister’s being before me). What 
makes this non-discriminable alternative relevant in the example at hand is 
the twin’s moving toward my field of vision when I first enter, so that I am 
about to be deceived. On the relevant alternatives view, usually considered 
a kind of reliabilism regarding knowledge, genuine knowledge is reliably 
grounded in roughly the sense that the knower can discriminate any relevant 
alternative from the situation known to exist.
Relevant alternatives and epistemological contextualism
The cases in which the presence of relevant alternatives seems crucial for the 
question whether someone has knowledge may be conceived in a way that 
challenges a common assumption. One might naturally assume that there 
is a single concept of knowledge to be explored by reflection and that its 
content dictates whether a given true belief constitutes knowledge regard-
less of the believer’s circumstances. Even on this assumption, however, much 
of our pertinent reflection typically takes place by considering hypothetical 
situations in which a person might be thought to know something. But again, 
at least typically these will be approached by considering what may and may 
not be said about the person in these cases, particularly about whether the 
belief imagined in them constitutes knowledge.

262  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
With these points in mind, recall our case of the twins. In cases like this, 
context seems crucial. Apparently, in the context in which my friend’s identi-
cal twin whom I cannot tell from the friend is present, I do not know that it 
is my friend before me. In the context in which the twin is on another con-
tinent, I do. Hypothetical circumstances can also create different contexts. 
Ordinarily I may be said to know that I locked the door when I have the 
usual recollection of doing so. But what if someone says that there have been 
burglaries recently and asks if I know I did? Here the imagined problem, 
implicitly recalled by the emphasis on ‘know’, creates a context in which the 
standard for achieving knowledge is arguably higher.
The suggested epistemological idea is roughly this. When a “relevant” 
alternative to what we believe to be the so is actually present in the context 
and we cannot discriminate it from the case we believe to obtain, our belief 
does not constitute knowledge even if it is both true and justified. Suppose, 
however, that the question whether the person knows concerns a context in 
which such a relevant alternative is simply envisaged. There may then be no 
question about the person’s exhibiting the reliability necessary for knowledge 
as ordinarily understood, but there may also be an implication that greater 
reliability is needed to warrant attributing knowledge. The view that the 
truth or the falsity attributions of knowledge—including first-person claims 
to it such as ‘I know who did it’—should be judged by different standards in 
different contexts is often called contextualism.15 But the reliabilist view of 
knowledge that takes account of changes in reliability in different contexts 
is also a kind of contextual position. Both views would have us be cautious 
about claiming to know. But neither view entails that we never in fact have 
knowledge in some core sense in the kinds of cases in which we unselfcon-
sciously attribute it to people.
To develop a contextualist view, we must be able to decide what alterna-
tives are relevant; the mere possibility of Jane’s having a twin in the indicated 
situation is apparently not—or we would never know our friends are before 
us (a skeptical view we shall consider in Chapter 13). But suppose Jane has a 
twin who is never with her, or is currently abroad, or on the way to the party? 
And does it matter whether we realize there is such a person? These are dif-
ficult questions of a kind that a good reliability theory should adequately 
answer.16
 Now it may seem natural to conclude that the best way to answer these 
questions is by considering whether we may properly attribute knowledge 
in the relevant cases, in which we are now asking about hypothetical uses of 
language. In this way, philosophy of language seems highly relevant to epis-
temology. Contextualism is (at least in good part) a position in philosophy 
of language because it is mainly a view about spoken or otherwise linguistic 
attributions of knowledge rather than about what constitutes knowledge; but 
insofar as an account of correct attributions of knowledge bears on what 
knowledge is, the view is epistemologically important.
It should be stressed that contextualism is not the view that there are 

The analysis of knowledge  263
different meanings of ‘know’ in different contexts of ascription, nor the view 
that such ascriptions are commonly ambiguous (roughly, having two or more 
meanings and such that one cannot tell which to ascribe). Contextualists 
stress that the truth conditions for ascriptions of knowledge vary with impor-
tant differences in the context of ascription. They do not generally hold 
that the meaning of ‘know’ varies across these contexts. This difference is 
illustrated by ‘now’, which varies in what it designates on different occasions 
of its use (‘now’ is, e.g., indexical in being “indexed” to the time at which it 
is used), but has the same meaning on each, something like ‘the time at the 
moment of this reference’. Contextualists do not take ‘know’ to be essentially 
like ‘now’ and ‘I’, but do find differences in the contextual conditions for its 
correct application. Let us consider kindred views that might be considered 
contextualist.
That ‘know’ varies in meaning in different contexts of attribution is, 
however, implied by a relativistic view on which knowledge-attributions are 
elliptical, say meaning ‘knows relative to everyday standards’ versus ‘knows 
relative to high standards’. On this view, one might be said to know, in the 
first sense, that one will lose in a fair lottery with a million tickets, but not in 
the second sense, at least when the standards are very high—such as to “rule 
out error,” as even a moderately skeptical person might hold they should.17 
To illustrate, suppose the question is whether I would know that I won’t be 
suddenly able to buy a house as a result of having won a lucrative jackpot. The 
answer would be positive given ‘know’ in the everyday sense but negative 
given ‘know’ in the “high definition” sense common among skeptics.
 On a related view that posits differences in the meaning of knowledge 
ascriptions, one might take the varying standards for the truth of those attri-
butions to be essentially connected with variations in their meaning. Recall 
the case of my seeing Jane. If I know her fairly well, then I can know it is Jane 
I see as opposed to some other woman of similar age and appearance, yet not 
know it is she as opposed to her twin sister (who is about to enter the room). 
On this view—a kind of contrastivism—ordinary unqualified knowledge 
ascriptions are implicitly contrastive and the relevant set of contrasting cases 
is determinable by contextual features. Thus, to appraise a knowledge ascrip-
tion we must note not just speaker and context but a contrasting element, 
such as a proposition other than the one claimed to be known. This is a kind 
of contextual view, then; but (on the interpretation given here) it accounts for 
when we may and may not attribute knowledge in terms of differing mean-
ings of the attributions rather than just differences in the standards for their 
true application. For a contrastivist, standards also vary with differences in 
meaning; for contextualists, who do not posit different meanings in those 
attributions, it is just the standards for true attribution that change.18
If the relevant alternatives view is a natural route to contextualism, it 
should not be concluded that the opposing view—invariantism—cannot 
deal with the kinds of cases that challenge any account of knowledge which 
takes seriously our varying inclinations to attribute knowledge in varying 

264  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
circumstances. For invariantist views, there is just one set of truth condi-
tions for the statement that one knows that p, say knows that one will lose a 
lottery. The conditions will of course differ from person to person when dif-
ferent people have different kinds and amounts of evidence, but whether one 
knows will not also vary with context of ascription. Invariantists may argue 
that “pragmatic” factors, such as the importance of acting on the proposition 
in question, affect the appropriateness of ascribing knowledge. They also 
grant some vagueness in the concept of knowledge, which would account for 
indeterminacy in whether it applies in a given case, say, when the proposition 
is that my single ticket will lose a billion-ticket fair lottery.
I do not present any of these problems facing reliability theories of knowl-
edge as insurmountable or any of the contextualist or invariantist solutions 
as clearly adequate. But reliability theories do face serious difficulties, as do 
the other theories we have considered. One conclusion that might be drawn 
here is that knowledge is simply unanalyzable. But that should not be inferred 
from the difficulties I have brought out. They may be resolvable; and I have 
of course not discussed all the promising lines of analysis of knowledge there 
are.19 It should help us in understanding knowledge to consider other aspects 
of the concept, and the next chapter will address several important ones.
Notes
	 1	 The most important passages are probably those in Plato’s Theaetetus, 
201c–210b.
	 2	 The defeat of this account, which set a spate of detailed critiques in 
motion, was due to Edmund L. Gettier’s now famous ‘Is Justified True 
Belief Knowledge?’, Analysis 23 (1963), 231–3.
	 3	 Indeed, Timothy Williamson and others have held that knowledge is the 
“norm of assertion,” in roughly the sense that one tends to be criticizable 
for asserting something when one does not know it. See, e.g, Knowledge 
and Its Limits, esp. pp. 238–55.
	 4	 If I had believed that she is directly opposite me, in the sense that there 
is no obstacle between us, my belief would have been false; but I would 
not normally believe that here, where I have no reason even to imagine 
obstacles.
	 5	 The idea that we can learn much, and perhaps the most important things, 
about the nature of knowledge by determining what renders a true belief 
knowledge is also used by Alvin Plantinga. Instead of appealing to unde-
feated justification, he uses a different concept—warrant—which he has 
characterized functionally as (in rough terms) whatever it is that renders 
true belief knowledge. For his detailed analysis see esp. Warrant and 
Proper Function (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993), particularly 
chapters 1–3. Extensive critical discussion of this book, and his replies 
to it, are found in Jonathan L. Kvanvig (ed.), Warrant in Contemporary 

The analysis of knowledge  265
Epistemology: Essays in Honor of Plantinga’s Epistemology (Lanham, 
MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 1996).
	 6	 Detailed discussion of how a belief’s being knowledge is incompatible 
with its being only luckily true is provided by Duncan Pritchard in 
Epistemic Luck (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2005).
	 7	 This of course assumes that we rule out a probability of 1, which is com-
monly reserved for necessary truths. For a brief and plausible statement 
of the view that only beliefs based on conclusive (truth-guaranteeing) 
grounds constitute knowledge, see Fred Dretske, ‘Conclusive Reasons’, 
Australasian Journal of Philosophy 49 (1971), 1–22.
	 8	 For a valuable treatment of certainty particularly relevant to the one 
given here see G.E. Moore, ‘Certainty’, in his Philosophical Papers 
(London: George Allen & Unwin, 1959). Cf. Peter Klein’s Certainty 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1981). I should note that, 
more than most writers on certainty in epistemology, I am working with 
the notions central in everyday discourse and not with, e.g., the notions 
associated with Cartesian epistemology.
	 9	 The thermometer analogy, and some of the impetus for naturalism in 
recent epistemology, comes from D.M. Armstrong. See esp. his Belief, 
Truth and Knowledge (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973), 
though some of the relevant ideas are suggested in his (and others’) ear-
lier work.
	10	 The idea that abstract objects, such as concepts and propositions as 
standardly construed, are altogether causally inert should not be taken 
uncritically. For discussion of this issue and a case that no plausible 
causal requirement undermines the possibility of a priori knowledge, see 
Plantinga, Warrant and Proper Function, pp. 113–17.
	11	 It seems better to call it reliably grounded than reliably produced (as 
many call it), as I could have a belief that is not knowledge until I get 
appropriate evidence (such as testimony from someone who is reliable), 
and here the belief is not produced by what makes it knowledge, but 
rather becomes grounded therein. Some writers speak of knowledge as 
true belief that is reliably produced or sustained to capture what I am 
calling reliable grounding. A further advantage of the wider terminology 
I use is that it covers both process reliabilism, which takes the reliability 
of process of belief production or sustenance to be crucial for knowl-
edge, and indicator reliabilism, which simply requires that the belief be 
suitably connected with something which indicates that it is true.
	12	 Plantinga’s approach would suggest that the crucial factor in decid-
ing what description to use is how the faculty in question, say vision, 
is designed (whether by God or by evolution or in some other way) to 
function, for example in judging the identity of persons directly or 
despite the presence of impervious objects. As our visual faculties are 
not designed to judge in the latter way, the relevant process is not one 

266  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
in which believing someone is in a given place results from seeing the 
person in a photograph that accurately indicates her whereabouts. One 
difficulty here is how to determine the design of a faculty. For a detailed 
presentation of this view see Plantinga, Warrant and Proper Function.
	13	 For an approach to solving this specification problem, see William P. 
Alston, ‘How to Think about Reliability’, Philosophical Topics 23, 
1 (1995), 1–29. This paper is in part a response to Richard Feldman’s 
presentation of the problem—under the description ‘The Generality 
Problem’—in ‘Reliability and Justification’, The Monist 68 (1985), 
159–74.
	14	 The metaphor of tracking is usually attributed to Robert Nozick, 
Philosophical Explanations (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1981). The most relevant passages are reprinted in Huemer, Epistemology, 
pp. 475–90.
	15	 For an early discussion of contextualism see, e.g., Keith DeRose, 
‘Contextualism and Knowledge Attributions’, reprinted in Huemer, 
Epistemology. He considers two cases in which he is asked if the bank 
is open. In one, the matter is routine, in the other, of great importance. 
He knows it is open in the first, but in the second he does not know 
without getting further evidence. For “Attributor factors set a certain 
standard the putative subject of knowledge must live up to in order to 
make the knowledge attribution true” (p. 497). This is why he can know 
in one case—in which the context does not demand a high standard for 
truly attributing knowledge to someone—and not in the other. The 
implications of this position for skepticism, as well as for understand-
ing knowledge in ordinary cases (on almost any analysis of knowledge 
we might plausibly give), are significant. Cf. his ‘Solving the Skeptical 
Problem’, Philosophical Review 104 (1995), 1–52; David Lewis, ‘Elusive 
Knowledge’, Australasian Journal of Philosophy 74 (1996), 549–67; 
and (for a critique of Lewis’s paper), Stewart Cohen, ‘Contextualist 
Solutions to Epistemological Problems: Scepticism, Gettier, and the 
Lottery’, Australasian Journal of Philosophy 76 (1998), 289–306; Jason 
Stanley, Knowledge and Practical Interest (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2005); and Keith DeRose, The Case for Contextualism (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2009).
	16	 For a detailed and plausible approach to such questions see Alvin I. 
Goldman, ‘Discrimination and Perceptual Knowledge’, Journal of 
Philosophy 73 (1976), 269–82.
	17	 For detailed discussion of various kinds of relativism concerning knowl-
edge, see Stanley, Knowledge and Practical Interest, esp. pp. 138–41 and 
144–53.
	18	 Critical discussion of contrastivism as represented by Jonathan Schaffer 
is provided by Keith DeRose in The Case for Contextualism, pp. 38–41.
	19	 On Plantinga’s notable theory referred to earlier, knowledge is roughly a 
true belief that results from our cognitive faculties functioning properly 

The analysis of knowledge  267
in the relevant situation, which is a matter of their functioning as they were 
designed to function in such a situation (‘environment’ may be preferable 
here to ‘situation’). This idea can be adapted to a naturalistic view by 
construing proper function in biological and psychological terms drawn 
from a theory of human design, but it is also consonant with a theistic 
view of our design as determined by divine plan. Plantinga’s approach 
provides a different way of dealing with a number of the problems posed 
in this chapter (though they remain significant problems), but there is 
not space to discuss it or other recent theories separately.


11	 Knowledge, justification, and truth
Internalism, externalism, and intellectual virtue
•	
Knowledge and justification
The apparent possibility of clairvoyant knowledge
Natural knowledge
•	
Internalism and externalism in epistemology
Some varieties of internalism and externalism
The overall contrast between internalism and externalism
•	
Internalist and externalist versions of virtue epistemology
Some apparent problems for virtue epistemology
The internality of justification and the externality of knowledge
•	
Justification, knowledge, and truth
•	
The value problem
Why is knowledge preferable to merely true belief?
The value of knowledge compared with that of justified true belief
•	
Theories of truth
The correspondence theory of truth
Minimalist and redundancy accounts of truth
The coherence theory of truth
The pragmatic theory of truth
•	
Concluding proposals

11	 Knowledge, justification, and truth
Internalism, externalism, and intellectual virtue
Whatever the difficulties we face in seeking an analysis of knowledge, our 
understanding of knowledge may be greatly enhanced by considering the 
nature of its grounds and its relation to other important notions. Indeed, 
justification is of great epistemological interest even apart from its relation 
to knowledge. Let us consider justification in ways we have not so far and, in 
that light, pursue its relation to knowledge.
Knowledge and justification
So far, I have often spoken as if, at least in non-testimonial cases, although 
not all justified true belief constitutes knowledge, all knowledge is at least 
justified true belief. But if the reliability view is correct in any of its plausible 
forms, certain true beliefs should be reliably groundable without the subject’s 
having grounds of a kind that yields justification. Let us explore some cases 
in which knowledge without justification seems possible.
The apparent possibility of clairvoyant knowledge
Imagine a man who foretells the results of horse races. He always gets them 
right, even though he never inspects the horses’ records, but merely looks at 
them and their jockeys closely as they amble about and line up. He has no 
idea why he believes what he does about the results; and after the races he 
does not even check his accuracy. He does not bet nor especially care who 
wins. He does, however, have definite beliefs, and we can suppose that it 
seems natural to him to believe what he does and that there is nothing in his 
state of mind that would lead him to mistrust himself or think he is guilty 
of wishful thinking or “crazy.” He might be puzzled at forming such beliefs 
as he does, but he might not even think of their origin or status. It is not 
clear just how such a thing is possible; but it clearly is possible. There could 
be a way, for instance, in which both his belief that a horse will win and its 
actually winning are common effects of the same causes, so that his getting 
the right answers is not lucky accident, but prophetic in a way, or perhaps 
sixth-sensory.1

Knowledge, justification, and truth  271
Now it appears that this man knows who will win the races. But he surely 
does not have justified beliefs as to who will win. He would have justification 
if he kept track of his record and noted how well his forecasts turn out. But 
he does not bother to check on his predictions regularly and has no idea that 
he is constantly getting the results right. Perhaps we may also assume that (as 
may be thought to be essential in the case) he also has no good justification 
for thinking he is not reliable or not justified.2
One might protest that he has a kind of foresight which generates directly 
justified beliefs on the basis of certain experiences, somewhat as perception 
does. But why would one say this, other than to preserve the view that knowl-
edge implies justified belief? There is no candidate for a sense organ, nor any 
kind of conscious state that sustains or has any grounding connection with 
the belief. Nor need he have sensory images representing the victorious horse 
crossing the finish line; and although we assume that there is some causal 
process by which he receives the crucial information, we have no idea what 
it is and cannot plausibly regard it as conferring justification, particularly if 
the man is puzzled by his having the predictive beliefs at all and has no good 
reason to think they are justified.
Natural knowledge
Another kind of case (and a more realistic one) argues for the same point. In 
some of the literature of psychology we read of the idiot savant. Such people 
are considered mentally deficient, yet they have, by nature, as it seems, some 
extraordinary abilities. We may assume that those adept at arithmetic under-
stand enough to count and to use elementary mathematical concepts. Some 
of them can apparently just reel off the answers to arithmetical problems that 
normally require calculation in writing. Let us assume that they regularly 
get right answers, yet have no idea how they do so: it is not, for instance, 
by rapidly doing in their head what we would laboriously do in our heads if 
our memories enabled us to solve the problem mentally. Nor is it by rational 
insight into the truths in question, such as one has for certain simple logical 
or arithmetic propositions. It is not known how they do it, and let us assume 
they have no sense of why they believe the answers in question.
Now consider the first time one of these people—Pip, let us say—reels off 
the answer to a multiplication problem involving two three-digit numbers. 
He cannot see that he has a built-in ability or note a series of successes. (We 
may make a similar assumption about the horse race predictor’s initial suc-
cess.) But he believes the answer and might also know it. For one thing, the 
belief is a manifestation of an arithmetic ability that is stable and reliable. 
One could claim there is a mathematical sense that yields directly justified 
beliefs. But this seems ad hoc, a move designed only to save the view the 
example counters: that knowing entails justifiedly believing.
If we all turned out to have this mathematical ability under certain condi-
tions, such as an impression of the proposition as true (if only in the form of 

272  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
an image of it written in boldface), then we might come to believe that there 
is an arithmetic sense which generates such directly justified beliefs. Perhaps 
that shows that our concept of justification might evolve; but it does not 
show that the arithmetic beliefs now in question are justified.
If, as seems likely, Pip’s beliefs and those of the horse race predictor are 
knowledge, they are special cases. We might call them natural knowledge, 
since they seem rooted in the nature of its possessors and do not depend on 
their training, or their having learned much beyond what is needed to possess 
the concepts required for holding the relevant arithmetic beliefs, or on their 
using either their senses or, so far as we can tell, their powers of reason. But 
even if natural knowledge is rare, its possibility would show that justified 
belief is not necessarily a constituent in knowledge.
If there can be natural knowledge, that possibility shows something 
important about both knowledge and justification. What inclines us to grant 
that Pip knows the answer is chiefly the regularity of his correct results 
and apparent stability of the mechanism yielding them. The accuracy of the 
results is surely not accidental; it is rooted in some inner calculative process 
which regularly—and reliably—yields correct results. On being presented 
with the problem, he registers the truth. He need have no sense of calculating 
or even an appearance of truth or self-evidence, such as one may have when 
one directly grasps an a priori proposition.3
There is, then, no mental process of calculation of which the person is 
aware, or anything else of the sort that grounds justification, as visual impres-
sions can ground it even when one is (unknowingly) having a vivid hallucina-
tion. The calculator cannot point to anything to justify the answers, even 
in the elementary way we can cite how things look to us to justify believing 
there is a green field before us. This contrast suggests that there may be a 
major difference between knowledge and justification that explains why the 
former seems possible without the latter. Let us explore this.
Internalism and externalism in epistemology
Could it be that justification and knowledge are grounded in quite different 
ways? Perhaps their grounding differs in a way connected with the basic con-
trast between them in relation to truth. Apart from self-knowledge, knowl-
edge is at least true belief about the external world (or external matters, such 
as those of logic). Insofar as it is true belief about the external world, one 
might expect its grounds to be essentially in that world. The justifiedness of 
a belief, by contrast, does not entail its truth and seems to many philosophers 
to rest on a source “inside” the mind.
Some of our examples suggest that what justifies a belief—the ground of 
its justification—is something internal to the subject. The internal, in the rel-
evant sense, is what we might call the (internally) accessible: that to which one 
has access by introspection or reflection. Introspection can be simply focus-
ing on what is in consciousness and reflection can be as brief as considering a 

Knowledge, justification, and truth  273
proposition. The accessible includes what is actually in consciousness—such 
as thoughts and visual and other sensory impressions—though here it can be 
misleading to say that the subject has access, since the phenomena are present 
to the mind and thus, as it were, being accessed.
The accessible also includes dispositional mental phenomena, such as 
beliefs and desires. To have (internal) access to something is either to have 
it in consciousness or to be able, through self-consciousness or at least by 
reflection, whether introspective or directed “outward” toward an abstract 
subject matter, to become aware of it, in the (phenomenal) sense that it is in 
one’s consciousness.4
Call the view that justification is grounded in accessible elements internal-
ism about justification. By contrast, some of the same examples, such as those 
of the predictor and the calculator, suggest that knowledge may be grounded 
entirely in what is external to the mind, in a sense of ‘external’ implying that 
the grounds are not internally accessible to the subject. Call the view that the 
grounds of knowledge are at least in part external to the mind externalism 
about knowledge.
There are counterparts of these views: externalism may be maintained for 
justification, and a kind of internalism may be held to apply to knowledge. 
The plausible counterparts are not pure (or unrestricted) externalism about 
justification and pure (or unrestricted) internalism about knowledge. For 
one thing, because knowledge entails truth it cannot be understood entirely 
in terms of internal variables, since no combination of these, however well 
it may justify a belief about the external world, entails the truth of that 
belief. And there appears to be some respect in which justification is inter-
nally grounded, even if it must also imply (say) some objective probability 
that justified beliefs are true.5 I propose to say, then, that internalism about 
knowledge is the restricted internalist view that knowledge is at least in part 
grounded in elements internal to the mind; and externalism about justifi-
cation is the restricted externalist view that justification is at least in part 
grounded in elements external to the mind.
Consider beliefs based on sense experience as plausible support for 
internalism about justification. My justification for believing that there is a 
green field before me is grounded in my sense impressions, and I can become 
directly aware of them (hence access them) by simply “looking within” or 
by appropriate reflection on my experience. By contrast, the grounds of my 
knowledge that there is such a field are perceptual and require its actually 
being there. To become aware that I am perceiving it, by contrast with hal-
lucinating it, I must do more than consider the contents of my mind. I need 
evidence from other visual standpoints, or from other senses. Even when 
I get it, skeptics will tend to deny that I know, since I could be repeatedly 
hallucinating. This skeptical problem will be pursued in Chapters 13 and 14. 
The point here is simply that sensory experience, as a basis of justification, is 
accessible to introspection in a way that perceptual experience, as a basis of 
knowledge, is not.

274  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
Justificationist views of knowledge (roughly those that construe it as 
essentially embodying justification of a kind that is not analyzable in terms 
of reliability) typically embody an internalist conception of justification. 
Reliability views of knowledge typically embody a strongly externalist 
conception of knowledge; and if they appeal to the notion of justification, 
they conceive it too as grounded in ways that need not be accessible to con-
sciousness, above all to introspection or reflection. (Reflection need not be 
introspection and is important for the internalist account of our access to the 
grounds of a priori justification: above all to our understanding of concepts 
and their relations.)
Some varieties of internalism and externalism
Internalism about justification and externalism about knowledge are, in 
their qualified forms, compatible, whereas pure internalist and externalist 
views cannot both hold, either for justification or for knowledge. There are 
many versions of internalism and externalism, whether they are restricted as 
I have suggested or meant to apply unrestrictedly to both justification and 
knowledge.
An important respect in which internalist views differ among them-
selves concerns how readily the justifiers are accessible to consciousness. 
An im­portant and parallel way in which externalist views differ among 
themselves is in the kind of non-introspective knowledge or justified belief 
they take to be possible regarding the grounds of knowledge: one might, for 
instance, think that commonsense observation is enough to ascertain how 
reliable perception is, or one might take scientific evidence to be necessary 
for determining this.
Many points underlie the contrast between internalism and external-
ism. My concern is chiefly with what seem the most plausible internalist 
and externalist views: internalism about justification and externalism about 
knowledge. To simplify matters, let us consider these views mainly in relation 
to the nature of the grounds of justification and knowledge, not as applied to 
either how, or how strongly, those grounds justify. This is, however, a further 
respect in which internalist and externalist views differ among themselves as 
well as from one another, and I will note some points about it.
The imagined internalist about justification holds only that the grounds 
of one’s justified beliefs are internal, for instance sensory states of the kind 
present in perception or beliefs, of which we can be conscious by virtue of 
their manifestations in consciousness, such as an assenting thought of the 
believed propositions. The view does not say that how, or how strongly, those 
grounds justify beliefs based on them must (say, by guaranteeing their truth) 
be an internal matter and thereby, in principle, accessible to introspection. 
Similarly, the imagined externalist holds that what grounds knowledge—reli-
able production or sustenance of the constituent true belief—is not wholly 
internal, and so not altogether accessible to consciousness, even if part of the 

Knowledge, justification, and truth  275
ground, say sensory experience, is. If what grounds knowledge is not wholly 
internal, then how it does so is not either.
It is of course natural to think (as reliabilists tend to) that how such belief 
production grounds knowledge is less likely to be accessible to conscious-
ness than what elements ground knowledge. The former is, for one thing, 
more complex. Similarly, internalists may hold (plausibly) that our access by 
introspection or reflection to what grounds our justification is better than 
our access to how it grounds that justification.
The overall contrast between internalism and externalism
If these internalist views about justification and externalist views about 
knowledge are roughly correct, then the main point of contrast between 
knowledge and justification is this. Apart from self-knowledge, whose object 
is in some sense mental and thus in some way internal, what one knows is 
known on the basis of one’s meeting conditions that are not (at least not 
entirely) internally accessible, as states or processes in one’s consciousness 
are. By contrast, what we justifiedly believe, or are simply justified in believ-
ing, is determined by mental states and processes to which we have internal 
(introspective or reflectional) access: our visual experiences, for instance, or 
our memory impressions, or our reasoning processes, or our beliefs of sup-
porting propositions. All of these are paradigms of the sorts of things about 
which we can have much introspective knowledge.
It is significant that for the externalist about knowledge, even introspec-
tive knowledge, whose object is mental, is based partly on something not 
accessible to consciousness, namely the appropriate kind of functional 
relation between the thing known, say my imaging, and the beliefs about it 
that constitute self-knowledge, in this case my believing that I am imaging. 
Roughly, because my imaging process reliably grounds my believing that I 
am imaging, I know I am; but I have no internal access (and ordinarily none 
at all) to the reliability of this process. Even if I can be aware of some of the 
presumably causal connections between imaging and believing I am imaging, 
I would apparently need inductive, partly external evidence to become aware 
of the reliability of the process grounding such belief.
What is central for knowledge, in the externalist view, is that the beliefs 
constituting it register truth. As this objective connection between the 
grounds of a belief and its truth is understood, the belief-grounding factors 
are not internal in the crucial way: they are not necessarily accessible to con-
sciousness. An externalist can grant that I can become directly conscious of 
my believing that I pruned my blue spruce. But internal access to the memo-
rial belief does not imply such access to the reliability of the process by which 
memory produces true beliefs about the past. I can become aware of that 
reliability only through a study of how well memory works in producing 
true beliefs. This requires at least making observations, some of which, like 
observations of the spruce, are external, and indeed relying on memory of 

276  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
my results in checking on my memory. I cannot rely on introspection or 
reflection alone in determining the reliability of my memory; and indeed, I 
cannot without circularity test it for reliability at all (we will reconsider this 
last problem in discussing skepticism).
 On the other hand, what is central for internalism about justification is 
that justified beliefs be those that one is in some sense in the right in hold-
ing, given the sensory impressions, rational intuitions, and other internal 
materials introspectively accessible to one. In very broad terms, the stron-
gest contrast may be this. Insofar as we may appropriately use the language 
of rights to frame an analogy, we might say that the internalist regarding 
justification tends to conceive justification, in accordance with certain justi-
ficational standards, as a matter of having a right to believe, and of knowledge 
as occurring when justification is combined with truth in a certain way; the 
externalist about knowledge tends to conceive knowledge, in accordance 
with certain epistemic standards, as a matter of being right and of justification 
as occurring when one’s belief is, in a certain way, likely to be right.6 Just as 
we can have a right to do something and not do it, we can have justification 
for believing something and not believe it; but in both cases we have a basis 
that puts us beyond a certain kind of criticism. In neither case, however, does 
our right guarantee that we believe truly or do the right thing: in the realm 
of belief as of action, protection from criticism is not protection from error.
This terminology can be misleading if one thinks of having a right as 
always applicable to actions; for beliefs are not actions, nor can we in gen-
eral—if ever—bring it about at will that we believe something, the way we 
can move our limbs at will. But there are rights to property, and that is not 
action either. We must also resist thinking that we have a right to believe 
something when it is not our duty not to believe it—the notion of a right 
appealed to here is associated with critical standards but does not presup-
pose ascribing to us duties to believe or withhold belief. There may be some 
such duties, but even apart from that we should see the notion of a right as 
facilitating a useful analogy between epistemology and ethics.
The terminology of rights is misleading if one thinks that being within 
one’s rights puts one beyond all criticism. It does not: one might have a 
right to punish a child but because of special circumstances be criticizable 
for doing it. Similarly, one could be criticizable for holding a justified belief, 
say because there is still room for doubt and the matter is so important that 
one should withhold belief until one’s grounds are conclusive. But when one 
holds a justified belief, there are certain kinds of criticisms one is not liable 
to, such as that of making a groundless assumption or being intellectually 
sloppy. In different normative language, we might say that justified beliefs 
are in a certain sense creditworthy, as they are grounded in considerations 
that support them in a way an intellectually responsible person should rec-
ognize. Moreover, just as some rights are better grounded or stronger than 
others, or both, creditworthiness also admits of degrees.
The central internalist idea about justification is that of meeting a certain 

Knowledge, justification, and truth  277
justificational standard that one can conform to on the basis of a kind of 
response to accessible elements. Internalists strongly associate having 
justification for belief and a readiness to justify it: roughly, to give one’s 
ground(s) for it. This readiness presupposes that the grounds are accessible. 
This conception of justification contrasts with the reliabilist notion of jus-
tification as having, on the right kind of ground, a true or at least probably 
true belief. The difference might be described as roughly between a kind of 
permissible, or minimally creditable, belief and a kind of successful belief. 
Moving further from the language associated with rights (as I think wise), 
we might say that the contrast is between belief that is internally and justi-
ficationally well-grounded and belief that is externally (in an objective way) 
truth-conducively well-grounded. One appeal of the externalist conception 
of justification is that it links grounds of justification closely with grounds of 
knowledge, which in some sense seem to be clearly truth-conducive.
Internalist and externalist versions of virtue 
epistemology
Internalist and externalist approaches in epistemology represent a basic 
division. The contrast between them can help in understanding any compre-
hensive epistemological theory, and applying them to a sample theory can 
also help in understanding them. Consider, for instance, virtue epistemology, 
which represents theories committed to (roughly) the position that knowl-
edge and justified belief are to be understood as expressions of epistemic 
virtue, taken as a capacity, such as observational acuity, apt for arriving at 
truth.
Virtue epistemology is in part modeled on virtue ethics, which takes the 
concept of moral virtue to be the basic moral concept and construes morally 
sound actions as the kinds that express that capacity, say by being grounded 
in the virtuous character traits of honesty or justice. For instance, Aristotle 
said of the virtues of justice and self-control, “actions are called just or tem-
perate when they are the sort that a just or temperate person would do. But 
the just or temperate person is not [defined as] the one who [merely] does 
these actions.”7
Different theories analyze and divide epistemic virtue in different ways, 
say into observational and a priori virtues and further into perceptual versus 
introspective virtues and (on the a priori side) into logical and mathemati-
cal ones. For an internalist virtue theory, justified belief would be (roughly) 
belief based on internally accessible grounds understood in terms of, and 
connected in the person with, an epistemic virtue. Thus, a justified belief 
might be based on sensory experiences taken as the sort of thing an epis-
temically responsible person relies on for the kind of proposition in ques-
tion. On an externalist virtue theory, justified belief would be belief based 
on processes that are appropriately connected with a virtue and reliably lead 
to truth. Accurate observations producing true perceptual beliefs would 

278  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
exemplify such a process, and making them is a typical manifestation of 
epistemic virtue.8
For either kind of virtue theory, knowledge would imply truth; but 
whereas the internalist would also require that knowledge rest on acces-
sible grounds, the externalist would not. To see the difference better, recall 
Macbeth’s hallucination of the dagger. For an internalist virtue theorist, if 
his sensory experience is normal enough and he has no accessible reason to 
doubt his acuity (say because he sees the dagger as hanging on a peg on the 
wall, rather than—incredibly—as in midair), then his belief that there is a 
dagger before him may be justified: it is the kind of belief a person with virtu-
ous intellectual character would form in the circumstances. For a reliabilist 
(hence externalist) virtue theorist, the relevant process grounding his belief 
is presumably not reliable and his belief does not express epistemic virtue.9 
Similarly, the idiot savant—our lightning calculator—would lack epistemic 
virtue on the internalist account but might, on some externalist accounts, 
have it—in the form of a specific arithmetic virtue.
The chief difference is that virtue is defined in terms of internal standards 
in the first case and external ones in the second. But both views are virtue 
approaches to justification because they construe it as an expression of epis-
temic virtue, as opposed to defining epistemic virtue (as many epistemolo-
gists would) as the sort of character feature that tends to produce justified 
belief. It is possible, however, to build internalist requirements into a reliabi-
list virtue epistemology, just as one may build justification into knowledge. 
One might hold, for instance, that a belief constitutes knowledge only if it is 
both reliably produced and manifests an epistemic virtue in such a way that 
the knower can, with careful reflection (hence by accessing some accessible 
justificatory element), say something in favor of it.10
This contrast between externalist and internalist virtue theories can be 
developed in many ways. For instance, on externalist lines, the crucial fea-
ture of the relevant epistemic virtue would be producing a favorable ratio of 
true to false beliefs; on internalist lines, the crucial feature would be either 
producing such a ratio on the basis of internally accessible grounds or—if 
justification rather than knowledge is the epistemic target—producing a suit-
able ratio of beliefs that are internally justified.
The contrast between internalist and externalist virtue epistemologies is 
also expressible in terms of the difference between an epistemic power and an 
intellectual virtue in the ordinary sense illustrated by clarity of mind, imagi-
nation, and logical rigor. Epistemic powers are exhibited by the lightning 
calculator who reliably gets correct answers and, similarly, by people who, 
in the automatic way that some can tell the sex of a chicken, simply detect 
truths about others’ thoughts yet have no idea how they do it. The math-
ematical and psychological powers in question are certainly good things and, 
in that generic sense, virtues. But suppose we conceive virtues as Aristotle 
did and as, in the ethical tradition following him, character traits that one 
develops by intellectual exercise and through which one acquires justification 

Knowledge, justification, and truth  279
on the basis of grounds in one’s ken. Then it becomes important to determine 
whether virtue epistemology is focused more on epistemic powers than, as 
its name suggests, on intellectual virtues. The determination may be quite 
different for different positions in virtue epistemology.
Some apparent problems for virtue epistemology
At this point, we can discern an apparent problem confronting epistemic 
virtue theories. Precisely how can we specify the kind of character feature 
we wish to call an epistemic virtue without already having at least a rough 
account of justified belief and knowledge? One answer would be that, as in 
the task of constructing any epistemological theory, we need only an intui-
tive sense of what count as instances of justification and of knowledge; we 
can then construct a trait-based account of what they are. Perhaps, however, 
such a sense is required for construction of any account of justification or 
knowledge. Consideration of natural knowledge still leads to some doubt 
whether there is a plausible conception of a virtue, as distinct from a power, 
whose exercise yields such knowledge. If the lightning calculator knows the 
answers in an automatic way and with no sense of the basis of the beliefs, 
there is obviously a cognitive competence and it is clearly a good thing to 
have. Still, to those who think of virtues as praiseworthy in themselves and as 
exercised for reasons connected with a kind of good the agent understands, 
it may seem that the arithmetic competence in question is elevated to a virtue 
by its desirable outputs rather than being an element in character whose 
manifestations in beliefs render those beliefs creditworthy.
It is true that we may be able to devise a set of conditions for belief rooted 
in a good epistemic constitution—epistemic character, in one sense of that 
phrase—such that virtuously formed belief is equivalent to justified belief 
(or, when true, to knowledge). The question is whether we do not do better 
to try to understand the relevant character traits, such as perceptual acuity, 
intellectual insight, and logical rigor, by appeal to non-virtue-theoretic 
accounts of justification and knowledge, rather than proceed in the other 
direction, trying to understand justification and knowledge in terms of intel-
lectual character.
For most epistemologists, the natural approach is first to understand jus-
tified belief and knowledge in some non-virtue-theoretic way and then to 
explicate epistemic virtue as the kind of character trait suited to producing 
them, a kind, indeed, that can be cultivated by internalizing the more basic 
standards for appraising belief. Roughly, the idea is that an epistemic virtue 
is to be analyzed as a trait apt for producing knowledge or justified belief; 
knowledge is not to be analyzed as, say, true belief reliably produced by an 
exercise of an epistemic virtue, or justified belief as the kind grounded in an 
epistemic virtue.
There are various approaches to solving this kind of problem. Quite 
apart from whether they succeed, the notion of epistemic virtue provides 

280  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
a distinctive perspective on both knowledge and justification. Moreover, 
knowledge and justified belief could usefully be understood as equivalent to 
notions rooted in virtue theory, even if the best way to analyze the former 
is along the kinds of internalist or externalist lines we have been exploring.
The internality of justification and the externality of 
knowledge
Regardless of whether we focus on virtue theories or on the more common 
epistemological positions we have been considering—individual-belief 
accounts of justification and knowledge as opposed to epistemic-character 
accounts—the idea that knowledge is externally grounded and justification 
internally grounded would help to explain why reliability theories are, in the 
ways I have indicated, as plausible as they are for knowledge, yet less plau-
sible for justification.
It is true that the sources of justification of belief seem generally to be 
sources of true belief. But must they be? Could not my apparently normal 
visual experience in hallucinating a green field sometimes justify me in 
believing there is one quite as strongly as an ordinary seeing of it? It could. 
Moreover, though I would not know that there is a green field before me, the 
internalist would hold that my justification for believing there is could be 
quite as good as it would be if I did know it.
To be sure, if I justifiedly believe I may be hallucinating, then I am  
unlikely to be justified in believing there is a green field there. But my beliefs, 
including beliefs about possible hallucinations, are themselves internal. We 
thus have one internal factor affecting the way another bears on justification, 
not an external factor preventing a basic source of justification from generat-
ing it. Here, then, internalism does justice to the phenomenon of defeat of 
justification.
Moreover, notice how the clear cases of highly reliable belief produc-
tion illustrated by the predictor and the lightning calculator do not appear 
to generate justification, though they do appear to generate knowledge. 
Furthermore, no matter how reliable my perceptual processes are, say in 
giving me impressions of birds flying by, and thereby true beliefs that they 
are flying by, if I confidently and reflectively believe that my vision is unreli-
able, and especially if I also justifiedly believe this, then it is doubtful that 
I am justified in believing that birds are flying by. The more confident and 
reflective my justified belief that my vision is unreliable, the less the justifica-
tion, if any, of my belief that birds are flying by. Thus, in addition to reliable 
grounding alone not producing justification, its apparent capacity to produce 
justification in common circumstances is vulnerable (at least) to justified 
beliefs that the beliefs it produces are unjustified or their underpinnings 
unreliable.
If knowledge and justification do contrast in the suggested way, why 
is justification important to knowledge at all, as it certainly seems to be? 

Knowledge, justification, and truth  281
Here are two points by way of partial answer. First, the sources of justified 
belief—experience and reason—are generally (if in a different way) sources 
of knowledge. Second, virtually the only knowledge we can conceive of for 
beings like ourselves—and certainly the normal kind we take ourselves to 
have—is apparently grounded, at least indirectly, in those sources, broadly 
understood. If these points are correct, then we can at least understand how 
knowledge typically arises if we think of it as (in part) justified belief. If, 
moreover, we think of it as appropriately justified true belief, then, conceiv-
ing knowledge under that description, we can at least pick out the vast major-
ity of its instances.
Justification, knowledge, and truth
There may be a further, perhaps deeper, point implicit in what has been said 
about justification and knowledge. Justification by its very nature has some 
kind of connection with truth. One can see this by noting that there is some-
thing fundamentally wrong with supposing that a belief’s being justified has 
nothing whatever to do with its truth. This in turn can be seen by consider-
ing how the process of justifying a belief, conceived as showing that the belief 
has the property of being justified, is always taken to provide grounds for 
considering the belief true. Justification (justifying) of our beliefs is by its 
nature the sort of thing we do when their truth is challenged; their justified-
ness—which entails justification for taking them to be true—is what this 
process of justification shows when it succeeds.
The connection between justification and truth is perhaps most readily 
seen in the case of a priori justification. Consider such paradigm cases as a 
priori justified beliefs of self-evident propositions and of propositions that 
self-evidently follow from them, as do some very simple theorems of logic. 
Here, our apparently most plausible conception of a priori justification entails 
the truth of the beliefs so justified.11 These cases are unlike perceptual ones 
in that if a belief claimed to be a priori justified turns out to be false, there is 
at least normally a defect in the purported justification, say a misunderstand-
ing or a careless error in reasoning, whereas a false perceptual belief can be 
strongly justified.
Justification of empirical beliefs also seems connected with truth. If, for 
instance, I am justified, by a clear visual impression, in believing there is a 
field before me, then I may take it to be true that there is one. If, on the other 
hand, we discovered that a certain kind of empirical belief is always false, we 
would not consider a belief of that kind justified. Imagine that the smell of 
onions ceased to indicate their presence and that beliefs grounded in it no 
longer correspond to the facts (thus to truth) as determined by other sources 
of belief, such as vision and touch. Then we would have good reason to cease 
to regard these olfactory impressions as a source of justification. As we cease 
to take a ground of belief as indicating truth, we tend to cease to take beliefs 
thus grounded to be justified.

282  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
These points about the relation of justification to truth suggest that even 
if it is an internal matter whether a belief is justified, the standards we use for 
determining justification are responsive to our considered judgments about 
which internal sources tend to produce true beliefs. The way we conceive 
justification, then, makes it well suited to help us understand knowledge, 
in at least this respect: when a belief is justified, it has the sort of property 
which, by its very nature as apparently grounding the belief in the real world, 
we take to count toward the truth of the belief, hence (other things being 
equal) toward its being knowledge.
Justified true belief need not be knowledge, and knowledge apparently 
need not be justified belief. But normally knowledge arises from the same 
sources as justification: normally, the internal states and processes that jus-
tify our beliefs also connect our beliefs with the external facts in virtue of 
which those beliefs are true.
The value problem
In the light of what we have now seen regarding the nature of knowledge 
and the relation between knowledge and justification, we are in a position to 
explore what has come to be called the value problem—one raised by Plato 
in his dialogue Meno. Why is knowledge more valuable than mere true belief? 
This is a difficult and multi-dimensional question. Only a few points perti-
nent to this problem can be made here.12
Why is knowledge preferable to merely true belief?
It is important to see at the outset what kind of value is at issue. Two kinds 
are commonly distinguished, the kind of value things may have in them-
selves—commonly called intrinsic value—and the kind of value things may 
have as a means to something of intrinsic value. The latter is typically called 
instrumental value (and a thing may have both kinds of value). We might now 
ask whether knowledge has value in itself, whether it has instrumental value, 
and whether it has either kind as knowledge rather than simply as true belief.
There is some plausibility in saying that knowledge is both good in itself 
and (often) good as a means to other things that are good in themselves, such 
as a beautiful building whose creation knowledge makes possible or, to shift 
from product to process, enjoying the construction of such a building. As 
these examples show, there is a profound difference between kinds of things 
that are good in themselves: enjoying something is an experience; but neither 
buildings nor knowledge is an experience. I propose to call non-experiential 
things that are good in themselves inherently good and treat only experiences 
as strictly speaking intrinsically good.
One reason to make this distinction is that intrinsic goodness is valu-
ationally more basic than inherent goodness (and is plausibly taken to be 
the basic kind of value). Consider a beautiful painting. It is good in itself, 

Knowledge, justification, and truth  283
non-relationally, though it may also be good relationally, say as a means. 
Beautiful things are good whether or not they are instrumentally good, as 
means to some further good. Still, the beautiful painting is good because of 
the intrinsic goodness of appropriate (actual or possible) experiences of its 
colors and shapes. If no one has a good (aesthetic) experience of the painting, 
its inherent value is in a sense unrealized. The point of painting is (largely) to 
produce something that yields a good experience in being properly viewed. 
The painting is not, however, a means to this experience; it is a constituent in 
it, not, say, a cause of it. As this suggests, in such cases we should conceive 
the inherently good not as good on account of what it is a means to, but 
as good depending on whether an appropriate kind of experience of it on 
the basis of its non-relational properties is intrinsically good, for instance 
aesthetically rewarding.13
To ask, then, whether knowledge is good in itself is implicitly to ask 
about the intrinsic value of an appropriate kind of experience of it, say in 
comprehending contemplation of knowledge of a logical principle. This is 
not merely contemplating a belief that is knowledge, but contemplating a 
belief as knowledge, in this case as knowledge of the principle in question. 
With everyday knowledge, such as that there is furniture around me, it is not 
obvious that contemplating it, even as knowledge, is inherently valuable. But 
there can be a kind of positive and valuable response to contemplating one’s 
knowing such things. In any case, some instances of knowledge surely are 
inherently valuable; and even apart from that it appears that if merely true 
belief that p has any inherent value, then (other things equal) knowledge that 
p has more. This approach is helpful in answering the question why merely 
true belief might not have the same kinds of value as knowledge and whether, 
even if not, justified true belief might. Let us take these questions in turn.
Mere true belief, belief which is not even knowledge or justified, does not 
seem inherently good, say creditworthy. Reflect on what it typically is: only 
by accident or by good fortune is the belief true. The believer is in no way 
creditworthy for being right, and it is plausible to think that, as manifesting 
this point (and perhaps in other ways), the belief is not creditworthy either. 
Moreover, there is some reason to think that—at least from the point of view 
of being intellectually virtuous—one ought not to hold beliefs that are not 
(to at least some extent) justified. Reflection on this kind of belief does not 
have the positive character (a kind of intrinsic goodness) that should mark 
comprehending reflection on something good in itself.
The verdict regarding the instrumental value of merely true beliefs seems 
more complicated. On the plausible assumption that true beliefs by and 
large guide our lives better than false ones, we might say at least this. First, 
although a true belief—say that eating raw pork is risky—may produce or 
guide the same actions whether it is justified or not, if it is not based on a 
justifying ground, it will not, other things equal, be as stable as if it were 
so based; one would not, for instance, have any basis for it that would lead 
one to resist giving it up under even slight (misleading) counter-evidence. 

284  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
Granted, other things may not be equal. If, for instance, I justifiedly believe 
that p only on the basis of testimony, you could undercut my justification 
by plausibly attacking my source even if I retained my belief that p. But 
many kinds of grounds for justification (as for knowledge), such as the many 
kinds provided directly by perception or intuition, are not easily undercut 
or overridden; and in any case, other things equal, beliefs that are justified 
or constitute knowledge are more stable than beliefs that are true but do not 
have a justificatory or an epistemic basis.
To be sure, a bad reason for believing p—such as a sophistical consider-
ation that does not even probabilistically support p—might happen to give 
the belief much stability. But believing for a bad reason would not only be 
an inherently bad thing, in being a condition contrary to intellectual virtue, 
which it ill-befits. It would also produce an at least instrumentally bad ten-
dency to believe for bad reasons of the same kind. Believing for bad reasons 
may, more often than not, be expected to imply or lead to believing false-
hoods. Second, if one has no adequate support for believing p—which would 
be typical with beliefs held for bad reasons14—then, other things equal, one 
cannot as easily get others to accept p, and this may interfere with harmoni-
ous relations, or at least reduce the chance of getting others’ support.
The value of knowledge compared with that of justified true 
belief
The value which knowledge that p tends to have over that of justified true 
belief that p is more difficult to see. But recall the cases in which one has a 
justified true belief that is not knowledge. In many of them, one is correct 
only by accident or good fortune. In that case, the belief would seem to have 
at best less inherent value than knowledge, even if it is still creditworthy to 
some extent, depending on the kind and degree of justification. But what of 
the lottery case? There a justified belief that one will lose is not true by acci-
dent or good fortune, since one has only a single ticket out of a million. Still, 
knowing one will lose would require a basis beyond the mere probability 
calculation underlying one’s justification. This basis would yield additional 
grounding and would tend to provide additional stability. Stability in a true 
belief seems inherently valuable, at least where we see the stability as based 
on knowledge-grounding elements. Such stability is surely also instrumen-
tally valuable. True beliefs help us to map reality; they should not be easily 
erased. Justifiers and knowledge-grounding elements tend to sustain true 
beliefs based on them.
A further point about at least many justified true beliefs, and hence about 
much knowledge, is that they are intimately connected with whatever mea-
sure of understanding goes with their particular justification. This may not 
be appreciable, as where testimony is one’s only basis of justification; but for 
much that we justifiedly believe, our justifying ground also provides some 
understanding—indeed that ground is understanding in the case of those 

Knowledge, justification, and truth  285
self-evident propositions we justifiedly believe in the non-inferential way 
described in Chapter 5. Similarly, if I believe p on the basis of proving it, my 
proof both justifies my belief and provides a kind of understanding of why 
p is true. By contrast, in at least many cases of empirically justified belief, 
we gain or can gain some understanding of the justifying factor from the 
proposition it justifies for us. If knowledge of a distinctive roar is my basis for 
believing a helicopter is flying nearby, I can understand the character of the 
sounds I hear on the basis of taking them to be caused by engine and propel-
ler sounds. Very roughly, the difference in question is that in the a priori 
cases what justifies provides understanding of the content of the belief it 
justifies, and in the empirical cases the content of the justified belief provides 
understanding of the justifier. May we say, however, that other things equal, 
where one knows p as opposed to simply having a justified true belief of it, 
the understanding provided in the ways just illustrated is greater? This is far 
from obvious and may not be so, but it might still be true that in the former 
case, the understanding is more stable.
I have so far presupposed that understanding has value. It surely does. 
Understanding, even when dispositional, is inherently as well as instru-
mentally valuable. Contemplating it tends to have a positive element and 
may embody the reward of satisfaction. We seek understanding for its own 
sake—hence non-instrumentally. Contemplating it often embodies the sense 
of having achieved—or at least of possessing—something worthwhile. The 
instrumental value of understanding is perhaps even more variable than its 
inherent value, but understanding anything can be a means to achieving 
something.
Much of our understanding is dispositional and as such not in conscious-
ness (though we may be conscious that we have it). Consciousness that I see 
why knowledge is not justified true belief is not consciousness of something 
that explains why not. But understanding may also be occurrent, and occur-
rently understanding a proposition, as when one consciously realizes the full 
meaning of a theory, seems intrinsically good. There is often a special grati-
fication in the occurrent understanding that consists in consciously seeing 
why something is so. “Ah, of course!” one may sometimes think triumphally.
Regarding instrumental value, knowledge again generally adds something 
to mere justified true belief. Take the lottery. If I know I will lose, this must 
be on a ground, say because I know the drawing is fixed. Here (and in similar 
cases) I would have more to say to others about why I believe I will lose than 
where I believe this from calculating the probabilities. This would add instru-
mental value to my belief, for instance where I need to eliminate someone’s 
fervent hope of my soon becoming rich by winning the jackpot. (Some hope 
would be sustainable in a fair lottery.) I would also have a better explanation 
of why I believe I will lose than if I am justified simply by probability calcula-
tions. I have an additional explanatory factor and can now account for how 
my explanation of why I will lose differs from one that, before the drawing, 
the winner could give.

286  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
An even more difficult challenge occurs if we countenance knowledge 
that is constituted by non-justified belief, as with the lightning calculator. 
Perhaps this kind of knowledge is not better in itself than justified true belief. 
But it may be more accurate to say that justified true belief is better than 
such knowledge on the basis of manifesting intellectual virtue, but not as 
good on the basis of reflecting or otherwise reliably indicating the facts. The 
arithmetic beliefs in question, for instance, are based on the deliverance of 
a reliable mechanism. In this case, however, the calculator might not know 
why p is true, whereas those who calculate the result in the normal way can 
explain, in terms of arithmetic principles, why it is true.
As to instrumental value, we again find mixed results. Which of the two, 
mere justified true belief and knowledge constituted by non-justified belief, is 
more stable would vary from case to case, but even if the non-justified beliefs 
constituting knowledge are deeply rooted and highly stable, they might be 
difficult to justify even upon inquiring into possible evidence for them, as 
with the horse race predictor. They would then lack the kind of instrumental 
value belonging to beliefs of which we can convince others by citing our jus-
tification, or for which we can at least provide them—and ourselves—with 
the rational basis that our justification constitutes.
There are, then, some good reasons for several tentative conclusions.  
(1) At least where knowledge embodies justified true belief, it is inherently 
better than mere true belief, and (2) justified true belief that does not consti-
tute knowledge is also inherently better than mere true belief. (3) Both points 
are supported by the role of justification in yielding understanding, which is 
an inherent good. (4) By and large, the same preferability expressed in (1) and 
(2) holds for instrumental value, and (5) where knowledge does not embody 
justification, it may be inherently good on some counts and inherently bad 
on others (e.g. intellectual virtue). But (6) such knowledge is likely to be 
instrumentally better than mere true belief, though (7) perhaps not instru-
mentally better than justified true belief that does not constitute knowledge.
Theories of truth
The notion of truth figures in much of this book, and it has been discussed 
voluminously by philosophers. But even though it is more a metaphysical 
problem than an epistemological one, an outline of some of the main posi-
tions on the nature of truth may help us. It will add definiteness to the major 
theories of knowledge we have considered, and, more important, it will 
enable us to see that they can be largely neutral on the difficult question of 
precisely what account of truth is sound.
The correspondence theory of truth
The way of speaking of the truth that seems most natural in epistemology 
suggests that truth, like knowledge, is external (apart from propositions with 
such internal content as that I am thinking about knowledge). Whether there 

Knowledge, justification, and truth  287
is a green field before me is not a matter of states of my mind. It seems to be 
an objective matter independent of anyone’s mind, and the green seems to 
be present or not regardless of whether we believe it is. Whether my belief is 
true is determined by whether the field is actually there: by external reality.
Sometimes this is put by saying that in general the truth of our beliefs is 
not mind-dependent. If truth is not mind-dependent (unless it is about mind, 
say that I am silently reciting a line of Shakespeare), and if truth is at least 
in that sense objective, then we have a version of realism, roughly the view 
that there are external things which are as they are independently of what we 
take them to be. I am thinking of true propositions, and of truth as repre-
sented by them, whether believed or not, along the lines of a version of the 
correspondence theory of truth. Its central thesis is that true propositions 
“correspond” with reality. It is usually added that they are true in virtue of 
that correspondence. Thus, the proposition that there is a green field before 
me is true if in reality there is a green field before me; and it might also be said 
to be true in virtue of there really being such a field before me.15
An expression apparently equivalent to the first, modest formulation of 
the correspondence view would be this: to say that the proposition is true is 
to say that it correctly represents reality. This, in turn, is commonly taken 
to mean that it represents a fact. How else could we even think of truth, one 
might wonder? What else could it mean to say that a proposition is true other 
than that things (or the facts) really are as the proposition says?
Agreement on this, however, leaves room for much diversity. One can think 
of facts metaphysically or, in an ideal sense, methodologically. An important 
example of the latter view is the idea (articulated by the nineteenth-century 
philosopher C.S. Peirce) that truth is what scientific investigators would 
ultimately agree on. On the most common version of the metaphysical view, 
by contrast, there can be truths that would evade inquiry for ever, and so the 
concept of truth is not analyzable even in terms of an ideal method.
Minimalist and redundancy accounts of truth
One answer to the question of how to conceive truth uses the schema ‘p’ is 
true if and only if p; for instance, ‘Grass is green’ is true if, and only if, grass 
is green.16 One might now argue that to say something is true is equivalent to 
asserting it, in the way illustrated, and go on to hold that this equivalence is 
at least the main thing we need to understand about truth. This approach is 
associated with a minimalist account of truth. The idea is roughly that there 
is no more to understanding what constitutes truth than understanding this 
equivalence. For instance, we know what it is for people to assert proposi-
tions; we normally know what kinds of considerations confirm or disconfirm 
those; and we know under what sorts of conditions to agree or disagree.
If the minimalist account is correct, then asserting the correspondence 
of true propositions either with “reality” or with “the facts” is nothing more 
than an equivalent of endorsing the schema, or it goes too far. One might 
think that to give such a minimalist reading of the correspondence view is 

288  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
to abandon it altogether. Perhaps that is so, but at least the schema expresses 
a kind of correspondence: an equivalence between calling a proposition true 
and asserting it. There is a sense, moreover, in which each of these affirma-
tional acts can itself correspond to facts.
One might go even further than the minimalist account and say that, for 
instance, ‘ “Grass is green” is true’ is not just equivalent to ‘Grass is green’ 
but has essentially the same meaning. The relation would thus be like that 
between ‘circle’ and ‘locus of points equidistant from a given point’ rather 
than like that between ‘circle’ and ‘shape whose circumference equals its 
diameter times pi’. This identity of meaning, unlike the equivalence asserted 
by the minimalist view, would make the phrase ‘is true’ redundant in predi-
cating it of a proposition. ‘It is true that p’ would add nothing to the meaning 
of simply asserting that p, though it might be an emphatic way to assert it. On 
that basis, one might speak of a redundancy account of truth. On this view, 
saying ‘That is true’ is another way, perhaps a sometimes more emphatic way, 
of saying that p. But it has exactly the same content.17
The coherence theory of truth
There are other alternatives to the correspondence view. The best known is 
perhaps the coherence theory of truth. It takes many forms, but its central 
idea, expressed broadly, is that a true proposition is one that coheres appro-
priately with certain other propositions. (The theory may also be expressed 
in terms of what it is for beliefs to be true, but that formulation invites confu-
sion of the coherence theory of truth with the coherence theory of knowl-
edge, which, though knowledge is constituted by belief, is a quite different 
theory and does not depend on the coherence theory of truth.)
I cannot discuss truth in detail, but let me indicate how a coherence theory 
of truth might go if justification is its central concept. In outline, it might say 
that a true proposition is one which is fully justified by virtue of coherence 
with every other relevant justified proposition, where a justified proposition 
is, minimally, one that at least someone is (or anyway might be) justified in 
believing.18
There are serious difficulties in determining what propositions are both 
justified and relevant to the truth of another proposition which is plausibly 
thought to be true in virtue of coherence with them. Perhaps a plausible 
example of how truth can be based on coherence would be a proposition I 
am perceptually justified in believing, say that there is a maple tree before 
me, which coheres with what I justifiedly believe on the basis of memory, 
introspection, inference, and so on, as well as with what I or others would be 
justified in believing in these ways. This proposition would be true in virtue 
of coherence with others, such as that I seem to remember a maple there. To 
say that it is false, by contrast, would be to call it incoherent with certain 
others, such as the proposition that I fail to have a visual impression of a tree 
in the relevant place.

Knowledge, justification, and truth  289
The propositions for which I now have justification are not the only ones 
that matter. If they were, then if I visually hallucinated a maple tree system-
atically enough, say with accompanying tactual hallucinations and support-
ing memory impressions, it would be true that there is one before me. By 
making the set of relevant propositions indefinitely large, the theory seeks to 
prevent such embarrassing results. Thus, if I am hallucinating, there is surely 
some proposition I could come to be justified in believing, say that the “tree” 
will not burn—something I might discover by trying to ignite it—which is 
not coherent with the proposition that there is a maple there.
Suppose, however, that owing to some quirk of nature—or to some evil 
genius of the kind Descartes imagined in his skeptical passages—there is 
no proposition I could become justified in believing that is incoherent with 
there being a tree before me. If, for instance, I take a torch to the “foliage,” 
I hallucinate flames. If the evil genius undetectably ensures that every such 
test is positive, the coherence theorist seems forced to conclude that it is true 
after all that there is a tree before me. But surely it is still possible that I am 
merely hallucinating and that it is false that there is a tree there, despite the 
unending series of justified beliefs I have, or can have, confirming that there 
is one.
This kind of possibility has led critics of the coherence theory to say that 
the truth of a proposition is simply not exhausted by our coherent beliefs or 
potential beliefs supporting that proposition, even when they are justified. 
Another way to put it is to say that truth is not a construct out of evidence, 
even excellent evidence that produces a coherent body of beliefs. We can 
better understand this point if we consider a related theory of truth.
The pragmatic theory of truth
There is also a negative motivation for the coherence theory of truth. When 
we try to understand what correspondence means, we seem thrown back on 
some kind of coherence. To say that the proposition that the tree is green cor-
responds with reality seems to come to little more than saying that in testing 
this proposition, say by examining the tree in good light, one will always get 
(or will at least in the main get) confirming results, that is (one might argue), 
discover propositions that cohere well with the original one. For instance, 
boiling its leaves will produce a green broth.
This kind of point has led some thinkers to go further and hold a pragmatic 
theory of truth, on which true propositions are simply those that “work,” 
in the sense that they are successful in practice—pragmatically. What this 
comes to is chiefly the claim that believing them, acting on them, and other-
wise confirming them, leads (at least in the long run) to positive results, such 
as spectrographic confirmation of the tree’s color.19
Certainly we do not expect a genuine truth to fail us. If, for instance, there 
really is a maple there, then I can find shade under it, cut wood from it, and 
expect others to verify its presence. And we do expect falsehoods to fail us 

290  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
eventually. With enough testing, we tend to think, there will (in principle) 
be disconfirmation. What more is there to truth as correspondence or, for 
that matter, truth as coherence than such pragmatic success—especially if we 
consider it over a sufficiently “long run”?
Correspondence theorists have replied that points made by proponents 
of coherence (and pragmatic) theories of truth confuse the criteria of truth, 
roughly, the standards for determining whether a proposition is true, with 
the nature of truth, what it is. Turning blue litmus paper red is a criterion of 
acidity, but it is not what acidity is; that must be characterized in theoretical 
terms involving, say, atomic structure. In support of this, they often argue 
that a false proposition could cohere with all the propositions that are ever 
justified, including those discovered in attempted confirmation of it. We 
might, after all, be permanently unlucky in testing it—or permanently foiled 
by an evil genius (a possibility pursued in Chapter 13)—so that we never 
discover its falsity.
These points parallel some made against phenomenalism, which may 
(though it need not) be held by proponents of either a coherence or a prag-
matic theory of truth. In general, a sufficiently powerful evil genius might 
prevent one from discovering that a stable, recurring set of sense-data which 
coheres with one’s other sense-data derives from hallucination and does not 
represent a concrete object. If it is possible for coherence to be systematically 
misleading in this way, then neither coherence with justified propositions nor 
any other kind of pure coherence can be what truth is.
I cannot pursue this issue, but it should be plain that it is crucial to assess-
ing the pragmatic and coherence theories of truth. I want to add only that 
despite the similarities between the coherence theory of truth and the coher-
ence theory of justification, neither theory entails the other. The analysis of 
knowledge, moreover, can be discussed within either framework for conceiv-
ing truth.
It appears, however, that particularly if one favors a reliability theory of 
knowledge, the correspondence view of truth, even on a minimalist interpre-
tation, seems most appropriate. This is in part because the notion of reliable 
production is at least not readily analyzed along coherentist or pragmatic 
lines, especially if justification is central in truth as the coherence and prag-
matic theories of truth conceive truth. For then the apparently value-laden 
notion of justification would be required for understanding reliability, which 
is characteristically conceived by reliabilists in naturalistic terms, in part as 
a property belonging to processes that produce true beliefs. None of this 
implies the falsity of coherence or pragmatic theories in every form, but 
perhaps enough has been said to suggest some presumption in favor of some 
version of the correspondence theory.
Concluding proposals
Is there no analysis of knowledge that we may tentatively accept as correct 
and illuminating? There certainly may be; the ones I have discussed are only 

Knowledge, justification, and truth  291
a representative sample of the available analyses, and even they can be refined 
in response to problems of the kinds I have raised. But there may be no 
simple and straightforward analysis of knowledge which is both illuminating 
and clearly correct. Much depends on how detailed an account must be to 
count as an analysis.
We may be able to formulate what is at least a sound conception of knowl-
edge, and this should help in seeking a full-dress account. We might say that 
knowledge is true belief based in the right way on the right kind of ground. This 
conception leaves a great deal open, but what we have seen in this chapter and 
earlier ones indicates many ways in which we might develop the conception 
into a detailed account.
The conception leaves open that it may, but need not, turn out that the 
right kind of basis of knowledge is in part causal. It may, but need not, turn 
out that the right kind of ground always justifies the belief. It may, but need 
not, turn out that the right kind of ground is always accessible to conscious-
ness, or is a reliable producer of true beliefs, or is expression of an epistemic 
virtue. And it may, but need not, turn out that ultimately epistemic chains 
terminate in experience or reason, or in some other kind of ground of knowl-
edge which is direct in the way foundationalism maintains it is.
In a similar vein, we might conceive justified belief as well-grounded belief. 
Like knowledge, justified belief must be based in the right way on the right 
kind of ground. We have seen what at least some of the appropriate kinds  
of grounds are: most basically, perceptual, memorial, introspective, and  
rational, but sufficient grounds may also be testimonial or inferential. 
However, the conception leaves open the same kinds of things as the con-
ception of knowledge: whether the right kind of ground is in part causal, 
whether it is accessible to consciousness or simply a reliable source of true 
beliefs, whether it is (or is suitably connected with) an epistemic virtue, and 
whether justificational chains terminate in experience or reason, or in some 
other kind of ground of knowledge, that is direct in the way foundationalism 
maintains it is. In exploring justification and knowledge, I have exhibited 
some of these options as preferable to others, but here my point is simply 
that the suggested conceptions of knowledge and justification provide a good 
focus for inquiry regardless of our position on these options.
Quite apart from how these broad questions about knowledge and jus-
tification are resolved, then, the conceptions just sketched indicate where 
a great deal of the work in understanding knowledge and justification must 
be done. We need an account of how knowledge and justification are based 
on whatever it is in virtue of which they count as knowledge or justification, 
for instance perception, introspection, and reason; and this will require an 
account of the inferential transmission of knowledge and justification as well 
as of their non-inferential grounding. Here I have suggested a partly causal 
account of both inferential and non-inferential grounds and a moderately 
holistic account of inductive and deductive transmission of justification and 
knowledge. We need an understanding of whether the appropriate bases of 
knowledge must ground it through generating justified belief, or may yield 

292  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
knowledge independently of justification. Here I have suggested that an inter-
nalist account seems preferable for justification and a qualifiedly externalist 
one seems preferable for knowledge. We also need a general understanding 
of what it is for a belief constituting knowledge to be true. And we need an 
account of whether the ultimate grounding of knowledge and justification is 
some kind of coherence among one’s beliefs or, as seems more likely on the 
basis of what has emerged in this book, anchoring in experiential and rational 
foundations.20
Notes
	 1	 This example is a variant of the central case described in D.H. Lawrence’s 
story, ‘The Rocking Horse Winner’. If the case presented seems too far 
from real possibility, the same point can be made using one in which it 
is easier to imagine relevant causal mechanisms, say when someone fore-
sees rain by the effect of sensations that in effect measure meteorological 
conditions.
	 2	 One might argue that it is obvious that such a belief must be unjusti-
fied. I can see a case for its being so, but I do not find it compelling. I 
also doubt that his having justification for believing his predictive belief 
unjustified must prevent its constituting knowledge.
	 3	 As this description suggests, I am not thinking of the relevant knowl-
edge as a priori even in the loose sense, but perhaps a case can be made 
that a kind of understanding of the relevant proposition, as opposed to, 
say, a subliminal calculation, grounds the knowledge.
	 4	 These examples of accessible items suggest that internalism might be 
characterized as the mentalist view that justification is grounded in mental 
elements, and indeed Earl Conee and Richard Feldman have argued for 
that. See esp. their ‘Internalism Defended’, in Hilary Kornblith (ed.), 
Epistemology: Internalism and Externalism (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 
2001). It may be plausibly argued that what I call internally accessible 
is mental, at least if we omit abstract entities such as concepts. But in 
part to include the abstract and in part for other reasons, I prefer not to 
assimilate the accessible to the mental.
	 5	 For two quite different externalist compromises with internalism 
see Alvin I. Goldman, ‘Strong and Weak Justification’, Philosophical 
Perspectives 2 (1988) 51–69, and William P. Alston, ‘An Internalist 
Externalism’, in his Epistemic Justification (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1989).
	 6	 A.J. Ayer is widely known for having taken knowledge (and I think the 
kind of justification appropriate for it as well) to entail a “right to be sure.” 
See The Problem of Knowledge (Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin 
Books, 1956), esp. chapter 1. For further discussion see R.M. Chisholm, 
Theory of Knowledge, 2nd edn (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 
1977), and Carl Ginet, Knowledge, Perception, and Memory (Dordrecht: 

Knowledge, justification, and truth  293
D. Reidel, 1978), esp. chapter 3. Extensive discussion of the deonto-
logical conception of justification is provided in Matthias Steup (ed.), 
Knowledge, Truth, and Duty (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001).
	 7	 Nicomachean Ethics 1105b6–8, trans. by Terence Irwin (Indianapolis: 
Hackett, 1999). The bracketed ‘defined as’ is my insertion, the bracketed 
‘merely’ Irwin’s.
	 8	 Virtue epistemology, despite its roots in ancient Greek philosophy, has 
received attention in epistemology only in recent years. For a sense of 
the development and variety of the perspective, see esp. Ernest Sosa, 
‘Knowledge and Intellectual Virtue’, in his Knowledge in Perspective 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991); Jonathan L. Kvanvig, 
The Intellectual Virtues and the Life of the Mind (Lanham, MD: Rowman 
and Littlefield, 1992); James Montmarquet, Epistemic Virtue and 
Doxastic Responsibility (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 1993); 
Linda Zagzebski, Virtues of the Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1996); John Greco, Putting Skeptics in Their Place (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2000); Abrol Fairweather and Linda 
Zagzebski (eds.), Virtue and Duty (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2001) (this contains papers by most of the philosophers mentioned as 
well as my ‘Intellectual Virtue and Justified Belief ’, which develops ideas 
about virtue epistemology that I suggest here), and Ernest Sosa, A Virtue 
Epistemology: Apt Belief and Reflective Knowledge, vol. 1 (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2007). 
	 9	 I say ‘presumably’ because it might be that sensory experience is a reli-
able ground, because of how rarely it misleads, say because hallucina-
tions either are uncommon or (because they do not feel normal) do not 
produce belief. 
	10	 We thus find Sosa saying (in A Virtue Epistemology), “Knowledge is apt 
performance in the way of belief” (p. 41), where “A performance is apt 
if, and only if, it is correct attributively to a competence exercised by the 
performer, in conditions appropriate for its exercise” (p. 92). I take the 
relevant kind of competence to be a kind of virtue. See also pp. 22–42.
	11	 This entailment thesis is obvious if we adopt the conceptions of the self-
evident and of strict a priori justification proposed in Chapter 4. But 
simply working with the intuitive notions of the self-evident and the a 
priori, the entailment claim has some plausibility.
	12	 For wide-ranging discussion of the problem and an extensive bibliography 
concerning it see Duncan Pritchard, ‘Recent Work on Epistemic Value’, 
American Philosophical Quarterly 44, 2 (2007), 84–110 and Jonathan 
Kvanvig, The Value of Knowledge and the Pursuit of Understanding 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003). For further discussion 
see Marian David, ‘Truth as the Primary Epistemic Goal: A Working 
Hypothesis’, in M. Steup and E. Sosa (eds.), Contemporary Debates 
in Philosophy (Oxford: Blackwell 2005), and Ram Neta and Duncan 
Pritchard (eds.), Arguing about Knowledge (London: Routledge, 2009), 

294  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
Part Two, which contains Meno and recent papers by John Greco, 
Jonathan Kvanvig, and Linda Zagzebski.
	13	 I develop and defend this distinction in chapter 4 of The Good in the 
Right: A Theory of Intuition and Intrinsic Value (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 2004) and further in ‘Intrinsic Value and Reasons for 
Action’, in Terry Horgan and Mark Timmons (eds.) Metaethics after 
Moore (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006).
	14	 A person’s having no adequate support for p would be only typical of such 
cases because one might have some good reason to believe it yet simply 
not have noticed it or come to believe p for the reason(s) in question.
	15	 A classical statement of the correspondence theory of truth is found in 
Aristotle’s Metaphysics. For a study of the correspondence view and a 
defense of realism concerning truth in general, see William P. Alston, 
A Realist Conception of Truth (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1996); and for a wide-ranging scholarly treatment of the theory of truth, 
see Richard Kirkham, Theories of Truth (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1992).
	16	 The schema in question is commonly called (Alfred) Tarski’s T schema 
or the disquotation principle, as in the way illustrated it provides for 
eliminating quotation marks. For minimally technical discussions of 
its bearing on our understanding of truth see W.V. Quine, Pursuit of 
Truth, revised edn (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1992), 
chapter 5; Mark Sainsbury, ‘Philosophical Logic’, in A.C. Grayling (ed.), 
Philosophy: A Guide through the Subject (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1995); and Kirkham, Theories of Truth.
	17	 The literature on truth, even on any one account of it, is immense. For a 
brief defense of the redundancy view see Quine, Pursuit of Truth, and for 
brief criticism of it see Alston, A Realist Conception of Truth. One might, 
like Quine in many places, speak of (declarative) sentences as true or 
false, and the minimalist and redundancy approaches have been taken to 
apply primarily to sentences. For reasons I cannot detail, so construing 
them may have some advantages over the standard terminology in the 
text, but it also raises serious problems.
	18	 Although G.W.F. Hegel (1770–1831) is often regarded as the leading his-
torical proponent of the coherence theory of truth, a clearer statement 
is probably to be found in Brand Blanshard, The Nature of Thought, vol. 
2 (London: Allen & Unwin, 1940). Cf. Donald Davidson, ‘A Coherence 
Theory of Truth and Knowledge’, cited in Chapter 9.
	19	 William James argued that truth is what works. See esp. his Pragmatism: 
A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking (New York: Longman, 
Green, 1907). Cf. John Dewey, ‘Propositions, Warranted Assertibility, 
and Truth’, Journal of Philosophy 38 (1941), 169–86.
	20	 I have not presented these conceptions of knowledge and justification 
as analyses, in part because of how much they leave unspecified. But it 
may be argued that they do constitute analyses and indeed say as much 

Knowledge, justification, and truth  295
as an analysis, as opposed to a full-blown theory meant to foreclose 
options an analysis should leave open, ought to say. For a case to this 
effect regarding my proposed conception of knowledge, see James E. 
Taylor, ‘Conceptual Analysis and the Essence of Knowledge’, American 
Philosophical Quarterly 30 (1993), 15–26.


12	 Scientific, moral, and religious 
knowledge
•	
Scientific knowledge
The focus and grounding of scientific knowledge
Scientific imagination and inference to the best explanation
The role of deduction in scientific practice
Fallibilism and approximation in science
Scientific knowledge and social epistemology
Social knowledge and the idea of a scientific community
•	
Moral knowledge
Relativism and noncognitivism
Preliminary appraisal of relativist and noncognitivist views
Moral versus “factual” beliefs
Ethical intuitionism
Kantian rationalism in moral epistemology
Utilitarian empiricism in moral epistemology
Kantian and utilitarian moral epistemologies compared
•	
Religious knowledge
Evidentialism versus experientialism
The perceptual analogy and the possibility of direct theistic knowledge
Problems confronting the experientialist approach
Justification and rationality, faith and reason
Acceptance, presumption, and faith

12	 Scientific, moral, and religious 
knowledge
In perceiving the world around us we constantly acquire knowledge: of 
colors and shapes, objects and events, people and their doings. We also 
acquire knowledge as we look into our own consciousness. By thinking about 
things we already know and by drawing inferences from those propositions, 
we extend some of our knowledge. And through memory, we retain much of 
our knowledge. Justification is acquired, extended, and retained in much the 
same way.
But how far does our knowledge extend? We have explored how knowl-
edge is transmitted once we have some, but not just how much we have in the 
first place or the range of subjects and questions to which it extends. I want 
to explore three important domains in which we are widely thought to have 
knowledge of truths that are central in guiding our lives: the scientific, the 
moral, and the religious. We should consider how knowledge and justification 
may occur in these domains. The task is immense; here I will simply show 
how the framework laid out so far can clarify knowledge and justification in 
relation to some important aspects of science, ethics, and religion. The focus 
will be more on knowledge than on justification. But much of what we learn 
about knowledge will apply to justification, and some of it may hold in other 
domains, such as that of art, history, or literature.
Scientific knowledge
If we knew nothing through perception, we would have no scientific knowl-
edge—roughly, the kind acquired by scientists in their professional investiga-
tions. And however much scientific knowledge one acquires by instruction 
and testimony from someone else, the discoveries that this knowledge rep-
resents must be made partly on the basis of perception. Perception is obvi-
ously crucial for laboratory work and observations of nature. Scientific work 
done without such first-hand experience, for instance by theorizing about 
nature or by mathematizing current information, still depends, directly or 
indirectly, on someone’s perceptions.1

Scientific, moral, and religious knowledge  299
The focus and grounding of scientific knowledge
How does scientific discovery fit into the framework I have developed? If we 
start with the idea that perception is basic for scientific knowledge, the pic-
ture which readily comes to mind is that one makes observations, inductively 
generalizes from them, and, through the inductive transmission of knowl-
edge from one’s premises to one’s conclusion, comes to know the truth of a 
generalization. Imagine Galileo rolling balls down his famous inclined plane. 
He measures their acceleration, collects the individual items of knowledge he 
thereby acquires, arrays them as premises, and generalizes (in a special way) 
to his formula (Galileo’s law), which gives the rate of acceleration for such 
balls in general. What does a case like this show?
First, the example rightly suggests that scientists tend to be interested in 
the nature and the behavior of kinds of things, such as accelerating objects, 
and that what is typically considered scientific knowledge is of generaliza-
tions: for instance, propositions about all freely falling bodies, not about any 
particular one. Knowledge of particulars is needed to obtain such general 
knowledge, but the former may be just ordinary perceptual knowledge. 
Granted, knowledge which is of a particular thing, but derived from a sci-
entific generalization, say knowledge that a parachutist will land at 8 a.m., 
is scientific in the sense that it is scientifically based. Still, it is not the sort 
of knowledge regarded as paradigmatically scientific, or the kind scientists 
directly seek in trying to understand nature.
The second point suggested by the example is that scientific knowledge 
is inductively, not deductively, grounded. For instance, the generaliza-
tion Galileo discovered concerning acceleration does not follow from the 
premises he formulated in expressing his data, say that ball 1 accelerated at a 
certain rate, that ball 2 accelerated at that rate, and so on. The generalization 
is strongly confirmed by such premises, but not entailed by them. Because 
it is not entailed by them, regardless of how well they justify it, they do not 
prove it. Proof of a proposition requires either a premise that entails it, or—in 
one ordinary use of the term—at least an event whose occurrence establishes 
it, as when we prove someone is in town by introducing him. In the former 
case, a proof is a conclusive deductive argument; in the latter it is a kind of 
active showing. Call the first proof in the argumental sense, the second proof 
in the behavioral sense.
Given the non-deductive (non-entailment) relation that holds between 
premises of scientific reasoning that yields, from knowledge of data, knowl-
edge of a generalization, it is best to avoid calling the reasoning that supports 
a scientific generalization “scientific proof,” as some do. The reasoning is not 
even deductively valid, much less the kind exemplified by a geometrical proof 
of a theorem from axioms.2
A third aspect of this case, however, may mislead. The example portrays 
Galileo simply observing and then generalizing, yet says nothing about why 

300  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
he is observing. But he made his observations for a reason. This is to be 
expected; scientific knowledge normally does not arise simply from hap-
hazard observations. Normally there is a question, such as whether falling 
objects speed up, that leads to observing a particular kind of thing.
Moreover, there is normally a tentative answer to such a question—a 
hypothesis—which both guides observation and sets the epistemic goal of 
the observations or the experiments that lead to scientific discovery. For 
instance, one might hypothesize that balls rolling down a plane speed up 
100 percent in a given time interval and then observe their speed at each such 
interval to see if the initial speed doubles, quadruples, and so on. The goal is 
to show that the hypothesis is true and thereby come to know it, or, if it is 
not true, to find a hypothesis that does account for the behavior of the balls.3
A different example will bring out more clearly how both formation and 
testing of scientific hypotheses depends on imagination, observation, and 
antecedent knowledge. It has been observed that ants can find their nests 
after foraging, even in the desert where winds blow away any olfactory or 
visual traces their paths may leave.4 Antecedent scientific knowledge indi-
cated that ants have a neural capacity to determine direction by the posi-
tion of the sun, but this would explain only how they return in the right 
direction. How can they “measure” distance? It was hypothesized that they 
might have a built-in pedometer by which they “counted” steps. Thinking 
of this required imagination, but even more imagination is needed to test 
the hypothesis. Suppose we could shorten the legs of some and lengthen the 
legs of others. Then we could reasonably predict that, in trying to find their 
nest after foraging, a significant number of the former would fall short and 
a significant number of the latter would overshoot. An ant population was 
partitioned into three groups and sent to forage. The first was normal, the 
second had legs cut off at the knee, and the third had them lengthened by 
attaching boar’s hair. The results were as predicted. This confirms (without 
proving) the pedometer hypothesis.
The central point here is that scientific knowledge does not automatically 
arise as we observe our surroundings. Normally, we must first raise ques-
tions about the world; in the context of background knowledge—which may 
come from previous science or everyday observation or both—they direct 
our inquiry. Only in the light of such questions are we in a good position 
to formulate hypotheses. These, in turn, are the raw material of scientific 
knowledge. Some are rejected, some are confirmed, and some that are con-
firmed may become known.
Scientific imagination and inference to the best explanation
Scientific knowledge does not develop, then, simply by inferentially extend-
ing what we already know. Normally, it emerges only through using imagina-
tion, both in formulating questions and in framing hypotheses to answer 
them. This is one place where scientific invention occurs. It is not only 

Scientific, moral, and religious knowledge  301
machines and devices that are invented but also hypotheses and theories. 
Invention and discovery may, however, coincide: if you invent a theory that 
is true, you may be said to discover the truth it states.5
The essential place of imagination in developing scientific knowledge is 
also illustrated by discoveries that result not from coming to know a general-
ization, but from apparent refutations of a proposition thought to be already 
known. The planet Neptune was discovered because the observed orbit of 
Uranus (the planet nearest to it on the Earth’s side) was not as expected 
according to the laws of planetary motion, the principles astronomers used 
in describing the motions and paths of the planets. Partly to avoid having to 
revise well-confirmed laws, it was hypothesized that the deviation of Uranus 
from its expected orbit was caused by the gravitational effect of a more dis-
tant planet. The observations made to test this hypothesis revealed Neptune.
If the Neptune hypothesis was considered the best available explanation 
of the data, we could speak here of an inference to the best explanation, an 
abductive inference: roughly, an inference to a hypothesis on the ground that 
it best explains one or more other propositions taken to be known or justi-
fiedly believed—or at least taken to need explanation and to be candidates 
for justified belief or knowledge if the hypothesis turns out to be true. If two 
or more hypotheses are equally good explanations, we may justifiably choose 
between them as we see fit, though simplicity is generally viewed as a major 
consideration in making a rational choice in such cases—if indeed it is not 
taken to be an element in a good explanation in the first place.6
Once again, through the use of imagination, a hypothesis is formulated, 
and, through testing it, a discovery is made and new knowledge acquired. And 
again, the basis of the new knowledge is inductive, though unlike Galileo’s 
knowledge about freely falling bodies, it is not a result of generalization. The 
pattern here is a successful case of inference to the best explanation. One 
imaginatively hypothesizes a gravitational influence by another planet as  
best explaining the deviation, tentatively infers that there is such a planet, 
tests the hypothesis, and, through positive results of the test, comes to know 
that the hypothesis is true.
We have already seen, in discussing the structure of knowledge and justi-
fication, that a proposition’s explaining one or more others can count toward 
its justification, and that this point can be accounted for in either or both 
of two ways. First, one might note the role of explanation in increasing the 
coherence of the patterns to which the explaining and explained propositions 
belong. Second, we might take, as a principle of the transmission of justifica-
tion from justified premises to a conclusion drawn from them, that if we are 
justified in believing the premise that a proposition explains one or more others, 
then we tend to have some justification for believing the proposition itself. The 
point here, however, is not mainly about justification but about discovery. 
We discover a great deal by seeking explanations and positing one or another 
hypothesis to explain the puzzling data. What we discover in this way com-
monly constitutes knowledge.

302  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
The role of deduction in scientific practice
These examples do not imply that deduction has no substantial role in the 
development of scientific knowledge. Far from it. Once we have a hypothesis, 
we typically need (valid) deduction to determine how to test it. For instance, 
one needs deductive mathematical reasoning to predict where to look for an 
as yet undiscovered planet, given a certain deviation in the orbit of Uranus.
Moreover, from very general laws, such as Newton’s laws of motion, one 
may deduce less general laws, for instance the laws of planetary motion and 
Galileo’s law of acceleration. (Actually, the best that one may be able to do 
is deduce generalizations which these laws only approximate; e.g., Galileo’s 
law, which represents increase in acceleration as uniform, does not take 
account of slight changes in acceleration that are due to minute increases in 
gravitational attraction as the falling object nears the Earth. But this deduc-
tion still helps to explain why we should get approximately the results we do 
in testing or applying that law.) Deduction may, then, not only take us from 
a hypothesis and auxiliary assumptions, such as propositions about condi-
tions of observation and the power of our telescope, to a proposition about 
a single event, say the sighting of a planet. Deduction may also take us from 
general laws or wide theoretical principles to less general laws or narrower 
principles. There is virtually no limit to the number of deductions we may 
make in search of new hypotheses.
Deductions of the second kind help to unify scientific knowledge. For 
example, they enable us to exhibit all the special laws of motion—for planets, 
for falling bodies, for projectiles, and so on—as instances of the general laws 
of motion. Even the behavior of gases, conceived as collections of molecular 
particles, can be explained by appeal to the general laws of motion. Their 
pressure in a container of air, for instance, is explainable in terms of how hard 
the particles hit its walls. This pressure, in turn, is connected with their tem-
perature viewed as explainable by their average speed of movement. Thus, the 
laws of motion provide an understanding of what determines both pressure 
and temperature and indeed a model for visualizing their relationship. They 
also give us, by appropriate deductive inferences, a subsidiary law (Boyle’s 
law) correlating the temperature of a gas with pressure at a constant volume.
Can we, then, have scientific proof after all, in which we validly deduce 
a special law of, say, motion, from more general ones? This is doubtful; for 
even if we might prove the special law relative to the more general ones, our 
knowledge of the more general laws is ultimately inductive and in a certain 
way inconclusive. That knowledge is based on inference to the best explana-
tion or on generalization from observed data or, more likely, on a combination 
of these procedures. It might seem that we could at least speak of “relative 
proof” of scientific laws. But a proof in the unqualified sense must decisively 
establish what it proves; and as the generalizations that are our premises are 
apparently not decisively established, it is at best misleading to say that what 
we deduce from them is. Even a valid deduction from a well-confirmed true 
proposition is not necessarily a proof.

Scientific, moral, and religious knowledge  303
If our scientific premises in a deduction of one law from a more compre-
hensive one is not proved, and if indeed such premises stand to be revised as 
new discoveries are made—a common fate of generalizations in science—
then what we know only through deduction from those premises is not 
proved either. These premises are indeed exposed to possible disconfirmation 
through the discovery of counter-evidence to what we deduce from them. If 
what is deducible from a set of propositions turns out to be false, then the 
premises that entail it are false as well: as presumptive guarantors of its truth, 
they must share in its falsification.
Fallibilism and approximation in science
So far, I have sketched some of the ways in which what we call scientific 
knowledge develops, and I have criticized certain stereotypes. Science is 
not, for instance, a domain in which hypotheses are proved conclusively. 
Nor are they typically discovered by simply generalizing from observations 
we happen to collect. These points, however, imply nothing about whether 
scientific generalizations are true, or can be known.
If a common fate of generalizations in science is their eventual revision, 
should we reject the idea that there is scientific knowledge at all? Even the 
incomparable Sir Isaac Newton, as he was called, was shown to be mistaken 
on some important points. Even if discovering this took centuries, is there 
good reason to believe that any other scientific generalizations are, strictly 
speaking, true, in the sense that they describe the world both correctly and 
timelessly, and apply to past, present, and future? If some are true, that may 
not be typical. Commonly, what we call scientific knowledge is regarded by 
scientists as needing refinement and as possibly mistaken. Quite properly, 
their attitude is fallibilistic.
If scientists accept fallibilism regarding scientific beliefs—the view that 
these beliefs may be mistaken and the accompanying rejection of dogmatic 
attitudes—they nonetheless tend to hold a kind of objectivism: the view that 
there is an objective method for ascertaining whether beliefs about the world 
are true, that is (roughly speaking), a method which can be used by any com-
petent investigator and tends to yield the same results when properly applied 
by different competent investigators to the same problem. Scientific method 
is widely taken by scientists and philosophers alike to be a paradigm of an 
objective method.
Since we cannot know propositions that are not true, one might conclude 
that we should really not speak of scientific knowledge at all, but only of 
relatively well-confirmed scientific hypotheses. This is a defensible position. 
We may prefer, however, to account for the apparent facts in a way that allows 
us to maintain that there is scientific knowledge. One possibility is that in 
speaking of scientific knowledge we are often speaking a bit loosely of what 
might be called approximate knowledge: well-grounded belief which holds 
true up to a certain level of precision in measurement—apart from “minor 

304  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
inaccuracies,” we might say. Newton’s laws have not, after all, been found 
completely inaccurate. In building bridges, as opposed to dealing with astro-
nomical distances or elementary particles, they seem an adequate guide, and 
their being only approximately true need cause no trouble in such practical 
applications.
One can insist that what is not precisely true is not known. But we could 
also say that what is approximately true in the scientific domain may be an 
object of approximate knowledge, and that beliefs of such propositions both 
are fallible and should be held with an openness to their revision in the light 
of new discoveries. I prefer the latter way of speaking. Why must we say it is 
false, rather than approximately true, that the circumference of a circle is its 
diameter times 3.1416, simply because pi can be worked out so much further? 
Indeed, given that pi can be carried out infinitely, how could we ever truly 
state the circumference of a circle if only absolutely precise propositions can 
be true?
There is, however, a second way to account for the apparent falsity of cer-
tain scientific generalizations. It seems that often their formulations are not 
properly taken to be absolutely precise, and that, rightly interpreted, they are 
true within the appropriate limits. Consider the general law that metals are 
conductors of electricity. Perhaps this should be interpreted with the under-
standing that certain abnormal (or for practical purposes impossible) condi-
tions do not obtain. If metals should fail to conduct electricity at absolute 
zero, would this show the generalization false or simply that its appropriate 
scope of application is limited? The latter view seems more plausible.
These points in defense of scientific generalizations against the charge 
of wholesale falsity do not imply that none of those generalizations can be 
shown to be simply false. The point is that in some cases, instead of saying 
that scientific generalizations are not really true and hence do not represent 
genuine knowledge, it is preferable to speak either of approximate knowledge 
of a precisely formulated, but only approximately true, generalization or, as in 
this case, of unqualified knowledge of an imprecisely formulated truth. The 
difference is roughly that between approximate knowledge and knowledge of 
an approximation. In practice, however, there may be no easy way to decide 
which, if either, of these cases one is confronted with, or which indicates the 
better way to represent the state of one’s knowledge in a given scientific area.
Scientific knowledge and social epistemology
I have so far spoken mainly about knowledge as individual belief. There is, 
however, scientific knowledge in journals no one entirely remembers. This 
can be called virtual knowledge as, although no one has it, many of us can 
easily acquire it. It is as accessible as our connections to our libraries; and a 
day could come when much information of that kind is more readily acces-
sible by computer than are items of information we must carefully draw from 
long-term memory.

Scientific, moral, and religious knowledge  305
A natural assumption, however, even for such knowledge in the public 
domain, is that individuals have generated it and that only one or more indi-
viduals can acquire it. This is not an uncontroversial assumption. Science is 
often said to be a social enterprise, and some thinkers, including some pro-
ponents of feminist epistemology, hold that science is often unwarrantedly 
represented as “individualistic” and even atomistic.7 One writer in feminist 
epistemology maintains that scientific knowledge is “produced by cognitive 
processes that are fundamentally social” and even goes so far as to say that 
scientific observation is “dialogic in nature.”8
Some feminist epistemologists, moreover, have held that “the gender of 
the inquirer influences the character of knowledge itself,” and “some people 
claim that women have gender-typical ‘ways of knowing’.”9 But the last 
two claims are not widely defended by feminist epistemologists. They are 
independent of the view that scientific knowledge is social. They are not 
implied, moreover, by the thesis that the gender of a researcher may affect 
what is actually known, for instance because in survey research “subjects 
give different answers to questions depending on the perceived gender of the 
interviewer.”10 This point is important for gathering knowledge, but it does 
not contribute to understanding the nature of knowledge or what constitutes 
evidence or justification.
Issues of these sorts are concerns of a subfield of epistemology that 
overlaps feminist epistemology at many points: social epistemology. If indi-
vidual epistemology is roughly the theory of knowledge and justification as 
applied to individual persons—the enterprise we have been mainly engaged 
in—social epistemology is roughly the theory of knowledge and justifica-
tion as applied to groups of (at least two) people.11 The field of epistemology 
has traditionally focused mainly on individuals taken one at a time, with the 
notable exception of the status of testimony as a source of grounds for belief. 
Should there be this individual emphasis?
One answer is this. It seems quite possible that a single individual could 
have both knowledge and justification even if no group does, whereas it is not 
possible that there be a group that has actual knowledge or justification when 
no individual member of that group has knowledge of or justification for the 
proposition in question. We cannot know anything unless it is known by you 
or me or some other individual—though there are things we cannot learn 
by ourselves. Thus, in the case of a map of the world, knowledge by many 
people is needed to build the resulting social representation of geographical 
knowledge. Nonetheless, one of us could survive the rest and retain knowl-
edge, or an omnipotent God could have created just one finite person with 
the capacity for knowledge and an environment in which the capacity is suc-
cessfully exercised. In this respect, individual knowledge and justification are 
apparently logically prior to their social counterparts: the former is possible 
without the latter, but not conversely.
Virtual knowledge is an exception: “we” can have it in our libraries, though 
no one in particular has it. There is still another, quite different case in which 

306  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
we can have virtual knowledge of something that no individual literally 
knows. You and I might each know one of two things that obviously imply 
a third, and, if we work together, we might thus be said to “know” the third 
but to have not quite articulated it. Perhaps I know that the assailant wore a 
full-length cape and you know the identity of the only person near the crime 
scene who wore one; between us we have a solution to the crime. This might 
be considered a kind of unrealized social knowledge.
Social knowledge and the idea of a scientific community
Both examples of virtual knowledge are instances of what might be called 
social knowledge. But the first kind of virtual knowledge (illustrated by 
the library case), though only socially accessible, is individually realizable, 
whereas the second kind of virtual knowledge (illustrated by the detective 
case) is in a sense socially constituted. Any competent individual can get 
the former; only cooperating individuals can get the latter. One concern of 
feminist epistemology has been to emphasize the role of cooperation, not 
only in generating knowledge but also in characterizing human knowledge 
conceived in the kind of overall way that encompasses both individual and 
social instances.
The priority of individual over social knowledge by no means implies that 
given an adequate understanding of individual epistemology one can easily 
construct a social epistemology. That is not so. It is an interesting and dif-
ficult question what relation must hold between a group and its members in 
order for its knowledge or justification regarding a proposition to reside in 
one or more of those members. This brings us to a related kind of priority of 
the individual over the social.
As the metaphor of residing suggests, what a group knows or justifiedly 
believes is constituted by what one or more members knows or justifiedly 
believes. If we (human beings) know that wet grass is slippery, for instance, 
then some of us must have appropriately grounded true beliefs of that propo-
sition (I leave aside unrealized social knowledge here). Not all of us have to; 
but if only a few of us do, then it would be wrong to say that we know, as 
opposed to, for instance, “It is known,” referring to the group as the context 
in which the knowledge occurs.
When a subgroup is intended by ‘we’, the situation differs. If the ‘we’ des-
ignates the scientific community, then it is permissible that only a few mem-
bers know in order for the group to know. It can be true that “we” now know 
the mass of a proton even if only a very few have the appropriate information. 
This may be precisely because scientific knowledge is social in the sense of 
socially sharable (in a way introspective knowledge of one’s own sensations is 
not sharable). It is also both publicly accessible, at least in the sense that it is 
normally open to public testing and proper use by any competent investiga-
tor, and, typically, cooperatively generated, in that most of it arises from 
team efforts.

Scientific, moral, and religious knowledge  307
These three points about the social character of scientific knowledge in 
part explain what it is to say that there is a scientific community. It is argu-
able, moreover, that some kinds of knowledge are (empirically) impossible 
without cooperation, as in the case of knowledge of a theory whose develop-
ment and confirmation require a team effort.12 Indeed, a measure of scientific 
cooperation is commonly required even to maintain scientific knowledge 
once it is acquired. For given the problems and challenges facing scientific 
hypotheses and theories as new information is acquired, the grounds on 
which they are maintained will often be eroded unless new evidences or 
arguments are found to explain away new data found by opposing theorists 
or new investigations.
What the relevant examples of social knowledge seem to suggest is, on 
the one hand, the genetic priority of the social over the individual in the 
development of our scientific knowledge—with testimony as well as scien-
tific cooperation playing a crucial role in producing that knowledge—and 
the constitutive priority of the individual over the social in epistemological 
matters: social knowledge, justification, and indeed belief are constituted by 
individual knowledge, justification, and belief respectively. The constitutive 
priority in question applies both to actual knowledge and justification, as I 
have illustrated, and (with such qualifications as are indicated by the detec-
tive case that illustrated unrealized knowledge) to virtual knowledge (and 
virtual justification).
The notion of virtual knowledge is implicit in the idea of “scientific knowl-
edge” as the scientifically grounded “knowledge” accessible to us within a 
certain degree of readiness—for instance in widely available journals—but 
not residing in any person’s belief. It is because there is no belief of the 
relevant propositions that there are scare quotes around ‘knowledge’. What 
is not believed (or in any way in someone’s mind) is not literally known. 
Nonetheless, the constitutive priority of the individual clearly applies to vir-
tual knowledge: plainly, we would not have access to the relevant knowledge 
unless some individual(s) among us did, at least in the sense of having access 
to crucial premises, as in the detective case.
Even if we do not consider individual knowledge logically prior to social 
knowledge, we still have the question of the status of apparent scientific 
knowledge (and certain other social knowledge). If we view science histori-
cally and do not idealize, it turns out that there is no unqualified answer to 
the question of whether what is called scientific knowledge is knowledge as 
conceived in this book. If we assume that there are some scientific proposi-
tions which are strictly true—and I see no cogent reason to doubt that there 
are some—then we apparently have no good ground for thinking that they 
cannot be known (or at least justifiedly believed). But the history of science 
indicates much change and extensive, apparently ceaseless correction of 
previously accepted hypotheses. For all its progress, it also gives us cause 
to wonder whether even at this advanced stage in scientific development we 

308  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
grasp many scientific truths that future investigation will never show to be 
inaccurate.
I am inclined to say that in spite of both scientific error and the fallibility 
of scientific attitudes, we do have much scientific knowledge, even if it is all 
only approximate knowledge, or knowledge of approximations. But even if 
we have a great deal of scientific knowledge, if much of it is approximate 
or is knowledge of approximations, we are quite some distance from the 
artificial picture one might have of scientific knowledge as a set of beliefs of 
precisely formulated and strictly true generalizations, arrived at by inductive 
transmission of knowledge from its basic sources in experience and reason. 
Those sources remain basic, and scientific method provides an objective 
way of building on them. But there is no straightforward transmission, or, 
when transmission occurs, any clearly final destination toward which it must 
proceed.
Moral knowledge
The possibility of moral knowledge raises rather different sorts of questions 
from those just explored. Moreover, whereas there is a widespread tendency 
to take for granted that there is much scientific knowledge, there is a wide-
spread inclination to take moral judgments to be at best culturally condi-
tioned assertions with no claim to genuine truth.
Consider the judgment that cruelty to children is wrong. A clear applica-
tion of this principle might be the more specific judgment that it is wrong 
to thrash a two-year-old for accidentally spilling milk.13 We accept this, but 
do we know it? Suppose someone denies it or simply asks us to justify it. It 
does not appear that we can establish it scientifically. It is apparently not a 
scientific judgment in the first place. Furthermore, it is not in any obvious 
way grounded in perception; and if it is grounded in reason, it does not seem 
to be so in the straightforward way the representative self-evident truths dis-
cussed in Chapters 5 and 6 apparently are. Many find it natural to consider 
this judgment to be grounded in our culture and to be accepted simply as part 
of the social fabric that holds our lives together. It would then be a socially 
accepted judgment but would not express social knowledge.
Relativism and noncognitivism
There are at least two major variants of the view that moral judgments are 
somehow grounded in our culture. One of them allows that they are true, but 
only in a qualified sense that reflects their being tied to the culture in which 
they occur. The other takes them not to belong to truth-stating discourse at 
all. Let us consider these views in turn.
The first view—a kind of relativism—says roughly that moral judgments 
are true relative to our culture (or even some subculture), but not unquali-
fiedly true, as judgments of fact, such as that a green field lies before me, may 

Scientific, moral, and religious knowledge  309
be. This is not to say merely that moral judgments are relativized—true in 
relation to certain circumstances, as when ‘We should not kill’ is said to be 
true relative to non-self-defensive conditions. This relativization view does 
little more than restrict moral judgments, often uncontroversially, to the 
circumstances in which they properly apply. Virtually all writers in ethics 
are “relativizationists.” Relativism, by contrast, is the thesis that there are, 
say, American moral truths, British moral truths, Chinese moral truths, 
Danish moral truths, and so on, but no universally valid moral truths (or 
standards)—even if some moral principles are universally held.
The second view that (in a way) takes moral truths to be culturally 
grounded—the attitudinal view, also called expressivist—says roughly that 
such judgments are not literally true at all; rather, they are expressions of 
moral attitudes, not assertions of a proposition, hence not “cognitive.” 
Normally, these are attitudes rooted in the culture of the person judging, 
but a noncognitivist might allow a subgroup or even an individual to qualify 
as having a morality in the sense relevant to providing the basis of moral 
judgment.
On one version of the attitudinal view, to say that cruelty to children is 
wrong is like uttering ‘Cruelty to children!’ in a tone expressing revulsion 
and adding, ‘I (hereby) condemn it!’ The attitude is moral both because of 
what it concerns and because it represents a certain kind of cultural stance.
Such attitudes may be reasonable or unreasonable and may be defended 
with reference to what is true or false; but attitudes are not themselves true 
or false.
On both views there is no moral knowledge, since either there are no 
moral propositions at all (the negative claim of the attitudinal view), or there 
are at least none that are true or false unqualifiedly (the negative claim of 
the relativist view in question), whereas propositions expressing empirical 
or a priori truths may be unqualifiedly true or false. The attitudinal view is 
thus committed to (ethical) noncognitivism: roughly the claim that there are 
no moral propositions to be known, or otherwise “cognized.” The (ethical) 
relativist position in question need not endorse noncognitivism. But doing so 
can clarify a relativist view, because, as our examples will show, it is not clear 
precisely how propositions can be true in a way other than the way in which 
empirical and a priori truths are, and it is clear (at least in outline) how moral 
attitudes can be rooted in a culture.
The attitudinal interpretation of moral judgments is on the surface the 
more radical view. It implies that there simply are no moral truths—or moral 
falsehoods either. There are no moral propositions to be known, or to be 
justifiedly or even mistakenly believed in the first place. What makes this 
apparently radical view plausible?
Suppose one is very impressed with the basic sources of knowledge as our 
only routes to knowledge, and one notes that apparently no propositions 
known on the basis of sense experience seem to entail the truth of any moral 
judgment. For instance, even the proposition that cruelty to children causes 

310  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
them pain does not entail that cruelty is wrong. Needed surgery, after all, 
may cause them pain yet not be wrong.
When we judge something to be wrong we apparently go beyond the 
evidence of the senses, and indeed beyond scientific evidence. For example, 
suppose that (as is surely possible) we know scientifically that in fact cru-
elty to children commonly breeds brutality in its victims. Unless we already 
know or are justified in believing that breeding brutality is wrong, the fact 
that cruelty to children breeds brutality does not justify us in believing that 
cruelty to children is wrong.
It seems to noncognitivists, then, that we cannot know that cruelty to 
children is wrong just on the basis of its causing brutality; this fact would 
(deductively) ground that knowledge for us only if we already knew that 
brutality is wrong. Now suppose we also assume that nothing known a priori 
entails that cruelty to children is wrong: no logical truth, and not even a 
synthetic proposition like the truth that nothing is red and green all over at 
once. These points serve as premises for the negative conclusion that there is 
no moral knowledge. For if knowledge is grounded in the basic sources and 
moral judgments are not grounded in them, then moral judgments do not 
constitute knowledge.
There is also a positive thesis held by the attitudinal theory: that (even 
though moral judgments do not express propositions) moral judgments do 
express significant attitudes. A main reason for saying they express attitudes 
is that we are not neutral in making moral judgments; we are (normally) pro 
or con regarding what we morally judge. Normally, we at least indirectly 
commend or condemn when we make a positive or negative moral judgment.
Now suppose we combine the positive view that moral judgments express 
attitudes with the negative view that there are no moral propositions, which 
itself implies that there is no moral knowledge. It is now plausible to con-
clude that the point of making a moral judgment is not to assert something 
but to express a positive or negative attitude and thereby to influence human 
conduct, if only by endorsing or condemning one or another kind of behav-
ior. Many noncognitivists hold this third position.
Noncognitivism must not be taken to imply that in moral matters “any-
thing goes.” Noncognitivists may grant that moral attitudes may be unrea-
sonable, say based on misinformation or prejudice. The view can thus allow 
that there are moral mistakes. But mistakes that are specifically moral are 
mistakes in attitude, not about what is true or false.
The relativistic view that moral judgments are culturally grounded endorses 
the first argument just set out, based on the premise that those judgments 
are not anchored in the basic sources of knowledge, but not necessarily the 
second, attitudinal argument. On this relativist view, although moral judg-
ments are not rooted in those basic sources, they are learned as we absorb our 
culture, and they may thus share with judgments that do represent knowl-
edge a wide social acceptability. Still, we are at best entitled to expect them to 
be accepted within our society (or one that morally agrees with it), and they 

Scientific, moral, and religious knowledge  311
are at best “true for” one or another society. They are not unqualifiedly true, 
hence not genuinely known in the sense that implies cross-culturally valid 
standards of evidence. If they express propositions, those propositions are 
assertable in our culture, but not unqualifiedly true.
Preliminary appraisal of relativist and noncognitivist views
To assess the relativist and noncognitivist views, consider first the part of 
each position not shared with the other one. Let us start with the attitudinal 
aspect of noncognitivism and proceed to the cultural groundedness thesis 
characteristic of relativism.
Is there an alternative explanation of the attitudinal aspect of moral judg-
ments? Might they be true or false and still have, for instance, the commen-
datory or condemnatory force they do? Take the utterance, ‘The curtains 
are on fire!’ If sincerely uttered by any normal person, this would commonly 
express alarm and be meant to evoke action. But it is clearly factual, and it 
can be unqualifiedly true.
Moreover, it seems to be because of its factual content that the judgment 
that the curtains are on fire expresses the kind of alarm it does. Perhaps 
certain statements of those facts that are significantly and obviously linked 
to human concerns are no more attitudinally neutral than are typical moral 
judgments. For this reason (among others), one might resist the idea that the 
only distinctive function or even the major function of moral judgments is to 
express attitudes, as opposed to asserting propositions. It might just be that 
the facts supporting moral judgments are socially important in a certain way, 
as is the curtains’ being on fire.
As to the point that moral judgments are, in some cases, culturally tinged 
and differ from one culture to another, there are at least two related ways to 
explain this. One concerns the social origins of their acceptance, the other 
the content of such judgments.
First, cultures differ in what they accept as a moral judgment. Whereas 
contemporary Western societies might construe binding the feet of young 
girls to keep them from becoming large and “indelicate” as cruelty, the 
practice was not considered wrong by at least certain segments of Chinese 
society in the past. It might be replied that ‘cruel’ is a moral term, and hence 
there might be a moral disagreement after all—not about whether cruelty to 
children is wrong, but about whether this practice is cruel. Suppose there is 
disagreement about that. Why might it not be resolvable by appeal to non-
moral facts? Disagreements about whether certain punishments are morally 
permissible may turn on whether they tend to deter crime. Here a moral 
disagreement about what counts as morally permissible punishment does 
turn on the parties’ view of relevant non-moral facts.
Second, we must distinguish—even if we must also interconnect—genetic 
and justificatory considerations. The beliefs we express in making moral 
judgments may be learned through absorbing a culture, even if what justifies 

312  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
those beliefs or renders them knowledge does not depend on absorbing a 
culture. Clearly, the origin of a belief need not be what justifies it, nor need 
it reflect the truth of the proposition believed, if it is true. Thus, we might 
learn a moral principle through something characteristic of our culture (such 
as moral education), even though what justifies it is not grounded in our 
culture but, perhaps, something pertaining to human life as such. Our moral 
education might reflect this universality; but one could first learn a moral 
truth from an unreliable source—say, someone who deceitfully calls another 
person unfair—and later get a good justification for it.
Suppose that our moral beliefs do arise from our education and culture, 
and are in this sense culturally and historically “conditioned,” as it is some-
times put by theorists working in the sociology of knowledge, a field that 
overlaps both social epistemology and feminist epistemology. There is good 
reason to say that at least many of our scientific beliefs are also culturally and 
historically conditioned. If we need not thereby regard the relevant scientific 
beliefs as culturally relative, why should we so regard moral beliefs?
One might think that unless they are scientifically justified, moral judg-
ments are merely true for those who hold them. But both moral and scientific 
judgments, moreover, are “true for” the social groups that hold them, at least 
in the sense that the people in question believe them. Does that not indicate 
a kind of relativity in both cases? That is doubtful: anything we believe is 
in that sense true for us—it is believed by us to be true. If this is how moral 
judgments are relative to those who make them, their “relativity” character-
izes even simple self-evident truths. Isn’t it true for all of us that if the spruce 
is taller than the maple then the maple is shorter than the spruce?
Is there some other sense of ‘true for’ that discriminates between the sense 
in which anything we believe is true for us and the elusive sense in which 
moral judgments are, according to some relativists, true for some people and 
not others? One might try taking ‘true for’ as equivalent to ‘true from the 
(cultural) point of view’; but what does this come to beyond saying that ‘It is 
true for my culture’ means ‘My culture believes it’?
Another possibility is that ‘true for’ means something like ‘successfully 
works for’ or alternatively ‘conforms to the practices of’. This would be 
illustrated by ‘One ought to drive on the left side of the road’ is true for the 
British but not (many) others. But this does not yield a general relativism or 
at least not one that sets ethics apart from science. It is equivalent to some-
thing like ‘In Britain one ought to drive on the left’, and that simply specifies 
circumstances in which the judgment applies, just as ‘at sea level’ specifies 
when the air pressure on Earth is 14.7 pounds per square inch.
This circumstantial relativism—as we might call it—is simply the plau-
sible view that what we ought to do depends on the circumstances we are in. 
It says nothing about the status or the nature of the truth of moral principles 
once they are stated in relation to—relativized to—the circumstances they 
apply to. It leaves open that they might then be seen to be true or false in the 
usual sense appropriate to propositions about the empirical world.

Scientific, moral, and religious knowledge  313
There are certainly different kinds of circumstances in different cultures, 
and there may be important moral principles true for one society and not 
another, in the sense that in one of the societies, but not the other, people 
generally believe them. But, as the analogy to scientific disagreement indi-
cates, that would show nothing about whether moral principles or judgments 
are relative in any sense implying that they cannot be known or justifiedly 
believed.
Moral versus “factual” beliefs
We are now approaching the heart of the issue concerning the possibility of 
moral knowledge. Recall the objection that scientific beliefs, but not moral 
judgments, are testable by experience and reason, say by appeal to perceptual 
facts and deductive logic, and hence moral judgments are relative in a way 
scientific judgments are not. We are back to the argument which the relativist 
and attitudinal views commonly share: that since experience and reason do 
not ground moral judgments, those judgments cannot express knowledge. 
This argument must be squarely met.
The first thing to be stressed is that from the premise that moral judgments 
are not formally deducible—derivable by the standards of deductive logic—
from facts, it simply does not follow that they are not justifiable by appeal 
to facts. That this conclusion does not follow is evident from our discussion 
of scientific knowledge, which illustrates that knowledge can arise through 
inductive transmission from evidential premises. Scientific generalizations, 
for example, are inductively known on the basis of facts, such as observational 
data, which we use to confirm them. If there can be scientific knowledge on 
this basis, then there can be knowledge based on inductive grounds, grounds 
that do not entail any proposition known on the basis of them. Why, then, 
should there not be inductively grounded moral knowledge?14
One reply to this argument is that moral generalizations are not even 
inductively supported by the facts. But is that true? We certainly cite facts to 
justify moral judgments. I might justify my judgment that I ought to meet 
with Jane by citing the simple fact that I promised to. This does not prove 
that I ought to meet with her, but it surely provides a good reason for the 
judgment that I ought to. There is, moreover, a third possibility we should 
examine: that even if such a fact does not imply a moral judgment by the rules 
of logic, it implies it in a different kind of a priori way.
Ethical intuitionism
This brings us to a major account of moral knowledge, one quite different 
from the deductive and inductive ones so far specified. Suppose someone asks 
why I should keep my promises in the first place. I could perhaps explain 
why I believe this. But suppose that I cannot justify it by appeal to anything 
more basic. This would not show that I do not know or justifiably believe it. 

314  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
At some point or other in defending a perceptual judgment I may be equally 
unable to give a further justification. It would not follow that the judgment 
does not express knowledge or justified belief.
The issue before us should be explicitly considered in the light of what 
we saw concerning the structure of knowledge. A foundationalist may say 
that (with some special exceptions) the principle that one should keep one’s 
promises, or at least some more general principle, such as that people should 
be treated with respect, is self-evident, hence knowable a priori, and needs 
no defense by derivation from prior principles. This intuitionism does not 
claim that everyone who considers the relevant principle finds it obvious; 
but that same point will hold for certain truths of logic which, when finally 
understood, are comfortably accepted as self-evident. The crucial thing is 
that, through intuitive reflection, the principle can be seen to be true.15
Chapter 5 treated intuition as a rational capacity: roughly, a non-inferen-
tial, apprehensional capacity by whose exercise what is intuitively believed 
or known is believed or known. But I have said little about intuitions, under-
stood as a kind of exercise of that capacity. To understand intuitions we must 
consider at least three notions: (1) intuitions that p—cognitive intuitions; (2) 
a proposition’s being intuitive—evoking (under certain conditions) what 
might be called the sense of non-inferential credibility; and (3) objectual intu-
itions, roughly direct apprehensions of either (a) a concept or (b) a property 
or relation, such as the property of being a promise, the property of being 
unjust, or the relation of entailment. (1) and (2) will be my main concern.
On one view, cognitive intuitions are a kind of belief. This would explain 
why we rarely speak of an intuition that p without presupposing that the cog-
nition in question entails belief that p. Moreover, if we are asked whether p is 
true, then, if we are aware that we do not believe p, but it (non-inferentially) 
seems true, we are likely to say, in careful usage, just that—that it seems 
true or, sometimes, that it seems intuitive. If, however, cognitive attitudes 
are conceived broadly, as those with truth-valued objects, then what is  
not believed but, in the relevant phenomenal way, seems true to us may be 
considered an intuition of ours. For some philosophers this is the primary 
concept of an intuition.16 We might thus divide cognitive intuitions into 
those that are doxastic, that is, a kind of belief, and those that are not but 
embody a disposition to believe. I prefer, however, to call the latter intuitive 
seemings rather than intuitions. This terminology is harmonious with the 
view of intuitions held by most who take seemings to be the primary (or 
only) cases of cognitive intuitions.
More important than which terminology we use is the relation between 
doxastic intuitions and intuitive seemings. An intuitive seeming that p can be 
an evidential ground for believing p, somewhat as a sensory seeming can be 
a ground for believing that the paper before one is white. Intuitionists have 
typically presupposed this, sometimes with the idea that just as a perceptual 
seeming—say, its visually seeming that there is paper here—is evidence for 
that proposition (indeed for a range of “observational” propositions), an 
intuitive seeming that p is evidence for p.

Scientific, moral, and religious knowledge  315
Foundationalists will tend to argue that such a response—considering p 
true on the basis of its being intuitive—is legitimate when we get to certain 
stages in a process of justification. For them, some beliefs (including many 
non-self-evident kinds) are foundational in a way that warrants holding them 
without doing so on the basis of prior premises. If that were not true, then we 
could not be justified in holding anything. This is not in the least to suggest 
that the foundationalist must cut off discussion or simply reassert the propo-
sition in question. Clarification by examples may be adduced. Misguided 
objections may be refuted. An unexpected premise might be found after all. 
That is possible even for a self-evident proposition. Being evident in itself, 
such a proposition does not stand in need of a premise, but it is not necessar-
ily incapable of being evidenced by one.
Coherentists will certainly be willing to go on arguing by appeal to 
propositions that provide support by appropriately cohering with the one in 
question. They might point out that if we do not keep our promises, life will 
be unbearable, and then, for each thesis attacked, defend it with respect to 
one or more others. The objector may not be pacified by this approach either. 
But neither approach can simply be rejected out of hand. To be warranted in 
rejecting either approach, one must have a plausible alternative conception of 
knowledge and justification. What would it be? That is far from evident, as 
we shall soon see in exploring skepticism.
These responses in support of the possibility of moral knowledge do not 
go as far as one might like. They rest on limited analogies and on simply 
showing that the case against moral knowledge is inconclusive. There are 
two other important responses we should consider. One, defended perhaps 
most powerfully by Kant and later Kantians, as well as by intuitionists, con-
strues knowledge of moral principles as a priori. The other, defended perhaps 
most powerfully by Mill and later utilitarians, represents moral principles 
as empirical. In either case, moral knowledge and moral justification are 
grounded in the basic experiential and rational sources I have been discussing.
Kantian rationalism in moral epistemology
To understand the first, broadly Kantian, response, consider another applica-
tion of the principle that cruelty to children is wrong: the proposition that 
flogging infants for pleasure is wrong. There is some plausibility in saying 
that we know this. Intuitionists would tend to say we know it (or can know 
it) non-inferentially; Kantians would likely hold that we know it as an obvi-
ous application of Kant’s famous categorical imperative, which, in one form, 
says that we are to act only on principles that we can (rationally) will to be 
universal laws of nature obeyed by us all.17
The proposition that flogging infants for pleasure is wrong seems plau-
sible on even brief reflection about what it is to flog infants. It is difficult to 
conceive exceptions, and it is certainly difficult to conceive circumstances 
that would lead rational persons not to endorse it provided they are taking 
either the point of view of universalizability or the equally Kantian point 

316  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
of view of commitment to treating people as ends in themselves and never 
merely as means. To be sure, perhaps such cruelty as flogging an infant could 
in special cases be excusable, even if not morally right. Terrorists might elec-
trically manipulate my brain so that I change in personality and am somehow 
brought to flog an infant (perhaps even to do so for pleasure); but even then I 
would be doing something wrong, though in an excusable way.18
Consider another example, a modest version of something more powerful: 
we ought to treat people equally in matters of life and death, say in regard 
to wartime military service, unless they differ in some relevant way (and not 
merely in being different people). This is a kind of principle of consistency, 
not logical consistency, but something like consistency in roughly the sense 
of using a principled policy or procedure in making decisions. It says that 
such preferentially inconsistent treatment is prima facie wrong and that dif-
ferential treatment in these mortal matters must be justifiable by a difference.
Granted, the principle does not specify what kind of difference is relevant, 
for example that the health of candidates for organ transplant is relevant and 
their skin color is not. Specifying relevant differences is a further step. But 
the principle is still a moral one, and it commits us to the important require-
ment that there be a reason to justify the indicated differences in treatment. 
Particularly since it is a kind of consistency principle, there is some reason 
to believe that if it is true, it is knowable a priori, though defending this idea 
would be a major task.
As this perspective on equal treatment suggests, it is natural to take the 
Kantian view to be internalist in its moral epistemology: it is by the use of 
reason, and hence through grounds accessible to reflection, that we know and 
can justifiedly believe sound moral principles. We may need much experi-
ence to understand moral concepts; but once we understand them, sufficient 
reflection on them provides justification for basic principles of action and 
thereby for moral principles.
Utilitarian empiricism in moral epistemology
The second response to relativist and noncognitivist views in moral episte-
mology, the response of Mill’s utilitarianism, is very different. Its first point 
is that moral judgments are knowable on the basis of factual knowledge of 
how acting in accordance with them would contribute to producing some-
thing intrinsically good, hence good in itself, independently of what it leads 
to. Second, Mill maintained that only pleasure and freedom from pain are 
good in themselves. He apparently believed that if these two premises can 
themselves be known (as he thought they could be), they justify holding, as 
one’s fundamental moral principle, something like this: that precisely those 
acts are right which contribute at least as favorably to pleasure (and freedom 
from pain) in the relevant population as any alternative available to the agent. 
(I leave aside the points Mill raises later about qualities of pleasure.)19
Because, on Mill’s view, we can determine what these optimal acts are, 

Scientific, moral, and religious knowledge  317
that is, what acts have the most utility, by a combination of common sense 
and scientific procedures, moral judgments are knowable in the same way 
as common sense and scientific statements. By contrast with Kant’s moral 
epistemology, on which we have internal (a priori) access to the grounds of 
basic moral truths, Mill’s moral epistemology (and that of at least the major-
ity of utilitarians) is externalist. For them, we have access to grounds of 
moral truths only through considerations about the consequences of actions 
for pleasure and pain, and those considerations require observational or 
other kinds of inductive evidence. Given the central role of consequences 
in determining what is right, utilitarianism is a form of consequentialism. 
Consequentialism takes other forms, and most are epistemologically similar.
A question that now arises is how we know that pleasure or anything else 
is intrinsically good. Mill argued that (for one thing) we can know this by 
determining what people by nature actually desire for its own sake. But the 
utilitarian approach is by no means committed to that view (which many 
commentators on Mill find implausible). For instance, it might be argued 
instead that what is intrinsically good is what people want or would want for 
its own sake provided their wants are adequately rational, say held in the light 
of reflection that is logically and scientifically rational, vivid, and appropri-
ately focused on the nature of the thing wanted.20
Kantian and utilitarian moral epistemologies compared
The Kantian and the Millian utilitarian responses to challenges to moral 
knowledge are nicely parallel to Kant’s and Mill’s views of the truths of 
reason. On Kant’s rationalistic view, moral principles are (synthetic) a priori. 
On Mill’s empiricist view (only part of which I have stated), moral principles 
are empirical.
There is a further epistemologically interesting contrast here. On Kant’s 
approach, or at least on some approaches of the same rationalistic kind, 
such as most versions of intuitionism, there can be direct (non-inferential) 
moral knowledge. For on these views some moral principles are basic in a 
sense implying that knowledge of them need not be inferentially grounded 
in knowledge of any other propositions. For utilitarianism, there cannot be 
direct moral knowledge except in special cases. The main and perhaps only 
cases seem to be these. First, some direct moral knowledge is only memo-
rially direct, that is, direct as preserved in memory but originally indirect 
and now direct just by virtue of one’s forgetting one’s evidential grounds 
for it, as we forget the steps in proving a theorem and remember only the 
theorem. Second, some moral knowledge is testimonially direct, that is, non-
inferentially grounded in testimony, where (for the utilitarian) this requires 
that at some time someone (say, the attester) knew the truth inferentially.
Both of these memorial and testimonial cases would be secondary knowl-
edge, since the knowledge depends on other knowledge (of a non-testimonial, 
non-memorial kind) of the same proposition and is not primary in the way 

318  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
that, say, perceptual knowledge is. Secondary knowledge need not, however, 
be inferential, since it need not be based on other knowledge. For Mill, 
knowledge that, say, keeping one’s promises is obligatory would ultimately 
depend on someone’s knowing a good deal about the effects of promise-
keeping on happiness. We can know the principle through parental teaching 
in the course of our moral education. We could establish it for ourselves by 
studying human behavior and then retain our knowledge of it after forget-
ting our grounds. But no one could know it directly unless someone knew it 
inferentially, through evidence.
This difference between Kant and Mill—the former providing, as do 
intuitionists, for direct moral knowledge and the latter not—is no accident. 
Implicit in Mill’s utilitarianism is the view that moral properties, such as being 
obligatory, are unlike sensory properties in not being directly experienced or 
otherwise directly apprehensible. As an empiricistic, and thus experience-
based, moral theory, it must treat knowledge of moral truths as ultimately 
indirect (unless, as has sometimes been done, it posits moral experience as a 
source of knowledge that grounds knowledge rather in the way perception 
does). Thus, even if, by memory, I have some direct moral knowledge, no 
moral knowledge is independently basic, in the sense that it need not at any 
time be grounded in another kind of knowledge. If I know that cruelty to 
children is wrong, it is by virtue of my (or someone’s) knowing that it does 
not contribute optimally to happiness in the world.
For a broadly Kantian view, by contrast, we can rationally grasp this prin-
ciple, at least as a consequence of a more general principle. For intuitionism, 
we can sometimes even directly grasp a moral principle, say that arbitrarily 
unequal treatment of persons in matters of life and death is wrong. On both 
these views, then, we can have moral knowledge which is direct and indepen-
dently basic. But even if Kant is best interpreted as construing the most gen-
eral moral knowledge as depending on non-moral premises, he took all fully 
general moral knowledge to be deductively derivable from (and only from) a 
priori premises and thus itself a priori (at least in the provability sense).
Should Kantian or utilitarian or intuitionist views convince us that there 
is moral knowledge? From what I have said about them here, it is not obvi-
ous that they should. But, when carefully developed, they are each plausible, 
and each may be held with the attitude of objectivistic fallibilism that is also 
appropriate to scientific views. Each view certainly seems to warrant the 
conclusion that there can be moral knowledge; and apparently there is some, 
despite the sorts of relativistic and attitudinal arguments I raised to indicate 
why some thinkers deny its possibility.
There are, of course, other issues that should be explored in deciding 
whether moral principles or judgments can be known, or even justifiably 
believed. There may, for instance, be sources of moral knowledge, such as a 
special moral faculty analogous to perception. But I see no compelling reason 
to believe there are. Suppose, however, that we do have a special moral fac-
ulty. Presumably, it is a kind of rational capacity whose insights are rational 

Scientific, moral, and religious knowledge  319
ones capable of being known or at least justifiedly believed. Whatever the 
problems that remain, perhaps enough has been said to connect them with 
the epistemological framework developed in this book. Certainly, locating 
moral judgments in that framework is at least a good way to approach the 
question of whether they can constitute knowledge.
Religious knowledge
The case of possible religious knowledge is different in many ways from that 
of possible moral knowledge, but it can also be clarified in the light of some 
of the concepts and principles introduced in this book. Again, I want to be 
brief and to start with the negative view, in this case that religious propo-
sitions are simply beyond the scope of human knowledge. I have in mind 
mainly propositions about God, such as that God exists, brought order out 
of chaos, created the universe, or loves us: propositions that are not merely 
religious in subject matter but also imply or presuppose that God (or some 
spiritual reality with a central place in a religion) exists.
Why would it be thought that no religious propositions are known? The 
most common basis for holding this view is probably much like the most 
common reason for holding that there is no moral knowledge, namely, that 
religious propositions cannot be known either a priori or on the basis of 
experience, say by inferring God’s existence from the premise that God’s 
designing the universe best explains the order we find in it.
Both aspects of this negative claim have been discussed by philosophers 
and theologians at great length, and there are well-known arguments for the 
existence of God meant to provide knowledge that God exists. Some of these 
use only a priori premises; others use only empirical premises. For instance, 
the ontological argument, in one form, proceeds from the a priori premises 
that God is supremely perfect (has all perfections in the highest degree), and 
that existence is a perfection, to the conclusion that God exists. By contrast, 
the argument from first cause (in one form) uses the empirical premise that 
there is motion, together with the general premise that there cannot be an 
infinite chain of causes of motion, and concludes that God, as an unmoved 
first mover, exists.
There is a vast literature about these and all the other historically impor-
tant arguments for the existence of God.21 I am not concerned here with 
arguments for God’s existence. All I want to say about those arguments is 
that nothing in the framework I have developed implies either that there can 
or that there cannot be cogent arguments for God’s existence. For instance, 
nothing said about the basic sources of knowledge or about its transmission 
implies that those sources could not in some way lead to arguments yielding 
knowledge of God or of some other spiritual reality. The same point applies 
to justification of beliefs about God or about some spiritual reality, and both 
points hold within either a foundationalist or a coherentist epistemology.

320  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
Evidentialism versus experientialism
But what about the possibility—less often discussed than arguments for 
God’s existence—of direct (non-inferential) knowledge of God? Does the 
framework of this book rule out that possibility? General epistemological 
considerations have sometimes been thought to do so, but they do not. 
Indeed, if there can be what I have called natural knowledge, as in the case of 
direct knowledge of arithmetical results ordinarily knowable only through 
lengthy calculation, then there is some reason to think that knowledge can 
be built into a person in such a way that the person could have direct knowl-
edge of God. (The kind of knowledge in question was countenanced by John 
Calvin and its source dubbed the sensus divinitatis.)22 To be sure, there may 
be less mystery about how a mere calculating mechanism could be built into 
the brain than about how knowledge of an external, spiritual reality could be. 
But a mystery is not an impossibility.
If, however, it is even possible that there is an all-powerful (omnipotent) 
God, then that God could create such direct theistic knowledge. If there can 
be such knowledge, then one form of what is called evidentialism is mistaken, 
namely, evidentialism about theistic knowledge, the view that knowledge of 
God is impossible except on the basis of adequate (propositional) evidence. 
On this view, religious experience, say as described by mystics, is not con-
sidered evidence; the kind intended is not the non-inferential “evidence of 
the senses,” such as we have for there being paper before us, but the sort 
ordinarily called evidence, which could be expressed in premises enlisted to 
support theistic conclusions.23
How might evidentialism apply to justification? Recall the prima facie 
cases of direct knowledge of something that is ordinarily knowable only 
through evidence or inference, such as the result of multiplying two three-
digit numbers. If there is direct knowledge here, it need not be a case of 
justified belief. So we cannot use such examples to refute evidentialism about 
theistic justification: the view that justified beliefs about God are impossible 
except on the basis of propositional evidence.
Could one be directly justified in believing such religious propositions as 
that God exists? Would this require one’s having a sixth sense, or a mystical 
faculty? And even if there should be such a sense or faculty, would it generate 
justification directly, or only through one’s discovering adequately strong 
correlations between its deliverances and what is believed through reason or 
ordinary experience, for instance through one’s religious views enabling one 
to predict publicly observable events? In the latter case, the sense or faculty 
would not be a basic source of justification. Before it could justify the beliefs 
it produces, it would have to earn its justificational credentials through a suf-
ficient proportion of those beliefs being confirmed through other sources, 
such as perception and introspection.
There is, however, a way to resist evidentialism and argue for the possibil-
ity of direct justification of certain religious beliefs without assuming that 

Scientific, moral, and religious knowledge  321
there are any sources of justification beyond reason and normal experience 
(though normal experience need not be through the five senses). In particu-
lar, this approach need not posit either mystical apprehensions, such as over-
powering, ineffable, otherworldly experiences, or special divine revelations, 
whether in those experiences or in the presence of apparently miraculous 
changes in the external world.
I call the position I have in mind experientialism, since it grounds the 
justification of some very important religious beliefs in experience rather 
than in evidential beliefs or direct rational apprehension. Religious people 
sometimes say that, in perfectly ordinary life, God speaks to them, they 
are aware of God in the beauty of nature, and they can feel God’s presence. 
Descriptions of these sorts might be considered metaphorical. But if God is, 
as many think, properly conceived as a (divine) person, these avowals might 
have a literal meaning.
It is natural to object that all one directly hears in such experiences is a 
special kind of voice (presumably in one’s mind’s ear), that all one directly 
sees is the natural beauty which one takes to manifest God, and that one 
simply feels a spiritual tone in one’s experience. From these moves it is easy 
to conclude that one is at best indirectly justified in believing one is experi-
encing God. After all, one believes it inferentially; for instance, on the basis 
of one’s belief that the voice one hears is God’s, one might believe that the 
beauty one sees is a manifestation of divine creation; and so forth.
The perceptual analogy and the possibility of direct theistic 
knowledge
To assess the case just made to show that theistic beliefs are inferential and so 
not candidates to be directly justified (or direct knowledge), compare percep-
tion. Suppose it is argued that one is only indirectly justified in believing 
there is a green field before one, since one believes it on the basis of believing 
that there is grass, a green textured surface, and so on. Must we accept this? I 
think not. I do not normally even have these beliefs when I believe there is a 
green field before me, even if I do see it by seeing its grassy surface.
The matter is far more complicated than this, however. It may be argued 
that as God is both infinite and non-physical, one cannot be acquainted with 
God through experience. But this argument will not do. Even if a stream 
were infinitely long, I could still see it by seeing part of it. Seeing an infinite 
thing is not seeing its infinity.
But, if seeing an infinite stream is not seeing its infinity, then how can 
seeing it be a basis for knowing that the stream is infinite? Similarly, suppos-
ing God is experienced, how can the experience reveal that it is God who is 
experienced? The problem is not that God is non-physical. The non-physical 
can be quite readily experienced, and indeed in a direct way. Thus, my experi-
ence of my own thinking presumably need not be of something physical, 
even if in fact it is of something physical, say a brain process; and even if it 

322  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
must be (because of some necessary connection that might hold between the 
mental and the physical), it is not experience of, say, my thoughts as physical.
The problem, then, is not that there cannot be experience, even non-
mystical experience, of God. It is (in part) that if experiencing, say, God’s 
speaking to one, is possible, it is not clear how one could know (or justifiedly 
believe) that it is God speaking. How would one know that one was not 
having a merely internal experience, such as talking to oneself in a voice one 
thinks is God’s, or even hallucinating a divine voice? (Such skeptical ques-
tions will be discussed in the next chapter.)
In part, the question is how one might recognize God. Plainly, this requires 
having a concept of God. But that is acquirable without already having 
knowledge of God’s existence. One also needs a concept of, for instance, a 
sonata to recognize one. These concepts are very different, but either one can 
be acquired without actually knowing of the existence of (or experiencing) 
what it represents.
Here it is important to recall the perceptual analogy. Why would it be less 
likely that my experience of looking toward the green field is hallucinatory? 
It is true that there is a difference: we can, with all the other senses, verify 
that we see a green field, whereas God may seem perceptually accessible at 
most to sight and hearing—presumably indirectly, as God is seen in appro-
priate things and heard through hearing voices, perhaps inner voices, that are 
not literally God’s (at least if a being’s voice must be physically grounded in a 
physical embodiment, though even in that case, some would argue that God’s 
voice was physically embodied in Christ).
Even if God is accessible only to sight and hearing and, in any case, only 
indirectly, it does not follow that knowledge and belief about God are indi-
rect. As we saw in exploring the sense-datum theory, we can know one thing 
through another without inferring facts about the first from facts about the 
second. Thus, the force of this difference between the possible perceptual 
accessibility of God and that of physical objects can be exaggerated. Surely it 
is not true that sense experience can be trusted only when verification by all 
the other senses is possible. If that were so, we could not justifiably believe 
we see a beam of light that is perceptually accessible only to our vision.
Problems confronting the experientialist approach
There are many other relevant questions. Take first a psychological one of 
the kind relevant to epistemology. Do people ever really believe directly that, 
say, God is speaking to them, or is such a belief based—even if not selfcon-
sciously—on believing that the voice in question has certain characteristics, 
where one takes these to indicate God’s speaking? Second, how is the pos-
sibility of corroboration by others—what we might call social justification—
relevant? Does it, for instance, matter crucially, for experiential justification 
for believing in God, that not just any normal person can be expected to see 
God in the beauty of nature, whereas any normal person can be expected to 

Scientific, moral, and religious knowledge  323
see a green field? Or is this contrast blunted by the marked differences in 
perceptual acuity among clearly normal people, particularly in complicated 
matters such as aesthetic perception in music and painting, in which what 
is directly heard or seen can be seen or heard only with both practice and 
sensitivity?
A related question is the role of testimony as a social source of direct 
justification. If it is true that (as argued in Chapter 7) beliefs based on testi-
mony are commonly direct, then perhaps certain theistic testimony by some 
people provides knowledge of God to others. Even if one supposed that very 
few have theistic knowledge or justified theistic belief (at least “first-hand”), 
one might argue that the relevant testimonial chains can extend to many 
people—either during a given period of time or, where there is a community 
of believers, across time extending as long as thousands of years.
To be sure, justification seems different from knowledge here, at least 
insofar as we must have justification for believing someone to acquire justi-
fication for what is attested. But perhaps religious believers often have this 
justification for accepting testimony in religious matters; it is at least not 
obvious, for instance, that in order to be justified in religious beliefs on the 
basis of testimony they must have a kind of justification that is out of their 
reach as rational persons.
Whatever the place of testimony in providing theistic knowledge or jus-
tification, one might expand the possibilities for direct experience of God. 
Might God be seen, not necessarily in the ethereally direct way mystics have 
sometimes imagined, but in a more ordinary, if no less direct, fashion? If 
so, there is more ground to testify from as well as less need for testimony 
as a source of theistic knowledge or justification. Might God be seen, for 
instance, in nature, rather than so to speak inferred from it? Here is one of 
Gerard Manley Hopkins’s poetic expressions of that idea:
The world is charged with the grandeur of God.
It will flame out, like shining from shook foil;
It gathers to a greatness, like the ooze of oil
Crushed . . .
And for all this, nature is never spent;
There lives the dearest freshness deep down things . . .24
After all, if nature is God’s work—perhaps God’s ongoing work—might 
there be a sense in which God is seen in it by those with appropriate sensitiv-
ity? A special sensitivity is needed even for seeing the beauty in a painting. 
To be sure, the relation of beauty to a painting that has it is different from the 
relation of God to nature conceived as revealing God. The point, however, is 
only that special sensitivity may be required for theistic perception, not that 
it is exactly like aesthetic perception.
The suggestion is not that nature is partly constitutive of God, at least not 
in the way that the shape and texture by which I perceive a spruce tree are 

324  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
in part constitutive of it. Still, could nature, as some views apparently have 
it, be in some way part of God? If it is (as it in some sense would be on the 
view that the physical universe is God’s body), then directly perceiving God 
may in a way be too easy, or at least quite easy to do without directly perceiv-
ing the divinity in what one sees. One could not see a beautiful landscape 
without seeing God, though one could see it without seeing it as manifest-
ing God.25 As stressed in examining perception, seeing something that has a 
property does not entail seeing it as having it. In this, divinity is no different 
from beauty.
The dimensions of these questions quickly widen, and even the many 
points that have come to light do not enable us to determine with any confi-
dence whether there can be directly justified religious beliefs. It has so often 
been taken to be obvious that there cannot be, however, that it is important 
to see why it is really not obvious. It is at best very difficult to establish abso-
lute restrictions on what sorts of beliefs can be directly justified. This holds 
even if the only way in which beliefs can be directly justified is by virtue of 
their grounding in the basic sources of justification.
A parallel point holds for absolute restrictions on what we can justifiedly 
believe (or know) on the basis of one or more arguments. It is particularly 
difficult to determine what can be justifiedly believed (or known) through 
a combination of plausible but individually inconclusive arguments for the 
same conclusion. As both coherentists and moderate foundationalists are at 
pains to show, there are times when a belief is justified not by grounding in 
one or more conclusive arguments, but by its support from—which implies 
some degree of coherence with—many sets of independent premises none 
of which, alone, would suffice to justify it.26 The arguments that may work 
together here are not limited to the traditional kind proceeding from prem-
ises about the external world. Where one has non-inferential justification, say 
from a perceptual experience, one may formulate an argument that proceeds 
from premises describing the occurrence and character of the experience. 
Such arguments from experience can be combined with the traditional kind.
It must be granted, however, that it is often hard in practice to distinguish, 
even in our own case, between beliefs that are grounded directly in one of the 
basic sources and beliefs that are grounded in those sources through other 
beliefs of which we may not even be aware, or through inferences we do not 
realize we are making from propositions which we are aware we believe. This 
means that what we take to be direct belief, such as a belief that God has 
called on one to make sacrifice for someone else, may really be based on at 
least one other belief and may depend for its justification on the evidence 
or grounds which some other belief expresses. Still, even if we cannot tell 
whether a belief is inferential, we may be able to determine what further 
beliefs it is based on if it is inferential, and we may then be able to defend its 
justification on the basis of those.
Suppose for the sake of argument that there cannot be directly justified 
religious beliefs of the kind we have been discussing. There might still be 

Scientific, moral, and religious knowledge  325
direct knowledge of such propositions, if (as I have argued) one can know 
certain kinds of things by virtue of a connection with them even if one does 
not have justification for believing them. For some religious people, even 
knowledge without justification might be considered very precious in this 
case. It would, perhaps, be one kind of faith.
Justification and rationality, faith and reason
Our topic in these passages about theistic justification is sometimes called 
the question of faith and reason. In discussing that question, reason—above 
all rationality in holding religious beliefs—is commonly thought to be 
roughly equivalent to justification. I take it, however, that although a justi-
fied belief must be rational, a rational belief, while it presumably cannot be 
patently unjustified, need not be unqualifiedly justified.27 Consider a belief 
that someone likes you. It can be rational on the basis of a vague “intuitive” 
sense before it is justified by evidence.
Moreover, justification seems tied more to specific justifiers than rational-
ity is to any analogue of a justifier. If I justifiedly believe there is a cold glass 
in my hand, my justification is (chiefly) my tactual sensations; if I rationally 
believe that a painting is beautiful, there need be nothing comparable in the 
way of a sensory ground. I must have color sensations, but there is no sensa-
tion specifically of beauty as there is of the cold glass.
Perhaps rationality belongs for the most part to beliefs (and other elements, 
such as actions) that are (roughly speaking) fully consistent with reason and 
so, for instance, not obviously false, not crazy, and not mere results of wish-
ful thinking. Moreover, rationality is to be understood by contrast chiefly 
with beliefs (and other elements) that are irrational,28 whereas what is justi-
fied contrasts chiefly with what is unjustified. An unjustified belief—as many 
philosophers have discovered from their critics—need not be irrational. It 
is far easier to avoid having irrational beliefs than to avoid having unjusti-
fied ones. Rationality in a belief is achievable with lesser grounding than is 
required for its justification.
There is, then, at least one respect in which justification represents a less 
permissive normative standard than rationality. Mere absence of conditions 
that would make a belief that p unjustified does not imply that it is justified, 
but at most that one may suspend judgment on not-p, as opposed to being 
justified in believing that proposition. But in a rational person, absence of 
conditions that would make it irrational to hold a belief does tend to imply 
that it is rational. Normally, I may rationally believe a painting is beautiful if 
it seems so to me and I can find no reason to the contrary; I cannot justifiedly 
believe this without some substantially supportive ground that goes beyond 
the kind of impression that may suffice for rationality.
The suggested view is close to what has been called epistemic conserva-
tism. In one form this is the view that our beliefs are, as it were, innocent 
unless “proven” guilty; in another form, it is the view that if a proposition 

326  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
seems to one to be true, one is justified in believing it. The first view is too 
strong, since it applies to just any belief one might hold. The second view, a 
phenomenal conservatism, is plausible provided the seeming true is to some 
degree evidential, as it may often be. But the view suggested here is weaker in 
applying only to rationality rather than justification, in which the former is a 
more permissive (less strong) normative standard.
If rationality is a weaker—i.e., more permissive—normative notion than 
justification, it still provides a significant positive status that a theistic belief 
can have even if it is not justified. This is an important point. Scientific, 
moral, and other kinds of beliefs may also achieve rationality more readily 
than justification, even if, when they do, this is commonly a stage on the way 
to justification.
In any case, if rationality is possible without justification yet is implied by 
it, a plausible conclusion is that the experiential and rational grounds that, 
when sufficiently weighty, produce justification may, even when not quite 
weighty enough to yield justification, still render a belief based on them 
rational. A theistic belief might then be rational even if not justified. There 
might, to be sure, have to be some consideration weighing in the direction of 
justification, and one could speak here of some degree of justification; but as 
examples we explored earlier show, one can have some degree of justification 
for a proposition without having overall justification for believing it.
These points about the difference between justification and rationality do 
not show that anyone does hold rational theistic beliefs, or even that scientific 
or moral beliefs are ever rationally held. But if rationality is a weaker notion 
than justification, there would at least be better reason to think that this is so 
than there would be if the requirements for rationality were as strong as those 
for justification. In particular, whatever the weight of the considerations 
favoring the possibility of justified scientific, moral, and theistic beliefs—and 
I think the weight is substantial—those considerations weigh more heavily in 
favor of the possibility of rational scientific, moral, and theistic beliefs.
Acceptance, presumption, and faith
One further line of thinking should be introduced here. We need not explore 
either justification or rationality in these three domains only in terms of 
belief. Belief has been utterly dominant in most epistemological discussions 
of cognition, but it is not the only cognitive attitude that raises epistemo-
logical questions or is appraisable in relation to justification or supporting 
grounds. There are attitudes weaker than belief in the degree of conviction 
they imply, yet strong enough in that psychological dimension to guide 
thought and action. Some philosophers have taken acceptance in this way. 
Accepting a scientific hypothesis, in this terminology, does not imply believ-
ing it, but it can commit one to using the hypothesis—say, that a certain ill-
ness is caused by a particular chemical—as a premise in (tentative) reasoning 
and in guiding one’s day-to-day actions.

Scientific, moral, and religious knowledge  327
Similarly, in ethics one might presume the truth of a moral proposition, 
say that a certain job would involve one in a conflict of interest, without 
believing it. And in theology, one might have faith that, for instance, God 
is sovereign in the universe, without unqualifiedly believing this—though 
of course one may not have faith that this is so if one disbelieves it. In each 
case—acceptance, presumption, and faith—one cannot simultaneously have 
extremely strong doubts about the proposition; but one can have or entertain 
some degree of doubt, in a way one cannot if one genuinely believes it.29
It seems clear that the weight of evidence or grounding required for either 
justification or rationality will be less for these non-belief-implying attitudes 
than it is for belief. For instance, faith that a friend will recover from a disease 
can be rational when the situation is too bleak for justified (or even rational) 
belief that the recovery will occur. I might be perfectly reasonable, so far 
as the evidence goes, in having faith when I would be unreasonably under-
weighting the evidence if I believed the recovery will occur. And I can accept 
a hypothesis, at least for purposes of determining how to think and act in 
an urgent matter, when it would be premature to believe it. Acceptance and 
presumption can yield many of the practical benefits of believing but do not 
entail it. To be sure, religious faith differs in significant ways from the kind 
just described, but the main point still applies: whatever the grounds needed 
for justified theistic belief, weaker grounds will suffice for theistic faith with 
the same content, say that God is sovereign.
It turns out, then, that epistemology broadly conceived may consider not 
just the scope of our knowledge and justified belief but also the scope of 
our rational belief and even of other rational attitudes toward propositions, 
such as certain kinds of acceptance, presumption, and faith. This extension 
of epistemological appraisal to other, weaker attitudes provides more scope 
for rationality than there would be if belief were the only object of rational-
ity. The same strength of evidence or grounding may take us further in the 
domain of attitudes like acceptance, presumption, and faith than in that of 
belief.
The question of how far our knowledge and justification extend beyond our 
beliefs grounded directly in experience or reason turns out to be compli-
cated. We at least have warrant for rejecting the stereotypic view that whereas 
there obviously exists scientific knowledge as an upshot of proof, it is at 
best doubtful that there is any moral knowledge, or even can be religious 
knowledge. It seems a mistake to talk of scientific proof at all if that means 
(deductive) proof of scientific hypotheses or theories from premises indicat-
ing observational or other scientific evidence. Moreover, scientific knowledge 
does not often represent uncontroversial beliefs of precise generalizations, 
but is commonly either approximate knowledge, often known to need refine-
ment, or knowledge of approximations, formulated with the appropriate 
restrictions left unspecified.
There is good reason to think that we also have, and certainly have not 

328  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
been shown not to have, moral knowledge. And there is apparently no cogent 
reason to deny the possibility of religious knowledge. The same holds for 
moral and religious justification; and in all three instances, the scientific, 
the moral, and the religious, the case for the possibility of rational beliefs 
seems undefeated and, beyond that, stronger than the case for justification. 
Both cases appear still stronger as applied, not to beliefs, but to attitudes 
like acceptance, presumption, and faith, which in certain ways are weaker 
than belief. There are, of course, important skeptical arguments we have not 
considered, arguments that attempt to undermine all these positive conclu-
sions and various other views about the scope of knowledge, justification, 
and rationality. It is time to examine some of those arguments.
Notes
	 1	 Cf. W.V. Quine’s point that “Observation sentences [such as ‘Rain’ (for 
‘It is raining’) and ‘Milk’ (for ‘That is milk’)] are . . . the vehicle of scien-
tific evidence . . . But they are also the entering wedge in the learning of 
language.” See Pursuit of Truth, p. 5.
	 2	 The point that scientific theories are not proved, nor even, strictly speak-
ing, disproved, by the kinds of observations that confirm or disconfirm 
them is developed by Pierre Duhem in The Aim and Structure of Physical 
Theory, trans. by Philip P. Wiener (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1954); and the idea which explains this—that theories are tested in 
conjunction with a number of related hypotheses and assumptions rather 
than in isolation—is often called the Duhem–Quine thesis (or sometimes 
the Quine–Duhem thesis, given Quine’s more detailed development of 
the view). For a short statement of the view see Quine, Pursuit of Truth, 
and Carl G. Hempel, Philosophy of Natural Science (Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1966).
	 3	 For a good non-technical discussion of scientific inquiry and confirma-
tion, see Carl G. Hempel, ibid.
	 4	 This case closely follows one described on National Public Radio on 
November 25, 2009.
	 5	 I assume here that one can unknowingly discover a truth, somewhat as 
one can unknowingly discover a diamond, thinking it may be paste (a 
zirconium imitation). Discovering that p does not entail knowing it and 
is compatible with thinking it is just a hypothesis to be tested (though 
not with believing not-p). One could presumably make a great discovery 
that is recognized as a discovery only by others.
	 6	 My characterization of inference to the best explanation quite properly 
does not require that the inferred hypothesis be true. For such inferences 
are meant to be confirmatory and are not normally taken to entail truth. 
If, however, we make the plausible assumption that only true proposi-
tions are (genuine) explanations, then the term ‘inference to the best 

Scientific, moral, and religious knowledge  329
explanation’ can mislead: the idea is roughly that of inference to what 
seems the best explanation (usually with the presupposition that the 
explanation is not just possibly correct but is adequately explanatory if 
true).
	 7	 Feminist epistemologists have emphasized the social and cultural “situ-
atedness” of knowers and their interdependence. They have also chal-
lenged the claims to scientific objectivity that many philosophers have 
made for scientific work properly carried out. For wide-ranging essays 
in and about feminist epistemology, see Kathleen Lennon and Margaret 
Whitford (eds.), Knowing the Difference: Feminist Perspectives in 
Epistemology (London: Routledge, 1994); and The Monist’s special issue, 
Feminist Epistemology: For and Against, 77, 4 (1994). 
	 8	 See Helen E. Longino, ‘The Fate of Knowledge in Social Theories of 
Knowledge’, in Frederick Schmitt (ed.), Socializing Epistemology: The 
Social Dimensions of Knowledge (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 
1994), reprinted in Jack S. Crumley II (ed.), Readings in Epistemology 
(Mountainview, CA: Mayfield, 1999), pp. 158, 159. For more recent wide-
ranging works that treat feminist epistemology, see Miranda Fricker, 
Epistemic Injustice: Power and the Ethics of Knowing (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2007), and Lorraine Code, ‘Feminist Epistemology’, in 
Jonathan Dancy, Ernest Sosa, and Matthias Steup (eds.), The Blackwell 
Companion to Epistemology, 2nd edn. (Oxford: Blackwell, 2010). 
	 9	 See Elizabeth Anderson, ‘Feminist Epistemology: An Interpretation and 
a Defense’, Hypatia 10 (1995), 50–84, reprinted in Crumley, Readings in 
Epistemology, p. 505.
	10	 Ibid., p. 505.
	11	 For a representative collection of essays in this field, see Schmitt (ed.), 
Socializing Epistemology. The field is interdisciplinary, particularly in 
raising issues for philosophers, sociologists, psychologists, and others. 
For a wide-ranging study see Steve Fuller, ‘Recent Work in Social 
Epistemology’, American Philosophical Quarterly 33, 2 (1996), 149–66.
	12	 The paper by Hardwig cited in Chapter 7 notes an example of a scientific 
article with scores of co-authors, each of whom may be presumed essen-
tial for some item of knowledge important to the overall knowledge the 
article presents.
	13	 The wrongness is prima facie, not absolute, but this need not be made 
explicit, as it is ordinarily presupposed—and is certainly presupposed 
here.
	14	 That there is such moral knowledge is a major thrust of what is sometimes 
called ‘Cornell Realism’, since so many philosophers at or associated with 
Cornell University have defended it. For some of the seminal papers and 
other relevant studies see Geoffrey Sayre-McCord (ed.), Essays in Moral 
Realism (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1988); and for a wider 
treatment of these issues see Walter Sinnott-Armstrong and Mark C. 

330  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
Timmons (eds.), Moral Knowledge? (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1996).
	15	 This is the kind of thing W.D. Ross and other intuitionists have said 
about basic moral principles: they are intuitively knowable and self-
evident, though seeing their truth may take a good deal of reflection. 
See, for example, Ross’s The Right and the Good, esp. chapter 2.
	16	 See, e.g., George Bealer, ‘Intuition and the Autonomy of Philosophy’, 
in Michael DePaul and William Ramsey (eds.), Rethinking Intuition 
(Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 1998); Ernest Sosa, ‘Minimal 
Intuitionism’, in DePaul and Ramsey, Rethinking Intuition; and Michael 
Huemer, Ethical Intuitionism (Houndmills, Basingstoke: Palgrave-
Macmillan, 2005). Sosa’s notion may allow that both beliefs and seemings 
can count as intuitions (see, e.g., pp. 258–9); but for Huemer intuitions 
are a distinct, non-doxastic type of propositional attitude, evidenced 
when someone admits that p is intuitive (e.g., seems to be true), but 
denies believing it.
	17	 See esp. Immanuel Kant, Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals, trans. 
by Lewis White Beck (New York: Liberal Arts Press, 1959), section 2. 
Kant offered other formulations of the imperative (and the one I give 
involves some interpretation, e.g. the insertion of ‘rationally’), but noth-
ing said here turns on the interpretation).
	18	 The wrongness in question is prima facie: this allows that excuses are 
possible but is compatible with the prohibition’s being very strong, so 
that, for example, inexcusable violation is a grave moral offense.
	19	 In chapter 2 of Utilitarianism (London, 1861; Indianapolis: Hackett, 
2001), shortly after introducing his utilitarian principle, Mill contends 
that some pleasures are preferable to others, offers an empirical way to 
determine which of two pleasures is better (paragraph 5), and attempts 
to provide a similar way to weight quality of pleasure against quantity 
(paragraph 8). All this complicates his moral epistemology but does not 
alter the basic features in question here. A further complication is the 
possibility that he is best read as holding that the maximization of hap-
piness standard applies to rules rather than individual acts. No major 
epistemological point made here turns on these issues of interpretation 
or on the indefiniteness of ‘the relevant population’.
	20	 Mill’s attempted proof that pleasure is good is given in chapter 4 of his 
Utilitarianism; for an account of the view that goodness is to be deter-
mined by seeing what one would desire given adequate information and 
suitable reflection, see Richard B. Brandt, A Theory of the Good and the 
Right (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1979).
	21	 For an assessment of some of the most important arguments and an indi-
cation of the relevant literature see Keith Yandell, Philosophy of Religion: 
A Contemporary Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion (London: 
Routledge, 1999).
	22	 For detailed discussion of the sensus divinitatis and an epistemology that 

Scientific, moral, and religious knowledge  331
gives it a substantial role, see Alvin Plantinga, Warranted Christian Belief 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000).
	23	 A more modest form of evidentialism, holding only that there is in fact 
no actual direct knowledge of God, would be unaffected by the bare 
possibility of the existence of an omnipotent God, but that evidentialist 
view is not our focus here.
	24	 From Gerard Manley Hopkins’s ‘God’s Grandeur’, in A.J.M. Smith 
(ed.), Seven Centuries of Verse, 2nd edn (New York: Scribner’s, 1957), 
p. 529.
	25	 For an extensive treatment of the possible ways in which God may be 
perceived, with much general epistemology as context for demonstrating 
this possibility, see William P. Alston, Perceiving God: The Epistemology 
of Religious Experience (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991).
	26	 It should be noted that noncognitivism can be applied to the philoso-
phy of religion as to ethics. For many contemporary theological views, 
religious language is construed noncognitively, say as expressing rev-
erent attitudes about people and their world, rather than as asserting 
metaphysical propositions about the ultimate origin and nature of the 
universe.
	27	 I have compared and contrasted justification and rationality in 
‘Rationality and the Practice Conception of Justification’, in Thomas D. 
Senor (ed.), The Rationality of Belief and the Plurality of Faith (Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 1995).
	28	 Bernard Gert has defended in detail the wider view that rationality is 
simply the contradictory of irrationality, which he takes as the prior 
notion. He might not accept, however, the use I make of a similar view 
here. See esp. Morality (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988).
	29	 A detailed discussion of one of these non-belief cognitive attitudes is 
provided in my ‘The Dimensions of Faith and the Demands of Reason’, 
in Eleonore Stump (ed.), Reasoned Faith (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 1993).


13	 Skepticism I
The quest for certainty
•	
The possibility of pervasive error
Perfectly realistic hallucination
Two competing epistemic ideals: believing truth and avoiding falsehood
Some dimensions and varieties of skepticism
•	
Skepticism generalized
Skepticism about direct knowledge and justification
Inferential knowledge and justification: the problem of induction
The problem of other minds
•	
The egocentric predicament
•	
Fallibility
Three kinds of infallibility
Knowledge and fallibility
•	
Uncertainty
Knowing, knowing for certain, and telling for certain
Entailment as a requirement for inferential justification
Knowing and showing

13	 Skepticism I
The quest for certainty
The commonsense view is that we all know many things. I believe I know 
many facts about my immediate surroundings, much about myself, some-
thing about the past, and a little about the future. I believe that we also have 
scientific knowledge, that we know some general moral truths, and that it 
is certainly possible that many of us know some religious truths. But there 
are reasons to doubt much of this. There are reasons to think that at best 
we know very little, perhaps just self-evident truths, for instance that if no 
vixens are males then no males are vixens, and a few propositions about our 
present consciousness, say that I am now thinking about the scope of human 
knowledge.
The possibility of pervasive error
As I consider these matters, I look back at the green field. I reassure myself 
that I see it vividly. I cannot help believing I do. But an inescapable belief 
need not be knowledge, or even justified. Suppose I am hallucinating. Then I 
would not know (through vision, at least) that the field is there.
Perfectly realistic hallucination
I find it impossible to believe that I am hallucinating. But I might find that 
impossible even if I were, provided the hallucination was as vivid and steady 
as my present visual experience. I begin to wonder, then, whether I really 
know that I am not hallucinating. If I do not know this, then even if I am 
in fact not hallucinating, can I know that there is a green field before me? 
Similarly, if I do not know that I am not simply having a vivid dream in which 
it seems to me that there is a green field before me, can I know that there is 
one there?1
Remembering that we can justifiedly believe something even if we do not 
know it, I think that at least I may justifiedly believe that there is a green field 
before me, even if I do not know that I am not hallucinating one (or merely 
“seeing” one in a dream). Moreover, if I justifiedly believe that there is a green 
field before me, how much does it matter whether I also know this? As we 

Skepticism I  335
saw in considering the value of knowledge and of this kind of justified true 
belief, the latter has substantial inherent value, even if (other things being 
equal) less than knowledge. Moreover, the likelihood that my belief is true, 
so far as that likelihood is something I can discern, depends on how probable 
the presence of the field is, given the sensory experience on which my belief is 
based; and in my attentiveness and caution as an observer, I have contributed 
all I can to that probability. Despite the possibility of hallucination, then, 
it appears that my belief remains justified, and it is as likely to be true as I 
can make it by any steps in my power, such as more carefully observing the 
grassy texture. Internally, in my own consciousness, I am being perfectly 
reasonable in continuing to believe that there is a green field there. So far as 
justification is concerned, I am beyond reproach.
These points about justification are plausible, but they give false comfort. 
Doubtless, we can have beliefs which, though they do not constitute knowl-
edge, are justified, and we can have such a belief even if its basis is hallucina-
tory. But it is now not merely possible that I am hallucinating: I am also quite 
aware that I could be. Given this awareness, am I still justified in believing 
that there is a green field there? Should I not regard this belief as unjustified, 
suspend judgment on whether the field is there, and merely hope that it is?
Two competing epistemic ideals: believing truth and 
avoiding falsehood
These questions produce a tension. I want to believe that the field is there if 
it truly is, for I have a deep-seated desire to believe as many significant truths 
as I can. But I also want to avoid believing that it is there if it is not, for I 
have a deep-seated desire to avoid believing falsehoods. Both of these desires 
are important; and they represent ideals that govern much of our thinking. 
But the two ideals pull against each other. The former inclines us to believe 
readily, since we may otherwise miss believing a truth; the latter inclines us 
to suspend judgment, lest we err by believing a falsehood.
The former ideal, calling on us to believe truths, pushes us toward credu-
lity: believing on grounds that evidentially are too thin—or without grounds 
at all—and thereby believing too much. The latter ideal, calling on us to 
avoid believing falsehoods, pushes us toward a kind of skepticism: believing 
only on conclusive grounds, and thereby—if common sense is right about the 
matter—believing too little.
How can we balance these ideals with each other? So far, I have spoken 
more about how we fulfill the ideal of believing as many significant truths as 
we can than about how we might fulfill the ideal of avoiding belief of false-
hoods. Clearly, the easiest way to fulfill the latter would be to suspend judg-
ment on every proposition one entertains, or at least on those which, unlike 
certain self-evident truths, lack a luminous certainty that tends to compel 
assent. This is the kind of response characteristic of Pyrrhonian skepticism, 
an ancient variety tracing to Pyrrho of Ellis (c. 360–275 bc).2

336  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
These reflections about possible error through hallucination, about the 
apparent vulnerability of justification in the face of such possibilities, and 
about the ideal of avoiding error suggest why philosophers have been so 
concerned with skepticism. In very broad terms, skepticism is most com-
monly conceived by philosophers roughly as the view that there is little if any 
knowledge. Call this view knowledge skepticism.
A related kind of skepticism is constituted by an attitude or feature of 
temperament, such as a disapproval of believing without conclusive grounds. 
This is not our direct concern. But if philosophical skepticism is not justified, 
then some common skeptical attitudes are not either, and some people who 
go through life with a skeptical attitude lack the kind of intellectual balance 
that goes with epistemic virtue. One reason, then, for studying skepticism is 
to approach a mean between two cognitive traits—intellectual vices, in the 
language of virtue epistemology. One vice is (excessive) credulity, which is 
too weak a disposition to doubt or withhold belief; the other is (excessive) 
skepticism, which is too strong a disposition to doubt or to withhold belief.
Skepticism may also target justification. Typically, skeptics do not take 
our justified beliefs to be significantly more numerous than our beliefs con-
stituting knowledge. Call the view that we have little if any justification for 
belief justification skepticism. How far-reaching might a plausible skepticism 
of either kind be, and how is skepticism to be assessed? I want to pursue these 
questions in that order and at some length.
It may seem that skepticism offends so blatantly against common sense, 
and so lopsidedly prefers the ideal of avoiding falsehood over that of believing 
truths, that it should be dismissed as ridiculous. But it will soon be evident 
that skepticism is a serious, perhaps even irrefutable, challenge to common 
sense. Moreover, even if skepticism turns out, as phenomenalism apparently 
does, to be quite implausible, we learn a great deal about knowledge and jus-
tification from studying it.
A serious exploration of skepticism, whether or not we finally accept some 
form of it, also tends to help us to avoid dogmatism about our own personal 
views and a self-satisfied assurance that our collective outlook as rational 
observers of the world embodies knowledge of the sorts of things we think it 
does: facts about ourselves, our surroundings, and the ways of nature.
Some dimensions and varieties of skepticism
To understand a skeptical view we should locate it in relation to at least four 
dimensions: (1) subject matter, say the past or the future or physical objects 
or other minds; (2) epistemic attitude, such as knowledge, justified belief, 
and suspended judgment; (3) modality, above all contingency or necessity, 
or the empirical versus the a priori; and (4) the kind of being it purports to 
limit, say human, subhuman, or superhuman. Regarding subject matter, my 
concern is wide-ranging. As for (2)–(4), my concern is with human beings 
and mainly with knowledge and justification regarding contingent empirical 
propositions.

Skepticism I  337
Much skepticism, whether about knowledge or about justification, is 
restricted to a given kind of subject, for instance to propositions about the 
world outside oneself, or about the past, or about the future, or about ethics, 
religion, or science. Skeptical views also differ markedly in the status of the 
knowledge, and in the degree of the justification, they concern. A strong 
skepticism regarding propositions about the past, for instance, might hold 
that there is no knowledge, or even justified belief, about the past. A weaker 
skepticism might hold that although some beliefs about the past are justified 
to some degree, there is neither certain knowledge of the past nor any beliefs 
about it that are sufficiently justified to make it more reasonable to hold them 
than to suspend judgment on them.
Still another difference between skeptical views concerns their order. The 
usual skepticism is first order: it concerns the sorts of beliefs or knowledge 
we have discussed as typical of the kinds grounded in experience or reason, 
and not beliefs or knowledge about such beliefs or knowledge, say beliefs that 
ordinary perceptual beliefs often do constitute knowledge. First-order skep-
ticism might deny, then, that I know there is a cold glass in my hand, even 
when I have the seemingly familiar experience I would describe as smelling 
the mint in my iced tea and feeling the cold glass in my hand. Second-order 
skepticism might say that even if I do know this, I do not know that I know 
it.
A first-order skeptic is committed to second-order skepticism: to hold-
ing, for instance, that there is no second-order knowledge to the effect that 
there is (first-order) knowledge, say knowledge of people, places, or things. 
This second-order skepticism is obviously true if there is in fact no first-
order knowledge—as from that it would follow then that no one knows there 
is. But a second-order skeptic can also hold that even if there is first-order 
knowledge, no one knows this.
It is, moreover, natural for skeptics to hold their main views as necessary 
truths, as, for one thing, they commonly believe that for fallible creatures 
like us there cannot be knowledge or justification of certain kinds. I do not 
intend to discuss skepticism in detail in each of the many forms described, 
but what follows will apply to a very wide range of cases.
Skepticism generalized
The skeptical challenges I have brought forward can be directed against all 
our beliefs about the external world, all our memory beliefs, all our beliefs 
about the future, and indeed all our beliefs about any subject provided they 
depend on our memory for their justification or for their status as knowledge. 
Memory is, after all, at least as liable to error as vision.
Skepticism about direct knowledge and justification
Plainly, if all of the senses can deceive through hallucination, then beliefs 
grounded in any of the senses may be justificationally or epistemically 

338  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
undermined in the same way my belief that there is a green field before me 
may be undermined by a realization that I might have been hallucinating. 
Quite apart from whether perceptual beliefs are true, skeptics tend to claim 
that the possibility of such hallucinations either prevents these beliefs from 
being justified or, even if they are justified, precludes their constituting 
knowledge.
Suppose, for instance, that I might be having an auditory hallucination of 
bird songs. Then my present experience of (apparently) hearing them might 
not justify my believing that there are birds nearby and is certainly not a 
sufficient basis for my knowing there are, even if it is true that there are. 
Similarly, there is a counterpart of hallucination for memory beliefs: memo-
rial hallucination, we might call it. I may have the memorial impression that 
when I was four I saw my parents kissing under the mistletoe, but this could 
be just a romantic fantasy masquerading as a memory.
Beliefs about the future are rather different from memory beliefs. The 
former concern future events and hence are not grounded in experiential 
states that in some way causally derive from things about which we have 
knowledge (as with perception). But even if there is no counterpart of memo-
rial hallucination, there are equally undermining possibilities. For instance, 
a confident belief that I will talk with Jane could be a product of wishful 
thinking, even when in fact it is grounded in my long-standing intention to 
talk with her. Perhaps the belief is an anticipatory delusion. Even my belief 
that I will live to discuss skepticism could be mistaken for many sorts of 
reasons, including dangers to me of which I am now unaware.
Now consider our apparent general knowledge, whether a priori or sci-
entific, say in arithmetic or science. Because it is possible to misremember 
propositions, or to seem to remember them when one does not, or to have 
a kind of memorial hallucination that gives rise to a completely groundless 
belief, it would seem that the only secure beliefs of general propositions are 
of the relatively few that we can know directly without needing evidence. 
This apparently leaves none of our general scientific beliefs, and only our a 
priori knowledge of self-evident propositions, epistemically unscathed.
Inferential knowledge and justification: the problem of 
induction
Even if we leave aside problems about perceptual and memory beliefs, there 
is a difficulty for the commonsense view that justification or knowledge 
grounded (directly or indirectly) in a basic source can be transmitted induc-
tively. The classical statement of this problem of induction—the problem of 
how to justify such inductive inferences—comes from David Hume.3 Hume 
showed that one cannot know a priori that if the premises of a specific piece 
of inductive reasoning are true then its conclusion is also true. He noted 
that there is no contradiction in affirming the former and denying the latter. 
Moreover, one can conceive the premises being true while the conclusion is 

Skepticism I  339
false, whereas one cannot conceive its being true that (1) all human beings are 
mortal and Socrates is one of them, and yet false that (2) Socrates is mortal. 
Even good inductive reasoning is (deductively) invalid.
Consider the inductive reasoning from the premise that the sun has always 
risen each day to the conclusion that it will rise tomorrow. Of all such rea-
soning—reasoning “concerning matter of fact and existence”—Hume says: 
That there are no demonstrative [roughly, valid, evidentially conclusive] 
arguments in the case seems evident, since it implies no contradiction 
that the course of nature may change and that an object, seemingly like 
those which we have experienced, may be attended with different or 
contrary effects. 
(Enquiry, Sec. 4, Part II)
Hence, even if I do know that the sun has risen every day since time imme-
morial, I could be mistaken in believing that it will rise tomorrow, and it 
seems questionable whether I am even justified in believing this.
More generally, Hume’s arguments lead us to ask whether, if our premises 
could be true yet our conclusion false, we have any reason at all, on the basis 
of the premises, for believing the conclusion. And how can we ever know 
the conclusion on the basis of such premises? Indeed, how can we even be 
minimally justified in believing the conclusion on the basis of such premises? 
The problem of induction, as most often understood, is largely the difficulty 
of adequately answering these questions.
The problem can also be put in terms of probability. We normally operate 
on the commonsense presumption that when one thing is associated with 
another, say a sunrise with the passage of twenty-four hours, and the two have 
never failed to be associated in the same way, then the greater the number of 
cases of association, the greater the probability that the association will occur 
in a new case—for instance that the sun will rise tomorrow.4 We also operate 
on the related commonsense presumption that for natural phenomena such 
an association can occur sufficiently often to yield justification for believing, 
and even knowledge, that the association will occur in a new case.
From a Humean perspective, it will not do to argue as follows: I am justi-
fied in believing my conclusion on the basis of inductive support for it, such 
as the past regular behavior of the sun, since past experience has shown that 
reasoning like this, which has had true premises, has also had true conclu-
sions. For this way of defending an inductively based conclusion simply relies 
on yet another inductive argument—it gives a kind of inductive reasoning 
to support the view that certain kinds of inductive arguments justify one in 
believing their conclusions. It just inductively generalizes about inductive 
arguments themselves, using as a guide past experience in which we seem to 
have found out that by and large their conclusions turned out true when their 
premises were true.
That reasoning, then, apparently begs the question against Hume.5 For 

340  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
it assumes, without independent evidence, part of what he regards as false, 
namely, that inductive inference constitutes reasoning that either can ground 
knowledge of its conclusion, or can at least justify its conclusion, in the sense 
of providing good reason for it. We have taken the battle to a different field—
that of inductive argumentation rather than sunrises—but we have added no 
new weapons nor enhanced our forces.
The problem of other minds
One of the major points that Hume so powerfully defended—roughly, that 
non-deductive inferences are fallible—is by no means restricted to beliefs 
about the future. Such beliefs are, however, so prominent in his discussion 
of inductive inference that sometimes the problem of induction is narrowly 
conceived as that of how we can show that we have any reason to believe 
the future will be like the past. This conception is unduly narrow. Recall 
my observing Jim briskly shuffling papers and angrily mumbling curses. 
I cannot help believing, on this basis, that he is angry. But this reasoning 
leaves my belief clearly fallible: even if I know my premises (through percep-
tion), it does not follow that he is angry, and that could be false. He could be 
pretending.
The case of Jim’s anger is alarmingly representative. Everything I believe 
about what is occurring in the inner lives of others seems to rest on grounds 
that are inductive in this way: what I observe—above all, their behavior—
does not entail anything about their minds. They could be pretending, or 
psychologically abnormal; or some other source of error could occur. So if I 
cannot have knowledge of people’s inner lives from their behavior, apparently 
I can never have it.
Worse still, if I cannot know anything about the inner lives of others, can I 
even know that there are others, as opposed to mere bodies controlled exter-
nally, or by hidden microscopic machinery, rather than directed through 
beliefs and intentions of the kind that I take to animate me?
There is, then, a problem of other minds. Can we know, or even justifiedly 
believe, that there are any? If our experiences would be just as they are if the 
human bodies we interact with are controlled from outer space and have no 
inner life of their own, how can we know that those bodies are, as most of us 
cannot help thinking, animated by minds like ours?6
The problem is compounded when we realize that we can never directly 
verify, as we introspectively can in our own case, what is occurring in 
someone else’s consciousness. Thus, all I can do to check on my inductively 
grounded beliefs about the inner lives of others is obtain further inductive 
evidence, for instance by observing whether they behave as one would expect 
if I am right in thinking them to be, say, angry. I cannot, as in my own case, 
introspectively focus on the events in their consciousness. How can I know 
anything about their mental and emotional life if I am in principle debarred 
from decisively verifying my beliefs about the contents and events of their 
consciousness? Even if I am sometimes right, I can never tell when.

Skepticism I  341
It may be replied that by far my best explanation—and apparently a good 
explanation—of why other bodies behave as if they were animated by a mind 
is that they are so animated. The other hypotheses, such as control from 
outer space or by a machine, are far-fetched. The suggested reasoning sounds 
plausible, but notice that it is still a kind of induction: inference to the best 
explanation (abduction).
It is worth inquiring here whether some principle of inference to the best 
explanation is self-evident and may thus be presupposed in dealing with 
certain skeptical challenges. To simplify matters, let us bypass the common 
notion of the “best explanation.” Two explanations, after all, might be equally 
good. More important, our best explanation might not be good at all, hence 
of little help in supporting beliefs. Consider, then, this moderate abductive 
principle: if our only good explanation for a proposition we are amply justi-
fied in believing entails the truth or likely truth of a further proposition, we 
are prima facie justified in believing the latter proposition. Now imagine that 
(1) our only good explanation of why other bodies behave as if they were 
animated by a mind is that they are so animated. Taken together with the 
abductive principle, this entails that (2) we do have prima facie justification 
for believing that (say) the human creatures we interact with in normal ways 
have minds.
This is a plausible argument, but skeptics will reject it on at least two 
counts. They will question whether the abductive principle is self-evident or, 
perhaps, even true; and they will certainly challenge our presupposition that 
we are justified in holding (1).
I grant that, if the abductive principle is self-evident, it is not self-evident 
that it is. (Arguing that it is self-evident would be a difficult task I cannot 
undertake here.) As for (1), surely it too is plausible. Is there any good expla-
nation for the apparently purposive, mentally guided behavior of other bodies 
that does not entail their being animated by minds? I doubt it. Granted, these 
bodies could be biological robots controlled from outer space, just as I could 
be hallucinating them in the first place. But is there any reason to think these 
possibilities more than bare logical possibilities? I see none.
It should be added here that the indicated inference to propositions about 
other minds as best explaining observed behavior is supported by a strong 
argument from analogy: again and again, when my body behaves in a certain 
way under certain conditions, I am in a certain mental state, say in pain when 
I am burned and cry out; so (surely) the same behavioral pattern in another 
body is accompanied by a similar mental state. Other bodies are so much like 
mine in physical structure and observed behavior that they are very probably 
animated by minds like mine.
There is no need to deny either that positing other minds is our only good 
explanation of what we seem to know about other human bodies or that the 
analogical argument just sketched is strong. Still, from one proposition’s 
being our only good explanation of another (in the sense of ‘explanation’ rel-
evant here) it does not follow that the first is true; and the analogies between 
my body and others at most render probable, rather than entailing, that some 

342  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
other body is associated with mental states as mine is with my mental states. 
Recall that there are other possible explanations (such as the hypothesis of 
control of other bodies from outer space, or by a powerful and clever evil 
genius); these explanatory alternatives, if true, would leave my experience 
exactly as it is. For another thing, some of these alternative hypotheses can 
well explain the analogies that otherwise seem compelling.
Another way to see the power of these skeptical hypotheses is to note that 
our experience does not discriminate between the skeptical scenario and the 
commonsense one. In that scenario, our experience would be just what it is 
if we were steadfastly hallucinating the external world, including even the 
human bodies we seem to see. The same holds if we are not hallucinating but 
the human bodies are externally controlled. How, then, can our experience 
justify us in believing that there is an external world or that there are other 
minds?
Putting the problem somewhat differently, if our experience under­
determines the truth of propositions we commonly believe about the external 
world, roughly in the sense that it does not decisively indicate their truth as 
opposed to the truth of skeptical (or other) alternative hypotheses that can 
explain our experience, how can our experience justify our believing such 
commonsense propositions? If it cannot, and if, as Hume plausibly argued, 
we also cannot know that proposition, how can we be justified in believing 
anything at all about the external world?7
It is only a short step from this full-scale attack on inductive inference to a 
problem of the body. If, as a skeptic might well hold, our apparent knowledge 
of our own bodies is inductively grounded, being based on perceptions and 
bodily sensations somewhat as beliefs about external objects are, then can 
we know, or even justifiedly believe, that we have a body? Could we not be 
steadily hallucinating even our own flesh?
It might be replied that thoughts, including my reflections on skepticism, 
necessarily require an embodied thinker. But that point would only imply 
that I have some kind of body, not that I can know anything about it. The 
point is also far from self-evident and is indeed denied by philosophers in the 
powerful tradition of Descartes. They hold that we (persons) are essentially 
mental (or spiritual), hence non-physical, substances.
In any case, even if it should be true that thoughts can occur only in an 
embodied thinker, the only embodiment needed might be a brain. Hence, on 
the skeptical view imagined, the most we could know is that we are embodied 
in some way, say in a brain. Whether that brain is itself embodied, or ever 
interacts with anything else, would be beyond our knowledge. Why, then, 
could I not be alone in the world, or perhaps a “brain in a vat” kept alive 
in a nurturing liquid and subjected to hallucinations that falsely convey the 
impression of normal life?8 Call this the envatment problem.

Skepticism I  343
The egocentric predicament
In this way, skepticism can drive us into an egocentric predicament: a posi-
tion that makes it seem clear that all we can (empirically) know about the 
world, perhaps all we can justifiedly believe about it as well, concerns our 
own present experience. Perhaps, for all I know, I am a lone conscious ego 
vividly hallucinating a non-existent physical world. The kind of view in ques-
tion—that only oneself exists—is called solipsism, and it serves as a limiting 
case to be avoided.
Most skeptics have tended to push no further, or at least not to express 
very much doubt about our capacity to know propositions of two specific 
kinds: those about what is currently going on in our minds and at least those 
a priori propositions that are luminously self-evident. But skeptics can push 
further. Descartes, in the first of his Meditations, raised the possibility that 
there was nothing of which he could (justifiedly) be certain. Recall intro-
spectively grounded beliefs, such as that I am thinking about skepticism. It 
seems possible that this belief is mistaken. If that is possible, how can I know 
that I am thinking about skepticism? If I know, I cannot be wrong. But here 
error is possible. Perhaps I do not even have knowledge of my own conscious 
states.
To make this sort of argument work with beliefs of self-evident proposi-
tions we must, I think, strain. Descartes may perhaps be read as holding that 
God, being utterly omnipotent, could have falsified even propositions of the 
sort I am calling self-evident. But could an omnipotent being bring it about 
that while some dogs are pets, no pets are dogs? I see no reason to think so. 
As Thomas Aquinas and many other philosophers have maintained, omnipo-
tence is simply not the power to “do” things that are absolutely impossible.9 
Power is exercised within the realm of the possible: impossible “deeds” are 
not candidates for any being to do.
If one accepts this point, one might argue that there is no act of bringing 
it about that while some dogs are pets, no pets are dogs. Calling this an act 
misuses the vocabulary of action. Hence, the impossibility that an omnipo-
tent being can bring it about does not imply that there is any act which that 
being cannot perform. This point, in turn, deprives the skeptic of a way to 
argue that beliefs of necessary truths could be false.
This reasoning may not settle the matter, but it is sufficiently plausible 
to warrant leaving aside skepticism concerning beliefs of luminously self- 
evident propositions. These propositions seem not only incapable of false-
hood, but, in some cases, also incapable of even being believed without  
justification, at least when carefully and comprehendingly considered. 
Leaving such skepticism aside takes little from the skeptic in any case. If 
these are the only knowable propositions, then we can know nothing about 
our world, not even about our innermost consciousness. We are at best in an 
egocentric predicament.

344  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
Fallibility
In appraising skepticism, I want to formulate some of the main principles 
that underlie it in what seem its most plausible forms. If they can be shown 
to be unreasonable, then the skeptical threat to the commonsense view that 
we have a great deal of knowledge and justification can at least be blunted. In 
formulating and assessing these principles, we should distinguish skeptical 
threats to the generation of knowledge (or of justification) from skeptical 
threats to its transmission. It is natural to start with questions about genera-
tion. If no knowledge is generated, there is none to be transmitted.
Three kinds of infallibility
Is there really any reason to doubt that, normally, introspectively grounded 
beliefs constitute knowledge? It may be true that such beliefs could be mis-
taken, but what is a skeptic entitled to make of this? The skeptical argument 
that comes to mind here is based on what I will call the infallibility claim 
about knowledge: if you know, you cannot be wrong. If we simply add the 
premise that you can be wrong in holding a given introspective belief, say 
that you are thinking about skepticism, it would seem to follow that such 
beliefs do not represent knowledge. This kind of argument from fallibility, 
as we might call it, can be applied to just about every sort of proposition we 
tend to think we know.
If, however, we look closely, we find that the infallibility claim is multiply 
ambiguous. There are at least three quite different things it might mean, and 
hence really three different infallibility principles.
The claim, ‘If you know, you can’t be wrong’, might have the meaning of:
	 1	 It must be the case that if you know that something is true, then it is true 
(i.e., you cannot know something that is false).
Call (1) the verity principle, since it says simply that knowledge must be of 
truths (verities). Knowledge can never have a falsehood as its object. The 
claim might, on the other hand, have the meaning of:
	 2	 If you know that something is true, then it must be true, that is, the 
proposition you know is necessarily true (i.e., you can know only neces-
sary truths).
Call (2) the necessity principle, since it says simply that knowledge is of neces-
sary truths. Knowledge never has among its objects any propositions that 
could possibly fail to hold.10 The claim ‘If you know, you can’t be wrong’ 
might also have the meaning of:
	 3	 If you know that something is true, then your belief of it must be true, 
in the sense that your believing it (the fact that you believe it) entails 

Skepticism I  345
or guarantees its truth (i.e., only beliefs that cannot be false constitute 
knowledge).
Call (3) the infallibility principle proper, since in saying that only infallible 
beliefs constitute knowledge it connects with skepticism more closely than 
(1) or (2). Knowledge, it says, is never constituted by fallible beliefs, those 
that can have falsehoods among their objects.
Unlike (2), (3) implies nothing about the propositional or other objects of 
knowledge; instead, it restricts the kind of belief that can constitute knowl-
edge. And by contrast with (2), (3) also allows for knowledge of contingent 
(non-necessary) truths, such as that I exist. This proposition can be false 
(that I exist is not a necessary truth); but my belief of it is infallible and 
therefore cannot be false. If I now believe that I exist, then it follows that I 
do now exist.
Knowledge and fallibility
We can now assess the skeptical reasoning that employs the infallibility claim 
in one or another interpretation. I will be quite brief in discussing the first 
two; the third is the most controversial and most important for skepticism.
The verity principle, (1), is plainly true: one cannot know something that 
is false. In this sense, knowledge is infallible. If it is false that the maple is 
taller than the spruce, then I do not know it is. But if this is all the infallibility 
claim comes to, it provides no reason to conclude that I do not know that 
I am thinking (or that anything else I believe is not genuine knowledge). 
Granted, it must be true that if I know I am thinking, then I am. But that 
tells us nothing about whether I do know I am. The verity principle is itself a 
verity, but it does not advance the skeptical cause.
The necessity principle, on the other hand, principle (2), seems mistaken. 
Surely I know some propositions that are not necessarily true, such as that I 
exist (as noted earlier, it is not a necessary truth that I exist, as it is that vixens 
are female). Even skeptics would grant that I cannot falsely believe this, since 
my believing it self-evidently entails that I exist (non-existent things cannot 
have beliefs at all). It may indeed be impossible for me even to be unjustified 
in believing the proposition that I exist when I comprehendingly consider 
it, in which case I have in mind some sense of myself. (Descartes seems to 
maintain in Meditation II that this case is impossible.) The same holds, of 
course, for you in relation to your belief that you exist.11
It might seem that we may grant the skeptic that the only kinds of propo-
sition that cannot be falsely believed are either necessary or the rare kind that 
cannot be unjustifiably believed when comprehendingly considered. But that 
would also be a mistake: any proposition entailed by there being at least one 
belief is incapable of being falsely believed. Anyone’s believing this one—that 
there is at least one belief—would entail that it is true (though it might be 
possible, given certain logical deficiencies, to believe such a proposition with-
out having justification for it, as is certainly possible for necessary truths of 

346  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
mathematics). Such cases suggest that there is no simple relationship between 
the kind of proposition believable with infallibility and the conditions for 
knowing or justifiedly believing it.
Even if the necessity principle were true, however, a skeptic could not 
reasonably use it, without first defending it by adequate argument, against 
the commonsense view that introspective or even perceptual beliefs normally 
constitute knowledge. For clearly they are not beliefs of necessary truths, 
and defenders of common sense do not take them to be. Hence, invoking the 
necessity principle against common sense, without first arguing for the prin-
ciple, would be in effect a flat denial that such beliefs constitute knowledge. 
That would beg the question against the commonsense view.
Suppose, for instance, that a skeptic says that if you know, you cannot be 
wrong, in which this means (2), then notes that introspective and perceptual 
beliefs (which are of propositions that are not necessary) can be false, and 
concludes that such beliefs do not constitute knowledge. This would not be 
presenting a good reason to believe the conclusion, but just denying, dis-
guisedly given (2), the commonsense view that we have introspective and 
perceptual knowledge. There may seem to be a good argument here, because 
it is so easy to take ‘If you know, you can’t be wrong’ as asserting the verity 
principle. But that principle is acceptable to common sense, whereas the 
necessity principle is not. To argue for the latter by allowing the plausibility 
of the former to serve as support for it is to trade on an ambiguity. It masks 
poor reasoning—or the absence of any argument or support at all.
The infallibility principle proper, (3), in effect says that only infallible 
beliefs can be knowledge. Now as we have seen, some beliefs of contingent 
propositions are infallible. Consider my belief that I exist, and my more spe-
cific belief that I have a belief. Just as my believing I exist entails that I do 
exist, if I believe I have a belief, it follows that I have one: I have at least that 
very belief even if I have no others. Beliefs like these might be called self-
grounding, since comprehendingly considering them constitutes a sufficient 
ground both for justifiably holding them and indeed for their truth.
The infallibility of these two contingently true, but self-grounding, beliefs 
shows that despite appearances, (3) is not equivalent to (2), since (3), the 
infallibility principle, but not (2), the necessity principle, allows knowledge 
of propositions that are not necessary (i.e., are contingent propositions). But 
why should we accept (3)? What reason can the skeptic give for it? Not that if 
you know, you cannot be wrong; for when we look closely, we find that when 
plausibly interpreted as meaning (1), that is no help to the skeptic, and when 
interpreted as (2) or (3) it just flatly asserts the skeptical position against 
common sense.
What makes the infallibility claim seem to give the skeptic an argument 
against common sense is the way skepticism can trade on the ambiguity of 
that formulation: one finds the argument from fallibility attractive because its 
main premise, conceived as equivalent to (1), is so plausible; yet the argument 

Skepticism I  347
succeeds against common sense only if (2) or (3) is a legitimate premise. (2) 
is clearly mistaken, and it is doubtful that the skeptic has a cogent argument 
for (3). It will help to consider first the bearing of the concept of uncertainty, 
one closely related to the notion of infallibility.
Uncertainty
Like fallibility, uncertainty has seemed to many skeptics to leave us with 
little, if any, knowledge. Recall the possibility that I am hallucinating a green 
field before me when there is none there. May I be certain, then, that there is 
one there? And can I ever tell for certain whether or not I am hallucinating? 
Skeptics tend to answer negatively and to contend that if we cannot tell for 
certain whether we are hallucinating, we do not know we are not hallucinat-
ing. They also tend to argue that if we do not know we are not hallucinating, 
surely we do not know that there is a field there.
Moreover, in a way uncertainty cuts deeper than fallibility: for even if I 
believe a theorem of logic that cannot be false and so have an infallible belief, 
I may not be justified in taking my proof to be sound and so cannot be jus-
tifiedly certain. Uncertainty arises when one’s grounds are inconclusive, and 
it can arise, as with beliefs of theorems, even when one’s belief is infallible. 
Thus, even infallibility is insufficient to render a belief knowledge. At least 
two important principles are suggested here.
One principle suggested by reflection on these questions about possible 
error is the certainty principle: if one cannot tell for certain whether something 
is so, then one does not know it is so. This principle is plausible in part because, 
typically, ‘How can you tell?’ and ‘How can you be certain?’ are appropriate 
challenges to a knowledge claim. Moreover, ‘I know, but I am not certain’ 
sounds self-defeating, in a way that might encourage a skeptic to consider 
it contradictory. Further support for the certainty principle can be derived 
from the idea that if our grounds for a belief underdetermine its truth—as 
when a skeptical possibility such as the Cartesian demon hypothesis can also 
explain our having those grounds—then one cannot tell for certain that the 
belief is true.
Another principle suggested by our questions about the possibility of hal-
lucination is the back-up principle: a belief that p constitutes knowledge only 
if it is backed up by one’s knowing, or at least being in a position to know, 
the falsity of any proposition inconsistent with p. Thus, if I believe that there 
is a field before me, then, as this proposition is inconsistent with my merely 
hallucinating a field, I know this proposition only if I am at least in a position 
to know that I am not hallucinating.
The back-up principle is plausible in part because one is in a sense respon-
sible for the implications of what one claims to know. If, for instance, I claim 
to know that there is a green field before me, and that proposition implies 
that the field is not a pavement textured and painted to look just like a green 

348  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
field, it would seem that I had better know or at least be in a position to know 
that it is not such a pavement. This, in turn, is commonly taken to imply that 
I must at least be justified in rejecting that strange possibility.
The upshot of this skeptical reasoning is that if I know that there is a green 
field before me, I apparently must be prepared to back that up by justifiedly 
rejecting exactly the sorts of possibilities that the skeptic reminds us are 
always there, in abundance. But must I be thus prepared? Let us consider the 
certainty and back-up principles in turn.
Knowing, knowing for certain, and telling for certain
Chapter 10 argued that knowing does not imply knowing for certain. This 
conclusion suggests that the kind of certainty in question, epistemic cer-
tainty, is not required for knowledge, and that having such certainty may be 
something quite different from simply knowing. Still, from the point that 
knowing need not be knowing for certain, it does not follow that one can 
know without being able to tell for certain. Thus, the skeptic may still main-
tain that the certainty principle undermines the commonsense view that we 
have perceptual knowledge.
Let us first ask what it is to tell for certain. A skeptic may mean by this 
acquiring knowledge, in the form of an infallible belief, of a proposition that 
entails the truth of what one can tell is so. Thus, to tell (for certain) that one 
is not hallucinating a green field one might, like Descartes in the Meditations, 
prove that there is a God of such goodness and power that—since it would be 
evil for God to allow it—one could not be mistaken in a belief properly based 
on such a vivid and steadfast perception as one now has of a green field. We 
can tell for certain that there is an object before us because we can prove that 
God would not allow us to believe this under the present conditions unless 
it were true.
Some thinkers might embrace Descartes’s theistic solution here. But one 
might also reject the skeptical principle in question, the infallibility principle. 
To require that a belief can be knowledge only if—whether in Descartes’s 
way or a similar fashion—it can be conclusively shown to be true would again 
beg the question against the commonsense view that a belief can constitute 
knowledge without being infallible (a belief that can be absolutely conclu-
sively shown to be true is infallible). Thus, if skeptics have no good argument 
for the principle of infallibility proper, they should not assume that principle 
in defending the view that we can know only what we can “tell for certain” in 
this strong sense of the phrase.
Perhaps, on the other hand, telling for certain is simply a matter of ascer-
taining the truth in question by some means that justifies one in being (psy-
chologically) certain of what one can tell, even if not maximally certain (if 
there is a maximum here). If so, perhaps we normally can tell for certain that 
we are not hallucinating, for instance by seeing whether the senses of touch 

Skepticism I  349
and smell confirm our visual impression. To be sure, the confirming experi-
ences do not entail that there is a green field before me. But we still have no 
good argument that certainty (or knowledge) may arise only from entailing 
grounds (another controversial view, shortly to be discussed). Thus, this 
point does not establish that confirming experiences cannot enable us to tell 
for certain that we are not hallucinating.
Moreover, suppose that we interpret telling for certain in the modest way 
just suggested, and that we can tell for certain in this sense that what we 
know is true. In that case, perhaps there is a weak sense in which beliefs con-
stituting knowledge are infallible. They need not be such that it is absolutely 
impossible (logically impossible, in a broad sense) that they be false, as in 
the case of my belief that I exist. There need only be something about our 
grounds for them in virtue of which they (empirically) cannot be false, say 
because it would violate the laws of nature. Water cannot flow (as opposed to 
being pumped) uphill, but this is empirically impossible, not absolutely so, 
as it is impossible for some pets to be dogs without any dogs being pets. By 
contrast, it is not even empirically impossible to win a lottery with just one of 
a trillion tickets, and this can explain why the skeptically inclined will likely 
refuse to say one can know in advance that such a ticket will lose.
It may be true that grounds of what is commonly considered to be knowl-
edge are typically such that, given those grounds, the belief constituting 
that knowledge cannot be false (at least cannot be false given the laws of 
nature). Suppose this is true. Should we now say to the skeptic that the beliefs 
commonsensically considered knowledge, such as many perceptual ones, are 
empirically certain? We may say this only if we keep in mind what was wrong 
with inferring the necessity principle from ‘If you know, you can’t be wrong’. 
There surely might be causal laws of nature which guarantee that if one is 
situated before a field in good light, as I am, and one has visual experiences 
like mine caused by the field as mine are, then one sees it, and hence cannot 
falsely believe that it is there. But this hypothetical proposition does not 
imply that my belief is, of empirical necessity, true, as a law of nature at least 
commonly is, any more than the “logical” law that it is necessary that if one 
knows that p then p is true implies that p itself is necessary. A guarantee of 
truth given certain grounds is not a guarantee of even empirically necessary 
truth, much less of epistemic certainty, any more than a guarantee of pay-
ment is a guarantee of payment in gold or in some medium that cannot be 
devalued.
If the existence of causal laws and associated causes of many of our beliefs 
implies the truth of many of our beliefs grounded in experience, such as 
my belief that there is a green field before me, it does not follow that those 
true ones cannot be mistaken, in the sense of being epistemically certain, or 
conclusively justified, or any other epistemic status high enough to satisfy a 
skeptic. What follows is only that given the laws of nature and their causal 
grounding, they are true. This seems more than enough for common sense. 

350  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
The skeptic gives us no good argument to show that there are no such laws or 
that such law-based truth is not quite sufficient to render a belief knowledge 
whether it represents certainty or not.12
Entailment as a requirement for inferential justification
The back-up principle fares no better than the infallibility principle proper. 
For one thing, it depends on the assumption, which defenders of common 
sense stoutly reject, that in order to know that something is true, one must 
have grounds that entail its truth. To see that the back-up principle depends 
on this, consider first a very simple case. Take the proposition that it is false 
that there is a green field before me. This is inconsistent with what I believe, 
namely, that there is one before me. Hence, the back-up principle requires 
that I at least be in a position to know that this is false. Its falsity entails that 
there is a green field before me.
The back-up principle may seem true because one may think: How else, 
besides being able to know the falsity of propositions incompatible with 
what I believe, can I be adequately armed against the threat of error? If I am 
not in a position to know that propositions plainly incompatible with what 
I believe are false, I cannot properly back up what I believe. But the falsity 
of the negative proposition that there is not a green field before me entails 
that there is one before me; for if it is false that it is false that there is one, 
then it is true that there is one. Thus, if, by virtue of how I must be able to 
back up my original claim, I do know that this negative proposition is false, 
then I thereby have (and know) an entailing ground for the truth of what I 
originally believed—that there is a green field before me.
Now take a case in which backing up what I think I know is more com-
plicated. Consider the proposition that what I take to be a green field is 
really a pavement with such a realistic-seeming grassy green texture that I 
cannot tell (perceptually) that it is really not a field. Must I be in a position 
to know that this is false to know that there is a green field before me? The 
very description of the case suggests that I cannot know, at least by using the 
senses unaided by experimentation or specialized knowledge, that the field 
is not a textured pavement. But why must I be able to tell this at all? Is there 
any reason to think that the field might actually be dyed pavement? Is that a 
“relevant alternative,” some philosophers would ask?
One might object that in order to know a proposition I must be in a posi-
tion to know whatever follows from it (or at least obviously follows from it). 
After all, if something does follow from what I know, I could infer it by valid 
steps from what I initially know, and thereby come to know it too.
This is an important objection. But in discussing the transmission of 
knowledge and justification, we considered cases that apparently undercut 
the objection. I can apparently know the sum of a column of figures even if I 
cannot, without further checking, know something which obviously follows 
from it: that if my wife (whom I justifiedly believe to be a better arithmeti-
cian) says this is not the sum, then she is wrong. If this can be true of me, 

Skepticism I  351
then neither knowledge nor justification is automatically transmitted across 
valid deductive inference.
It apparently will not do, then, to say that we can always count on the 
transmission of knowledge from propositions we know or justifiedly believe 
to those they entail, even when the entailment is, as in our example, obvi-
ous. Thus, even though my seeing a green field plainly entails (for instance) 
that I am not seeing a pavement with a textured grassy-looking surface, I 
presumably do not have to be in a position to know or justifiedly believe (by 
inferring it) that this proposition is false.
Suppose, however, that this view is mistaken, and that knowledge and 
justification are always transmitted across valid deductive inference. It may 
be plausibly argued that I do have justification for rejecting the skeptical 
hypothesis that there is a pavement before me textured to look just like a 
green field. It is not just that it appears to me that there is a green field before 
me; I also have no reason to think there is anything abnormal in the situa-
tion, and some reason to think that, in cases like this, large, nearby familiar 
kinds of things are as they appear to me in such vivid and careful observation. 
That they are as they appear is at least supported if the abductive principle 
is sound; for their being as they appear is surely my only good explanation 
of their appearing as they do. On balance, then, I may apparently reject the 
skeptical hypothesis and I do know or at least justifiedly believe that there is 
a green field before me.
We could also stress that the kinds of grounds I have for believing there is 
a green field before me are plainly sufficient for knowing this proposition and 
then take that very proposition as my premise for the entailed conclusion that 
there is not a pavement before me textured to look like grass. On this view, 
the point is that by virtue of perceptual justification we gain (commonsense) 
knowledge of a conclusive ground for rejecting the skeptical hypothesis.13
There are other factors one might cite in defending commonsense views 
of the scope of our knowledge, indeed, too many to discuss here. My point 
is simply this. Because the skeptic has not provided good reasons for the 
principles I have already rejected (or for comparably strong principles), even 
if knowledge and justification are always transmitted across valid inference, 
there may be good reason to say that skeptical hypotheses, such as that 
the “field” is a cleverly painted and textured pavement, may be justifiedly 
rejected.14
Knowing and showing
There is something we may grant to the skeptic that will help to justify my 
rejection of the certainty and back-up principles. Admittedly, to show the 
skeptic that my original belief is knowledge, in the face of the suggestion 
that one of those explanations of its falsity holds, I may have to know that, 
and perhaps why, this explanation does not hold. Showing something, after 
all, commonly requires invoking premises for it, and one must presumably 
know or justifiedly believe those premises if one is to show a conclusion from 

352  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
them.15 The question ‘Do you know?’ tends to move discussion to a second-
order context in which one seeks not simply to offer grounds for what one 
takes oneself to know, but grounds for the second-order proposition that 
one knows it. After all, a direct answer to, for instance, ‘Do you know that 
she missed the train?’ is something like, ‘Yes, I know because I just checked 
the station’, rather than ‘I just checked the station’. The latter reply provides a 
ground on which one may know that she missed the train and only indirectly 
implies that I do know it. A skeptic would not grant this evidential power to 
such a ground, however, and would indeed not take my citing the station check 
to provide an adequate answer to ‘Do you know that she missed the train?’
Still, we may ask, why, in the absence of the need to show that I know, 
must I, in order simply to have knowledge, have the capacity to show that I 
have it, as the back-up principle strongly suggests? Surely I need not. I can 
know that if some dogs are pets then some pets are dogs, even if I cannot 
show this self-evident truth—perhaps simply because I can think of nothing 
more obvious to use as a reasonable premise from which to show it. And if 
my wife raises no question of whether my arithmetic answer is correct, I can 
know that answer even if I cannot show—without obtaining further grounds 
for the answer—that I do know it. (If my original justification were good 
enough to enable me to show that if she says the sum is wrong then she is 
wrong, perhaps it would also enable me to know, even without showing it, 
that if she says this, she is wrong.)
The point that one can know without being able to show that one does 
drastically weakens the case for the back-up principle. Moreover, if, as seems 
quite possible, I can know the sum on the basis of my calculations without 
being able to show that I do—apart from gaining new evidence—then I can 
know it without being able, given my evidence from careful calculation, to 
tell for certain whether it is true. That would require new calculations and 
hence new evidence. This second point directly cuts against the certainty 
principle as well as against the back-up principle.
Examining the relation between knowing something and being able to 
show it also indicates that the converse of the certainty principle—the show–
know principle, we might call it—should also be rejected: being able to show 
something one believes, even being able to prove it, entails knowing it. This can 
be seen from our example. Suppose I can now show that if she says the sum is 
wrong, she is mistaken, by doing a more careful calculation twice over. Does 
it follow that I now know this proposition for certain? I do not see that it 
does. From the fact that I now have the ability to show something I believe, it 
does not follow that I now know it at all. Having the raw materials to create 
something—here grounds for knowledge—does not entail already having it. 
Moreover, suppose that, as sometimes happens, I am lucky in a mathematical 
hunch; I might still be capable of constructing a proof I myself would not 
have expected to discover. By good fortune, we may have raw materials to 
create a foundation for something we have fabricated only by a stroke of luck.
My examples of showing something are cases of deductive demonstration. 

Skepticism I  353
But it would be a mistake to think that all instances of showing require deduc-
tive demonstration or proceed from absolutely conclusive grounds. Both 
points were discredited by our discussion of how propositions are established 
through scientific reasoning. It appears that we can know certain kinds of 
things even if we cannot show them and that, when we can show to be true 
something we know, the kind of showing possible for us need not require 
proof. We have yet to explore, however, whether there is any way in which 
we might show that a commonsense view of the scope of our knowledge is 
justified. This will be the main business of the next chapter.
Notes
	 1	 Some writers on skepticism prefer using the dream case rather than 
the hallucination one, perhaps in part because Descartes so famously 
used a dream argument in his Meditations. For relevant discussion, 
esp. of the dream argument, see, e.g., Barry Stroud, The Significance 
of Philosophical Scepticism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1984); 
Michael Williams, Unnatural Doubts (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1991); 
Robert Fogelin, Pyrrhonian Reflections on Knowledge and Justification 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994); Sanford Goldberg, Anti-
Individualism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008); and 
Ernest Sosa, A Virtue Epistemology, esp. chapter 1. Another way to raise 
skeptical possibilities is to imagine being a “brain in a vat,” i.e., that one’s 
brain is alive in a liquid and given just the sorts of stimulation it now 
has, so that one would seem to experience things just as one now does. 
This example derives from Hilary Putnam, who uses it to argue, against 
skepticism, that the very content of such sentences as ‘I am a brain in a 
vat’ prevents their being intelligibly thought in the way Descartes appar-
ently believed possible. Because of how language and conceptualization 
work, “although the people in that possible world [in which they are 
merely brains in a vat] can think and ‘say’ any words we can think and 
say, they cannot (I claim) refer to what we can refer to. In particular they 
cannot think or say that they are brains in a vat (even by thinking ‘we are 
brains in a vat’).” See the selection from Hilary Putnam, Reason, Truth 
and History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981), entitled 
‘Brains in a Vat’, in Huemer, Epistemology. The literature contains much 
critical discussion, including Huemer’s ‘Direct Realism and the Brain-
in-a-Vat Argument’, reprinted (from Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 61, 2 [2000]) in Huemer, Epistemology. See also Timothy 
Williamson, ‘On Being Justified in One’s Head’, and my response to 
him, ‘Internalism and Externalism in Epistemology and Semantics’, both 
in Mark Timmons, John Greco, and Alfred R. Mele (eds.), Rationality 
and the Good: Critical Essays on the Ethics and Epistemology of Robert 
Audi (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007).
	 2	 Pyrrhonian skepticism need not imply that suspending judgment is 

354  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
always psychologically possible; and it may also allow that one can accept 
a proposition for the sake of argument, and so, without believing it, act 
on it as one who believes it would act; but there is no need to discuss this 
position here. If what I say about skepticism in general is sound, it can be 
readily applied to the Pyrrhonian form.
	 3	 See, for instance, section IV of Hume’s Inquiry Concerning Human 
Understanding (first published in 1748).
	 4	 This formulation is roughly the one given by Bertrand Russell in The 
Problems of Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1912). The 
formulation should be understood to apply only to phenomena of a cer-
tain kind, such as we explore in scientific inquiry and much everyday 
investigation; it will not hold for certain special cases. For instance, with 
an increase in the number of instances in which I lose a fair lottery in 
which I hold one of a million coupons, there is no change in the prob-
ability that I will lose; the probability remains the ratio of the number of 
tickets I hold—one—to the total number: 1 million. To think my good 
day is now more likely to come is to commit the gambler’s fallacy.
	 5	 I cannot take time here to consider begging the question in any detail; 
it is an important but elusive notion. For a detailed treatment see Walter 
Sinnott-Armstrong, ‘Begging the Question’, Australasian Journal of 
Philosophy 77, 2 (1999), 174–91.
	 6	 A remark attributed to Bertrand Russell introduces (humorously) the 
possibility that we may, perhaps haphazardly, be sometimes right and 
sometimes wrong about other minds: “There may be other minds,” he 
quipped, “but there certainly aren’t many of them.” In this spirit I might 
note another twist to the problem of other minds. As usually conceived, 
it concerns whether, in effect, there are as many minds as there seem to 
be. But reflection on skepticism can also lead us to a converse worry. 
How do I know that when I am asleep my body is not taken over by 
another mind, one connected, perhaps, with a part of the same brain 
as goes with my mind? And why might there not be several others who 
control this body when I do not? Granted there could be a conflict with 
another mind over, say, the movements of my right arm; but I could be 
built (or programmed) so as never to be conscious when another mind 
takes over this body. Call this the problem of too many minds.
	 7	 There is much recent literature on the extent to which skeptical hypoth-
eses undermine commonsense views about the extent of our knowl-
edge. See, for instance, Butchvarov’s Skepticism and the External World 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1998), Moser’s Philosophy after 
Objectivity (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993) and the books by 
Fogelin, Huemer, Klein, Nozick, Rescher, Sosa, Stroud, and Michael 
Williams also cited in the bibliography. For a helpful discussion of skep-
ticism focusing on the underdetermination problem, see Jonathan Vogel, 
‘Dismissing Skeptical Possibilities’, Philosophical Studies 70 (1993), 
235–50.

Skepticism I  355
	 8	 This is the term widely used in recent literature in connection with a 
debate between, on the non-skeptical side, Hilary Putnam, who (as 
quoted in note 1) denies that one really could be both a brain in a vat and 
have the mastery of language needed to raise the question of skepticism, 
and, closer to the skeptical side in interpreting such examples, a number 
of other philosophers, including Anthony Brueckner, ‘Trying to Get 
outside Your Own Skin’, Philosophical Topics 23, 1 (1995), 79–111, which 
contains references to Putnam’s original discussions of the brain-in-a-
vat problem and a number of more recent discussions. See also the paper 
by Huemer cited in note 1 and his Skepticism and the Veil of Perception.
	 9	 See, for example, Thomas Aquinas’s Summa Theologica (written in the 
thirteenth century), Ia, question 25, a.3.
	10	 As an epistemic principle, (2)—and indeed (1) and (3) as well—would 
commonly be taken by proponents to be necessarily true. Thus (2) would 
rule out even the possibility of knowledge of falsehoods, as opposed to 
the mere occurrence of it. But for our purposes the formulations as more 
simply stated will serve.
	11	 That my thinking entails my existing does not, of course, entail that my 
existing entails my thinking. But Descartes’s claim (also in Meditation 
II) that his essence is to be a thinking thing led to the following joke 
(which I recount as I remember it). Bartender to customer: Do you want 
another? Customer: I think not. Outcome: The customer disappears.
	12	 If there are such laws then there is empirical grounding that is conclu-
sive in the sense that it implies the proposition it grounds with “natural 
necessity,” the kind appropriate to causal laws. Because those are not 
absolutely necessary, as are logical laws and necessary truths as described 
in Chapter 5, it would not follow that the implication is an entailment.
	13	 This is the kind of strategy taken by Peter D. Klein in Certainty: A 
Refutation of Scepticism (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
1981); he extends it in ‘Skepticism and Closure’, cited in note 22 of 
Chapter 9 and reprinted in Huemer, Epistemology, pp. 552–74. In part, 
the issue concerns whether we may simply take it as obvious that we 
do know certain things before we have a criterion of knowledge, e.g. an 
account that tells us both what knowledge is and whether beliefs con-
stituting it must be infallible. For detailed discussion of this problem 
of the criterion—the problem of whether cases of knowledge are prior 
to accounts or vice versa—see R.M. Chisholm, ‘The Problem of the 
Criterion’, in his The Foundations of Knowing (Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press, 1982), reprinted in Huemer, Epistemology; and 
Robert Amico, The Problem of the Criterion (Lanham, MD: Rowman 
and Littlefield, 1994). For an examination of Moorean commonsensism 
in relation to criteria, dogmatism, and skepticism, see James Pryor, ‘The 
Skeptic and the Dogmatist’, Noûs 34 (2000), 517–49. 
	14	 There is a sophisticated and plausible compromise with skepticism that 
deserves note here. One could argue that knowledge must be understood 

356  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
not unqualifiedly but in terms of relativization to “contrast classes.” 
Thus, relative to the contrast class of near perfect imitations, I do not 
know that there is a green field before me; relative to the contrast class of 
ordinary green things encountered in the same visual way, such as green 
ponds and green canvas laid out for picnicking, I do. For a detailed state-
ment of this view—which may be regarded as a kind of contextualism—
see Walter Sinnott-Armstrong’s chapter on moral skepticism in Walter 
Sinnott-Armstrong and Mark Timmons (eds.), Moral Knowledge? (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1996). One reply is that knowledge may 
be understood without relativization provided we at least (1) recognize 
that knowledge attributions occur in a context and are in some way rela-
tive to it, and (2) distinguish between the following kinds of things: (a) 
knowing there is a green field before one and (b) knowing that there is a 
green field before one as opposed to a pavement textured to look just like 
one. Knowing the former does not entail knowing the latter, contras-
tive proposition (nor does Sinnott-Armstrong claim this), but it is easily 
taken to require that because (i) the latter proposition apparently follows 
from the former and (ii) noting the possibility of ignorance of the latter 
is an intelligible challenge to a claim to know the former.
	15	 The ‘presumably’ is meant to allow that there is a sense of ‘show’ in which 
one need not have justification for one’s premises: if they are true and are 
cogent grounds for what one wants to show, then invoking them may 
serve to show it. Here, however, one might not be justified in believing 
the very thing one shows. This objective, externalist way of showing—
call it de facto showing—something is not the one of interest here, which 
might be called dialectical showing, as it figures crucially in philosophical 
disputation.

14	 Skepticism II
The defense of common sense in the face of 
fallibility
•	
Negative versus positive defenses of common sense
•	
Deducibility, evidential transmission, and induction
Epistemic and logical possibility
Entailment, certainty, and fallibility
•	
The authority of knowledge and the cogency of its grounds
Epistemic authority and cogent grounds
Grounds of knowledge as conferring epistemic authority
Exhibiting knowledge versus dogmatically claiming it
•	
Refutation and rebuttal
•	
Prospects for a positive defense of common sense
A case for justified belief
The regress of demonstration
A case for knowledge
A circularity problem
•	
The challenge of rational disagreement
Intellectual pluralism
Epistemic parity
Dogmatism, fallibilism, and intellectual courage
•	
Skepticism and common sense

14	 Skepticism II
The defense of common sense in the face of 
fallibility
The previous chapter indicates various ways in which a skeptical case against 
what might be called epistemological commonsensism can be resisted. But 
even if such resistance is warranted, it leaves open just what may be said posi-
tively in favor of the view that the kinds of apparent knowledge and justified 
belief discussed in the first 12 chapters of this book are genuine. This chapter 
will explore that question.
Negative versus positive defenses of common 
sense
In the context of thinking about skepticism, it is easy to forget that know-
ing something does not require being able to show that one knows it. For 
in thinking about skepticism we are likely to be trying to defend, against a 
skeptical onslaught, the commonsense view that there is much knowledge, 
and we easily think of defending this view as requiring us to show that there 
is knowledge. There is, however, more than one kind of defense. The two 
kinds I have in mind are analogous to standing firm as opposed to attacking.
A negative defense of common sense, one that seeks to show that skeptical 
arguments do not justify the skeptic’s conclusion, does not require accom-
plishing the second-order task of showing that there is knowledge or justified 
belief. That achievement is required by a positive defense of common sense, 
one that seeks to show that we have the kinds of knowledge and justified 
beliefs common sense takes us to have. A negative defense requires only con-
tending that skepticism provides no good argument against common sense.
It does not appear that skepticism as so far examined provides a good 
argument against common sense. Why, for instance, should the skeptic’s 
merely suggesting a possible explanation of how there could be no green field 
before me, without giving any reason for thinking the explanation is correct, 
require me to know, or be in a position to know, that it is not correct? For 
virtually anything that could be true, there is some possible explanation of 
why. Is this mere possibility sufficient to undermine the force of positive 
grounds for belief?
So far, we have not seen adequate reason to reject the commonsense view 

Skepticism II  359
that we have much knowledge and numerous justified beliefs. But even if 
skeptical arguments do not require rejecting this view, they may prevent our 
showing that it is true or even providing minimal justification for it. Let us, 
then, explore the possibility of doing this.
Deducibility, evidential transmission, and 
induction
When we come to the problem of induction, it seems clear that one assump-
tion the skeptic is making is that if we believe something on the basis of one 
or more premises, then we can know it on the basis of those premises only if 
it follows from them, in the sense that they entail it. Call this the entailment 
principle. It says in effect that knowledge can be transmitted only deductively.
Why should we accept this principle? Not simply because inductive rea-
soning is “invalid”; for that term may be held to be improperly applied to 
it: inductive reasoning is strong or weak, probable or otherwise, but it does 
not even “aim” at (deductive) validity. Even if it may be properly said to be 
(deductively) invalid, however, that may be considered an uncontroversial 
technical point about its logical classification. It is a point of logic, not of 
epistemology. So conceived, the point does not imply either that knowledge 
of the premises of inductive reasoning cannot ground knowledge of its con-
clusions, or that justified beliefs of those premises cannot ground justified 
beliefs of their conclusions.
One might, on the other hand, accept the entailment principle and argue 
that when properly spelled out inductive reasoning can be replaced by valid 
deductive reasoning. For instance, suppose we add, as an overarching prem-
ise in inductive reasoning, the uniformity of nature principle, which says that 
nature is a domain of regular patterns that do not change over time. From 
this together with the premise that the sun has always risen each day it appar-
ently does follow that it will rise tomorrow.1
But what entitles us to the premise that nature is uniform? Hume would 
reply that it is not knowable a priori, and that to say that we know it through 
experience—a way of knowing it that would depend on inductive reason-
ing—would beg the question against him. For on the Humean view, if our 
belief of the uniformity principle is grounded wholly in premises that only 
inductively support it, we do not know it. I believe that this Humean response 
is highly plausible. The problem of induction must be approached differently.
Epistemic and logical possibility
What perhaps above all makes the entailment principle plausible is the thought 
that if our premises could be true and yet our conclusion might be false then 
we cannot know (or even justifiedly believe) the conclusion on the basis of 
those premises. At first, this thought may sound like just another formula-
tion of the entailment principle. It is not; it is different and considerably 

360  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
more plausible. That is partly why, when it is conflated with the entailment 
principle, it seems to support that principle. The ‘might’ in question is epis-
temic; it is like a farmer’s in ‘That wood dust might mean carpenter ants’ or a 
physician’s in ‘Those abdominal pains might mean appendicitis’. This ‘might’ 
suggests not only that for all we know (or may take ourselves to know) the 
pains do mean appendicitis, but also that there is reason for at least some 
degree of suspicion that there is appendicitis and perhaps some need to rule 
it out.
The statement that certain abdominal pains might mean appendicitis is 
not merely an expression of a bare logical possibility of appendicitis—a state-
ment that appendicitis is possible without contradiction—based, say, on no 
one’s being absolutely invulnerable to it. If that very weak and general state-
ment represents all we know about the case, we are not entitled to say that the 
pains might mean appendicitis. It is also not a logical impossibility that the 
Tower of London levitate above the City; but we would be quite unjustified 
in saying that it might.
Three notions must be distinguished here. The epistemic ‘might’ just 
illustrated suggests some reason to believe the proposition in question and 
might be called epistemic probability—not because the probability need be 
high but because it bears on knowledge and implies that, relative to all we 
know or are justified in believing, knowing any contrary proposition requires 
something like ruling out the truth of that proposition. As one would expect, 
epistemic probability is stronger than epistemic possibility—roughly, con-
sistency with what we know or may at least take ourselves to know. Both are 
quite different from mere logical possibility—what can be the case without 
contradiction or some other kind of necessary falsehood.2
Epistemic possibility does not entail epistemic probability, and neither 
is entailed by mere logical possibility. This point bears importantly on the 
problem of induction. It is true that if, no matter how good inductive reason-
ing is, its premises could be true and yet its conclusion might, in the epistemic 
sense, be false, perhaps we cannot know the conclusion on the basis of them. 
But is this generally the case with inductive reasoning? I cannot see that it is.
Moreover, suppose it could be true that, relative to its premises, the con-
clusion of inductive reasoning might, in the epistemic sense, be false, what 
reason is there to think that this really is true? Skeptics cannot justifiably 
argue for this claim as they sometimes do, maintaining, simply on the ground 
that the premises do not entail the conclusion, that the conclusion might be 
false. Arguing in this way is rather like saying, of just any stomach ache a child 
gets after eating too much Halloween candy, that it might mean appendicitis.
It is barely possible that, relative to all we know or are justified in believing 
about the child, the stomach ache means appendicitis. But from that bare 
possibility we may not automatically conclude that appendicitis is epistemi-
cally probable—roughly, that relative to all we know or are justified in believ-
ing, we are unjustified in disbelieving that the stomach ache might mean  

Skepticism II  361
appendicitis. Nor does this bare possibility rule out our knowing, on induc-
tive grounds, that overeating is the cause.3
Entailment, certainty, and fallibility
There are other reasons for the attractiveness of the entailment principle, 
at least from a skeptical point of view. If one embraces the infallibility 
principle, one is in fact committed to the entailment principle. For suppose 
that, from known—and hence on this view infallibly believed—premises, 
one inductively derives a belief which is not itself infallible, as (empirical) 
beliefs which are inferentially grounded typically are not. Because inductive 
transmission allows inference of a false conclusion from true premises, the 
belief I inferentially derive could, as far as sheer logic goes, be false despite 
the truth of its inductive premises and my infallibly believing them. True 
premises, even if infallibly believed, simply do not absolutely guarantee the 
truth of a conclusion inductively inferred from them. Hence, beliefs of such 
inductively inferred conclusions would be fallible (unless they happened to 
be self-grounding or to have necessary truths as objects). But then, being 
fallible, these beliefs would be capable of falsehood and hence would not con-
stitute knowledge. Thus, knowledge can be inferentially transmitted only by 
deductive inference. Only valid deduction inferentially preserves infallibility.4
If one thinks of knowledge as entailing absolute certainty, one might 
again be drawn to the entailment principle. For even if a fallible belief can be 
absolutely certain, a belief that is only inductively based on it will presumably 
be at least a bit less certain and thus not absolutely certain. For the proposi-
tion believed—the conclusion belief—is supported by the original belief with 
only a probability of less than 1 rather than with absolute certainty, as when 
the conclusion is entailed by the premises. This would allow that the premise 
belief be certain and the conclusion belief not certain (or less so), as it would 
not inherit from the premise belief the same degree of protection against 
falsehood.
To see this, suppose that the premise belief only minimally meets the stan-
dard for absolute certainty. Then a belief inductively grounded on it can fall 
below that standard and thereby fail to be knowledge. Putting the point in 
terms of probability, we might imagine a case in which our premise meets the 
bare minimum conditions for absolute certainty, which we might represent 
by a probability of 1. Then, any conclusion that follows only inductively from 
this premise will thereby inherit from it only some lower probability and 
hence fall below the minimum level for absolute certainty. Thus, again the 
skeptic will argue that only deduction is sufficient to transmit knowledge.
But we have already seen reason to doubt both the infallibility principle 
and the view that a belief constitutes knowledge only if its status is absolutely 
certainty. Indeed, I do not see that skeptics give us good reason to believe 
either these principles or the entailment principle. It does not follow from the 

362  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
absence of good arguments for the principles that they are, as they appear to 
be, false; but if there is no good reason to believe them, even skeptics would 
approve of our refusing to accept them.
Absolute certainty is a high, and in some ways beautiful, ideal; but it is 
neither adequate to the concept of knowledge nor appropriate to the human 
condition.
The authority of knowledge and the cogency of its 
grounds
There is one further principle we should consider, one rather different from 
those examined so far and apparently more modest. It derives in part from 
the idea that if you know something, you have a certain authority regarding 
it, an authority presumably due to your being in a position, by virtue of some 
ground of your knowledge, to see the truth you know. This authority is in 
part what accounts for the possibility of knowledge through testimony: if 
you know something, you have an authority about it such that normally I can 
come to know it, and commonly also to acquire justification for believing it, 
from your testimony.
Epistemic authority and cogent grounds
Indeed, if you tell someone that you know something—especially when you 
are asked whether you really know it—you put yourself on the line. It is as 
if you gave your firmest assurance—an epistemic promise, as it were—that 
it is true. If it turns out to be false, your position is somewhat like that of a 
person who has broken a promise. You are open to a kind of criticism and 
may have to make amends. A good theory of knowledge should account for 
this epistemic authority that seems to go with knowing—or to be, in many 
contexts, implicit in attributing knowledge to someone.
A stronger but closely associated view is that if you know that a proposi-
tion is true then you must be able to say something on behalf of it. After all, 
the question how one knows is always intelligible, at least for beliefs that are 
not of luminously self-evident truths or of self-ascriptive propositions about 
one’s current consciousness (two kinds of belief not in question for the most 
important kinds of skepticism); and if one really does know, one should be 
able to give more than a dogmatic answer, such as ‘I can just see that it is true’.
The associated principle might be expressed in what I shall call the cogency 
principle: with the possible exception of beliefs of certain self-evident propo-
sitions and certain propositions about one’s current consciousness, one knows 
that something is so only if one has grounds for it on the basis of which one can 
(in principle) argue cogently for it.
Since the cogency principle requires only that one can argue cogently for 
what one knows, temporary inability to mount an argument would not pre-
clude one’s knowing. Even little children might have knowledge, for perhaps 

Skepticism II  363
if they could just find a way to express their grounds they could provide 
cogent arguments. And since self-evident propositions and propositions 
about one’s current consciousness are knowable even according to most 
skeptics, and may be objects of directly justified belief, there is a stopping 
place in epistemic chains and no regress need result when one produces a 
series of arguments to support a claim. What is known must simply be either 
traceable to those secure foundations or otherwise defensible by appeal to 
adequate grounds.
If the cogency principle is combined with the entailment principle, it will 
immediately preclude anyone’s having knowledge on inductive grounds; for 
the entailment principle implies that inductive grounds are never cogent. But 
it need not be combined with the entailment principle. If it is not, it can allow 
for inductive reasoning of certain kinds to be cogent and thereby to transmit 
knowledge.
Even a moderate skeptic, however, is likely to accept at most a restricted 
kind of induction, a kind whose premises make its conclusion at least close to 
certain. This kind meets a higher standard than is usually applied to induc-
tive inference. Thus, even though the cogency principle is separable from the 
entailment principle, it need not be combined with the entailment principle 
to be very hostile to the commonsense view that we can know the sorts of 
things I have been suggesting we can know, at least if this view is understood 
in a foundationalist framework. For this principle strikes at some of the main 
sources of knowledge as they are plausibly understood, and it threatens to 
undermine our claim to knowledge of the past, the future, and the external 
world. Let us pursue this.
It is true that some of our beliefs that constitute direct knowledge (and 
are directly justified) can be supported by apparently more secure premises. 
For instance, my belief that I see a green field can be supported by premises 
about how things appear to me, which concern only my present conscious-
ness. After all, that this is so seems to be the only good explanation of why 
my visual field contains a green field. But this supportability by premises 
need not hold for everything it seems reasonable to regard as directly known. 
It may not hold for apparently memorial knowledge. As we saw in Chapter 
3, one might know something through the success of one’s sheer retentive 
powers even when the only premises one knows or is justified in using to 
support it fail to justify it.
A proponent of the cogency principle would certainly tend to deny that 
my memory can be trusted as a source of direct knowledge or direct justifica-
tion, in part because memory seems far more liable to error than percep-
tion. Moreover, I might be unable to provide good inductive reasoning to 
support the reliability of memory even in cases in which it is very vivid, if 
only because such reasoning would require my depending on my memory for 
my justification in believing its premises, say premises about how often my 
past memory beliefs have been confirmed. To summarize their track record, 
I must remember how things turned out in the past—or at least remember 

364  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
that I wrote the results down as they occurred. I would thus be relying on 
memory in order to vindicate it. Still, even if I could give no cogent argument 
to justify my memorial beliefs, it does not follow that they are not justified, 
or that they do not constitute knowledge.
Grounds of knowledge as conferring epistemic authority
Must we accept even the apparently modest cogency principle, which requires 
that in order to know something, we need grounds for it from which we can 
(in principle) argue cogently for it? I do not see why. Certainly one can have 
a kind of authority without being able to defend it by premises or exhibit it 
in argumentation. Consider someone who can always tell “identical” twins 
apart but cannot say how. Moreover, ‘I see it’ need not be a dogmatic answer 
to ‘How do you know?’ It may simply specify one’s grounds, as when one 
says, ‘I see it’ in answer to ‘How do you know there is still ice on the road?’ 
It says how one knows; it need not (though it may) show that one does, par-
ticularly if showing this requires more than exhibiting an appropriate source 
of the challenged belief.
There is a general lesson here. When skeptics ask how we know something, 
this is typically a challenge to show it. I have already argued that knowing 
something does not require being able to show it, so this challenge is not 
always appropriate. What I now want to stress is that the skeptical emphasis 
on ‘How do you know?’ as a request for a demonstration must not be allowed 
to obscure the possibility of taking it as just a request to specify a ground of 
one’s knowledge and of fulfilling that request simply by giving an adequate 
ground. In doing this successfully, one shows how one knows.
In saying how I know something by citing my ground I may also be doing 
something further: exhibiting my knowledge of what the ground supports 
and perhaps even of the fact that it does so. But even exhibiting knowledge 
need not be showing that one has it. I can exhibit knowledge that there is 
black ice before me by taking my foot off the accelerator and coasting over 
it while saying “Tighten your seat belt”; this is not doing anything with the 
epistemic conclusion that I know there is ice before me. Moreover, even if I 
know the abstract proposition that, say, seeing ice on the roads shows that 
they are icy, I may not know how to use this connection to show that I know 
they are icy. Still, if my knowledge that they are carries an authority that can 
be confirmed by my citing my ground, why need I be able to go on to the 
sophisticated task of showing that I have knowledge? Again the analogy to 
virtue is pertinent: having virtue requires being able to manifest it in appro-
priate circumstances, but not being able to show—in any further way—that 
one has it.
Exhibiting knowledge versus dogmatically claiming it
One might think this approach licenses dogmatism. Granted, saying ‘I see it’ 
could be dogmatic if intended to show conclusively that I know, for instance 

Skepticism II  365
by serving as absolutely proving that there is green grass before me. But the 
same words can simply indicate the basis for my knowledge. This is different 
from flatly claiming that I have knowledge. Indeed, saying it cites a ground 
for my belief which, if adequate, suggests that I am not being dogmatic in 
taking myself to know. Perhaps it is precisely because the skeptic’s ‘How 
do you know?’ is commonly meant as a challenge to be shown conclusively 
that one knows, and not as a request to specify a source or a ground of the 
knowledge, that saying ‘I see it’ seems dogmatic in the context of discussing 
skepticism, even when the function of saying this is mainly explanatory.
If the issue raised by skepticism is whether we can show that we have 
knowledge, the point that an appeal to visual experience does not conclusively 
establish visual knowledge is an important concession. But the issue here 
is whether the skeptic succeeds in showing that we do not have perceptual 
knowledge. In that context, the point is not a concession. Once again, we can 
see how skepticism can gain credibility because skeptics make it sound as if 
their case against the existence of one or another kind of knowledge succeeds 
if we cannot show that there is such knowledge. In fact, we need not be able 
to show that there is knowledge in order to have it; and the skeptic must give 
us good reason not to believe that there is knowledge.
Refutation and rebuttal
Have I, then, refuted skepticism, even in the few forms considered here? I 
have not tried to. Refutation would require showing that those forms of skep-
ticism are false, which in turn would entail showing that there is knowledge 
(and justified belief). What I have tried to do is to rebut skepticism in certain 
plausible forms, to show that the arguments for those skeptical views do not 
establish that we do not have knowledge (and justified belief). Refutation of 
skepticism suffices for its rebuttal; but rebuttal does not require refutation. 
Now suppose I have succeeded in rebutting skepticism. Where do we stand? 
May we believe that we have knowledge, or may we only suspend judgment 
both on this and on skeptical claims that we do not?
I have already argued, by implication, that one can know something with-
out knowing that one knows it. For instance, in arguing that much of our 
knowledge is not self-conscious, I indicated how I can know that there is 
a green field before me without even believing that I know this. I do not 
even form such self-conscious beliefs in most everyday situations. Moreover, 
toddlers, who do not understand what knowledge is—and so are not in a 
position to believe they know anything—can apparently know such simple 
things as that Mama is before them.
Even if I did have the second-order knowledge that I know the field is there, 
I surely would not possess (as seems impossible in any case) the infinite series 
of beliefs required by the view that knowing entails knowing that one knows—
the KK thesis, as it is called—the series that continues with my knowing that 
I know that I know; knowing that I know, that I know that I know; and so 
forth. There is no plausibility in thinking that if I know that (for example) 

366  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
the field is there, I must know that I know that I know . . . this, up to the 
limit of my capacity. I never have such a repetitive thought. Moreover, I do 
not think that I believe (or disbelieve) the proposition in question (I have not 
tested my memory here); and I cannot imagine a good use for it.5 Given these 
points (among others), it would be a mistake to think, as some skeptics might 
like us to, that if we do not know that we have knowledge, then we do not.
For similar reasons, it seems possible that we might be justified in believ-
ing that we have knowledge even if we are properly unwilling to claim that we 
know we do, and perhaps even if we are properly unwilling to claim justifica-
tion for believing that we do. Let us explore these possibilities.
If foundationalism is correct, then if one can know anything, one can 
know at least something directly. Moreover, some of the sorts of things 
that a plausible foundationalism says we know directly—for instance, self-
evident truths and some propositions about our present consciousness—are 
the kinds of things which, simply on the basis of reflection on the examples 
involved, it is plausible to think we know. Perhaps, of course, this intuitively 
plausible point, even if it does not involve arguing from premises, shows that 
we have knowledge. In any case, I think that we are justified in believing that 
we have some knowledge even if we cannot show that we do; and I am aware 
of no good argument against the view that we have some knowledge even of 
the external world.
Might there be a way, however, to give a cogent, positive defense of 
common sense: to show that we have knowledge, even of the external world? 
And could we establish this second-order thesis even to the satisfaction of 
some skeptics? There is no satisfying a radical skeptic, one who denies that 
there can be any knowledge or justified belief (including justification of that 
very claim, which the skeptic simply asserts as a challenge). For a radical 
skeptic, nothing one presents as a reason for asserting something will count 
as justifying it.
Could anything be said, however, to show that there is knowledge to a 
moderate skeptic: one who holds, say, that although transmission of justi-
fication and knowledge must be deductive, we may justifiedly believe, and 
perhaps know, at least self-evident propositions and propositions about our 
present consciousness? Even if the answer is negative, perhaps we can show 
that there is knowledge, or at least justified belief, whether any skeptics 
would find our argument plausible or not.
Prospects for a positive defense of common sense
How might an argument for a positive defense of common sense go? Let 
us consider justified belief first, as showing that certain of our beliefs are 
justified, unlike showing that some of them constitute knowledge, does not 
require showing that the beliefs in question are true.

Skepticism II  367
A case for justified belief
One might view the issue this way: if we are to show that there are justified 
beliefs, then one result of our argument will itself be producing justification, 
specifically justification for the second-order belief that there are justified 
beliefs. For to show something by argument entails at least producing justi-
fication for believing it.
If we are to provide such second-order justification, we apparently need 
at least two things: a general premise expressing a sufficient condition for 
justification, and one or more specific premises saying that a particular belief 
meets that condition. For instance, the general premise might be the justifi-
cation principle that
	 1	 An attentively held belief to the effect that one is now in an occurrent 
mental state, such as thinking, is (prima facie) justified,
where an attentively held belief is one based on careful attention to the 
proposition in question, and where the justification is not absolute but prima 
facie: it must simply be strong enough to make it appropriate for a rational 
person to hold the belief.6 The particular premise might be that
	 2	 I have an attentive belief that I am now in such a state, namely thinking.
If I am justified in believing these premises, I am justified in inferring deduc-
tively from them, and thereby in believing on the basis of them, what they 
self-evidently entail, namely, that
	 3	 My belief that I am thinking is (prima facie) justified.
Here I would be inferentially justified in believing (3), at least if I can hold 
all three propositions before my mind in a way that avoids dependence on 
memory of my premises; and this seems possible for me. (If I needed so 
many premises, or such complicated premises, that I could not hold them in 
mind at once, then my justification for my conclusion would depend on that 
of my memory belief(s) of my premises.) Premises (1) and (2) self-evidently 
entail (3), and a moderate skeptic will very likely grant that if, from premises 
that I am justified in believing, I infer (without dependence on memory) a 
conclusion that self-evidently follows from them, I am justified in believing 
that too.
But how am I now justified in believing premises (1) and (2), if I am? There 
is some plausibility in holding that the general principle, (1), is justifiable 
directly (non-inferentially) by reflection (and is arguably self-evident), and 
so my belief of it might itself be directly justified. This is not to deny that 
it could be justified by prior premises, since self-evidence does not entail 

368  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
unprovability or unevidenceability. The point is only that it is arguably jus-
tified by reflection not dependent on one’s appealing to such premises. As 
for the particular premise, (2), I might be directly justified in holding it by 
virtue of a justification principle similar to the general one, but applying to 
beliefs (dispositional elements), a principle to the effect that if, on careful 
introspection, one believes that one attentively holds a proposition, p, then 
one is justified in believing one does (presumably directly justified, if one has 
introspected carefully).
Now if my belief of my general premise is justified, and if I may justifiedly 
hold the particular premise, then surely I may justifiedly conclude that I am 
justified in my belief that I am thinking. I may justifiedly conclude this even 
if my justification in believing my premises is not direct, as I am tentatively 
assuming it is. Moreover, if my beliefs of (1)–(3) are true, they may also 
constitute knowledge: my justification for each seems strong enough, and 
apart from this matter of degree there appears to be no other kind of bar to 
knowledge.7
Given the plausibility of the premises just used to try to show that I am 
justified in holding a belief about my own mental life, I am inclined to think 
that it can be shown that there are some justified beliefs, even some justified 
empirical ones. But even if the line of argument I have used is successful, one 
might question whether it extends to any beliefs about the external world. 
What would be our general principle for, say, visual perceptual beliefs?
In answer, perhaps we might begin with an instance of a justification prin-
ciple stated in Chapter 1. Applied to the green field example, this would say 
that
	 a	 If, on the basis of a vivid and steady visual experience in which one has 
the impression of something green before one, one believes that there 
is something green before one, then one is (prima facie) justified in so 
believing.
Surely we may say this, particularly since the justification in question is 
admittedly defeasible. (It could, for instance, be undermined by my justi-
fiedly believing that I have frequently been hallucinating greens lately.) 
Suppose this premise may be believed with direct justification, and we may 
also believe (possibly with direct justification) that
	 b	 I have a belief (that there is something green before me) grounded in the 
way the premise—principle (1)—requires.
Then I may, much as before, justifiedly conclude that
	 c	 I am (prima facie) justified in believing that there is something green 
before me.

Skepticism II  369
To be sure, my perceptual belief is only prima facie justified—roughly, justi-
fied in the absence of defeating factors. But this is still a significant conclu-
sion, even if (as seems possible) I could not, by reflection alone, rule out all 
of those defeaters.
The regress of demonstration
Supposing this line of argument against the skeptic is sound, have I shown 
anything? If showing something is producing a good argument for it from 
true premises that one is justified in believing, presumably I have. It is easy, 
however, to think that the skeptic would be correct in denying that I have 
shown anything. For there is a subtlety here that is easily missed. Even if I 
have shown my conclusion, I might not be justified in saying, to the skeptic 
or anyone else, that I have shown it, or even in believing I have. For justifica-
tion for asserting or believing that second-order proposition about my beliefs 
would ordinarily require holding (or at least having justification for hold-
ing) third-order beliefs, such as the belief that my second-order belief that I 
believe I am thinking is justified and true (since this second-order belief has 
been shown by good argument). And what in my situation would give me 
that still higher-order justification?
The general point is that whatever one’s justificational or epistemic 
achievement, justifiedly saying or even justifiedly believing that one has suc-
ceeded in it requires justification or knowledge at the next higher level. This 
higher-order justification or knowledge may or may not be forthcoming. 
Initially, this point may seem to doom my original attempt to show that I 
have a justified belief. But I do not think it does; it brings out only that one 
can show this without automatically showing the higher-order proposition 
that one has shown it. Plainly, we can achieve something even if we are in no 
way entitled to credit ourselves with achieving it.
What we have encountered here is a counterpart of the regress of justi-
fication, a regress of demonstration: if one shows anything at all and can be 
asked to show that, then there will be either an infinite regress of demonstra-
tions, or a circle of them, or there will be some unshown shower (at least 
one unshown premise). In a sense, there will always be some point at which 
self-congratulation—or a final dismissal of the skeptical challenges—is inap-
propriate. This is another reason why a moderate foundationalist perspective 
should not be thought to lead to dogmatism.
Still, even if I do not know that I have shown that my belief that I am 
thinking is justified, I may yet have shown this; and if I have, then I may well 
know the proposition that I have shown: that my belief that I am thinking is 
justified. Perhaps, moreover, a similar procedure may be repeated, with equal 
success, at each higher level to which one can ascend without losing track 
of the progressively more complex issue. Then, with sufficient patience, one 
could show any given justification-ascribing proposition in the hierarchy—

370  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
that one has shown that one has a justified belief, that one has shown that one 
has shown this, and so on, to the limit of one’s comprehension.
A case for knowledge
The reasoning we have been exploring in connection with justification also 
bears on skepticism about knowledge. If the premise beliefs, (a) and (b), are 
true, they may constitute knowledge. I may, then, not only be showing that I 
am justified in holding a belief about the external world; I also may, as a result 
of my reasoning, know that I am justified in holding it. There would then be 
at least justificational self-knowledge: self-knowledge to the effect that one 
has justification for some beliefs.
In reasoning from (a) and (b) to (c), however, I do not automatically 
know that I am showing that I am justified in believing something about 
the external world. Suppose I do not know this. Perhaps I only hope that I 
am showing it. Then, even if I do have second-order knowledge that I have 
a justified belief about the external world, I may not be justified in holding 
the third-order belief that I have (second-order) knowledge that I have this 
(first-order) justified belief, the belief that there is something green before 
me. I have as yet no principle that would justify me in concluding that I know 
or justifiedly believe that I have a justified first-order belief. I lack a principle 
stating conditions that generate second-order knowledge or second-order 
justified belief.
It seems, however, that the sort of justification I apparently have for all 
the relevant beliefs, including the belief that I have a justified belief about the 
external world, is the kind whose possession by true beliefs is sufficient for 
their constituting knowledge. Thus, through reasoning using premises such 
as (a) and (b) I may well know that I have justified beliefs about the external 
world. Certainly I have reason to think that the skeptic does not know, or 
justifiedly believe, that I lack justified beliefs about the external world.
One assumption it is natural to make in using this strategy against skepti-
cism deserves emphasis: the assumption that the crucial principles of justi-
fication are a priori, and believing them is justified by reflection (directly, or 
at least on the basis of self-evident steps from directly justified beliefs of a 
priori premises). Suppose the principles are empirical. Then our justification 
for believing them would presumably be broadly inductive. A skeptic could 
plausibly deny that, on an inductive basis, we can justifiedly believe them. Let 
us pursue this possibility.
A circularity problem
There would apparently be a circularity problem if we had to justify our 
crucial principles inductively. For justifying them by inductive reason-
ing would seem to presuppose using just such principles, principles that 
specify, for instance, under what conditions inductive inference can transmit 

Skepticism II  371
justification or knowledge. We would have to use induction to develop a track 
record for such inferences, say by determining, observationally, how often 
their premises are found true and their conclusions determined to be false. 
We would need to rely on perception and memory to do this—in addition to 
using induction to infer from a good track record on the part of a source to its 
general reliability. To acquire justified beliefs about the reliability of percep-
tion, moreover, we would need to use perception, say in looking at objects 
again to see if our initial color perceptions were accurate.
Are the kinds of principles of justification I have been using a priori? That 
is certainly arguable; but it is also controversial. On the most plausible kind 
of reliability theory of justification, for instance, a belief is justified by virtue 
of being grounded in reliable belief-producing processes such as perceptual 
ones; and it is apparently not an a priori matter what processes are reliable, 
that is, actually produce a suitably large proportion of true beliefs. This is the 
sort of thing that must be determined largely by observation.8
Thus, for reliabilism about justification, in order to know what principles 
account for justification, one must know what processes tend to generate 
true beliefs. One could determine that only through considerable experi-
ence. Hence, if these principles are empirical, the circularity problem just 
mentioned would beset the attempt, within a reliabilist framework, to justify 
them. We would have to use perception to vindicate perception, for instance 
checking on our visual perceptions by relying on tactile ones. Our conclu-
sion could of course be true, but to rely on perception in arguing that it is 
reliable would not justify one’s conclusion. It is an interesting question how 
much the circularity may be mitigated insofar as, in confirming the reliability 
of one sense, we use (as just illustrated) only the deliverances of a different 
one. This widens the circle, but it does not provide a way out of it. Indeed, to 
validate any source over time, we must rely on memory to track our successes 
and failures. Without memory, our lives would be a series of disconnected 
snapshots.
On the other hand, I argued above that reliability theories are less plau-
sible for justification than for knowledge, and I believe that it is more reason-
able, though by no means obviously correct, to suppose that at least some 
principles about the conditions for justification are a priori. I would include 
various principles expressing ways in which—as described by Chapters 1 
through 5—justification is produced by its basic sources.
The challenge of rational disagreement
As so far described, skepticism applies to much that we ordinarily take our-
selves to know or at least to believe quite justifiedly. But skepticism may 
be both more selective and more worrisome even when less comprehen-
sive—when it takes a smaller bite. It may plausibly arise when we disagree 
with others we consider generally credible on the topic in question, say the 
existence of God or of objective moral truths. This example shows both how 

372  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
skepticism may be highly selective and how it may be disturbing. Skepticism 
about such matters is highly selective because some people seldom if ever 
encounter such disagreements; and it is disturbing because it challenges the 
rational basis of beliefs that guide important segments of our conduct.
Intellectual pluralism
This is an age of intellectual pluralism: there is a great diversity of views on 
many important matters. It is also an age of rapid and widespread communi-
cation: through various media and, especially, the internet, more and more 
people are aware of views opposing their own and, often, of evidences for 
those views. Should we respond skeptically and conclude that in the face of 
such widespread disagreements, we rarely have knowledge or justified beliefs, 
at least in controversial matters?
The mere presence of widespread disagreement on a topic, say the objec-
tivity of ethics, does not imply that no one has knowledge of one of the 
disputed positions. Nor does that skeptical conclusion follow even when one 
party has more evidence than the other(s). Quantity of evidence does not 
guarantee a quality sufficient to justify the proposition the evidence sup-
ports. This point has been disturbingly neglected by political advertisements 
that say such things as ‘Twenty million Americans can’t be wrong’. Even on 
the assumption that their testimony can provide some evidence, this claim is 
simply false. All of humanity has been wrong on such matters as the shape 
of the earth.
Moreover, as we have seen in earlier chapters, some beliefs—such as 
some beliefs of self-evident propositions—may be justified on an intuitive 
basis that is not, in everyday parlance, viewed as a kind of evidence. The 
intuitive sense of truth underlying such beliefs as that nothing is round and 
square—an intuitive seeming, in one terminology—may be considered a sup-
porting ground even if it is not considered a kind of evidence. But people 
have conflicting intuitions as well as conflicting beliefs based on ordinary 
kinds of evidence. Cognitive pluralism is not limited to belief, much less to 
theories or other complex views. To see how a skeptical problem is presented 
by rational disagreement in cognitive matters broadly construed, we must 
refine the issue.
Epistemic parity
The first thing to note is that dealing with rational disagreement presupposes 
a measure of non-skeptical confidence. Indeed, if I did not trust my experi-
ence in the first place, what would justify my belief that others differ from me 
and, despite this, meet a standard of rationality I respect? It turns out, surely, 
that to assess challenges to our views we must—whether in religion, science, 
philosophy, or other cognitive domains—consider both our experience and 

Skepticism II  373
our overall intellectual position, including our resources for explaining why 
others disagree, in a way that preserves as much as possible of our view.
More specifically, it is at best difficult—especially in complex cases—to 
acquire justification for believing someone else to be an epistemic peer with 
respect to some proposition, p, on which the other person disagrees. Roughly, 
to be an epistemic peer in a given matter is to be (a) exposed to the same 
relevant evidence as oneself, (b) equally conscientious in considering it, and 
(c) equally rational in the matter. Even beyond this, there is the question 
whether the other person might have background beliefs—such as a belief 
that Humean skepticism about induction is sound—that, perhaps by intro-
ducing biases, reduce the person’s overall justification regarding p.
At least three further factors should be noted. One is that someone else’s 
disbelieving p is itself a reason (even if not a strong one) for a person who 
rationally believes p to doubt that the other is a full-scale epistemic peer 
in the matter.9 The second is that we are better positioned to make a criti-
cal appraisal of our own evidence—at least when it is experiential, as with 
memory impressions and intuitions—and of our responses to it, for instance 
in assessing whether our belief that p is based on the evidence rather than 
on, say, wishful thinking, than of anyone else’s evidence or responses to that 
evidence.10 Other things equal, then, we are better justified in our assessment 
of our own basis for believing p and of our response to that basis than in 
our assessment of the basis of anyone else’s believing it or of anyone else’s 
response to that basis.
A third factor is this. As we check and re-check our own grounds for a 
justified belief that p and our responses to them, we tend to increase our 
justification for believing p, at least when we retain that belief in the light of 
this effort. Indeed, even if, from a skeptical disposition, we do not retain it, 
our propositional justification regarding p may still rise, as when we come 
closer to having conclusive evidence but, being highly cautious regarding p, 
withhold belief from it.
Dogmatism, fallibilism, and intellectual courage
These considerations provide some support for the modest conclusion that 
the very exercise of critically seeking to establish the epistemic parity of a 
disputant may give a rational person a justificatory advantage in the dispute. 
Perhaps we may conclude that other things being equal, a rational conscien-
tious attempt to establish the epistemic parity of a disputant tends to favor 
the conscientious inquirer who, on the basis of such an attempt, retains the 
belief that p. This conclusion, qualified as it is by a tendency element, does 
not entail that such conscientious inquirers should never withhold p instead 
(neither believing nor disbelieving it). That might be a reasonable thing to do 
in some cases, especially if one justifiedly believes a peer has made a consci-
entious attempt of the same kind and retained a contrary belief.

374  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
Where conscientious inquirers should not withhold p, retention with 
humility might well be a commonly justified result of the kind of reflection 
in question. Such retention, moreover, should normally be accompanied by 
a sensitivity to, and in some cases a search for, further evidence concerning 
p. Dogmatism, then, as implying a belief or strong disposition to believe that 
one is correct and the disputant is wrong, or a disproportionately strong belief 
of p, is inappropriate in all cases of rational disagreement between peers.
To be sure, each of two disagreeing peers can go through the same kind 
of conscientious review of the apparent parity of the other, in which case 
the enhancement in justification may be equivalent on each side. Moreover, 
repeating such a review should not be expected to increase one’s justification 
for p indefinitely and will tend to do so decreasingly with each repetition. 
Given these qualifications, it should be stressed that the kind of increase in 
justification that such critical reflection may bring does not automatically 
warrant reduced humility and may indeed call for more of it.
It turns out, then, that sometimes our plausibly challenged beliefs should, 
on balance, be retained; sometimes our unchallenged beliefs should be given 
up. There is no simple formula here, in ethics, philosophy, religion, or any 
other domain. A good attitude with which to approach rational disagreement 
with someone we consider an epistemic peer in the matter is fallibilism of the 
kind described in Chapter 12. This attitude contrasts with dogmatism but is 
consistent with intellectual courage. That courage is among the intellectual 
virtues. It is roughly a settled disposition to form beliefs, and to retain one’s 
existing views, with the right level of conviction in relation to the strength 
of one’s grounds, and with a kind of fallibilism that leads one to countenance 
disagreement but not to give up one’s views under the mere pressure of wide-
spread disagreement.
Skepticism and common sense
Where, then, does this chapter leave us with respect to appraising skepticism? 
To begin with, there are forms of skepticism I have not mentioned, and I 
have also not discussed every plausible argument for the skeptical principles 
I have addressed: chiefly the infallibility, certainty, back-up, entailment, and 
cogency principles. But these principles are in some important ways repre-
sentative of those on which even moderate skepticism rests. I have offered 
reasons for rejecting them, and on that basis I have maintained that skepti-
cism, at least insofar as it depends on these and similar principles, can be 
rebutted. It can be shown to be rationally resistible.
We are, then, warranted in refusing to accept skepticism concerning justi-
fication and knowledge of propositions other than those that are self-evident 
or self-ascribe to the believer a present occurrent mental property. If it is not 
false, it is at least not justified by what seem the main arguments for it. It is 
not clear, however, that anything said above refutes the kinds of skepticism 
we have considered. For refuting those views entails showing them to be 
false, and it is not altogether clear what that requires.

Skepticism II  375
Positively, I have suggested that on one plausible notion of showing some-
thing, namely, validly and justifiably deducing it from true premises which 
one justifiedly believes and are good grounds for it, we can show that there 
are some beliefs we are justified in holding, probably even some justified 
beliefs about the external world (these may perhaps include some about the 
inner lives of others).11 I am less inclined to say that we can—by this strat-
egy—show that there is knowledge, particularly knowledge of the external 
world. Much depends on the kind of grounding required for such premises 
as that I see a green field before me, which, because simple seeing entails the 
existence of the object seen, in turn entails that there is something external. 
Much also depends on how rigorous a standard of showing is appropriate.
On balance, then, I have supported the commonsense view that we can 
know that there is both justified belief and knowledge about the external 
world, and can know this even if we cannot show that there is. I also maintain 
that there is justified belief and knowledge about one’s own consciousness 
and about certain a priori matters. Skeptics certainly do not seem to have 
shown that we do not have knowledge and justified belief of these kinds. I 
believe that we have both.
Moreover, if, as argued in Chapter 12, it is true that rationality is a more 
permissive notion than justification, then whatever the anti-skeptical case for 
our having justification, it will count more strongly for the counterpart views 
concerning the rationality of our beliefs and other epistemic attitudes. Even 
if rationality, as applied to beliefs, is significantly weaker than justification, it 
is still the kind of status skeptics tend to deny is ever achieved by our beliefs 
about the external world, the past, and many other things.
Perhaps viewing knowledge, justification, and rationality in the way I have 
might be thought to be an article of epistemological faith. I do not think it is; 
but the difficulty of determining whether it is partly an article of unverifiable 
faith, or can be established by cogent argument, or is more than the former 
yet less than the latter, is some testimony to the depth and complexity of 
skeptical problems.
Notes
	 1	 It does not strictly follow unless we define regularity to preclude the 
following kind of thing: the sun rises every day except every trillionth 
after the Earth came to be, where tomorrow is the trillionth.
	 2	 As noted in Chapter 5, the synthetic a priori might be necessary without 
being logically necessary in the strict sense; similarly, something can be a 
synthetically necessary falsehood (thus impossible, as is a round square), 
but not strictly logically impossible. 
	 3	 Epistemic possibility for us is sometimes characterized simply in terms 
of what is possible given what we know, but I think it is appropriate to 
include justification here, if only because we may be better able to tell by 
reflection on our current overall cognitive resources what we are justified 
in believing than what we know.

376  The nature and scope of justification and knowledge
	 4	 This should be taken to apply to non-formal validity: infallibility would 
be preserved by the inference from something’s being round to its not 
being square, but this is a case of synthetic a priori, as opposed to formal, 
entailment. 
	 5	 Reasons for doubting that we should posit such beliefs are given in my 
‘Dispositional Beliefs and Dispositions to Believe’, Noûs 28, 4 (1994) 
419–34. 
	 6	 We might perhaps think of the degree of justification in question here as 
knowledge-sufficing: the kind sufficient to render a true belief knowl-
edge, in the absence of the sorts of cases discussed in Chapter 10 show-
ing that justified true belief need not constitute knowledge. 
	 7	 I ignore here the point that I might have only situational justification 
for my conclusion if my believing it is not based on my believing my 
premises. Note 11 comments on this problem. 
	 8	 For extensive discussion of the kind of circularity problem in ques-
tion here see William P. Alston, ‘Epistemic Circularity’, Philosophy 
and Phenomenological Research 47 (1986), 1–30. Cf. Ernest Sosa, 
‘Philosophical Scepticism and Epistemic Circularity’, Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume 68 (1994), 263–90, followed 
by a response from Barry Stroud. 
	 9	 My thought here is that if you have some reason or ground for believing 
p, and you adequately understand the obvious entailment of q by p (as 
when q simply is not-p), then you have some ground or reason, even if 
not as good ground or reason, for believing q. To be sure, to have some 
ground or reason for the higher-order belief that you have this ground 
or reason you may well need justification for the higher-order belief that 
you do in fact have ground or reason to believe p. But this justification 
is commonly achieved in cases of or approaching peer disagreement. 
Detailed discussion of the epistemology of peer disagreement, includ-
ing references to recent literature, is provided in my ‘The Ethics of 
Belief: Rational Disagreement, Intellectual Responsibility, and Ethical 
Conduct’, in Quentin Smith (ed.), Epistemology: New Essays (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2008). 
	10	 The reference to evidence here must be taken to designate grounds of 
an internal kind, such as the “evidence of the senses.” For evidence con-
ceived as publicly accessible supporting fact, I am not suggesting that 
any one person is necessarily in a better position than another to appraise 
it, though we may still have a kind of intrinsic advantage in appraising 
our response to it. But for assessing rationality the central concern is the 
person’s experience, memory impressions, reflections, and other internal 
elements. 
	11	 I have not directly argued that there are justified beliefs. For I have not 
argued for the premise, apparently needed for his conclusion, that we 
are non-inferentially justified in believing that the relevant beliefs, such 
as the belief that there is something green before me, are based on the 

Skepticism II  377
visual impressions constituting one’s grounds for it. This basing is partly 
causal, and skeptics are likely to argue that justification for attributing 
causal propositions requires inductive, hence inferential, grounds. This 
is not self-evident, and I have challenged it in ‘Causalist Internalism’, 
American Philosophical Quarterly 26 (1989), 309–20, reprinted in my 
The Structure of Justification (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1993). In any case, even if I am not justified in believing that my external 
world belief is based on a sense impression, but only that I have the rel-
evant impression, I am justified in believing that I have this justification 
for the external world belief: we might say that I am entitled to hold it 
even though I may not hold it on the basis of my entitlement.


15	 Conclusion
Once again, I look at the grassy green field before me. A haze has obscured 
it, but the afternoon sun now streaming down on it puts it in clear view. Its 
shape and its shades of color are plainly in my sight. The birds are still sing-
ing. As I look at the spruce tree, I remember cutting the poison ivy vine from 
it. I recall its furry stem, and the recollection is so vivid that as the scene fills 
my consciousness, I seem almost to re-enter the past.
I cannot help having these experiences of color and shape and sound 
unless I deaden my senses to the world; and normally I cannot help forming 
beliefs as I perceive the world or look into my consciousness. I can walk away 
and change the external sources of my belief. But as we saw in exploring 
perception, we cannot entirely resist those sources. If my senses are open to 
my surroundings, I perceive them; if I perceive them, I tend to form beliefs 
about them, even if such perception does not entail forming them: beliefs 
about their colors and shapes, their sounds and scents and textures, and, if 
they have found a place in my memory, sometimes about their history.
These beliefs seem to arise directly from perceptions and through the 
recollections that surface from memory; they do not emerge by a process of 
inference from anything else I believe. I realize that such beliefs are fallible, 
and I understand the profound inclination toward skepticism that we can 
experience as we reflect on the significance of that fallibility. Still, I find no 
reason to doubt these everyday beliefs, and I am convinced that for the most 
part they are justified and constitute knowledge.
Our beliefs are countless and varied. A vast proportion of them are stored 
in memory, though beliefs do not originate there. As Chapter 2 brought out, 
memory preserves belief, but does not by itself normally produce it. It also 
preserves, but does not create, knowledge. Once I come to know through 
perception that the spruce is taller than the maple, I may know this from 
memory even when I have forgotten my evidence for it.
By contrast with its preservative role in relation to knowledge, memory 
is a basic source of justification. It can be the only present source of justi-
fication for many beliefs stored therein, beliefs whose original grounds are 
long forgotten. And, like sensory experience, memory can be deceptively 
generous in supplying justification. Just as sensory experience can mimic 

380  Conclusion
perception and thereby justify false beliefs about the external world, memo-
rial experience can mimic genuine recollection and thereby justify certain 
false beliefs which have the appearance of being memorially retained. I may 
later discover that despite their apparent memorial authenticity, they arose 
from wishful thinking.
These and other cases of justified false memory beliefs show that our 
justification for believing what is, so far as we can tell, grounded in memory 
is defeasible. Nonetheless, it is significantly strong. If we had good reason 
to believe it lacked a certain minimal strength, we would not be justified in 
trusting our memories without external evidence of their reliability; and it is 
doubtful that we could get enough such evidence if we could not trust our 
memory directly in at least some cases. To test my memory of the texture of 
the maple by going closer to it, for instance, I must retain the belief whose 
truth I am trying to confirm. If memory were not a basic source of justifica-
tion, we could never have a large enough store of justified beliefs to yield 
premises adequate for significant deductive and inductive extension of our 
justification. The scope of our justified belief would then be drastically nar-
rowed; and at least a great deal, and perhaps all, of our knowledge of the past, 
the future, and general empirical propositions would also be undermined.
If Chapter 1 concerns what might be called outer perception, Chapter 3 
explores what is sometimes called inner perception. When we look into our 
own consciousness, we find beliefs also arising in the same natural, seem-
ingly irresistible way in which they arise from outer perception. We have, 
however, far more control over the scenes and events that we experience only 
inwardly. I can blot out my sensations of color and shape only by closing my 
eyes, but I can dismiss my memorial image of the poison ivy vine at will and, 
just as directly, call up an image of the friend who helped me pull it down. 
In this respect—in relation to the will—beliefs, even about elements in pres-
ent our own consciousness, are more like perceptions than like images of 
memory and imagination. Even though I can at will cease imaging the vine, 
once I focus on this memory image, I cannot help believing that it represents 
something with a greenish cast, nor could I have come to believe this at will. 
The inner world, like the outer world, produces certain beliefs directly and 
irresistibly. And these beliefs tend to be justified and, often, to constitute 
knowledge.
If our only sources of knowledge and justification were perception, 
whether inner or outer, and memory, we would be at best impoverished. 
We can also turn our attention to abstract matters, even while our senses 
bombard us with impressions. Looking at the spruce and the maple and then 
further to the right where there is an apple tree at the side of the field, I real-
ize that they are so far apart that I cannot see by direct comparison whether 
the spruce is taller than the apple tree. But I can see that it is taller than the 
maple and that the maple is taller than the apple tree. Clearly, then, the spruce 
is taller than the apple tree. As stressed in Chapters 5 and 6, reason makes it 
obvious—and it is indeed intuitively obvious—that if the spruce is taller than 
the maple and the maple is taller than the apple tree then the spruce is taller 

Conclusion  381
than the apple. This belief is as natural, and would be no less difficult to resist 
when I vividly consider its propositional content than my belief that there 
is something blue before me when I squarely see the spruce. Clearly, this a 
priori belief is also justified, and it constitutes knowledge.
The experiences and reflections of individuals, even when well-preserved 
in their memories, are limited. There is a great deal we cannot know about 
the world without relying on others. Much of what we justifiedly believe 
and much of what we know is, in a sense, socially grounded: based on what 
others have said to us, whether in person or impersonally in their writings. 
Testimony, the central concern of Chapter 7, is a special source of justifica-
tion and knowledge. It often yields direct belief; yet unlike perception, it is 
not a basic source of belief. It does not yield belief apart from perception, 
since it must be received perceptually, as in listening or reading.
Testimony is, however, like memory and unlike perception in being unlim-
ited in the scope and subject matter of the propositions we can learn from it. 
To be sure, we might gain no justification from testimony if we had none 
deriving from a basic source. But we would have, at best, far less justification 
than we do if our only knowledge and justification came from basic sources, 
or even from basic sources and inferences from the propositions we believe 
on the basis of those sources.
Once we have beliefs directly grounded in one of the five common sources 
of non-inferential knowledge and justification—perception, memory, con-
sciousness, reason, and, secondarily but indispensably, testimony—we are 
in a position to extend whatever justification and knowledge we then have. 
Take a simple case. On the basis of my beliefs that the spruce is taller than the 
maple and that the maple is taller than the apple, together with my belief that 
if those things are so then the spruce is taller than the apple, I infer that the 
spruce is taller than the apple. I began with non-inferential beliefs grounded 
directly in basic sources of knowledge: perception and reason. By a spontane-
ous deductive inference, I extended both my knowledge and my justification. 
And when, on another occasion, I heard rapid knocking, believed it to sound 
like that of a woodpecker, and inferred that there was a woodpecker nearby, 
I extended my knowledge by inductive inference. Chapter 8 indicates how 
knowledge and justification can grow indefinitely in these ways. Inference 
has a virtually unlimited capacity to extend our outlook.
A picture has emerged. We are in almost constant interaction with the 
world, external and internal. We are regularly bombarded by sensation, often 
immersed in the stream of our consciousness, and sometimes occupied with 
the testimony of a friend or with our reflection on abstract matters, such as 
questions of philosophy, mathematics, or science. Beliefs are a natural prod-
uct of these engagements. They arise in perception, introspection, reflection, 
and testimony; they are preserved in memory; they are multiplied by infer-
ence. Many beliefs are grounded in the basic sources, or preserved, as non-
inferential beliefs, in memory; many other beliefs are inferentially grounded 
in these direct ones, in the ways detailed in Chapter 9.
This picture portrays two interconnected structures. One is constituted 

382  Conclusion
by foundational beliefs anchored in the bedrock of experience and reason, 
whether directly or through testimony that ultimately rests on it as well. The 
other is a superstructure of vast complexity built from the foundations by the 
building blocks of inference. The theory associated with this picture of our 
beliefs in relation to the world is psychological foundationalism. The picture 
is natural; and there is much to be said for the theory.
Once our psychology is understood in this structural fashion, another 
natural picture, similar to the first, emerges. The theory associated with this 
structural picture is epistemological foundationalism. I know that the spruce 
is taller than the apple tree. I know this on the basis of knowing that the 
spruce is taller than the maple and the maple is taller than the apple tree, 
together with the proposition that if this is so then the spruce is taller than 
the apple tree. I know that conditional proposition directly, through rational 
comprehension of it, and I know the other premise by sight. These two items 
of knowledge are foundations of my (non-basic) knowledge that the spruce 
is taller than the apple tree.
I do not readily see how to go any further in grounding my knowledge 
here; and even if I can go on, it is not clear how I could have knowledge at all 
if there were not some point or other at which my belief is connected with 
the reality in virtue of which it is true: the trees with their woody skeletons 
and colorful foliage; the apparently unchanging abstract relations grasped by 
reason.
Metaphorically, this epistemological picture portrays both knowledge and 
justification as grounded in looking and thereby in seeing. Perception looks 
outward, and through it we see the physical world. Memory looks backward, 
and through it we see the past, or at least some of our own past. Introspection 
looks inward, and through it we see the stream of our own consciousness. 
Reason looks beyond experience of the world of space and time, and through 
it we see concepts and their relations. Testimony, our chief social source 
of knowledge, looks to others and thereby draws, however indirectly, on 
all of these individual sources in those who convey their knowledge to us. 
Testimony enables us to see—though at one remove, through the attester’s 
eyes—virtually anything that an accurate person attests to. By attending to 
testimony we can look through any of the basic sources of knowledge and 
justification, as they have informed others, upon any subject matter they 
accurately describe to us.
The foundational pictures, both in epistemology and in psychology, have 
their appeal; yet we can imagine going further in the process of justification 
than they suggest we should. It may be natural to think that, at any given 
time, a chain of justification or knowledge will be anchored in the bedrock of 
experience or reason, just as its constituent beliefs apparently are—though, 
to be sure, the chains may be interconnected and, where one of them puts 
stress on another, broken or torn from their moorings. Coherentism chal-
lenges the foundationalist picture. Its proponents may grant that the picture 

Conclusion  383
fits our psychological make-up. But they view the structure of our knowledge 
and justified belief differently.
Coherentists see the structure of our knowledge and justified belief as 
something like a vast fabric of interlocking fibers. Some of these may be con-
nected to experience, but those are not privileged in generating knowledge or 
justification. True beliefs constitute knowledge when they are suitably woven 
into the whole fabric, which, in turn, must hold together in a systematic way. 
Justification is also a matter of how beliefs are connected with the rest of the 
fabric. A belief that is a largely isolated strand, for instance one that is not 
inferentially based on any other belief or even significantly connected with 
any other in subject matter, would not be justified.
This and other coherentist pictures can also have powerful appeal, par-
ticularly in understanding the process of justification, in which we com-
monly try to show that a belief is justified by connecting it with others that 
support it and thereby cohere with it. But the process of justification should 
not dominate our understanding of what it is for a belief simply to be jus-
tified—to have the property of justifiedness. Moreover, when it comes to 
knowledge, which entails truth, the coherence picture is less plausible. For 
indefinitely many fabrics can have internally coherent patterns; and coher-
entism—unless alloyed with foundationalist elements—does not require 
that any of the strands be anchored to the world, whether in perception or 
introspection or in any other way. Why, then, should we expect a coherent 
set of beliefs to contain truths that represent the world, or when it does, to 
embody knowledge?
Indeed, if a belief’s being justified counts in some way toward its truth, 
then why should coherence alone be the basis of justification, given that 
coherence by itself implies nothing about truth? Furthermore, self-evident 
propositions, say that if no vixens are males then no males are vixens, seem 
such that we need only understand them to be able to know or justifiably 
believe them. Even if possessing this knowledge and justification implies 
having a measure of coherence in one’s cognitive system, how might knowl-
edge or justification, whether of this kind or any other, derive from coher-
ence? There are plausible attempts to provide answers, but I have seen no 
clear success in doing so. Whether the structure of knowledge is foundational 
or not, I may know such things as that there is a cold glass in my hand and 
that there is rapid knocking nearby.
But what is knowledge?
This dauntingly simple question is the focus of Chapters 10 and 11. My 
knowing that, say, there is rapid knocking may seem to be simply my jus-
tifiably and truly believing this. But it is not. Through some remarkable 
coincidence, I could be hallucinating such a knocking while my ears, quite 
unbeknownst to me, are temporarily blocked. Given such veridical hallu-
cination, I could have a justified true belief which is not knowledge. The 
suggested account of knowledge as justified true belief is, then, too broad. It 

384  Conclusion
also seems too narrow. For there might be knowledge without justification, 
as with someone who, by virtue of a stable cognitive capacity, unerringly 
computes difficult arithmetic results with lightning speed, but is unaware of 
the success and is not (at first) justified in believing the answers.
We can strengthen our requirements on justification to deal with the 
true belief based on hallucination, and we can weaken them to deal with 
the arithmetic success of the lightning calculator. But it is not evident that 
this strategy will yield a correct and illuminating account of knowledge. We 
can bypass the concept of justification as a central element in understand-
ing knowledge and try to account for knowledge by appeal to the notion of 
reliably grounded true belief. But it is not clear that this approach will fully 
succeed either, and it certainly leaves us with the problem of explaining why 
justification, which need not figure in the approach, has the close connection 
to knowledge which it apparently does have.
Moreover, justification is epistemologically important in its own right, 
and reliability theories seem less likely to succeed in accounting for justi-
fication than for knowledge. This is at least in part because the grounds of 
justification seem internal in a way the grounds of knowledge, or at least 
some of them, do not. We may, however, say at least this: that knowledge is 
true belief based in the right way on the right kind of ground. Justification 
or reliability or both may be essential to adequately filling out this idea; and 
although it is not clear just how it is to be filled out, many of the important 
elements can be gathered from what we have seen in this book concerning the 
sources, development, structure, and analysis of knowledge.
However we analyze what knowledge is, there remains the question of 
how much of it, if any, we have. The question is particularly important in its 
bearing on the major domains that concern Chapter 12: the scientific, the 
ethical, and the religious. It is sometimes thought that we have a wealth of 
scientific knowledge, as well as knowledge of certain moral principles and 
some knowledge of religious truths. But if what passes for scientific knowl-
edge is often not, strictly speaking, true—or might be utterly rejected in 
the future—may we really say that there is scientific knowledge? If moral 
principles should turn out to be neither clearly grounded in experience nor 
plausibly regarded as a priori, on what basis might they be known? And if, as 
many philosophers think, there are no cogent arguments for God’s existence 
and, in addition, God is not directly knowable through the experiential or 
rational sources that ground knowledge, how can there be knowledge of 
God?
These questions are very difficult. But we are warranted in giving some 
partial answers to them. Consider the scientific, moral, and religious domains 
in turn.
First, although some of what is termed scientific knowledge is no doubt 
mistakenly so called because it is far from the truth, there may be some 
propositions that are scientifically known though not precisely true, and 
in any case we may speak of approximate scientific knowledge in which 

Conclusion  385
the proposition in view is not precisely true, but also not grossly inaccu-
rate. Moreover, perhaps we may sometimes speak unqualifiedly of scientific 
knowledge, even if this knowledge is only of approximations. We may appar-
ently speak so when the truth known is not precisely formulated, but holds 
within the limits of its intended application. The degree of inaccuracy within 
which we may speak in these ways is not sharply specifiable. But particu-
larly when a scientific proposition yields true predictions, helps to explain 
other apparently true propositions, and approximates a more accurate, true 
proposition, we may be justified in thinking we know it and correct in call-
ing it approximate knowledge. However we describe scientific knowledge, it 
should not in general be considered to result from proof, and indeed ‘proof’ 
is misleading if applied to propositions for which our evidence is inductive, 
as scientific evidence typically is. This point calls for fallibilism as an attitude 
but not for skepticism as a stance.
Second, although even our most plausible moral principles are neither 
obviously knowable a priori nor obviously knowable empirically, rationalist 
and empiricist conceptions of moral knowledge are each defensible for some 
moral principles. Indeed, neither conception of moral knowledge has been 
refuted despite sustained ingenious attempts to discredit them. Moreover, 
once we cast aside the common stereotype of scientific knowledge as rep-
resenting chiefly a body of facts and laws discoverable by simple inductive 
generalization, or rigorously provable by observations, the contrast between 
well-confirmed scientific beliefs and reflectively grounded moral beliefs 
appears less sharp. It now becomes far more difficult to discredit the view 
that there is moral knowledge by unfavorably contrasting moral beliefs with 
scientific ones, as if scientific generalizations were straightforwardly “hard” 
and moral principles unalterably “soft.” We should not conclude, then, that 
there is no moral knowledge. Indeed, a plausible case can be made for the  
view that there are some basic moral principles that are intuitively knowable 
and broadly self-evident. Even apart from that, it is far from clear that we 
should adopt either moral skepticism about moral statements or the non­
cognitivist view that there are no moral propositions to be known or justi-
fiedly believed in the first place.
Third, in the religious domain the possibility of knowledge and justifica-
tion may also be defended. Even if it is true that no argument for theism is 
decisive, it should be remembered that a diverse group of independent but 
individually inconclusive arguments may, if they are mutually supporting in a 
certain way and if each provides some degree of justification for a conclusion, 
together justify that conclusion even if none by itself does. It has not been 
established that this point could not apply in the case of arguments for the 
existence of God. In any event, discussions of the question of justified reli-
gious belief and possible religious knowledge should not simply assume the 
evidentialist view that such propositions can be known or justifiedly believed 
only inferentially, on the basis of further beliefs expressing evidence for the 
theistic propositions in question. One or another kind of religious experience 

386  Conclusion
might provide non-inferential grounds of justification, or of knowledge, or of 
both, somewhat in the way familiar kinds of perception do.
There are, to be sure, many important differences between the religious 
and perceptual cases, and what we have seen does not show either that there 
is or that there is not some direct knowledge of theistic propositions or direct 
justification for believing some of them. But apparently, even if there cannot 
be directly justified beliefs of them, there could be direct knowledge of them. 
Even supposing, however, that there could be neither theistic knowledge 
nor justified theistic beliefs, there might be rational theistic beliefs: beliefs 
a rational person with a certain range of experience may hold, even without 
having the kinds of specific grounds, or as strong grounds, as are needed 
for justification. The case for the possibility of rational theistic beliefs, then, 
is stronger than the case for the possibility of their justification. Moreover, 
not all religious faith entails belief. Faith that p (say that God is sovereign 
in the universe) may be non-doxastic: it does not entail belief that p, though 
it is inconsistent with disbelieving it. When non-doxastic faith is in ques-
tion, it is especially important to see that the baseline for rationality is both 
more permissive than for justification and more permissive than for rational 
belief with the same content as the faith. On two counts, then, skepticism 
in religious epistemology needs a stronger case than is usually thought: one 
strong enough to defeat grounds for rational, as distinct from justified, cog-
nition—whether faith or belief or some other propositional attitude—and 
far-reaching enough to undermine non-doxastic faith as distinct from belief-
entailing faith, which requires stronger grounds.
Powerful skeptical arguments threaten the view that our knowledge 
includes as much as Chapter 12 suggests. They threaten even the common-
sense view that we have some knowledge of the external world, the past, 
the future, and the inner lives of others. Chapters 13 and 14 are devoted to 
appraising some major skeptical arguments. When we realize that our beliefs 
concerning these domains are clearly fallible, we can begin to appreciate 
skeptical views. Even our sense that, whether or not we have knowledge, we 
do have justified beliefs weakens if we take seriously the possibility that what 
we accept as justification is no final guarantee of truth. But the common 
skeptical commitment to the ideal of infallible belief as central to knowledge 
is not warranted by careful inquiry into the nature of knowledge.
Infallibility may be a reasonable ideal for proof, conceived as decisively 
demonstrating a conclusion from rock-solid premises, such as self-evident 
truths or, on the empirical side, propositions about the believer’s immediate 
consciousness. For one cannot decisively prove something—or demonstrate 
it, to use a term that sometimes has wider scope—from insecure premises, 
or by making merely inductive and hence fallible steps from even the most 
trustworthy premises. But why should proof be our standard of the kind 
of justification (or even for a kind of certainty) appropriate to knowledge? 
We are not talking about what is required to show conclusively that there is 
knowledge, but about whether there in fact is any.

Conclusion  387
If, however, we think that there is knowledge, and the skeptic challenges 
us, we want to show that there is. But we must not confuse—or allow skep-
tics to confuse—the requirements for showing that there is knowledge with 
the requirements for the existence of it. Perhaps it can be shown that there 
is knowledge. Certainly, if we want to argue for this, we need not accept 
the idea that showing something to be true is equivalent to proving it. But 
even if it cannot be shown that there is knowledge or justified belief, it does 
not follow that there is none. It also does not follow that we do not have 
something less difficult to achieve than justified belief, though significant in 
most of the same ways: belief that is rational.
But there surely is knowledge and justified belief. I justifiedly believe, 
indeed I know, that that green field lies before me. Those bird songs are 
not fantasy. My stream of thoughts is in unmistakably clear focus. Even my 
recollection that I cut a vine from the spruce tree is clear and steadfast. I 
am justified in believing that I did, and surely I know this. We all have a 
huge store of beliefs of these and other kinds, including countless beliefs 
originally formed through testimony. These beliefs form a structure of great 
complexity, with innumerable changing elements that reflect our continuing 
experience and thought, our actions and emotions, our learning and forget-
ting, our inferring and accepting, our revising and rejecting, our speaking 
and listening. That structure is grounded in us: in our memories, our habits 
of thought, our mental and perceptual capacities, our rational nature.
Knowledge of the truths of reason arises within the structure itself, once 
we have the needed concepts. Through our consciousness of what is inside of 
us, and our perceptual engagement with what is outside of us, with the social 
world as well as our physical environment, this structure is anchored, both 
internally and externally, to the world. That vast and various reality is at once 
the ultimate source and the object of our empirical knowledge.


Short annotated bibliography of books 
in epistemology
Alston, William P., Epistemic Justification, Ithaca, 1989. A collection of papers cen-
tering on justification and knowledge in a way that unites internalist and external-
ist elements. Especially relevant to Chapters 1, 2, and 7–11.
——, Perceiving God: The Epistemology of Religious Experience, Ithaca, 1991. A 
major study in religious epistemology, also containing much general epistemol-
ogy, particularly in the theory of perception. Highly relevant to Chapters 1, 2, 
and 12.
——, Beyond “Justification,” Ithaca, 2005. An account of the various elements a 
sound epistemology should take into account. Relevant especially to Chapters 1, 
2, and 11.
Aristotle, Posterior Analytics, trans. by G.R.G. Mure, Oxford, 1928. A major text of 
immense influence. Especially relevant to Chapter 9.
Armstrong, D.M., Belief, Truth and Knowledge, Cambridge, 1973. A wide-ranging 
epistemological essay influential in the reliabilist tradition. Especially pertinent 
to Chapters 1–3 and 9–11.
Audi, Robert, The Structure of Justification, Cambridge and New York, 1993. A col-
lection of papers covering (and often clarifying) most of the topics in Chapters 
4, 6–8, and 10–14.
——, The Architecture of Reason, Oxford and New York, 2001. A comprehensive 
theory of rationality, practical as well as theoretical; explicates in detail the nature 
of justification by comparison with rationality; offers an account of the role of 
experience in grounding both; and applies some of its epistemological results to 
the foundations of ethics. Particularly relevant to Chapters 1, 4, 10, and 12.
——, The Good in the Right: A Theory of Intuition and Intrinsic Value, Princeton, 
2004. A statement and defense of an intuitionist ethics, with much discussion of 
intuition, self-evidence, and moral knowledge. Relevant mainly to Chapters 5, 6, 
10, and 12.
Aune, Bruce, Knowledge of the External World, London, 1991. A historically oriented, 
integrated treatment of empirical knowledge. Bears particularly on Chapters 1, 2, 
10, and 11.
Austin, J.L., Sense and Sensibilia, Oxford, 1979 (reprint). A study of perception 
particularly pertinent to the appraisal of sense-datum theory and of relevance to 
understanding foundationalism. Especially relevant to Chapters 1, 2, and 9.
Ayer, A.J., The Problem of Knowledge, Harmondsworth, 1956. An epistemological 
survey in the empiricist tradition. Especially relevant to Chapters 1, 2, 8, 10, and 
11.

390  Bibliography
Bergmann, Michael, Justification without Awareness, Oxford and New York, 2006. 
This book defends an externalist theory of justification with intensive scrutiny of 
internalist awareness conditions for justification and a development of a proper-
function view of justification and knowledge. Highly relevant to Chapters 11 and 
12.
Berkeley, George, A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge, New 
York, 1929 (originally published in 1710). Perhaps the most important statement 
of phenomenalism, and of an idealist world view in general, in the empiricist tradi-
tion. Bears particularly on Chapters 1–3, 8, 9, and 10.
Bernecker, Sven, Memory: A Philosophical Study, Oxford and New York, 2009. A 
detailed presentation of a theory of memory and its role in knowledge and justifi-
cation. Highly relevant to Chapters 3, 10, and 11.
Boghossian, Paul and Peacocke, Christopher (eds.), New Essays on the A Priori, 
Oxford and New York, 2000. A collection of professional papers on epistemo-
logical, metaphysical, and logical and semantic aspects of the a priori, with an 
introduction by the editors and separate chapters by each. Pertinent above all to 
Chapters 4–5.
BonJour, Laurence, The Structure of Empirical Knowledge, Cambridge, MA, 1985. 
A detailed and widely discussed statement and defense of coherentism regarding 
empirical knowledge. Especially pertinent to Chapters 1, 2, 8, 9, and 10.
——, In Defense of Pure Reason, Cambridge and New York, 1998. An account of 
a priori justification and knowledge, with detailed critical discussions of Kant’s 
position on them and of Hume on induction. Highly pertinent to Chapters 5, 6, 
and 10.
——, Epistemology: Classical Problems and Contemporary Responses, 2nd edn, 
Lanham, MD, 2009. An introductory book covering most (though not all) of the 
major topics treated in this book and defending a different though overlapping 
view of perceptual justification.
Brandt, R.B. and Nagel, Ernest (eds.), Meaning and Knowledge, New York, 1965. A 
comprhensive, historically informed assembly of classical and recent readings in 
epistemology. Bears on all the chapters.
Butchvarov, Panayot, The Concept of Knowledge, Evanston, IL, 1970. A metaphysi-
cally oriented, foundationalist inquiry into the nature of knowledge. Especially 
pertinent to Chapters 1, 2, 4, and 8-10.
——, Skepticism in Ethics, Bloomington, IN, 1989. A detailed study of the possibility 
and possible extent of justification and knowledge in ethics. Particularly relevant 
to Chapters 12–14.
——, Skepticism and the External World, Oxford and New York, 1998. An account of 
skepticism and its implications for a realist metaphysics, with a distinctive theory 
of the role of decision in determining the extent of our knowledge. Most closely 
pertinent to Chapters 11, 13, and 14.
Chisholm, R.M., Theory of Knowledge, 2nd and 3rd edns, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 
1977 and 1989. A rigorous treatment of many basic topics in the field, and an 
introduction to Chisholm’s own epistemological views. Relevant to each chapter.
——, The Foundations of Knowing, Minneapolis, 1982. A collection of essays, on 
topics relevant to each chapter, by one of the major epistemologists of the twen-
tieth century.
Chisholm, R.M. and Swartz, Robert (eds.), Empirical Knowledge, Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ, 1973. A large collection of influential epistemological writings. Especially 
pertinent to Chapters 1, 2, 3, and 7–10.

Bibliography  391
Coady, C.A.J., Testimony, Oxford, 1992. A comprehensive, historically wide-rang-
ing treatment of testimony that links it at many points with the philosophy of 
language and the views of Wittgenstein. Pertinent above all to Chapter 7.
Craig, Edward, Knowledge and the State of Nature, Oxford, 1990. A sophisticated 
but lucid and concrete treatment of the problem of analyzing knowledge, with 
considerable attention to skepticism and far more on testimony than most general 
books on epistemology. Particularly relevant to Chapters 7, 11, and 13.
Crumley, Jack S. II, An Introduction to Epistemology, 2nd edn, Petrboro, Ontario, 
2009. A wide-ranging but concise introduction to both the problems and litera-
ture of the field. Pertinent to nearly every chapter.
—— (ed.), Readings in Epistemology, Mountainview, CA, 1999. A comprehensive 
collection of mainly contemporary readings in the field, with introductions to 
each section. Bears on each chapter.
Dancy, Jonathan, Sosa, Ernest, and Matthias Steup (eds.), A Companion to 
Epistemology, 2nd edn, Oxford, 1992. A comprehensive reference work of short, 
dictionary- and encyclopedia-style articles. Highly pertinent to every chapter.
DePaul, Michael R. and Ramsey, William (eds.), Rethinking Intuition: The Psychology 
of Intuition and its Role in Philosophical Inquiry, Lanham, MD, 1998. A collection 
of papers by philosophers and psychologists on the nature of intuition, with per-
tinent discussion of recent psychological studies of reasoning. Especially relevant 
to Chapters 4, 5, and 12 but also useful in understanding philosophical method 
in general.
DeRose, Keith, The Case for Contextualism, Oxford and New York, 2009. A detailed 
account of contextualism with attention to many variants and a partial theory of 
the importance of the view for skepticism. Especially relevant to Chapters 11, 13, 
and 14.
DeRose, Keith and Warfield, Ted A. (eds.), Skepticism: A Contemporary Reader, 
Oxford and New York, 1999. A collection of recent writings that concern skepti-
cism particularly in the context of questions about contextual variables, meaning, 
self-knowledge, and transmission of justification. Highly pertinent to Chapters 
8, 11, 13, and 14.
Descartes, René, Meditations on First Philosophy, in vol. 2 of The Philosophical 
Writings of Descartes, trans. by John Cottingham, Robert Stoothof, and Dugald 
Murdoch, Cambridge, 1984 (originally published in 1641). One of the greatest and 
most influential works in modern epistemology, and a powerful statement of both 
rationalism and foundationalism. Bears on every chapter.
Dretske, Fred I., Seeing and Knowing, London, 1969. An intensive study of percep-
tion and its relation to empirical knowledge, with an influential defense of the 
notion of non-epistemic seeing. Especially relevant to Chapters 1, 2, and 11–14.
——, Knowledge and the Flow of Information, Cambridge, MA, 1981. A major state-
ment of a reliabilist, information-theoretic account of knowledge. Particularly 
pertinent to Chapters 1, 8, and 10.
Everitt, Nicholas and Fisher, Alec, Modern Epistemology, New York, 1995. A high-
level introductory textbook with special attention to mathematical and logical 
knowledge and detailed discussions of Quine (a major influence on the authors) 
and Rorty. Pertinent to most chapters, but especially Chapters 5, 6, and 8.
Fales, Evan, A Defense of the Given, Lanham, MD, 1966. A defense of the view that 
justification is conferred by what is given in immediate experience, with detailed 
applications to the foundationalism conceived as a plausible theory that makes use 
of the given. Pertinent to Chapters 1, 2, and 9.

392  Bibliography
Feldman, Richard, Epistemology, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2003. An Introductory 
treatment relevant mainly to Parts One and Three and especially to Chapters 10 
and 11.
Fogelin, Robert, Pyrrhonian Reflections on Knowledge and Justification, Oxford and 
New York, 1994. An intensive and sympathetic inquiry into skepticism, from a 
distinctively Pyrrhonian point of view. Relevant above all to Chapters 13 and 14.
Foley, Richard, The Theory of Epistemic Rationality, Cambridge, MA, 1987. A 
detailed development of a subjectivistic theory of justification. Pertinent mainly 
to Parts Two and Three.
——, Working without a Net, Cambridge, MA, 1993. A development and generaliza-
tion of his theory of epistemic rationality. Especially relevant to Chapters 11–14.
Fumerton, Richard A., Metaphysical and Epistemological Problems of Perception, 
Lincoln, NE, 1985. A study of both the nature of the objects of perception and 
the way perception yields justification and knowledge. Especially pertinent to 
Chapters 1, 2, and 10.
——, Metaepistemology and Skepticism, Lanham, MD, 1996. A systematic treatment 
of skepticism with special reference to the controversies between internalism and 
eternalism and foundationalism and coherentism. Highly relevant to Chapters 11 
and 12–14.
Ginet, Carl, Knowledge, Perception, and Memory, Dordrecht and Boston, 1975. A rig-
orous high-level study of these three notions in relation to each other. Particularly 
relevant to Chapters 1–3 and 11–14.
Goldman, Alan H., Empirical Knowledge, Berkeley, CA, 1988. A detailed presenta-
tion of a theory of knowledge and evidence with special emphasis on inference to 
the best explanation. Pertinent above all to Chapters 1 and 9–14.
Goldman, Alvin I., Epistemology and Cognition, Cambridge, MA, 1986. A presen-
tation of reliabilism for justification and knowledge, with much discussion of 
related developments in cognitive psychology. Particularly relevant to Chapters 
1, 3, 8, 10, and 11.
——, Knowledge in a Social World, Oxford and New York, 1999. A wide-ranging 
treatment of epistemology in the context of social elements in its development, 
with much discussion of the nature and structure of knowledge in such domains 
as science, law, and education. Bears on many chapters, particularly 7 and 12.
——, Pathways of Knowledge, Oxford and New York, 2002. A concise treatment of a 
number of the topics treated in this book.
Greco, John, Putting Skeptics in Their Place, Cambridge and New York, 2000. An 
examination of the structure of skeptical arguments which contends that taking 
account of them requires an externalist epistemology and that a version of virtue 
epistemology deals best with knowledge and skepticism. Particularly pertinent to 
Chapters 1, 10, 13, and 14.
Greco, John and Sosa, Ernest, The Blackwell Guide to Epistemology, Oxford, 1999. A 
book of commissioned papers aimed at providing high-level examinations of the 
current status of major epistemological issues. Pertinent to every chapter.
Haack, Susan, Evidence and Inquiry, Oxford, 1993. An attempt to combine the best 
elements in foundationalism and coherentism, with special attention to the con-
nections between epistemology and philosophy of science. Bears especially on 
Chapters 8, 9, and 12.
Hamlyn, David, Understanding Perception, Aldershot, 1996. A monograph on 

Bibliography  393
perception and its relation to belief, learning, consciousness, and other notions 
important in this book. Highly relevant to Chapters 1, 2, and 4.
Harman, Gilbert, Thought, Princeton, NJ, 1975. A broad, influential study of the 
nature of knowledge, with much attention to defeasibility conditions, inferential 
transmission of knowledge, and the role of coherence in justification. Bears espe-
cially on Chapters 1, 3, and 8–11.
——, Change in View, Cambridge, MA, 1986. A detailed study of evidence and jus-
tification as bearing on changing, as opposed to simply holding, a position, with 
special emphasis on the conditions for coherence in one’s overall view. Especially 
relevant to Chapters 8–11.
——, Reasoning, Meaning, and Mind, Oxford and New York, 1999. A collection of 
papers presenting large-scale conceptions of the a priori, reasoning, and knowl-
edge; it helpfully contrasts with the perspectives in Chapters 5, 8, and 9.
Hawthorne, John, Knowledge and Lotteries, Oxford and New York, 2004. A study of 
the lottery problem and the conditions for the transmission of knowledge, with 
direct bearing on Chapter 8 and relevance to Chapters 10–14.
Heatherington, Stephen Cade, Knowledge Puzzles, Boulder, CO, 1996. A brief but 
comprehensive introduction to epistemology with emphasis on the puzzles gener-
ated by many of its central questions. One or another section bears on any given 
chapter.
Heil, John, Perception and Cognition, Berkeley, CA, 1983. A study of perception in 
relation to belief, with discussions linking epistemology to philosophy of mind. 
Especially pertinent to Chapters 1, 2, 4, and 10.
Hintikka, Jaakko, Knowledge and Belief, Ithaca, NY, 1962. A rigorous, advanced 
study in epistemic logic. Particularly relevant to Chapters 8 and 10.
Huemer, Michael, Skepticism and the Veil of Perception, Lanham, MD, 2001. A 
critical, historically informed analysis of skepticism about perceptual knowledge, 
with a detailed response in the foundationalist, realist tradition. Highly pertinent 
to Chapters 1, 2, 9, and 10.
—— (ed.), Epistemology: Contemporary Readings, London, 2002. A large, wide-
ranging collection of classical and contemporary papers and book selections. It 
is designed to complement this book and has at least several readings pertinent 
to every chapter, as well as introductions to each major section by Huemer and 
useful study questions for each reading.
Hume, David, A Treatise of Human Nature, Oxford, 1888 (originally published in 
1739). One of the greatest and most influential works in modern philosophy, and 
a powerful statement of empiricism. It bears on every chapter.
——, An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, Indianapolis, 1977 (first pub-
lished in 1748). A major work in modern epistemology, particularly for the topics 
of causation, induction, and skepticism. Especially relevant to Chapters 1, 2, 10, 
and 11.
Kant, Immanuel, Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics, trans. by Lewis White 
Beck, New York, 1950 (originally published in 1783). A short presentation of the 
ideas in Kant’s monumental Critique of Pure Reason, one of the greatest texts in 
modern philosophy. The Prolegomena bears particularly on Chapters 1, 5, 6, 10, 
and 13.
Kitcher, Philip, The Nature of Mathematical Knowledge, Oxford, 1984. A wide-rang-
ing, historically informed treatment of mathematical knowledge, with a sustained 

394  Bibliography
critique of various apriorist conceptions of it and an account of a “defensible 
empiricism.” Particularly relevant to Chapters 4 and 5.
Klein, Peter, Certainty: A Refutation of Scepticism, Minneapolis, 1981. A rigorous 
treatment of the nature of knowledge, certainty, and skepticism. Especially perti-
nent to Chapters 8 and 10–14.
Kvanvig, Jonathan L., The Intellectual Virtues and the Life of the Mind, Lanham, MD, 
1992. A detailed statement and critical appraisal of a virtue epistemology, relevant 
mainly to Chapters 1, 10, and 11.
—— (ed.), Warrant in Contemporary Epistemology: Essays in Honor of Plantinga’s 
Epistemology, Lanham, MD, 1996. A collection of commissioned papers on the 
warrant approach developed by Plantinga and related topics. Bears particularly on 
Chapters 10 and 11.
Kyburg, Henry E., Jr., Epistemology and Inference, Minneapolis, 1983. A collection 
of advanced papers, of which several are especially pertinent to Chapters 10–12.
Lackey, Jennifer, Learning from Words: Testimony as a Source of Knowledge, Oxford 
and New York, 2008. A comprehensive theory of the nature and epistemological 
significance of testimony. Particularly pertinent to Chapters 7 and 11.
Lackey, Jennifer and Sosa, Ernest (eds.), The Epistemology of Testimony, Oxford and 
New York, 2006. Contains contemporary essays squarely relevant to Chapter 7 
and bearing on Chapters 11 and 12.
Lehrer, Keith, Knowledge, Oxford, 1974. A critique of foundationalism and develop-
ment of the author’s own coherentist theory of knowledge, with a detailed, non-
causal account of justification. Particularly relevant to Chapters 1, 4, and 9–11.
——, Theory of Knowledge, Boulder, CO, 1990. A successor to his Knowledge that 
presents a revised theory and remains relevant to Chapters 1, 4, and 9–11.
Lewis, C.I., An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation, La Salle, IL, 1946. A systematic 
study, in the foundationalist tradition, of many major epistemological and meta-
physical questions. Especially relevant to Chapters 1–6 and 7–11.
Locke, Don, Memory, New York, 1971. A concise but wide-ranging treatment of 
memory and memorial knowledge. Bears mainly on Chapter 3.
Locke, John, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, New York, 1928 (origi-
nally published in 1689). A major text in modern epistemology, and a powerful 
statement of a commonsense empiricism. Bears on each chapter.
Luper-Foy, Stephen, The Possibility of Knowledge: Nozick and His Critics, Lanham, 
MD, 1987. A set of papers discussing above all Nozick’s tracking account of 
knowledge and its bearing on skepticism. Relevant especially to Chapters 8, 10, 
and 11.
Lycan, William, Judgment and Justification, New York, 1988. An account of justi-
fication and of aspects of knowledge, with emphasis on their connection with 
the notion of explanation and with selected topics in the philosophy of mind. 
Especially relevant to Chapters 1, 2, and 8–11.
Lyons, Jack C., Perception and Basic Beliefs: Zombies, Modules, and the Problem of the 
External World, Oxford and New York, 2009. A monographic, psychologically 
informed study of perception defending a reliabilistic account of its nature and 
role in grounding knowledge. Relevant especially to Chapters 1, 2, 8, and 11–14.
McGrew, Timothy J., The Foundations of Knowledge, Lanham, MD, 1995. A system-
atic defense of foundationalism (strong as opposed to moderate); relevant mainly 
to Chapters 1, 5, 8, and 9.
Malcolm, Norman, Knowledge and Certainty, Ithaca, NY, 1975. A collection of 

Bibliography  395
epistemological essays by a leading proponent of the philosophy of Wittgenstein. 
Especially relevant to Chapters 1–4, 10, and 12.
Mill, John Stuart, A System of Logic, London, 1843. The leading nineteenth-century 
statement of radical empiricism. Especially relevant to Chapters 1, 2, and 6.
Montmarquet, James A., Epistemic Virtue and Doxastic Responsibility, Lanham, MD, 
1993. A statement and appraisal of a virtue epistemology with special emphasis 
on the relation between justification and intellectual responsibility. Especially 
relevant to Chapters 1, 10, and 11.
Morton, Adam, A Guide through the Theory of Knowledge, 3rd edn, Oxford, 2002. A 
brief but moderately comprehensive introduction, with more on probability and 
induction than many short books of the same range. Pertinent to nearly every 
chapter.
Moser, Paul K., Knowledge and Evidence, Cambridge and New York, 1993. A rig-
orous and detailed presentation of an account of knowledge and the nature and 
scope of its supporting grounds. Especially pertinent to Chapters 1, 2, and 9–11.
——, Philosophy after Objectivity, Oxford and New York, 1993. A rigorous treatment 
of the relation of realism to skepticism and of both to semantic questions about 
meaning and epistemological questions about evidence, reasons, and justification. 
Especially pertinent to Chapters 5, 6, and 10–12.
—— (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Epistemology, Oxford and New York, 2002. A 
collection of wide-ranging papers covering central issues and developments in 
most of the main the areas treated in this book.
Moser, Paul K. and van der Nat, Arnold (eds.), Human Knowledge, 2nd edn, New 
York, 1995. An extensive set of classical and contemporary readings, with editors’ 
introductions to each section. Pertinent to every chapter.
Moser, Paul K., Mulder, Dwayne H., and Trout, J.D. (eds.), The Theory of Knowledge, 
Oxford, 1998. A brief introduction covering many of the topics in this book and 
especially pertinent to understanding the relation between epistemology and 
philosophy of science. Bears on most chapters.
Nathan, N.M.L., The Price of Doubt, London, 2000. A systematic treatment of 
skepticism, with much examination of the notion of evidence and rational belief. 
Pertinent especially to Chapters 10, 11, 13, and 14.
Neta, Ram, and Pritchard, Duncan (eds.), Arguing about Knowledge, London and 
New York, 2009. A comprehensive anthology covering most of the topics in this 
book and with editorial introductions to each of its many sections.
Niiniluoto, Ilkka, Matti Sintonen, and Jan Wolenski (eds.), Handbook of Epistemology, 
Dordrecht, 2004. A large collection of essays on the major areas of epistemology 
by. Pertinent to every chapter.
Nozick, Robert, Philosophical Explanations, Cambridge, MA, 1981. Contains a 
book-length epistemology section bearing on Chapters 9–11, 13, and 14.
Pappas, George S. and Swain, Marshall, Essays on Knowledge and Justification, 
Ithaca, NY, 1978. A collection of papers, many influential, mainly from profes-
sional journals. Especially relevant to Chapters 1 and 10–14.
Peacocke, Christopher, Being Known, Oxford, 1999. A philosophical treatment of 
knowledge, especially self-knowledge, in relation to central issues in philosophy 
of language and metaphysics, particularly intentionality, representation, and 
truth. Highly pertinent to Chapters 3, 4, 10, and 11.
Plantinga, Alvin, Warrant and Proper Function, Oxford and New York, 1993. A 
systematic development of a theory of warrant as to what renders true belief 

396  Bibliography
knowledge and of key epistemic concepts related to warrant. Particularly relevant 
to Chapters 1, 5, 6, and 10–14.
——, Warrant: The Current Debate, Oxford and New York, 1993. A critical study of 
many major epistemological theories. Highly relevant to Chapters 8–14.
Plato, Theaetetus, trans. by F.M. Cornford, Cambridge, 1934. A major text in the 
history of epistemology. Especially relevant to Chapter 10.
Pojman, Louis P. (ed.), Knowledge: Classic and Contemporary Readings, Belmont, 
CA, 1993. A large collection, with introductions to each section. Relevant to 
every chapter.
——, What Can We Know?, 2nd edn, Belmont, CA, 2001. A wide-ranging, highly 
readable, historically informed introduction with attention both to basic issues 
and to classical and contemporary literature. Pertinent to every chapter.
Pollock, John L., Knowledge and Justification, Princeton, 1974. A systematic, wide-
ranging treatment of these notions which develops a foundationalist account of 
both. It bears on all the chapters.
Price, H.H., Perception, Oxford, 1932. A detailed major study of the topic, with 
important discussions of sense-data. Especially relevant to Chapters 1, 2, 10, and 
11.
Pritchard, Duncan, Epistemic Luck, Oxford and New York, 2005. An exploration of 
how knowledge must be conceived given an understanding of the sense in which 
it may not be due to luck and of how the resulting conception bears on skepticism. 
Particularly pertinent to Chapters, 10, 11, and 13.
Quine, W.V., The Pursuit of Truth, revised edn, Cambridge, MA, 1992. A short 
statement of many of Quine’s epistemological views, with valuable discussions 
connecting epistemology with the philosophy of science. The chapters devoted to 
evidence, meaning, perception, and truth make it especially pertinent to Chapters 
1, 5, 6, 10, and 12.
Quine, W.V. and Ullian, Joseph, The Web of Belief, 2nd edn, New York, 1978. An 
introductory treatment of the development of commonsense and scientific 
knowledge. Bears particularly on Chapters 1, 2, and 8–10.
Quinton, Anthony, The Nature of Things, London, 1973. A survey of problems in 
metaphysics and epistemology, with much discussion of the foundationalism–
coherentism controversy. Especially relevant to Chapters 1, 9, and 10.
Reid, Thomas, Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man, London, 1869 (originally 
published in 1785). An important critique of other modern philosophers, rational-
ist and empiricist, and an original development of a commonsense epistemology. 
Especially relevant to Chapters 1–7 and 10–14.
Rescher, Nicholas, Skepticism, Oxford, 1980. A detailed critical survey of many of 
the arguments for skepticism. Especially relevant to Chapters 10–14.
Robinson, Howard, Perception, London, 1994. A historically detailed defense of the 
sense-datum theory in the philosophy of perception. Bears on Chapters 1–4.
Rorty, Richard, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature, Princeton, 1979. A widely 
discussed critique of the foundationalist tradition in epistemology (and indeed 
of aspects of epistemology itself), with special attention to foundationalism as 
deriving from Descartes. Pertinent especially to Chapters 1 and 9.
Russell, Bertrand, The Problems of Philosophy, London, 1912. An influential intro-
ductory and highly readable survey of epistemology and metaphysics. Particularly 
pertinent to Chapters 1, 4, and 10–14.
——, An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth, London, 1940. An articulation of an overall 

Bibliography  397
epistemological position by one of the twentieth century’s major epistemologists. 
Especially relevant to Chapters 1, 2, and 8–11.
Sellars, Wilfrid, Science, Perception, and Reality, London, 1963. A collection of 
advanced epistemological papers by a major contemporary philosopher and lead-
ing coherentist. Especially pertinent to Chapters 1–4 and 9–12.
Shope, Robert, The Analysis of Knowing, Princeton, 1983. A highly detailed study of 
major kinds of analysis of knowledge. Especially relevant to Chapters 10 and 11.
Sinnott-Armstrong, Walter, Moral Skepticisms, Oxford and New York, 2006. A 
development of a contrastivist epistemology, with detailed analysis of its bearing 
on the possibility of moral knowledge and an account of the scope and varieties of 
plausible skepticisms. Pertinent especially to Chapters 8, 10, and 12–14.
Sosa, Ernest, Knowledge in Perspective, Cambridge and New York, 1991. A wide-
ranging collection of papers intensively exploring most of the topics treated in 
Chapters 1, 2, 3, 10, and 11, and introducing a sophisticated and influential version 
of virtue epistemology.
——, Virtue Epistemology: Apt Belief and Reflective Knowledge, Oxford and New 
York, 2007. A detailed statement of Sosa’s version of virtue epistemology, with 
special relevance to Chapters 1, 8, and 10–12.
Sosa, Ernest and Kim, Jaegwon (eds.), Epistemology: An Anthology, Oxford and New 
York, 2000. A wide-ranging set of mainly recent writings on justification, knowl-
edge, and skepticism. Highly pertinent to Chapters 1, 6, 8, and 10.
Steup, Matthias, An Introduction to Contemporary Epistemology, Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ, 1996. A comprehensive and systematic introduction to epistemology, with 
close attention both to theoretical and conceptual issues and to major statements 
in the literature.
——, Knowledge, Truth, and Duty: Essays on Epistemic Justification, Responsibility, 
and Virtue, Oxford and New York, 2001. A collection of recent papers focusing 
largely on the relation between belief and will and on how that relation bears on 
knowledge and justification in general and on virtue epistemology in particular. 
Particularly relevant to Chapters 10 and 11.
——, Contemporary Debates in Epistemology, Oxford, 2005. A volume in which 
prominent contemporary epistemologists debate major issues, including many 
central in this book. Especially relevant to Chapters 8–14.
Stroud, Barry, The Significance of Philosophical Scepticism, Oxford, 1984. An inten-
sive study of skepticism, particularly as set out by Descartes. Particularly relevant 
to Chapters 1, 2, 10, 12, and 13.
Swain, Marshall, Reasons and Knowledge, Ithaca, NY, 1981. A rigorous statement 
of an account of knowledge that unites justificationist and reliabilist elements. 
Especially relevant to Chapters 1, 2, 8, 10, and 11.
Swinburne, Richard, Epistemic Justification, Oxford and New York, 2001. A wide-
ranging treatise with much on the contrast between internalism and externalism; 
it clarifies the importance of probability for justification and explores the relation 
between the genesis of beliefs and their epistemic standing. Particularly pertinent 
to Chapters 8 and 9–11.
Unger, Peter, Ignorance, Oxford, 1975. A full-scale case for skepticism. Bears par-
ticularly on Chapters 1, 2, 10, 12, and 13.
Vinci, Thomas, Cartesian Truth, Oxford and New York, 1998. An interpretation 
of Descartes’s epistemology that rigorously defends some main Cartesian ideas. 
Bears especially on Chapters 1, 2, 5, 8, 10, and 11.

398  Bibliography
Will, Frederick L., Induction and Justification, Ithaca, NY, 1974. A critical study of a 
foundationalist approach to justification, with much attention to the problem of 
induction. Especially relevant to Chapters 9–14.
Williams, Michael, Unnatural Doubts, Oxford, 1991. A detailed diagnostic account 
of skepticism and some major issues concerning the possibility of foundations of 
knowledge. Pertinent especially to Chapters 1, 2, and 9–12.
——, Problems of Knowledge, Oxford and New York, 2001. A broad treatment of 
many of the problems of epistemology, with particular attention to skepticism. 
Pertinent to nearly every chapter.
Williamson, Timothy, Knowledge and its Limits, Oxford and New York, 2000. A 
rigorous defense of the idea that knowledge is a state of mind and should be taken 
as a basis for understanding other notions important in epistemology, such as evi-
dence, rather than analyzed in terms of allegedly more basic notions. Especially 
pertinent to Chapters 1, 2, 8–11, and 13.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, Philosophical Investigations, trans. by G.E.M. Anscombe, 
Oxford, 1953. Wittgenstein’s most wide-ranging and influential work, spanning 
topics in epistemology, metaphysics, and other philosophical areas. Its remarks 
and examples bear on every chapter.
——, On Certainty, trans. by Dennis Paul and G.E.M. Anscombe, Oxford, 1969. An 
important discussion of the topic by one of the major twentieth-century philoso-
phers. Especially relevant to Chapters 9–14.
Zagzebski, Linda, Virtues of the Mind, New York, 1996. A statement of virtue episte-
mology distinctive for its background account of virtue ethics as the counterpart 
on which virtue epistemology should be based. Pertinent above all to Chapters 
10 and 11.

Index
basic source 6–7, 78, 138, 154, 155, 167, 184, 
191, 216, 234, 320, 381
basing relation 68, 106, 142, 147 (n. 6), 154, 
168 (n. 6), 180, 181, 199, 200 (nn. 5, 7), 
208, 209, 219, 220; direct vs. indirect 143
begging the question 339, 346, 348, 349, 354 
(n. 5)
belief: and acceptance 326–7; about percep-
tibles 16 (see also belief, perceptual); a 
priori 8, 139–141, 144; as dispositional 
85–6, 231; basic see basic belief; episodi-
cally vs. structurally inferential beliefs 180; 
dispositional vs. disposition to believe 34 
(n. 8), 153, 231, 314; direct 143, 182; for 
a reason 178, 200 (n. 6); foundational (see 
also basic belief) 216, 233, 235, 239 (n. 
16); genesis vs. justification 118; indirect 
181, 210; inductive 340, 361; infallible 92, 
94, 345, 346, 347; inferential 178, 180; 
inferential development of 181, 185 (see 
also belief, inferential); innate 65, 79 (n. 
5); introspective 214–15; memorial 8, 364; 
non-inferential 59 (n.4), 124 (n. 11), 152, 
160, 178, 182, 198; objectual 21, 22, 27, 
32 (n. 2); perceptual 16; propositional 32 
(nn. 2, 3, 4), 91, 105; reasoned 178–80; 
retained 63–4; second-order 229–30, 367; 
self-grounding 346, 361; testimony-based, 
151–2, 154–55
Bender, John W. 239 (n. 15)
Berkeley, George 52, 53, 60 (n. 10)
Bernecker, Sven 81 (n. 12), 240 (n. 19)
Blanshard, Brand 294 (n.18)
blind sight 34 (n. 9), 57, 58
BonJour, Laurence 59 (n. 3), 122 (n. 1), 126 
(n. 24), 238 (n. 11), 239 (n. 15)
brain in a vat 242, 353 (n. 1), 355 (n. 8)
Brandt, Richard B. 330 (n. 20)
Brueckner, Anthony 355 (n. 8)
Burge, Tyler 172 (n. 17)
Butchvarov, Panayot 354 (n. 7)
a posteriori (empirical) propositions 114
a priori justification 141–4
a priori knowledge 141–4
a priori proposition 111, 112–14, 116, 124 (n. 
11), 125 (n. 14), 140, 144, 225, 256
abduction see inference to the best explana-
tion
abstract entities 116, 120, 256, 292 (n. 4)
acceptance 326–7; see also belief
accessibility 87, 189, 207, 316; internal 272–8; 
perceptual 322; public 304, 306
accidentality 31, 64, 270, 272, 283, 284; see also 
chance, luck
adverbial theories: applied to hallucination 
48–49; applied to memory 70–71, 74; 
of perception 47; of sensory experience 
48–50; see also phenomenalism
Alston, William P. 59 (n. 1), 236 (n. 1), 266 (n. 
134), 292 (n.5), 294 (nn. 15, 17), 331 (n. 
25), 376 (n. 8)
Amico, Robert 355 (n. 13)
analysis 54, 107, 110–11, 246, 247, 291, 295
analytic proposition 107–8, 112, 117, 130; as 
independent of experience 113
Anderson, Elizabeth 329 (n. 9)
anti-realism 89, 124 (n. 10), 170 (n. 13)
appearance state 240 (n. 20)
Aquinas, St Thomas xi, 123 (n. 6), 125 (n. 13), 
323 (n. 9), 343, 355 (n. 9)
argument from analogy 241
Aristotle 121, 215, 238 (n. 7), 277, 278, 294 
(n. 15)
Armstrong, D.M. 34 (n. 10), 59 (n. 4), 265 
(n. 9)
attesting 151
Austin, J.L. 201 (n. 9)
Averill, Edward Wilson 124 (n. 10)
Ayer, A.J. 201 (n. 9), 292 (n. 6)
Barnes, Winston H.F. 60 (n. 8)
basic belief 155, 165
basic knowledge 155, 160
Page numbers in bold show where a term is defined.

400  Index
Calvin, John 320
Canary, Catherine 203 (n. 22)
Castañeda, Hector-Neri 238 (n. 8), 240 (n. 
19)
Casullo, Albert 146 (n. 4)
categorical imperative 315
causal dependence 55, 260
causal theory of perception see perception, 
causal theory of
certainty 236, 265 (n. 8), 335, 347–9; certainty 
principle 347; epistemic 251, 348; proposi-
tional 251; psychological 250
chance 191, 249, 259–60; see also accidental-
ity, luck
Chisholm, R.M. 59 (n. 6), 60 (nn. 8, 9), 292 
(n. 6), 355 (n. 13)
circularity problem 370–1, 376 (n. 8)
clairvoyance 270–2
Coady, C.A.J. 167 (n. 1), 171 (n. 17), 172 (n. 
22)
Code, Lorraine 329 (n. 8)
Cohen, Stewart 266 (n. 15)
coherence 216–34; with experience 235, 240 
(n. 20); see also coherentism
coherence theory of concepts 226–7
coherentism 216–32; holistic 218–21; isolation 
problem for 222–3; linear 217; see also 
coherence
common sense 40, 54, 134, 214, 325, 346, 349; 
negative defense of 358; positive defense 
of 358
conative attitudes 33 (n. 4)
conception 19–21, 27
Conee, Earl 292 (n. 5)
consciousness 84–7, 91–3, 170 (n. 14), 273; of 
vs. that 285
consequentialism 317
conservatism, epistemic 325–6
conservatism, phenomenal 147 (n. 7), 326
content: belief, 25, 32 (n. 2), 33 (n. 7), 34 
(n. 10), 35 (n. 14); perceptual 25, 27–8; 
property, 27–8; propositional 28
contextualism 261–3, 266 (n. 15), 356 (n. 14)
contingent proposition 106
contrast class 356 see also relativism, relevant 
alternative
contrastivism 263, 266 (n. 18)
conventionalism 130–3
correspondence theory of truth see truth, cor-
respondence, theory of
courage, intellectual 373–4
credibility, testimonial 151–4, 156
credulity 152
criterion, problem of the see problem of the 
criterion
Crumley, Jack S., II 329 (nn. 8, 9)
Davidson, Donald 123 (n. 7), 171 (n. 17), 240 
(n. 19), 294 (n. 18)
de Almeida, Claudio 202 (n. 13), 237 (n. 4)
de dicto 32 (n. 3)
deducibility 313
deductive reasoning 186–7; and proof 299; 
and scientific knowledge 302
deductive transmission 188, 193–7
defeasibility 105, 189, 201 (n. 13); see also 
justification, indefeasible
definition, truth by 130–2; see also meaning
dependence see causal dependence; discrimi-
native dependence; epistemic dependence; 
evidential dependence; functional depen-
dence; genetic dependence; inferential 
dependence; justificational dependence; 
operational dependence; presuppositional 
dependence; psychological dependence
de re 32 (n. 3)
DeRose, Keith 266 (nn. 15, 18)
Descartes, René 42, 79 (n. 3), 92, 99, 216, 239 
(n. 18), 289, 342, 343, 345, 348, 353 (n. 1), 
355 (n. 11)
design 265 (n. 12), 267, 319
Dewey, John 294 (n. 19)
Dickinson, Emily 42–3
disagreement, rational 311, 313, 371–4
discriminative dependence 35, 57
disjunctivism 59 (n. 2)
disposition to believe see belief, dispositional 
vs. disposition to believe
dispositional belief see belief, dispositional vs. 
disposition to believe
dispositional properties 85–6
disquotation principle 294 (n. 16)
dogmatism 236, 364, 374
doxastic attitudes 33 (n. 5)
doxastic voluntarism 207–8, 236 (n. 1)
dream argument 353 (n. 1)
Dretske, Fred 34 (n. 11), 35 (n. 14), 203 (n. 
22), 240 (n. 19), 265 (n. 7)
Duhem, Pierre 328 (n. 2)
Duhem–Quine thesis 328 (n. 2)
egocentric predicament 342–3
Einstein, Albert 118
empirical see a posteriori proposition
empiricism 116, 120
entailment 115, 125 (n. 13), 126 (n. 20)
envatment problem 242
epistemic conservatism see conservatism, 
epistemic
epistemic authority 362–3
epistemic chain 211
epistemic dependence 228–9; negative 228–9; 
positive 228–9; see also causal dependence; 
presuppositional dependence; psychologi-
cal dependence
epistemic grounding see grounding, epistemic
epistemic immediacy see immediacy, epistemic
epistemic indirectness see indirectness
epistemic parity 372–3
epistemic particularism 201 (n. 10)

Index  401
epistemic possibility 360, 375 (n. 3)
epistemic power 143, 278
epistemic principle 30
epistemic priority 306
epistemic regress argument 215
epistemic regress problem 210
epistemic virtue 277–9
epistemology, naturalistic see naturalistic 
epistemology
essential truth see truth, essential
Euclidean geometry 194
evidence of the senses 28
evidential dependence 112
evidentialism 320
excluded middle, principle of the 120, 121
excusability 76, 316,
experientialism 320–5
explanation 111, 221; mutual 225–6; reciprocal 
226; see also inference to the best explana-
tion
externalism 272–3; about justification 273; 
about knowledge 273
factive attitudes 22
faculties, active vs. reactive 99
Fairweather, Abrol 293 (n. 8)
faith 325–7
fallibilism 303–4, 374
Feldman, Richard 203 (n. 22), 266 (n. 13), 292 
(n. 4)
feminist epistemology 305–6, 312, 329 (nn. 
7–9)
Fish, William 59 (n. 2)
Fogelin, Robert 353 (n. 1), 354 (n. 7)
foundationalism, epistemological 216; moder-
ate 233; psychological 219–20; strong 234
Freud, Sigmund 101 (n. 9)
Fricker, Elizabeth 170 (n. 13), 172 (n. 22)
Fricker, Miranda 329 (n. 8)
Fuller, Steve 329 (n. 11)
functional dependence 55
Galileo 299, 301, 302
gambler’s fallacy 354 (n. 4)
generality problem see specification problem
genetic dependence 139,
Gert, Bernard 331 (n. 28)
Gettier, Edmund L. 264 (n. 2)
Giaquinto, M. 146 (n. 3)
Ginet, Carl 80 (n. 8), 292 (n. 6)
Goldberg, Sanford 353 (n. 1)
Goldman, Alvin I. 203 (n. 22), 266 (n. 16), 
292 (n. 5)
Graham, Peter 169 (n. 8)
Grayling, A.C. 294 (n. 16)
Greco, John 35 (n. 14), 126 (n. 16), 170 (n. 
14), 238 (n. 11), 293 (n. 8), 294 (n. 12), 
353 (n. 1)
Grice, H.P. 125 (n. 15)
grounding 6–7; causal 6; deductive 299 (see 
also strong foundationalism); epistemic 6; 
inductive 299 (see also moderate foun-
dationalism); internal 273, 280; justifica-
tional 6; memorial 8, 62, 71, 76 79 (n. 1); 
perceptual 16, 219; reliable 255–7; truth–
conducive 169, 277
grounding conditions 227; vs. possession 
conditions 227
Hagaman, Scott 202 (n. 18)
hallucination 40; argument from 42; empty 
41; memorial 69
Hannay, Alastair 101 (n. 6)
Hardin, C.L. 124 (n. 10)
Hardwig, John 171 (n. 15)
Harman, Gilbert 203 (n. 22)
Hawthorne, John 202 (n. 15)
Hegel, G.W.F. 294 (n. 18)
Heil, John 59 (n. 4)
Hempel, Carl G. 28 (n. 2)
Hopkins, Gerard Manley 323
Huemer, Michael xvi, 80 (n. 11), 126 (n. 17), 
147 (n. 7), 201 (n. 9), 266 (n. 14, 15, 16), 
353 (n. 1), 354 (n. 7), 355 (n. 8, 13)
Hume, David 91, 92, 165, 338–9, 340, 342, 354 
(n. 3), 359, 373
idealism 52
illusion 40
imagination 69, 85 88, 300–1
imaging, second-order 88
immediacy, epistemic 106; epistemic vs. 
temporal 106
indefeasibility see defeasibility
independence principle 234, 239 (n. 17)
indirectness 112; causal 44; epistemic 44, 143; 
inferential 181; justificational 386; objec-
tual 43, 44; visual 42
induction see inference, deductive and induc-
tive; intuitive induction; problem of 
induction
inductive reasoning 187; analogical 187; 
explanational 187; generalizational 187; vs. 
perception 179; and probability 189; see 
also inference to the best explanation
inductive transmission 192–3
infallibility 344–5; thesis of 92
inference 80 (n. 7), 152, 153, 177–78; analogi-
cal ; to the best explanation 300–1; belief-
forming 183; confirmatory vs. generative 
183; content of vs. process of 177; deduc-
tive and inductive 186–7; subsumptive 
187; vs. perception 44, 179
inferential chains 208
inferential dependence 160
instantial reasoning 187
intellectual courage see courage, intellectual
intentional object 100 (n. 4)

402  Index
internalism 272–3; about justification 273; 
about knowledge 273
intrinsic goodness 282–3
intrinsic property 46
introspection 3, 85, 87; and perception 88, 
89–90; as a basis of justification and 
knowledge 96–100
intuition 106, 135, 140, 276, 314,
intuitionism (ethical) 317 , 318, 330 (n. 15)
intuitions 314
intuitive induction 126 (n. 22)
invariantism 264
irrealism, direct 52; see also anti-realism
isolation problem see coherentism
James, William 294 (n. 19)
Jeshion, Robin 122 (n. 2)
justification 3, 28–9, 76, 96–8, 158–9, 197, 
272–5, 367–9; belief justification 3 (see also 
justification, situational); conclusive 250; 
defeasible see defeasibility; dispositional 
vs. occurrent, 81; degrees of 140, 147 
(n. 6), 197, 326; doxastic 3; for believing 
see justification, situational; global vs. 
individual 106; in believing see justifica-
tion, situational; indefeasible 143, 145, 
236; introspective 97–8; prima facie 28; 
process of 229; property of 230, 383; 
second–order 367; situational 3, 8, 25, 
194, 197, 376 (n. 7); social 322 (see also 
testimony); transmission of 187–97; and 
truth 281–2; see also knowledge
justificational dependence 216
Kant, Immanuel 315, 317, 318, 330 (n. 17)
Kirkham, Richard 294 (n. 15)
Kitcher, Philip 126 (n. 18)
KK thesis 365
Klein, Peter D. 203 (n. 22), 237 (nn. 3, 4), 238 
(n. 9), 265 (n. 8), 354 (n. 7), 355 (n. 13)
knowledge: in the abstract 207; approximate 
304; a priori see a priori knowledge; basic 
see basic knowledge; by acquaintance vs. 
description 253; causal account of 254; and 
certainty 347; clairvoyant 270–2; defeat of 
183; direct 214, 320; fortunate 260; foun-
dational 214; general conception of 291; 
natural 272; recognitional 155; second-
order 337, 365; secondary 317–18; social 
(see also testimony) 306–7; sociology of 
see sociology of knowledge; testimonially 
direct 317; transmission of 187–197; value 
of see value problem; virtual 304; see also 
justification
Kripke, Saul 146 (n. 4)
Kvanvig, Jonathan L. 240 (n. 20), 264 (n. 5), 
293 (nn. 8, 12)
Kyburg, Henry E., Jr. 202 (n. 16)
Lawrence, D.H. 292 (n. 1)
learning 20, 51, 162–3; conceptual vs. propo-
sitional 162
Lehrer, Keith 168 (n. 3), 239 (n. 15), 240 (n. 
19)
Lennon, Kathleen 329 (n. 7)
Lewis, C.I. 60 (n. 9)
Lewis, David 266 (n. 15)
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm xii, 126 (n. 21), 
146 (n. 4)
Locke, John xii, 43, 44, 64, 79 (n. 5)
logical possibility 124 (n. 11), 360
logical truth 117–18, 121, 126 (n. 19)
Longino, Helen 329 (n. 8)
lottery paradox 202 (n. 16)
luck 156, 191, 246, 249, 261
Marcus, Ruth Barcan 123 (n. 7)
McDowell, John 170 (n. 13)
McGinn, Colin 124 (n. 10)
McLaughlin, Brian 101 (n. 7)
meaning: change of vs. falsification 134–5; 
truth by virtue of 130–1
memory: adverbial conception of 71; episte-
mological centrality of 75; modes of 66; 
phenomenalist conception of 70; repre-
sentative theory of 68–9; see also belief; 
justification; knowledge
mentalism 292 (n. 4); see also internalism
mental properties and states 84–6; see also 
privileged access
Mill, John Stuart 116, 117, 126 (n. 18), 315, 
316–18, 330 (nn. 19, 20)
mind-dependence 46, 287
Moore, G.E. 147 (n. 5), 265 (n. 8), 355 (n. 13)
Moser, Paul K. 239 (n. 16, 354 (n. 7)
naive realism see realism, naive
naturalistic epistemology 253–4
necessary truth 106; see also analytic proposi-
tion, logical truth
necessity, empirical 349
necessity, logical see logical truth
necessity, natural 355 (n. 12)
necessity, nomic 136
Neta, Ram 293 (n. 12)
Newton, Isaac 116, 302, 303, 304
nomic necessity see necessity, nomic
noncognitivism 309
Nozick, Robert 203 (n. 22), 266 (n. 14), 354 
(n. 7)
objectivism 303
observation 254, 328 (nn. 1, 2)
occurrent properties 71, 86, 92
Odegard, Douglas 203 (n. 22)
omniscience, thesis of 92
operational dependence 160

Index  403
other minds, problem of see problem of other 
minds
parity, epistemic see epistemic parity
Peirce, C.S. 287
Pendelbury, Michael 32 (n. 3)
percept 25
perceptible 16, 51–2, 90, 176
perception: aspectual 26; basic elements in 17; 
and belief 15–24; causal theory of 39; inner 
and outer 84, 89, 380; and introspection 
89–90; moral 200 (n. 3), 313–14; objectual 
20; propositional 20; residue of 68; simple 
17; vs. inference 44, 179; see also adverbial 
theories; belief, dispositional vs. disposi-
tion to believe; realism, naive; phenom-
enalism; sense-datum theories; theory of 
appearing
perceptual hierarchy 24–5
phenomenal conservatism see conservatism, 
phenomenal
phenomenal property 87, 100 (n. 3)
phenomenalism 52; adverbial 52; sense-datum 
version of 51
Plantinga, Alvin 170 (n. 9), 264 (nn. 5, 10, 12, 
19), 276, 331 (n. 22)
Plato xi, 79 (n. 3), 117, 246, 264 (n. 1), 282
possibility, conceptual 124 (n. 11)
possibility, epistemic vs. logical 360
possibility, logical 360
presuppositional dependence 249
privileged access 91–6; strong doctrine of 
92; see also infallibility; and omniscience, 
thesis of
probability see Hume, inductive reasoning, 
probable reasoning, reason to believe
probable reasoning 186,189, 359 see also 
inductive reasoning
problem of the body 342
problem of the criterion 355 (n. 13)
problem of induction 359–61
problem of other minds 340–2
problem of too many minds 354 (n. 6)
proof 299
property attribution 33 (n. 4)
Pritchard, Duncan 265 (n.6), 293 (n. 12)
property see dispositional properties, intrinsic 
property, occurrent properties; qualities, 
primary; relational property
provability 113, 142, 144
Pryor, James 355 (n. 13)
psychological dependence 249
psychological foundationalism see foundation-
alism, psychological
Putnam, Hilary 353 (n. 1), 355 (n. 8)
Pyrrho of Ellis 335; see also skepticism, Pyr-
rhonian
Pyrrhonian skepticism see skepticism Pyr-
rhonian
qualities, primary 43
qualities, secondary 43
Quine, W.V. 125 (n. 15), 145 (n. 1), 146 (nn. 2, 
3), 294 (nn. 16, 17), 328 (nn. 1, 2)
Quine–Duhem thesis see Duhem–Quine 
thesis
rational disagreement see disagreement, 
rational
rationalism 116–17
rationality 325–6
Reid, Thomas 64, 168 (n. 3), 171 (n. 15)
realism 38, 329 (n. 14); direct 41, 47; indirect 
52, 67; naive 38; perceptual 38, 41; repre-
sentative 43
reason 104; to believe xi, 197, 202 (nn. 13, 
14), 346, 360, 376 (n. 9); see also truths of 
reason
reasoning 75, 176, 177, 178, 180, 186; by anal-
ogy ; probabilistic see probabilistic reason-
ing; second-order, 109; see also deductive 
reasoning; inductive reasoning; inference; 
subsumptive reasoning
recalling 66
regress argument see epistemic regress argu-
ment
regress of demonstration 369
relational property 46
relativism (ethical) 308–9; circumstantial 312; 
vs. relativizationism 309
relevant alternative 203 (n. 20), 261–2, 352; see 
also contrast class
reliabilism: indicator 265 (n. 11); process 265 
(n. 11); see also reliability theories
reliability theories 255–64, 371
remembering 62–4; active (occurrent) 71; 
event 66; how 66; objectual 66; proposi-
tional 66
representative realism see realism
Rescher, Nicholas 354 (n. 7)
Rigg, Wayne D. 240 (n. 20)
Robinson, Howard 59 (n. 3)
Rorty, Amélie O. 101 (n. 7)
Rorty, Richard 200 (n. 8), 239 (n. 18)
Ross, W.D. 126 (n. 22), 147 (n. 5), 330 (n. 15)
Russell, Bertrand 126 (nn. 15, 17), 201 (n. 9), 
354 (nn. 4, 6)
Sainsbury, Mark 294 (n. 16)
Sayre-McCord, Geoffrey 329 (n. 14)
Schmitt, Frederick 329 (nn. 8, 11)
scientific knowledge see knowledge, scientific; 
proof; testimony
seeing 56–8: as a causal relation 17, 27; by 27; 
and light 56
seemings 147 (n. 7), 314, 330 (n. 16)
self-consciousness 97
self-deception 101 (n. 7)

404  Index
self-evidence 105, 112–14,122 (n. 1); immedi-
ate 106; relativized notion of 125 (n. 13), 
147 (n. 9)
self-grounding belief see belief, self-grounding
self-knowledge principle 96
Sellars, Wilfrid 238 (n. 8), 240 (n. 19)
Senor, Thomas D. 321 (n. 27)
sense-data 42; see also phenomenalism; sense-
datum theories
sense-datum theories: of non-perceptual sen-
sory experience 50; of perception 41–6
sensory experience; see also adverbial theories; 
phenomenalism; sense-datum theories
Shakespeare 48, 56, 86, 179
Shalkowski, Scott A. 124 (n. 11)
showing (a proposition) 229; de facto (n. 15); 
dialectical 356 (n. 15)
show–know principle 352
Sinnott-Armstrong, Walter 354 (n. 5), 356 
(n. 14)
situational justification see justification, situ-
ational
skeptical principles: back–up 347; certainty 
347; cogency 362; entailment 359; infal-
libility principle proper 345, 361; necessity 
344
skepticism: attitudinal 336; first-order 337; 
justification skepticism 336; knowledge 
skepticism 336; moderate vs. radical 366; 
and the positive defense of common sense 
366–71; Pyrrhonian 335, 353 (n. 2); refuta-
tion vs. rebuttal of 365; second-order 337
Smart, J.J.C. 59 (n. 7)
social epistemology 305–6 see also testimony
sociology of knowledge 312
Sosa, Ernest 238 (n. 11), 293 (nn. 8, 10, 12), 
329 (n. 8), 330 (n. 16), 351 (n. 1), 354 (n. 
7), 376 (n. 8)
source conditions 185; see also transmission 
conditions
specification problem 258–9, 266 (n. 13)
Steup, Matthias 147 (n. 7), 293 (n. 12)
Strawson, P.F. 125 (n. 15)
Stroud, Barry 353 (n. 1), 354 (n. 7), 376 (n. 8)
Stump, Eleonore 331 (n. 29)
subsumptive reasoning 187
suspended judgment 5
synthetic a priori 114–17,124 (n. 10)
synthetic propositions 112
Tarski, Alfred 294 (n. 16)
Taylor, James E. 295 (n. 20)
testability 118, 313
testimony: demonstrative vs. propositional 
162; formal and informal 150
theory of appearing 40
Timmons, Mark C. 35 (n. 14), 294 (n. 13), 330 
(n. 14), 353 (n. 1), 356 (n. 14)
tracking 260, 266 (n. 14)
transmission conditions 185–97; and testi-
mony 156–7; see also source conditions
trust 152–3
truth: coherence theory of 288–9; corre-
spondence theory of 286–7; criteria vs. 
nature of 290; essential 137; for a person 
or culture 310–11; logical see logical truth; 
minimalist account of 287–8; pragmatic 
theory of 289–90; redundancy account of 
287–8; see also justification; knowledge; 
meaning; necessary truth
truths of reason 176 see also a priori proposi-
tions, self-evidence
uncertainty 347–48; see also certainty
underdetermination 342, 347, 354 (n. 7)
understanding 104, 105, 111, 121 (n. 1), 133, 
141; of and that 111; value of 285
uniformity of nature principle 359
vagueness 23, 127 (n. 25), 134, 264
validity 186
van Gogh 26
verity principle 344
virtue epistemology 277–80
value problem, the 282–6
visual experience principle, the 30
visual justification principle, the 29
Vogel, Jonathan 354 (n. 7)
voluntarism, doxastic see doxastic
warrant 170 (n. 10), 264 (n. 5)
Webb, Mark Owen 171 (n. 15)
Whitford, Margaret 329 (n. 7)
Williams, Michael 353 (n. 1), 354 (n. 7)
Williamson, Timothy 35 (n. 14), 127 (n. 25), 
264 (n. 3), 353 (n. 1)
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 239 (n. 14)
Yandell, Keith E. 330 (n. 21)
Zagzebski, Linda 293 (n. 8), 294 (n. 12)

