By the same author 
A N 
E S S A Y 
O N 
M A N 
T H E 
L O G I C 
O F 
T H E 
H U M A N I T I E S 
T H E 
M Y T H 
O F 
T H E 
S T A T E 
T H E 
P R O B L E M 
O F 
K N O W L E D G E 
D E T E R M I N I S M 
A N D 
I N D E T E R M I N I S M 
I N 
M O D E R N 
P H Y S I C S 
T H E 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
O F 
S Y M B O L I C 
F O R M S 
V O L U M E 
2 : 
M Y T H I C A L 
T H O U G H T 
V O L U M E 
3 : 
T H E 
P H E N O M E N O L O G Y 
O F 
K N O W L E D G E 

T H E 
PHILOSOPHY 
OF SYMBOLIG 
FORMS 
VOLUME ONE: LANGUAGE 
! 
~- -^*—, 
B Y 
E R N S T 
C A S S I R E R 
1 
' 
' 
' " 
? 
I 
translated by Ralph Mankeim 
preface and introduction by Charles W. Hendel 
N E W 
H A V E N 
& L O N D O N : 
Y A L E 
U N I V E R S I T Y 
P R E S S 

Copyright 1955. h 
University Press. 
Thirteentbprinting, 
1980. 
All rights reserved. This book may not be 
reproduced, in whole or in part, in any form 
(beyond that copying permitted by Sections 
107 and 108 of the U.S. Copyright Law and 
except by reviewers for the publicpress), 
without written permission from the publishers. 
Library of Congress catalog card number: 52-13969 
lSBN: 
0 - 3 0 0 0 0 3 5 3 ^ (cloth), 
0 - 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 7 - 5 (paper) 
Printed in the United States of America by 
BookCrafters, lnc., Predencksburg, 
Virginia 
Published in Great Britain, 
Europe, Africa, andAsia(except Japan) 
by Yale UniversityPress, 
Ltd., London. 
DistributedinAustraltaand 
New Zealand by Book & Film Services, Artarmon, N.S. W 
Australia: 
and in Japan by Harper & Row, Publishers, Tokyo Office. 

Contents 
Preface by Charles W. Hendel 
vii 
Introduction by Charles W. Hendel 
i 
ι. The Philosophy of Form in Kant 
x 
2. The Epochal Significance of Kant's Work and What Cassirer 
Made of the Developing Theory of Form 
21 
3. Toward the Development of a Phenomenology of Culture 
35 
4. The Symbolic Function and the Forms 
47 
5. Consequences for Philosophy 
54 
Foreword by the Author 
69 
Introduction and Presentation of theProblem 
73 
ι. The Concept of Symbolic Form and the System of Symbolic 
Forms 
73 
2. Universal Function of the Sign. The Problem of Meaning 
85 
3. The Problem of "Representation" and the Structure of 
Consciousness 
93 
4. Ideational Content of the Sign. Transcending the Copy 
Theory of Knowledge 
105 
V O L U M E 
O N E 
The Phenomenology of Linguistic Form 
115 
Chapter 1: The Problem of Language in the History of Philosophy 117 
ι. The Problem of Language in the History of Philosophical 
Idealism (Plato, Descartes, Leibniz) 
117 
2. The Position of the Problem of Language in the Systems of 
Empiricism (Bacon, Hobbes, Locke, Berkeley) 
133 
3. The Philosophy of the French Enlightenment (Condillac, 
Maupertuis, Diderot) 
139 

vi 
C O N T E N T S 
4. Language as an Expression of Emotion. The Problem of the 
"Origin of Language" (Giambattista Vico, Hamann, 
Herder, Romanticism) 
147 
5. Wilhelm von Humboldt 
155 
6. August Schleicher and the Development of the Scientific View 
of Language 
163 
7. Definition of Modern Linguistic Science and the Problem of 
Phonetic Laws 
167 
Chapter 2: Language in the Phase of Sensuous Expression 
177 
1. Language as Expressive Movement. Sign Language and Sound 
Language 
177 
2. Mimetic, Analogical, and Symbolic Expression 
186 
Chapter 3: Language in the Phase of Intuitive Expression 
198 
1. The Expression of Space and Spatial Relations 
198 
2. The Representation of Time 
215 
3. The Linguistic Development of the Concept of Number 
226 
4. Language and the Sphere of "Inner Intuition." Phases 
of the I-Concept 
249 
ι. Formation of Subjective Consciousness in Linguistic 
Expression 
249 
2. Personal and Possessive Expression 
259 
3. The Nominal and Verbal Type of Linguistic 
Expression 
266 
Chapter 4: Language as Expression of Conceptual Thought. Concept 
and Class Formation in Language 
278 
1. The Formation of Qualifying Concepts 
278 
2. Basic Trends in Linguistic Class Formation 
295 
Chapter 5: Language and the Expression of the Forms of Pure Re­
lation. The Sphere of Judgment and the Concepts of 
Relation 
303 
General Index 
321 
Index of Proper Names 
325 

Preface by Charles W. Hendel 
Ιτ WAs thirty years ago that the first translation into English of any of the 
works of Ernst Cassirer appeared—Substance and Function (by WiUiam 
Curtis Swabey and Mary Collins Swabey, Chicago and London, Open 
Court Publishing Co., 1923). Nothing followed until nineteen years later, 
in 1944, when Cassirer himself wrote in English An Essay on Man. Since 
then scarcely a year has passed without the announcement of another work 
in translation. 
This interest in Cassirer's writings was due at first to his own personality 
as he came to be known by many during his four years of residence in this 
country, teaching at Yale and Columbia universities. But it has mounted 
steadily since his death in 1945, and the chief reason may be that readers 
have discovered a new aspect of his philosophy. 
For it was in truth much too limited a view of Cassirer that prevailed 
before his arrival in America. The book entitled Substance and Function 
contained two items, the major piece being a rendering of Substanzbegriff 
und Funfyionsbegriff which Cassirer had written and published thirteen 
years earlier, the second a writing of more recent date, Zur Einsteinschen 
Relativitätstheorie (1921). At the time this volume came out there was an 
absorbing general interest in the Einstein theory and in the philosophical 
aspect of physical science. The consequence was hardly avoidable that the 
philosophy of Cassirer should appear to be solely a philosophy of science. 
Though the first piece did contain indications of a wider range of meaning 
they were practically unnoticed amid the contemporary scientific preoc­
cupations of the readers. 
It is a remarkable historic coincidence that the year of the publication 
of Substance and Function in America was also the date of Philosophie 
der symbolischen Formen: Die Sprache, in Germany (Berlin, Bruno Cas­
sirer). A second volume foUowed in 1925 with the subtide Das mythische 
Den%en. After four years came the third part, on Phänomenologie der 
Er\enntnis. And aLl this remained largely unknown in this country except 
to those scholars who were studying German philosophy in the original 
texts or some others interested as specialists in the different subjects of 
knguage, myth, and the theory of knowledge. Thus when Cassirer came 
v i i 

viii 
P R E F A C E 
to America in 1941, as visiting professor to Yale University, he found him­
self welcomed everywhere in the guise of his earlier self, as it were, the 
philosopher of science. It is true, of course, that he was by that time recog­
nized also as a remarkable historian of philosophy because of a great and 
invaluable work on the problem of knowledge, and his interpretations of 
Kant as well as of many other luminaries in the history of ideas and indeed 
of whole periods of intellectual history such as the Renaissance and the 
eighteenth century. Yet Cassirer was hardly regarded as a philosopher who 
had developed an original philosophy of his own. 
Nevertheless the reason he was called to Yale University from his exile 
in Sweden was a recognition of the significance of the Philosophie der 
symbolischen Formen. It happened that the late Professor Wilbur M. Ur­
ban was about to retire from active service: he had been working in the 
philosophy of language and theory of value, and it was essential to maintain 
teaching and research in these fields of philosophy. However, in supply­
ing its need in that quarter the university gained in Cassirer a versatile 
scholar who was superbly qualified for many enterprises. He conducted 
three different seminars jointly with other professors, seminarsin the phi­
losophy of history, in the philosophy of science, and in the theory of knowl­
edge. It should be reported, too, that Cassirer accepted not only willingly 
but adventurously various other assignments of duty in the undergraduate 
as well as the graduate school, as when he undertook on short notice in 
an emergency to give the undergraduate course on the history of phi­
losophy during a summer session when the university was on its wartime 
"accelerated program." Cassirer then sacrificed a summer which he had 
planned for writing—but it was part of his "Odyssey," as he said, that 
undertaking to teach American undergraduates. Thus he accommodated 
himself to the needs of the university rather than the university to him. 
More of his own philosophy might have been sohcited had it not been for 
the necessities of the situation. Even in the case of that specialized seminar 
on the philosophy of language in which he was a master, the interest of 
the members of the course was in "semantics" and not in a comprehensive 
philosophy of language. Those semantic preoccupations in 1943 Hke those 
with the philosophy of science of 1923 precluded immediate appreciation 
of Cassirer in his true capacity as a significant philosopher of the contempo­
rary world. 
Suddenly in 1943 Cassirer decided to show himself in a new hght by 
writing a book especiaUy designed for the America that he had cone to 

P R E F A C E 
ix 
know and love, a book which, as he teUs in the Preface, would be "symboUc" 
of his sojourn in this country. Thus he came to compose An Essay on Man, 
which was published by the Yale University Press in 1944. 
Some have called this Essay a "summary" of "the philosophy of symboUc 
forms," but it cannot quite be regarded as that. For after he had finished 
in 1929 the third part of the Symbolischen Formen Cassirer had gone on 
to apply its philosophy to scientific subjects, as in his Determinismus und 
Indeterminismus in der modernen Physi\ (1936). There was also his Zur 
Logi^ des Symbolbegriffs (Theoria, Göteborg, Sweden, Vol. 4,1938) and 
his recent Zur Logi% der Kulturwissenschaften (Göteborg, 1942). Earher 
he had written, too, the Philosophie der Aufkßrung (1932) in which the 
whole of a period of modern culture had been deUneated; and this work, 
incidentally, is perhaps the finest interpretation available of the eighteenth-
century Enlightenment. Cassirer had also written significandy of many 
individual figures of modern culture: Descartes, Kepler, Galileo, Spinoza, 
Leibniz, Shaftesbury, Rousseau, SchiUer, and always Kant, and of course 
Goethe, that kindred spirit who elicited the poetic imagination in Cassirer 
himself. Moreover, unknown to any but a few intimates, he had left behind 
him in Sweden the manuscript of a fourth volume of his Er%enntnis-
problem series, this last one treating of philosophy, science, and history 
"from the death of Hegel to the present." In this writing he had treated 
the problem of knowledge in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries by 
taking it in situ, so to speak, as it emerges in each case within the several 
different disciplines of mathematics, physics, biology, and history. These 
varied tasks had occupied him after the pubhcation of the volumes on 
symbolic forms. Hence his preface to An Essay on Man speaks of some­
thing new as weU as giving a summary view of that original masterpiece 
itseE 
The first impulse for the writing of this book came from my English 
and American friends who repeatedly and urgently asked me to puhUsh 
an English translation of my Philosophy of Symbolic Forms. Although 
I should have hked very much to comply with their request, after the 
first tentative steps I found it impracticable and, under the present cir­
cumstances [1944]> unjustifiable to reproduce the former book in its 
entirety. . . . [Moreover] from the point of view of the author it was 
scarcely possible or advisable to pubUsh a work planned and written 
more than twenty-five years ago. Since that time the author has con­
tinued his study on the subject. He has learned many new facts and 
I 

X 
P R E F A C E 
hc has been confronted with new problems. For all these reasons I de­
cided to make a fresh start and to write an entirely new book. 
And then came an express caution not to take the Essay as a substitute for 
the original. 
My critics should, however, be warned that what I could give here is 
more an explanation and illustration than a demonstration of my theory. 
For a closer discussion and analysis of the problems involved I must ask 
them to go back to the detailed description in my Philosophy of Symbolic 
Forms. 
It is important to note how those "old problems" did appear to him later 
and what the "new" ones were and where Cassirer was tending in his 
further thinking about the matter. A clue to the new direction is to be 
found in what happened next. The ink was hardly dry on his last pages 
of manuscript when he started on another writing in English, and on a new 
subject. This was to be a book on the Myth of the State. There were good 
reasons why that publication would seem justifiable "under the present 
circumstances." The Western civilized world was still in crisis, before 
thefinal decision of battle in Europe. It might help the defenders of civiliza­
tion to give them more of an idea of their hoped-for victory over the 
totalitarian power politics which had projected the world into war and 
whose power lay not simply in guns but in the minds and wills of those 
who were led into the catastrophe. It was commonly assumed that propa­
ganda of recent contriving had produced the mentaUty in virtue of which 
the authorities could rule and wage war. But there was the deeper question 
of the philosopher—what was it that gave such propaganda its firm pur­
chase on the minds of those who had succumbed? Propaganda only uses 
forces ah*eady at work—and the most potent was a "myth" of very long 
standing which had time and again threatened progress in the Western 
world and which political philosophy and statesmanship had managed 
again and again to overcome, thus preserving in Western society a civUiz-
ing leaven of reason and culture. To do battle for this in our time was the 
task of the peoples of America and the rest of Europe, and these nations 
should be made to understand both the history and the meaning of the 
"myth of the state." And of all persons qualified to treat of that myth 
Cassirer was supreme. He had studied the whole phenomenon of myth 
in the second part of the Philosophy of Symbolic Forms where he showed 
that myth is not evil as such, as if it were simply the diametrical opposite 

P R E F A C E 
of rational knowledge, for it has a proper, indeed, inevitable function in 
tife and society. The important thing is to know what manner of myth 
one Hves by, and to realize its true value through knowledge of its works 
and its consequences for human life, especiaUy in the reUtions between 
man and the state and between whole peoples. 
While Cassirer was busy writing his new book, word of this enterprise 
was quiedy passed on to an editor of Fortune, Mr. Richardson Wood, who 
saw the timely merit of it and proposed straightway an essay on the sub­
ject, which was very shortly pubhshed under the tide "The Myth of the 
State" (Fortune, 29, N0. 6, June, 1944). Before Cassirer could finish the 
final revision of the book he was suddenly stricken fataUy in New York 
on April 13,1945. The work was subsequently made ready for the press 
by the editor of the present volume, and The Myth of the State appeared 
in 1946, published by the Yale University Press. 
The Myth of the State is important to the student of Cassirer because 
while it was a work of occasion it also affords a clue to the meaning of those 
statements in An Essay on Man: "The author has continued his study on 
the subject" and "he has been confronted with new problems." Before one 
concludes any survey of Cassirer's philosophy he must consider what such 
a writing as this, and others subsequent to the last volume of the Philoso-
phy of Symbolic Forms, may disclose about "new directions" and even about 
"new views" of old problems. 
For the Essay plainly hinted that the possibUities of Cassirer's "theory" 
were not yet completely realized. One is tempted to surmise, for instance, 
that The Myth of the State might have had a sequel in another "entirely 
new book" or perhaps that the author would have recorded his "continued 
study" in a fourth part of the Symbolic Forms. For his system in that work 
was not a tighdy closed one: it admitted of further studies and other "parts" 
sirnUar to those treating of knguage, myth and religion, and science. Hav­
ing aheady ventured to treat of man and the state, he might weU have 
proceeded to study the symboUc forms of the ethical life of man in society. 
All this, of course, is sheer speculation. Nevertheless, the contents of the 
various writings subsequent to the three volumes of Symbolic Forms can­
not be disregarded without the risk of missing the full meaning of the 
work. The references, explanations, Ulustrations, and appHcations in these 
kter writings reflect hght upon that masterwork. In order to interpret 
it aright one should make use of the ktter-day pieces, a procedure which 
Cassirer would certainly have approved as a phibsophical ideahst, for it 
I 

xü 
P R E F A C E 
follows the classic maxim that one learns the truth of what is by what it 
is seen to be tending toward or its teleology. 
The truth of the matter is that the Philosophy of Symbolic Forms is not 
completely self-explanatory. Cassirer knew and said this himself, and his 
actions in writing two entirely new pieces in 1943 and 1945, offering "ex­
planation" and "illustration" and timely application, are further evidence 
that this was his own opinion. He, moreover, had become more conscious 
during his sojourn in America of the needs of "the reader." The subject, 
he confessed, was "difficult and abstract," and "when writing my Phi-
losophy of Symbolic Forms I was so engrossed in the subject itself that 
I forgot or neglected" wise maxims about style and presentation. He said 
all these things notwithstanding the fact that his first volume on Symbolic 
Forms had opened with an "Introduction and Presentation of the Prob­
lem." In retrospect, in 1944, he saw that for the reader's sake it would be 
necessary to provide more guidance and interpretation. 
But what about making the work itself, the Philosophy of Symbolic 
Forms, available? There seemed to be no immediate prospect after Cas­
sirer's death of providing for a translation. Nevertheless, his pupils, friends, 
and admirers started a movement of interpretation through the publica­
tion of his other writings. Thus his associates at Columbia brought out 
the inaugural volume of a new series in the History of Ideas, a translation 
of two essays, Kant and Rousseau and Goethe and the Kantian Philosophy, 
done by James Gutmann, Paul Oskar Kristeller, and John Hermann Ran­
dall, Jr., and published under the title Rousseau, Kant, Goethe by Prince­
ton University Press (1945). Then Susanne K. Langer made a translation 
of Sprache und Mythos, published in 1946 as Language and Myth by 
Harper and Brothers. This particular work offers an illuminating side­
light upon the development of the Philosophy of Symbolic Forms, inas­
much as it had been published in 1925, between the second part dealing 
with Myth and the third part on Science. Mrs. Langer's translation had 
been preceded, moreover, by her own book, Philosophy in a Neu> Key, 
that presented a view of Cassirer's theory of form and symbol with great 
freshness and vivacity. In her preface to the translation Mrs. Langer paid 
an enthusiastic tribute to his "new philosophical insight." The interest in 
Cassirer was thus being directed toward the Philosophy of Symbolic 
Forms, and readers were being prepared for it. 
Then, too, a memorial volume. The Philosophy of Ernst Cassirer, ap­
peared in 1949. It had been in preparation before Cassirer's death as a 

P R E F A C E 
xüi 
volume in the Library of Living Philosophers under the editorship of Paul 
Arthur Schilpp, Evanston, Illinois. The contributors to that volume had 
been previously endorsed by Cassirer himself, as the scholars qualified to 
speak of and criticize his work. Those contributors wrote their parts as 
joint authors and not as coUaborators, which thus makes all the more 
significant their unanimous agreement that "the philosophy of Cassirer" 
is essentially contained in the work on Symbolic Forms. Several of the 
essays are wholly or in large part devoted to the interpretation of this work 
—those by Carl H . Hamburg, I . K. Stephens, Felix Kaufmann, Dimitry 
Gawronsky, Robert S. Hartman, Folke Leander, M. F. Ashley Montagu, 
Susanne K. Langer. But it is even making invidious distinctions to cite a 
limited number without referring to the remainder of the authors. In one 
place or another everyone testifies to the value of the Philosophy of Sym-
bolic Forms as original and important philosophy. But the tribute of Wil­
bur M. Urban is particularly noteworthy, for he was not related as a pupil 
to Cassirer and wrote as a philosopher of the same generation, being also 
a student of the philosophy of language and a recognized spokesman, as 
Cassirer himself was, of modern idealism. 
Instead of the usual "Reply of the Author," the memorial volume con­
tained a concluding piece, " 'Spirit' and 'Life' in Contemporary Philoso­
phy," where Cassirer had taken his stand with respect to both the philoso­
phy of "Spirit" and the philosophy of "Life." The original work had 
appeared in 1930, close upon the third volume of the Symbolic Forms in 
1929, and it defines Cassirer's position in contemporary philosophy by refer­
ence to that work. The "explaining" of the Symbolic Forms had already 
begun in Germany, in the very year after publication. 
This piece and the various essays collected in The Philosophy of Ernst 
Cassirer offer expert help toward understanding. For the reader who 
is confining himsetf to what is translated into English other side lights 
are obtainable through recent publications. The fourth volume of the 
Problem of Knowledge, translated by William H . Woglom and Charles W. 
Hendel, was published in 1950 by the Yale University Press. Written by 
Cassirer in 1940, eleven years after the third part of the Symbolic Forms, 
it approaches the theory "from a different angle" and shows it "in a new 
light." The Philosophy of the Enlightenment appeared in 1951, translated 
by Fritz C. A. Koeln and James P. Pettegrove and published by the 
Princeton University Press. The work had come out in Germany in 1932. 
Here the investigator of cultural forms shows his own genius of inter-

X I V 
P R E F A C E 
pretation in dealing with a historical period where he exhibits the unity 
and the interrelationships of its natural science, psychology, epistemology, 
religion, history, state and society, aesthetics and art. Such a work brings 
to this "abstract and difficult subject" the concreteness and fullness of life 
of a work of art which, according to Cassirer's own view, is also a form 
of knowledge. 
These versions of Cassirer besides his own two last writings have become 
available to English readers since his death and afford them various op­
portunities to come to know his philosophy. But it may be questioned 
whether this is enough for "the reader" about whom Cassirer had become 
concerned. Is it enough to refer him beyond the volume in which he is 
reading to a diverse collection of books and learned critical articles? Is the 
reader to be expected to glean from a set of very different pieces the needed 
explanation of this "abstract and difficult subject"? Surely Cassirer would 
have provided some foreword of his own "for the reader" of today. 
Nobody can supply the introduction as Cassirer himself might have done, 
nor will any attempt be made in the following Introduction to "explain" 
the work. Nevertheless some help may be offered in the form of an inter­
pretation which looks forward as well as backward, which not only dwells 
on those "rich sources of inspiration" of which he speaks himself (p. 71) 
but also construes the work of those years 1923-29 in the light of the ideas 
in the works which were published subsequendy and which show the new 
direction of thought and the reflection upon old problems. A friend and 
student can sometimes do, moreover, what the modesty of the philosopher 
himself would never aUow him to do; that is, to present a view of him as 
a historic figure and venture to say where he stands in the development of 
modern thought. 
What foUows in the Introduction, then, is an interpretation for that 
reader about whom Cassirer was so solicitous. The further warrant for so 
doing may be found in his own words in An Essay on Man (pp. z84-185): 
" . · . . human works are vulnerable . . . They are subject to change and 
decay . . . in a mental sense. Even if their existence continues they are in 
constant danger of losing their meaning. Their reality is symbolic^not 
physical; and such reaUty never ceases to require interpretation and reinter¬
pretation." 
March 10,1953 

Introduction by Charles W. Hendel 
" W H E N SPEAKTOG of Plato in his Critique of Pure Reason" Cassirer wrote, 
quoting Kant himsetf, "it is by no means unusual upon comparing the 
thoughts which an author has expressed in regard to his subject. . . to 
find that we understand him better than he has understood himself. As he 
has not sufficiendy determined his concept, he has sometimes spoken, or 
even thought, in opposition to his own intention." Then Cassirer goes on 
to speak for himsetf: "The history of philosophy shows us very clearly 
that the fuU determination of a concept is very rarely the work of that 
, thinker who first introduced that concept. For a philosophical concept is 
generally speaking rather a problem than the solution of a problem—and 
the full significance of this problem cannot be understood so long as it is 
still in its first implicit state. It must become explicit in order to be compre­
hended in its true meaning and this transition from an impUcit to an ex-
phcit state is the work of the future." 1 
What Cassirer said in endorsing and developing Kant's remarks apropos 
of Plato's thought we may say with pertinence of Cassirer himself, that a 
concept first implicit in earlier philosophy had a future when it became 
explicit in the philosophy of Ernst Cassirer. And the concept in question 
is that of "symbolic form." 
The reader's first query is likely to be:what does the expression "symbolic 
form" mean? And another naturaUy follows—why is that concept so 
significant that the whole of a philosophy should be centered about it and 
named after it? 
ι . T H E P H I L O S O P H Y 
O F F O R M I N 
K A N T 
The recollection of Kant is ever-present in the pages of Cassirer's writing. 
Whenever he started for any goal he went back to the philosophy of Kant 
I . Cassirer, An Essay on Man, p. 180. Thc reference to Kant is Critique 
of Pure 
Reason 
(ad ed., 1787), B 370. Trans, by Norman Kemp Smith (London, MacmilIan, 1929), p. 310. 
• 

2 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
as a base from which to proceed. And it was specifically the Kantian con­
ception of"form" that was basic for the whole of his thought. The concept 
apparently had proven suggestive of possibilities to him beyond those 
realized by Kant himself. And Cassirer made the concept "explicit" so that 
it could be "comprehended in its true meaning." 
Even Kant himsetf in making that comment on Pkto in the second 
edition of the Critique ofPure Reason may well have spoken from the wis­
dom of his own experience: an author often does not first grasp the full 
import of his own conceptions. The new preface Kant wrote for the second 
edition constituted a reinterpretation of his own work—and Cassirer, it 
should be noted, never fails to dwell on its significance. There Kant had 
sought to make more precise the nature of the revolutionary point of view 
of his Critical Philosophy. A radical change of oudook was required: 
, philosophy in the form of the metaphysics of pure reason had fallen from 
grace in the eyes of inteUigent men. On the other hand natural science 
- enjoyed the very greatest credit and it elicited, too, the most impressive 
efforts of mind from the men of genius at that time, the age of Newton. 
Kant had studied the secret of that unquestioned scientific achievement. 
Science was not haunted by unnerving skepticism as metaphysics had been. 
It provided for its own correction without losing enterprise and cogency. 
It guarded against building hypotheses often mistakenly assumed to be 
facts. In this respect scientific knowledge was better off than even the 
empiricist philosophy which seemed so close to it but which was nonethe­
less quite as far away from the right method of knowledge as rationalism 
had been. Hume had truly seen what philosophy was coming to^nothing 
but doubt, uncertainty and contradiction." 2 With youthful prescience, at 
the end of the first book of his Treatise of Human Nature, he had described 
himsetf as having ventured out to sea on a frail raft and being ever and 
again frightened by the unknown reefs and dangerous waters of the deep 
and fated to be tossed in that "suspense of judgment," the name for which 
is skepticism. How could a modern philosopher ever proceed with any more 
confidence than Hume, whether he take the way of pure reason or that of 
experience? Kant perceived the fundamental need of a fresh charting of 
the course beforehand by means of a new philosophical astronomy, some­
thing comparable with that of Copernicus in the physical world. It is the 
orientation and the proper method that must first be determined. Both the 
rationaUstic and the empiricist philosophies had one assumption in com¬
2. Hume, Didogucs 
concerning Natural Religion, Pt. I . 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
3 
mon which resulted in both terminating in a skepticism from which noth­
ing positive seemed forthcoming. They had assumed that in knowledge 
one could possess what is ultimately real, either in terms of sense informa­
tion or in the form of rational thought. One reflection had apparenUy not 
occurred to the philosophers, or if it had, it had been forgotten as they be­
came absorbed in their systems of thought, namely, that there are limita-
tions in the nature of the case, for since man is involved in the knowing, 
his doing so has part in the resultant knowledge and so there can be no 
pure transcript of the truth in either sense or reason. We must study the 
knowing before we can claim a knowledge of something beyond it caUed 
ultimate reahty. There is no doubt about the knowing^:ertainly it is itsetf 
a fact, but there is a question concerning the character of the relation be* 
tween the knowing and the reality known. And the change of oudook Kant 
proposes is stated as a hypothesis: instead of assuming that our knowledge 
^represents absolutely what is real, suppose we proceed with the idea in mind 
: that whatever reaUty we do know is precisely such as "conforms to" our hu-
^man ways of knowing. Philosophy may then be able to advance securely as 
science had already done. 
It was to "the exact sciences," as Cassirer later designated them,8 that 
Kant had looked for his examples of the value and the truth of this new 
view of knowledge. It had been very early realized by the ancient Greek 
geometers that knowledge is not what one sees in the geometrical figure, 
or even what he can trace out as contained in his pure concept of the figure; 
knowledge must be brought about through a construction of thought, made 
in accordance with a priori concepts which are not in the foreground for 
inspection but which nonetheless determine whatever is relevant to the 
matter at hand.4 This remarkable aspect of knowledge, the role both of the 
a priori and of thought constructions, was not rcaHzed in natural science 
until modern times. Several physicists served as good examples of the right 
procedure, Galileo and TorriceUi, for instance; and foter Stahl, aU of whom 
grasped the truth that reason only possesses insight into that which reason 
itsetf constructs according to its own plan, and hence that reason must take 
the lead with its own proposals, and then by means of experiment eUcit 
from nature precise answers to them. It is only because reason has a priori 
principles—to answer Hume, for example—that the experienced "conjunc-
3. The title of Part I of thc fourth yolume of Oat Erkenntnisproblem, 
The Problem of 
Knowledge. 
4. A paraphrase of Critique of Pure Reason, B 12-x3. 
/ 

4 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
tion" of appearances can be taken as a rule for or law of these things. By 
' virtue of the universal concept of cause and effect a priori man is able to 
order the material of his experience according to causal law and then to 
discover empirically the various particular laws of science. That is the first 
condition of knowledge, the a priori concept treated as a rule for the or­
ganization of the data. The second condition is the experimentation which 
tests the particular theory conceived in accordance with the ruling princi­
ples of thought. Experiment is not merely supplying more pieces of ex­
perience, for reason is involved in aU genuine experiment and is necessary 
if one is to learn anything from it. And further when reason does receive 
the sought-for instruction from nature it is not at all in that too familiar 
role of a docile pupil who only repeats what the teacher says; reason acts 
rather as a judge possessing authority who can require a witness to answer 
to the point, andprecisely to those questions, too, that are asked.5 
Kant had mixed his metaphors liberally but they conveyed the sense 
well enough. Reason is two-handed, and the operation of knowing requires 
y both hands. With one hand man constructs a theory of the order of things 
and events in nature according to an inner plan; with the other he frames 
г the experiments in accordance with that preformed theory which wUl put 
nature through her course and subject the theory to the test. At this junc­
ture nature looms large on the scene as being able either to dispose of 
the theoretical construction or to confirm it through the event. But in de­
scribing the relation of man to nature, even in that last phase where nature 
tells the answer, the image of man changes from that of a simple learner 
to that of a judge with authority. However, one should remember here the 
limits of authority according to Kant who was so strong in his faith in 
freedom—it is the function of a judge to render the decision which the evi­
dence in court sustains and to abide by it, never to overrule it. When all these 
roles are played by man in his several parts and by nature, then man obtains 
genuine scientific knowledge. There is a time for him to propose theory 
and a time to await the disposition of nature. Every factor in the procedure 
has its distinctive function and place in the achievement of knowledge, both 
nature and man, and man's theory and man's experimentation and man's 
rational judgment exercised on the basis of the evidence of experience. 
Knowledge is the outcome of such complex rapports and processes. But 
there is a special emphasis upon the forwardness, or better, the responsi­
bility of man in the whole affair. A faithful Kantian will always remember 
5. Critique, B 13-14. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
5 
this, as Cassirer did, and it is not surprising that be kter bethought himself 
of An Essay on Man. 
Examples or iÜustrations are always used at some risk to the meaning, 
and Kant's references to the way of learning in science have had a mis­
leading effect. There has been a common opinion that Kant is entitled to 
fame only for his fresh and original analysis of the nature of scientific 
method. Whatever else he has done may be of dubious value, but this, it 
is thought, may pass as his solid achievement which survives the uncertain 
fate of his bold adventure in the three Critiques as weU as the large corpus 
of other writings. Since Kant's day the "scientific method in philosophy" 
has been so exalted that there is none other beside it. In consequence phikv 
sophical thinking tends to be assimilated to scientific thinking, and the 
adventure of philosophy has often come to be regarded as only a prekmi-
nary phase of science and the employment of the same method in fields 
the knowledge of whose material has not yet attained the definitive formu-
ktion of a strict science. Those who hold such views tend to read Kant as 
if the whole of the instruction proffered in the Critique were already con­
tained in these illustrative passages in the preface to the work. It is easy 
, to do this for other reasons: Kant gready admired Newtonian physics 
and spoke of it as the perfect example of the knowledge of nature. Add 
to this his strongly negative criticism of metaphysics, and the case seems 
complete that Kant was in reality arguing for the reduction of phUosopby 
to science. But Cassirer rejected vigorously such a view of Kant and righdy 
so. Science may properly be cited as the best example and yet not be con­
sidered to be in itself the ultimate ideal of knowledge. It is stUl only an 
"cxample"-a term Kant had repeatedly emphasized in the preface. But 
if so then other examples are conceivable. Kant also caUed the cases cited 
"analogies." 6 They indicated what ought to obtain anabgously in philoso­
phy. But it must be remembered that there is always more in the thing 
being introduced by analogy than is contained in the instance used for that 
introductory purpose. The analogies in this instance give the idea of an 
appropriate procedure for philosophy, one that might be as fruitful for 
progress in philosophy as the method of science had been in the knowledge 
y of nature. But this implies that philosophy is itsetf a distinctive mode of 
knowledge and is not reducible to science. 
And Kant was actually thinking in that preface of varying modes of 
knowledge. Mathematics, he says, has an ideal perfection for it is purely 
6. Had, B i6. 

б 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
a priori and absolutely certain; but it has no intrinsic connection with the 
, appearances in time and space. Science bears a resemblance to mathematics 
in the functional priority of its principles and theories, but in addition these 
a priori elements are applied to experience and yield genuine knowledge 
of nature. This is the realm of the understanding. But the understanding, 
Kant emphasizes, draws upon "experience which is itself another mode 
of knowledge." T Furthermore, as itself a "mode of knowledge," experience 
depends upon understanding with its a priori elements. Thus several modes 
' of knowledge are distinguished and at the same time they are related to 
each other. Experience, unintelligible without the understanding, is one 
extreme and pure mathematics with its apriority the other, and between 
them is science which is at once the knowledge of whatever appears in 
space and time and the matter of experience and knowledge in a mode 
that possesses the certainty of mathematics. There is here suggested a kind 
of progression in these contrasted modes of knowledge—experience, mathe­
matics, science. What then of metaphysics, which is also enumerated in 
the sequence? Is it a relapse or break in the progress, when pure reason 
runs wild and is neither mathematical nor empirical? Well, whatever meta­
physics may have been in the past, Kant clearly intends that any future 
metaphysic, as his title to the work intervening between the first and second 
editions of the Critique, A Prolegomena to Every Future Metaphysic, re­
veals, shall be a further advance beyond other modes of knowledge, even 
beyond natural science. He claims, in fact, in this very Critique that he has 
made a "successful attempt . . . at setting metaphysics on the secure path 
of genuine knowledge." 8 
However, the Critique is not itself a full-fledged "system of knowledge" 
or metaphysics but only the prior condition of a possible metaphysics. It 
is, Kant says, "a tractate on method," since the first step in advance is "to 
transform the previous procedure of metaphysics." 9 
The transformation is as momentous as a Copernican revolution, a 
wholly new orientation toward the problem of knowledge. It is the hy­
pothesis that, instead of human knowledge being shaped to reality, it is 
our human judgment which determines whatever is to have the character 
of being reality for us. The roles are reversed—the judgment conditions 
reality. 
7. lbid., B 17. 
8. Ibid., B 18-19. 
9. Ibid., B aa-23. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
7 
* The prime task of this new philosophy then is to study "the forms of 
judgment" through which we attain to a genuine and certain knowledge 
of objective reahty. So the philosopher is only taking his cue from the 
method of knowledge in science. The actual procedure in philosophy will 
have to be distinct from that in science and relative to the subject matter. 
For a new subject matter has been discerned. AU the "modes of knowl­
edge," experience, science, and mathematics, apparently involve a priori 
factors. The problem is to discover them and determine precisely what 
they are. And the "speculative reason" has this "peculiarity" about it, that 
it can from its own resources delimit its own competence and spell out 
completely the various modes in which it determines whatever shall be 
objects of knowledge. For in respect of the principles of knowledge there 
is a distinct and self<onsistent "unity in which every member is there for 
the sake of aU the others and all for one just as in an organised body." 1 0 
This organic corpus of principles, as it were, is the proper study of the 
Kantian metaphysics. 
Since Kant had drawn his "analogies" and "examples" from physics, it 
is important to distinguish at once between the universal principles of any 
knowledge, principles which are metaphysical, and the special principles 
of a science, which are particular laws. What Kant has said about a priori 
elements is that they are not a lot of scattered and random factors but an 
organic unity. They are not arbitrary inventions or ad hoc assumptions. 
They are the conditions of aU knowledge which has the true marks of uni­
versality and necessity. But knowledge is always particular and definite as 
weU—it is the knowledge of what is actually given in sensuous intuition 
and experience. Here there is plenty of contingency. The discovery of any 
law of physics depends upon the data that pose the problem, and they can­
not pose a problem except for a mind ready to perceive it and equipped by 
previous knowledge and experience to theorize concerning the matter at 
hand. The special theory of physics—that of Galileo or of Torricelli, whom 
Kant cited—does involve a particular genius who can discover what is not 
apparent to others or not yet accepted in the science to date. This is the 
empirical level of advancing knowledge. But aU this play of scientific dis­
covery takes place upon a foundation which is not variable or dependent 
upon special genius—the foundation of any knowledge whatsoever, that 
which enables us to envisage the eventual law as being universal and neces­
sary and thus possessing the character of being objectively true. The critical 
io. Ibid., B 23. 

8 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
study of this foundation in reason is a new logic underlying aU knowledge. 
* The a priori elements are "forms" of reason, using "reason" in the large 
? sense indicated above. It is only by virtue of form that there can be uni-
\ versality and necessity in the knowledge of the things of the world in space 
and time, the matter of our experience. Form, then, is the distinctive subject 
matter of this new philosophy of knowledge. 
But Kant anticipated a question coming from others who still cherished 
the ancient subjects of metaphysics—such as God, freedom, and immortal­
ity. Was he not confining philosophy unduly when he limited it to the 
, a priori conditions of knowledge ? Yet form is so central that the systematic 
analysis of it as it appears in the whole range of experience and action takes 
the philosopher over the entire universe of human interest and thought. 
In the preface Kant refers to the ethical realm and the realm of beauty and 
sublimity and that of religious and theological interest.11 A comprehensive 
philosophy is foreshadowed, and besides this first critique, "the metaphysics 
of knowledge,"there will be the second, "the metaphysics of ethics," and 
the third which is at once a metaphysics of nature and art and teleology. 
The first semblance of undue restriction disappears as the scope of this 
philosophy of form comes to be grasped. 
It is Cassirer's language that we have been using in this interpretation 
of the preface to the second edition of the first Critique. Kant's own name 
>for hisphilosophy was "critical" or "transcendental." The latter term is not 
to be thought of in connection with transcendence. This philosophy is not 
pretending to treat of transcendent things of a higher order,so to speak, 
than man's experience in this world. The name of the philosophy is derived 
from the new method, and the method is so strangely named because of the 
unobvious nature of the problem. Cassirer explains Kant as foUows: 
His transcendental method has to assume "the fact of the sciences" as 
> given, and seeks only to understand the possibihty of this fact, its logi­
cal conditions and principles. But even so, Kant does not stand merely 
in a position of dependence on the factual stuff of knowledge, the mate­
rial offered by the various sciences. Kant's basic conviction and presup-
" position consists rather of this, that there is a universal and essential 
form of knowledge, and that philosophy is called upon and quaUfied 
to discover this form and establish it with certainty. The critique of 
! reason achieves this by reflective thought upon the function of knowl-
I I . Ibid* B 3 2 - 3 3 6 . 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
9 
ι edge instead of upon its content. It discovers this function in judgment, *:>? 
and to understand judgment in its universal structure and in its specifica­
tion in different lines becomes one of the main problems of the critique.13 
F O R M 
A N D 
F U N C T I O N 
It is this functional aspect of form in Kant's philosophy that is relevant to 
our purpose. The Kantian position in general is of course quite famUiar 
to readers of modern philosophy. Space and time are two "pure forms of 
sensuous intuition." Then there is a galaxy of twelve "pure forms of under­
standing," the prime instances of which are the two categories or relational 
concepts that relate things perceived in space and time in terms of cause 
and effectand of substance and attribute. Both classes of forms, the "sensi­
ble" and the "intelligible," are a priori, that is, they are not learned from 
experience in the course of time nor derived by inductively generalizing 
from particulars. In contradistinction to the forms aU contents of knowledge 
are given through the contacts of experience—this is the material and it is 
assimilated and understood only by virtue of the a priori forms of both 
intuition and thought. Nothing ever enters our ken without conforming 
to their combined prescription. The forms are the universal and necessary 
conditions of the very first appearance of anything whatsoever to our hu­
man perception, and furthermore of its becoming progressively inteUigible 
to our understanding. The forms are thus "constitutive" of our whole ex­
perience of the world. 
Kant overstated his point in the phrase "the understanding ma\es na­
ture." What he showed, however, was that nature is understood in accord­
ance with such forms of the mind. Though nature-understood, is the only 
nature there is, yet not aU of nature is understanding-made. The content 
or the appearances are independent, and it is only their inteUigible order 
and form that derive from the constitution of man's mind. The over­
emphasis of Kant's statement seems due to a further thought about the 
creative role of man in connection with form. Later in his philosophy what 
is only a matter of "faith" in this first critique, viz, that man has freedom, 
is asserted as a justifiable postulate of reason, bi the present passage where 
12. The ProbUm of KnowUdge, pp. 14-15. 

1 0 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
Kant speaks of the making of nature by the understanding he may be 
anticipating that later assertion. The contention here is this, that the world 
is "constituted" in accordance with the forms of man's intuition and under­
standing. This constitutive function of the forms is the theme of Cassirer. 
As conditions under which appearances in space and time become knowa-
ble, the forms seem to be underlying logical factors. They are "transcen­
dental elements" which can only be grasped through an intellectual analysis 
by the philosopher and through his constructing a theory (for Kant emu­
lates the scientist in his own procedure here) explaining how knowledge 
as we actually have it is possible. Everything involved in this proceeding is 
"transcendental," the analysis, the theoretical construction, the elements, 
and the forms among the elements. The term "transcendental" which is 
applied to all of these items marks the fact that none of them is direcdy 
or empirically identifiable. We do not find in our direct experience that 
we first receive sensations and then construe them by means of a priori 
concepts (also distinguishable as being there prior to our thinking in terms 
of them) and then fashion the result into knowledge. Even the content 
or material of knowledge as an element must be transcendental: it is only 
distinguishable as a moment or factor in the analysis of knowledge. Con­
cretely we have appearances and experience, and in experience these ele­
ments and factors are already funded or, to use Kant's expression, they are 
"constitutive." This was a point that Cassirer watched carefully and he 
remarked critically of his master: "Even Kant seems, in the first chapters 
of the Critique of Pure Reason, to start from this presupposition ['that 
the first data of human experience are in an entirely chaotic state']. Ex­
perience, he says, is no doubt the first product of our understanding. But 
it is not a simple fact; it is a compound of two opposite factors, of matter 
and form. The material factor is given in our sense perceptions; the formal 
factor is represented by our scientific concepts . . . " 1 3 But the phrase "Even 
Kant seems to start" implies that Kant eventually knew better or at least 
that he was plainer about his meaning, which Cassirer made plainer still 
by treating these elements of form and matter in a functional and not in 
a substantive way. The discriminations of content and form are made only 
for the logic of knowledge. 
Yet the choice of the term "constitutive" suggests a quasiontological 
meaning. For one must keep in mind the important difference in Kant's 
thought between logioordinary and his proposed transcendental logic. The 
13. Essay, pp. 207-208. Cf. Das Erkjcnntnisproblem, 
3, 6^7, 11. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
I I 
former or older logic was purely formal whereas this logic functions in 
organic rektion with the content of actual experience. Kant has argued 
both that there is a logical structure of aU empiricaUy given reaUty and 
that the logical forms are forms of the appearances or objects in the world. 
They are formal characters woven in, to use a Goethean metaphor, as in­
gredient of whatever is experienced and known. The world has determinate 
form in the very least experience of it, and such form is nothing that is 
merely externaUy superposed upon the material. For such a function of 
form in knowledge it is difficult to find a better descriptive term than the 
one Kant actuaUy used, viz, "constitutive." 
Another key phrase pregnant with meaning in the Kantian philosophy 
is "synthetic unity." It is everywhere discovered through the transcen­
dental analysis. While form and matter are distinguished from each other 
as weU as the forms of intuition and those of understanding, aU of them 
must be conceived in combination and in their functional relations with 
each other in the formation of knowledge. They are aU together involved 
in the constitution of experience which has the character of being a "syn­
thetic unity." Now it is true that Kant tends to reserve the term "synthesis" 
for the work of judgment in knowledge, the field to which it was first 
relevant. The difficulty which Hume had exposed concerning the princi­
ple of cause and effect in reasoning had been the foremost logical problem 
of the Critique. How can "necessary connection" ever be grounded logi-
caUy, in face of the obvious distinction between and possible separation of 
the idea of the cause and the idea of the effect in our actual experience? 
We presume that things are necessarUy related without having any insight 
into the supposed necessity of their connection. Thejustification which Kant 
gives is that in the very possession of experience there is already synthesis, 
that is, a necessary relationship according to rule, and this is the basic logi­
cal warrant for all specific inferences to cause or effect. This "proof is 
the burden of the Analytic of Concepts. However, the situation with re­
spect to cause and effect is reaUy typical of aU cases of human judgment. 
And the proposed way of solving the difficulty in general is to show that 
there is always a "synthetic unity of a manifold" which is only to be grasped 
through transcendental analysis. There is one order or "one experience" 
as there is "one nature." An "original synthetic unity of apperception" is 
the ground of aU knowledge whatsoever. But synthesis is so fundamental 
that it can no longer be thought of as applying only to concepts but is 
pertinent to aU that is analyzed as having any part in knowledge. The 

12 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
union of form and content and the combination of forms of sense and 
forms of understanding with each other and with the content or material-
all this is synthesis. And in order to take care of this complex synthesis Kant 
introduced another transcendental function, namely, the "productive im­
agination." It appears then that the task Kant had set himsetf was far from 
being fuhiUed merely when he achieved a "deduction of the categories" 
and answered Hume. He still had to make intelligible that complex con­
stituting of experience and knowledge in which sensuous intuition and 
logical concepts and matter are all synthesized in imagination. To this fur­
ther task Kant turned in the Analytic of PrincipUs. 
T H E 
S C H E M A * S 
T H E 
T H I N G 
At the outset of this further analysis there is a reminder that the "transcen­
dental" logic differs significantly from ordinary logic. The latter abstracts 
the form from all content and is purely formal; the transcendental logic 
is a "logic of truth" which involves the application of a priori forms or rules 
of thought to sensuous content. How is this application to be conceived? 
How does it happen that the a priori concepts can be applied as "princi­
ples" to particular contents? But "happen" is the wrong term, for it im­
plies that matters could be otherwise, or that there could be experience in 
which principles like cause and effect might be inapplicable. But no ex­
perience according to Kant's argument can ever show such a possibility 
of concepts and sensuous intuitions failing to meld. The question then is 
how we are to conceive the via media between concept and intuition in the 
actual construction of specific knowledge by the human understanding. 
Kant states his proposed solution as foUows: 
"It is clear that a third thingmust be given which must stand in a relation 
of being of the same sort (gleichartig) with the category on the one hand 
and with the appearance on the other, and which makes possible the ap­
plication of the former to the latter. The mediating representation must 
be pure (without anything empirical) and yet not simply intellectual; it 
must at the same time be sensuous. Such a thing is the transcendental 
schema." " 
14. Critique, A i37-138, B 176^177. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
The schema is the uniting "representation," the synthetic "medium" 
in which the forms of understanding and the sensuous intuitions are as­
similated so that they constitute experience. The schema comprises the 
category but contains more than a category can supply, ш this respect we 
can say that the schema is something better than the category, for it is 
more adequate, making possible what neither logical form nor content 
could yield by themselves. The schema has something of both in its nature 
—it is a sensuous-intellectual form. 
But the schema is not merely the medium through which the sensuous 
and the inteUectual are brought into unity. The affair is more complex 
than that. We are not to forget that whatever is matter of sensuous ap­
prehension always appears in the universal form of time. The schema must 
be a relation of the concepts of understanding with temporal appearances. 
Thus, for example, cause and effect is a concept relevant to the succession 
of events in the world and making definite the necessary connections of 
things that occur in time. As Kant himsetf explains: 
The concept of understanding contains pure synthetic unity of the 
manifold in general. Time as the formal condition of the manifold of 
the inner sense,1" and consequently the condition of the connection of 
representations, contains an a priori manifold in pure intuition. Now 
a transcendental time-determination is of the same sort as the category 
(which constitutes the unity of the same) insofar as it is universal and 
grounded on an a priori rule. But on the other hand it is also of the 
same sort with the appearance insofar as time is contained in every 
empirical representation of the manifold. So it foUows that an applica­
tion of the category to appearances is possible by means of the transcen­
dental determination of time which, as the schema of the concept of 
understanding, effects the subsumption of the appearances under the 
category.™ 
"Thus," Kant says toward the close of the section on the Schematism of 
the "Categories," "the schemata of the pure concepts of the understanding 
are the true and sole conditions that make possible any relationship of the 
concepts to objects, and consequently the conditions of their having any 
meaning." 1 7 The schemata of pure concepts are both "schemata of sensi-
15. 'Tnna 
seme." T h i i U a moot point the dis.union of which muM be by-paMcd herc 
where we are concerned only with the general purport of the passage. 
16. Critique, A 138-139, B 177-178. 
17. ttid., A 146-147, B 18j-186. 

14 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
bility" and "the first realization of the categories." In this fashion the 
schema is a more complete thing than either the category or the form of 
time or the sensuous content—it is aU these together, in their synthesis. 
But as such it is no longer merely logical in character—it is "real," in the 
sense of phenomenal, of being a concrete constituent of the appearances. 
Kant says: "Hence it foUows that the schema is actually only the phenome­
non, or the sensuous concept of an object in agreement with the category."18 
The "only" in that passage excludes an identification with ultimate reality 
or things in themselves. But it is striking enough that the schema should 
be itsetf called the "phenomenon" as far as it is consonant with the form 
of understanding. For this means that the schema is no longer a hidden 
"transcendental" factor only conceivable in and through an analysis. It is 
a real phenomenal presence. 
The schema's the thing that caught the imagination of Cassirer. He inter­
preted the whole subsequent post-Kantian philosophy in Germany by refer­
ence to it. And his own philosophy of symboUc form was a development of 
the possibilities of this new concept of form. 
It is worth noting in detail how important Kant's notion of schema had 
been in Cassirer's own thinking. In Kants Leben und Lehre (1916) he re­
garded that notion as the focal point of the constructive thought leading 
from the Critique of Pure Reason to the Critique of Judgment, the latter 
being expressly described as the "outcome of the further development of 
the transcendental schematism."19 Again the Introduction of the third 
volume of Das Er\enntnisproblem (1920) opens with a survey qf the out­
standing problems remaining to be solved by those who had mastered the 
total meaning of Kant's Critical Philosophy. Here the third work in the 
trilogy of critiques, the Critique of Judgment, was again spoken of as an 
"advance" upon "the abstract schematism" of the first Critique.20 Further­
more, the variety of the attempts at a solution made by the post-Kantian 
philosophers, from Fichte to Hegel, is not to be understood as merely due 
to subjective idiosyncrasies of the different philosophers but to the rich sug-
gestiveness of Kant's own development of the schema doctrine, a develop­
ment toward greater concreteness. There were many problems brought 
into focus in the teaching of the third critique, concerning the thing in 
itsetf, the a priori and synthetic unity and the antithesis of form and matter, 
but these all revolved about a new conception of one of the oldest problems 
18. ttrid., A 146-147, B 185-186. 
19. Cassirer, Kanu Leben und Lehre, esp. Chap. 6, pp. 291, 327-328, 336, 375-379· 
20. Das Erkenntnisproblem, 
3,13,15. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
15 
of philosophy, "the relation of universal and particular." All derived from 
the doctrine of schematism. And Cassirer closed his introductory remarks 
even with a play upon the word schema, saying that this very survey which 
he has just given itseff offers "a schema that enables us to orient ourselves 
to the main lines of future speculation." 2 1 
But it is also an orientation for his own philosophy. The notion of 
schema that enabled him to interpret the achievements of others hghted 
the way to his own position and he was fond of using the term and in 
quite new contexts of his own choosing. The primary meaning is stated 
thus: "The schema is the unity of concept and intuition, the common 
achievement of both factors." 2 2 Then in the Essay on Man he speaks of 
"that other schema which we call space." 2 3 In the same Essay he treats of 
Art as a concrete manifestation of the union of intuitive and structural 
form, in other words, the schema.24 This varied usage is to be traced even 
in the first volume on Symbolic Forms when he writes: "Thus the particu­
lar can be posited only on the basis of a universal schema which is merely 
fined with new concrete content as our experience of the 'thing' and its 
'attributes* progresses." 2 0 Farther in this same book when dealing specifi-
caUy with its subject of language he writes: "language possesses a schema," 
"a monogram of the pure imagination a priori." 2 4 
There is no doubt, then, that the imagination of Ernst Cassirer busied 
itsetf much with the concept of schema. Had he not been led by various 
other important considerations to the discovery of a more original theme 
and tide for his work, he might well have presented his own philosophy 
as an extension of the doctrine of Schema, for it is clearly a stage in his 
thinking toward the concept of "symbolic form." 
T H E 
T H K E E 
P R O B L E M S 
O F 
T H E 
C R I T I Q U E 
O F 
J U D G M E N T 
I N V O L V I N G 
T H E T H E O R Y 
O F 
F o R M 
It is necessary to examine more closely Cassirer's preoccupation with the 
Critique of Judgment in order to realize the important development of 
21. Ibid., 
3,16. 
22. Ibid., 3, I I . 
23. Essay, p. 51. 
24. Ibid., chap, on "Ait," pp. 137-170 and csp. 167-169. 
25. See below, p. 102. 
26. See beIow, p. 200. 

l6 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
the philosophy of form in that work. He makes a great point of the fact 
that this third Critique brings to fulfillment the thought of the previous 
Critiques. This opinion confirms, of course, Kant's own view that he there 
reconciled the moral freedom of man with the universal lawfulness of 
nature. But some critics have belittled the motive and purpose of Kant's 
undertaking in this work when they suppose that he was merely animated 
by his love of system, and consequently they see here only a medley of 
really unrelated themes lumped together in an artificial unity of "archi­
tectonic," the whole lot somehow construed together by a reference to the 
transcendental imagination. But Cassirer wages war vigorously against 
this opinion. He has found in this Critique an important new inquiry that 
penetrated "to the uttermost depths, the very fundamentals of the Kantian 
structure of thought itself," and that showed besides a prevision of the 
"problems of profoundest significance in the cultural development of the 
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries."27 The third Critique is no artificial 
synthesis, then, but the maturest work of a philosopher pursuing a logical 
and comprehensive inquiry which developed his own philosophy and at 
the same time interpreted a whole "epoch." 
The great problems of the "epoch" which Cassirer selected for attention 
were three in number, the unity of empirical science, purpose in nature, 
and the nature of art. How these aU belong together was the special con­
cern of Cassirer the historian in his two writings, Kants Leben und Lehre 
and the third volume of Das Er\enntnisproblem which gives an opening 
survey of the state of the philosophical questions before the post-Kantian 
philosophy begins. 
T H E 
F U N C T I O N 
O F T H E I D E A O F 
S Y S T E M 
I N T H E 
O R G A N ­
I Z A T I O N 
O F 
S C I E N T I F I C 
K N O W L E D G E 
The first problem is a direct consequence of the Analytic of Principles 
in the Critique of Pure Reason which examines the employment of con­
cepts in the actual construction of specific scientific knowledge. The forms 
of understanding have previously been deduced logically as necessary to 
the constitution of the experience from which manwill derive aU his knowl-
27. Kants Leben, pp. 291 and 
375. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
17 
cdgc in detail of what actually happens in nature. But the further applica­
tion of any of these logical concepts as a principle must always be made to 
what is reaUy contingent material of sensuous intuition. And then one 
gains a determinate concept of an actual relationship of phenomena in 
space and time. An example is the concept of some definite causal k w ex­
pressing a necessary connection between things in nature. The law of 
falling bodies, as a Galileo or Newton determines it, is also such an em­
pirical concept in the sense that it cannot be analyzed out and deduced 
a priori solely from the concepts of matter and motion but depends like­
wise on what nature shows upon inquiry and experiment. Any knowl­
edge so acquired is always a piece of knowledge, the conception of some 
particular determinate law. Here a new aspect of the nature of aU our 
knowledge calls for examination: notwithstanding the step-by-step and 
piecemeal advance in scientific knowledge from law to law and truth to 
truth there is consistent progress and an integration of these Uws and 
truths into a comprehensive knowledge of the structure of the world. How 
is that unity among the empirical laws possible? How are we to under­
stand this fact about science itself that it progressively moves toward uni­
fication and systematic relationship? This is the occasion for a critique— 
for it is something to wonder at and it must be made intelligible through 
a further analysis and reflection. The older philosophy took a leap at this 
point without any consciousness of the seriousness of the problem. The 
system attained in knowledge was assumed without question to reflect 
the reality of a "system of nature" and many philosophers proceeded 
straightway to base a theistic inference to a cause of nature upon such an 
assumption of the perfection of system or order in reality. That procedure 
had been righdy questioned by the skeptics uke Hume. 2 8 Let us stick, 
Kant said in effect, to the new point of view of our critique of reason and 
only say this much at the outset, that there is a unity and system in our 
knowledge. We do not reaUy have a grasp of the system of nature as a 
whole so that we can proceed therefrom "to specify aU the particular kws 
and individual cases" which actually constitute our material knowledge 
of science as "subsumptions" under a comprehensive universal concept.29 
Our logic does not yet reach that far. Here, however, is an arresting fact, 
that our science does proceed toward perfect system as toward a goal, as if 
the ultimate system were guaranteed from the first. What human reason 
28. Sec Hume, Dialogues concerning Natural 
Religion. 
29. Kants Leben, pp. a94, 312. 

i8 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
is "guided by" in this progress of its science of nature is something new 
to the critical argument. It is the Idea, a guiding or "regulative" principle. 
It is a rule implicit in the sce%ing of knowledge. It is a postdate of the 
inquiring consciousness and its justification is to be found in the fact of 
scientific progress toward unity and system. 
This concept of the "regulative" Idea in the first Critique was destined 
to have quite a history in the third Critique. It was when Kant was propos­
ing this meaning for the term "Idea" that he made the above^uoted re­
mark about Plato, that he had introduced something into the history of 
thought of whose significance even he had not the clearest appreciation or 
even a consistent view. Kant believed that he himsetf was now giving the 
concept "Idea" its true characterization as a guiding principle toward the 
goal of empirical knowledge, a goal which is organic with the parts of truth 
out of which it is necessarily constructed. This organic conception of the 
contingent knowledge of empirical natural science is the first problem 
which occasions the inquiries of the third Critique. 
T H E 
C O N C E P T 
O F 
P u R P O S I V E 
F O R M 
I N T H E 
K N O W L E D G E 
O F 
N A T U R E 
Independent of this theme is another problem which anyone who had 
attended carefully to the state of knowledge in his day would not fail to 
examine as another "fact." There is the case of what was then called "natu­
ral history," and in later times biological science. Here the inquiring mind 
of man "ascribes to an existing thing a purposive character as being the ex­
pression of an inner form." 3 0 The older metaphysics had again uncritically 
assumed at once the reaUty of purpose in nature. We must follow the rule 
of the new Critical Philosophy and see instead that there is a problem here 
—the problem, namely, "by what right do we ascribe purposiveness to 
any phenomenon of nature? 3 1 Is the very concept of purpose a legitimate 
one as a principle to be applied to nature? 
There is a point of similarity between this problem and the previous 
one: we are asking in the first case whether we have a right to construe the 
30. Ibid., p. 303. 
3r. Ibid., pp. 303, 360. Cf. Problem of Knowledge, pp. 120, 124-125. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
19 
whole mechanism of the world as a system and, in the second case, whether 
we have the right to envisage a reahn within Nature as everywhere gov­
erned by an additional principle of purpose, ш both cases the critical phi-
bsophy refrains from attributing either the system or the purpose directly 
to Nature but recognizes that they are nevertheless essential and relevant 
to our knowledge. Hence the examination of both cases is a fundamental 
task for "the critique of knowledge." 
But an advance is achieved in this critique of knowledge in the realm 
of natural history or biology. According to Cassirer, Kant in studying the 
"problem of organic purposive forms gains a new and richer concept of 
nature." 8 2 Though the problem is analogous with that of the system of 
empirical knowledge it also discloses something new and signally differ­
ent. In physical science man proceeds with his research and discovery by 
constructing a whole out of parts, thanks to the regulative Idea of the 
whole; but in biological research the scientist sees in any individual or­
ganism the whole actually given and as already determinative of the several 
distinct parts.33 The whole is present, in a sense, in the beginning and in 
the very appearances where we can identify parts. Here nature offers to 
the imagination of man what that imagination is seeking and what it 
demands for satisfaction. That remarkable suitabiUty of the organic form 
in nature to the imagination of man is the thing to marvel at and explore 
further in this "transcendental" philosophy. 
T H E 
P U R E 
C O N C R E T E 
F o R M 
I N A K T 
In his discussion o f this second problem o f the Critique of Judgment 
Kant has aheady advanced beyond "the abstract schematism" o f the earUer 
Critique. 3 4 But the treatment of the third problem, that o f art, makes 
greater strides toward concreteness. For art is the "reahn of pure forms." 3 8 
"A work of art is an individual and distinct thing, something seh>contained 
and possessing its own purpose within itsetf; yet there is at the same time 
represented in it a new 'whole,' a new total image o f reakty and o f the 
32. Das Er\enntnisprobUm, 
3,15; see ako Kants Leben, p. 361. 
33. Kants 
Leben, 
pp. 362-363. 
34. Das ErkcnntnisprobUm. 
3, 14-15. 
35. Kanu Leben, p. 327. CL Essay, chap, on "Art." p. 148. 

20 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
spiritual cosmos." 3 8 Oncc again if is the phenomenon of consciousness we 
are to examine critically, the distinctive judgment. The aesthetic con­
sciousness possesses a unique form of concrete fulfillment: while being com­
pletely engrossed with its own passing states it apprehends even in those 
momentary conditions that which is of absolutely timeless signification." 3 T 
Here at last the imagination can be perfectly satisfied: art is the manifesta­
tion of pure, concrete form. 
The whole discussion of these three problems resolves itself into the one 
great question concerning form and its function. As Cassirer expresses it, 
each one of these special problems has to do with "the formation of that 
which is individual." 3 8 Or we may say alternatively, it is the problem of 
the relation of form and the individual in all existence. Thus in the first 
case each particular law of the physical world has its specific character only 
within a total system of concepts of the special science to which it belongs, 
and only by reference to that whole does it have its individual status as 
a particular law of that science. Otherwise the so<alled knowledge might 
be only some chance apprehension of an actual regular connection of events 
but it would not be understood because it would not be seen in relation­
ship with aU the other known connections. Thus if any individual law is 
apprehended, the whole must be conceptually in mind. In the second case, 
that of the knowledge of organisms, there is the phenomenon of "indi­
vidual forms" and they are organic beings in which the whole is realized 
as essentially determining the nature and function of the parts. Here the 
individual forms seem more "natural" and are not attributed to any obvi­
ous artifice of the mind of the inquirer. There is, as Kant calls it, a "prin­
ciple of formal purposiveness" involved in our understanding of individual 
form in nature. But the most direct and immediate apprehension of indi­
viduality and form is in art, which is a concrete representation where the 
phenomenon is experienced as the whole being determinant of the parts 
and disclosing itself through them. Here form is both "pure" and "con­
crete." 3 9 Thus the drift of this entire argument, Cassirer claims, is toward 
a new view of universal and particular as they are together involved in 
the realization of individual form. 4 0 
36. Kants Leben, p. 328. 
37. Ibid., p. 331. 
38. Ibid., pp. 306, 327, 363. 
39. Ibid., pp. 327-334. Cf. Essay, pp. 145-148. 
40. Das Erkcnntnisproblem, 
3,16. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
2Z 
In this sketch of the problems treated in the third Critique we have fol¬
lowed Cassirer's own interpretation, for our purpose is to see what he de­
rived from that work for his own philosophy of symbolic form. It is also 
worth while, and indeed essential, to study Cassirer's views about the 
epochal significance of Kant's achievement, relating it to subsequent phi¬
losophy and to his own in particular. 
a. T H E 
E P O C H A L 
S I G N I F I C A N C E 
O F 
K A N T ' S 
W O R K 
A N D W H A T C A S S I R E R M A D E O F 
T H E 
D E V E L O P I N G 
T H E O R Y 
O F 
F O R M 
We shall pass in review the "advances" attributed by Cassirer to Kant and 
consider at the same time how Cassirer himself developed them in the whole 
context of modern thought and culture. This involves Cassirer's evaluadon 
of Kant and showing some of the other "rich sources of inspiration" that 
entered into the making of his own philosophy. And it may reveal, too, the 
authentic originality of Cassirer's thought. 
S Y S T E M 
A N D 
P H Y S I C A L 
N A T U R E 
The development of the first of Kant's theses from the Critique of Judgment 
can be briefly dealt with. On this matter Cassirer had reached his own posi­
tion long before writing his work on Kant, namely, in his book Substanzbc-
griff und Fun^tionsbegriff (1910).There he explored in detail that "steady 
progress of science" of which Kant had spoken. The "way of advance" is 
ever a "logical" one.41 It is exemplified first in mathematics. Here Cassirer 
rejected the traditional doctrine that the formation of a mathematical con­
cept is by way of abstracting a common element from a multipkcity of 
similar particulars. Instead, the process is that of setting up forms of order 
41. Submnzbegriff 
und FunktionibegrifJ, 
p. 96. See Swabey ttans, Substanee and 
Func-
tion, p. 73. 

22 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
which serve as principles for distinguishing and relating the many differ­
ent particulars. These forms function actually as rules by which the diverse 
particulars can be represented as a series of identifiable elements in lawful 
rektion with each other.42 Scientific research into Nature is a further ex­
tension of this process. What Kant had envisaged here was a "dynamic 
unity," the kind of unity necessary for phenomena in time which have to 
be given determinate order and relationship. The "dynamic" aspect of this 
unity means that seemingly ultimate laws of nature prove inadequate to 
account for the very facts discovered by their means so that "constants of 
a higher order" become necessary.43 Thus science progresses toward its goal 
of unity by a regular development and transformation within itself. The 
key to the advance is the new forms that function in the ordering of the 
content ah*eady at hand. But at no time are these contents merely data given 
apart from form. The notion of such absolute "facts" as well as that of 
absolute fixed "laws" is due to a false abstraction whereby things are isolated 
artificiaUy from the organic whole of which they are functioning parts.44 
For nothing has any place or value in knowledge independently of the con­
structive, functional forms through which experience is organized as a 
system.45 Throughout we are operating within a whole where the con­
nectedness of the elements as weU as their reciprocal relations with each 
other is the first original fact. And every element has its objective reality 
precisely in so far as we grasp how it "weaves itsetf into a whole" "—inci­
dentally a favorite metaphor taken from Goethe. Wholeness and system 
are then of the essence of scientific knowledge and of the reality which is 
known in it. And the forms function thus creatively in making possible 
both the continuing progress and the unity of science. Thus Cassirer fol­
lowed out consistendy the lead given by Kant and in turn gave fresh form 
and explicit demonstration to the "critical" thesis regarding knowledge and 
the system of Nature. 4 7 
42. Ibid., p. 196. Swabey, p. 148. 
43. Ibid., p. 352. Swabcy, p. 266. 
44. Ibid., p. 377. Swabey, p. 284. 
45. Ibid., p. 369. Swabcy, pp. 277-278. Sec also Kants Leben, pp. 307-309, 3 n - 3 1 3 , 
317¬
318, 328-329» 357-358; Problem of Knou/ledge, pp. 6 2 ^ 3 , 109. 
46. Substanzbegriff und Funktionsbegriff, p. 377. Cf. Faust, Pt. I , "Nacht": "Wie alles sich 
zum Ganzen webt" (line 447). 
47. The argument of Substanzbegriff 
was restated in Kants Leben, 
pp. 306-313, and 
briefly in Das Erkenntnisproblem, 
3,12-14. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
23 
O R G A N I C 
F O R M S 
A N D T H E R E A L M 
O F 
L l F B 
But Cassirer had to take a considerable time to develop his position on the 
second subject, where it is a question of determining both the value of the 
concept of purpose in biological science and the resultant general concep­
tion of nature in accordance with that science, bi this case we would be 
weU advised to foUow Cassirer's own characteristic procedure and to sketch 
the background of modern thinking about purpose and organic existences. 
"Rich Sources of Inspiration": Leibniz 
For nearly a century prior to the appearance of the Critique of Judgment 
the theme of organic Ufe had engaged the attention of philosophers and 
men of science. Perhaps it is not too extreme to say that Leibniz wrote the 
character of Hfe into the very nature of ultimate reality. He was, however, 
not engaging simply in pure speculation for he was aware of the empirical 
discoveries made through the microscope and the work of Swammerdam 
and Leeuwenhoek which were widely pubticized and discussed. But Leib­
niz' own specific contribution, according to Cassirer, is summed up in this, 
that "the concept of the whole has gained a different and deeper significance. 
For the universal whole which is to be grasped can no longer be reduced 
to a mere sum ofits parts. The new whole is organic, not mechanical; its 
nature . . . is presupposed by its parts and constitutes the condition of the 
possibUity of their nature and being." 4 8 The last phrase "constitutes the 
condition of the possibUity of . . ." recaUs the formula of the Kantian 
theory of knowledge and intimates that the "concept of the whole" is func­
tioning according to Cassirer as "form," constituting the nature of the liv­
ing world. Cassirer here attributes to Leibniz the leading idea for the newly 
emerging "philosophy of nature within which the rigid concept of form 
gradually breaks down." 4 9 The "foundation for a new phUosophy of the 
organic was kid." e o 
48. The PhUosophy of the Enlightenment, p. 31. 
49. urid., p. 34. 
50. Ibid., p. 84. 

24 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
B U F F O N , M A U P E R T U i s , D i D E R o T . From the year 1750 the idea of a new 
"interpretation of nature" caught hold of the imaginations and engaged 
the serious attention of some of the most important thinkers of the En-
Hghtenment. Buffon, the author of the brilliantly written and comprehen­
sive Natural History (175c^70), had begun a scientific career as a student 
of Newton's physics and translated the Fluxions, but he was interested 
particularly in the phenomena of Ufe and when he proceeded to interpret 
and organize the data of natural history he realized the insufficiency of 
the "mechanical" conception of nature. One should not use unguardedly 
the inductive rule of reasoning so well described by Newton in the third 
part of his Principia ("Rules for Reasoning in Natural Philosophy"), that 
of judging the whole by those parts of which we have had experience, for, 
Buffon said, "on observing closely one perceives that its [nature's] course 
is not absolutely uniform; one recognizes that it admits of sensible varia­
tions . . . mutations of matter and form . . ." 5 1 Contemporary with Buf­
fon was the more speculative Maupertuis who suggested the "principle 
of least action" in physics, a man of whom the philosopher Hume (who 
had independently questioned the very logical foundation of that princi­
ple of the uniformity of nature which underlay inductive reasoning) 
6 2 
spoke with great admiration: 6 3 "It was especially Maupertuis who brought 
Leibniz to France," said Cassirer.61 And Maupertuis likewise perceived 
the unsuitability of Newton's rule of reasoning for the understanding and 
interpretation of organic Ufe. Most influential of aU in developing the new 
philosophy of nature was Diderot, chief editor of the great Encyclopedia 
who published his Thoughts on the Interpretation of Nature in 1754 and 
who dwelt on the "mutation of matter and form" and on the fact that "this 
infinitely changeable universe can only be understood by means of a flexi­
ble manner of thinking." And it is Diderot's eminent contribution to the 
whole development that "he changes the very forms of thought which had 
made [previous] achievements possible and given them permanence." 
5 5 
51. Buffon, Histoire naturelle (1750), 9, 455. For more extensive comment and translation 
see C . W. Hcndel, "The Status of Mind in Reality," ]ournal of Philosophy, 31, N 0 . 9 (April 
26, 1934), 225 ff. For Cassirer's own observations on Buffon see Philosophy of the 
Enlighten­
ment, pp. 35, 77 ff. 
52. This was Hume's basic question and "discovery" in philosophy. See his later preoc­
cupation (in the Dialogues concerning Natural Religion, Pt. V I to end) with the phenomena 
of organic nature. Hume knew Buffon, Maupertuis, and Diderot when he lived in Paris. 
53. See Letters of David Hume, edited by J. Y . T . Greig (Oxford, Cbrendon Press, 1932), /, 
227 (To Abbe- L e Blanc). 
54. 
Cassirer, Philosophy of the Enlightenment, p. 86 ff. See ako pp. 34-35, 55. 
55. Ibid., pp. 90, 92. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
25 
SHAFTESBURY, ln such new suggestions of "the mind of the Enlighten­
ment" a "philosophy of form" is adumbrated. Moreover, Cassirer with his 
rich knowledge of the various developments occurring in a historical pe­
riod was able to discern the remarkable affiliation of the new philosophy 
of organic form with a philosophy of aesthetics coming to the fore in the 
work of Shaftesbury. What Cassirer had in mind is shown in the foUow-
ing: that "Shaftesbury's purpose is so to state his concept of form that its 
inteUectual, supersensible origin wiU be recognisable, retaining, however, 
the purely intuitive aspect of this concept." 5 6 And Shaftesbury, Cassirer 
goes on to say, had a "decisive influence" upon kter German thought, par­
ticularly that of Herder and the early Goethe.57 
Kant's Signal Contribution to the Development of Eighteenth-Century 
Thought in This Realm 
Such were the characterisdc "cultural developments of the eighteenth cen­
tury" not only in Germany but also throughout aU Europe. And Cassirer 
regarded Kart's Critique of Judgment as fundamentaUy related to this 
movement of thought of a whole epoch. Let us consider, now, Kant's con­
tribution to the philosophy of nature which had started with interpreta­
tions of "natural history" and was to develop in the next century into a 
philosophy of biological science. 
Тл the Problem of KnouAedge, completed about 1940, Cassirer declared 
that "The Critique of Judgment marked a decisive break when it asserted 
the autonomy and the methodological independence of biology without 
giving up its connection with mathematical physics. Herewith there was 
posed a new question, which biological research, no matter what its school 
or trend, could not in the future neglect." 5 8 Now in a sense the break had 
been made previously by Buffon, Maupertuis, and Diderot nearly hatf a 
century earher, aU of whom at least had asserted the "methodological in­
dependence" of the mechanistic view of nature. The real break which 
Cassirer had in mind was internal to Kant's own thinking, like that which 
had occurred on other occasions as when Hume had "roused him from his 
56. Ibid., p. 84. 
57. H)id., p. 85. 
58. Problem of Knowledge, p. 118. 

2б 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
dogmatic slumber" or when Rousseau convinced him of the primacy of 
moral values. Тл the present case Kant had been holding to a conviction 
"that in any particular theory there was only as much real science as there 
was mathematics." 5 9 But he recognized the fact that an autonomous bio­
logical science was in the making, thanks to a new method of research 
and interpretation advanced by such men as Buffon, Maupertuis, and 
Diderot. As a "critical" philosopherhe had to address himsetf to "the fact" 
of knowledge in whatever guise it appeared. Now what the new adven­
tures in natural history and science were in fact doing was reaUy to bring 
back the notion of purpose, not in the old sense of "final causes" which 
early modern science and philosophy had eschewed to the profit of the 
science of nature as weU as philosophy, but in a new sense. Hence the basic 
question was "what sort of methodological value may be ascribed to the 
concept of purpose." And Kant in his own thinking 
asked simply whether it was possible and rational, at one and the same 
time, to conceive of phenomena as obedient to natural law, that is, to 
refer them to the universal dynamic principle of causaUty, and to regard 
them also from the point of view of purpose and organize and arrange 
them accordingly. The Critique of Judgment aims to prove that there 
is no antinomy whatsoever between these two forms of order in knowl­
edge. . . . CausaUty has to do with knowledge of the objective tem­
poral succession of events, the order in change, whereas the concept of 
purpose has to do with the structure of those empirical objects that are 
caUed Uving organisms. . . . Biology . . . considers nature under the 
aspect of a whole so formed that it determines the properties of its vari­
ous parts. Then nature ceases to be a mere aggregate and becomes a 
system.·0 
"Kant Umited the concept of purpose to this roIe of taking cognizance 
of nature, which must be distinguished from mathematical knowledge of 
ir," and Cassirer quotes Kant directly: " 'The concept of purposive com­
binations and forms in nature is at least, then, one principU more for bring­
ing the appearancesunder rules, where the laws of mechanistic causaUty 
do not suffice.'" 6 1 Thus "we must always make the presupposition that 
59. n>i<L 
60. n>id., p. i a t (Cassirer's itahcs). 
61. S n d * p. x22. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
27 
nature as a whole not only behaves according to law, but also discloses a 
thoroughgoing organization in aU detaUs as weU . . ." •* 
This "principle of formal purposivenessn is an a priori principle neces­
sary for the knowledge of nature but it is still only "regulative" for the 
knowing, and not essentially "constitutive" of the known, the appearances 
orthe phenomena. 
Cassirer's Advance upon Kant 
It should be noted later in this same work, the Problem of Knowledge, 
that the cautious position of Kant is called an "attempted solution of the 
antinomyof judgment." Kant "could dwell on the special rights and value 
of biology but could not assign it the same rank or the same objective value 
in the hierarchy of knowledge as mathematical and physical knowledge." 
He had misgivings about that but—and here Cassirer speaks for himsetf— 
"Such misgivings exist no longer." ·* 
Cassirer believes that he is stiU faithful to the Kantian orientation and 
method when he takes the next step, which is to obliterate the distinction 
between "regulative" and "constitutive" principles. Nature, according to 
the critical view, is that structure of empirical reality which is conforma­
ble with the specific ways of knowing of the human understanding, tf, 
then, phenomena of nature are actually understood and known in accord­
ance with this organic conception of the whole as determining the prop­
erties and functions of the parts, then the character of organic form is 
as constitutive of nature in respect to Ufe as causal order is in the case of 
physical science. Thus Cassirer has no hesitation in speaking of the "natu­
ral forms" with which biology deals.64 It was not Kant's "attempted solu­
tion" then that was so significant for the future development of philosophy 
but the sheer fact that he made the problem of "form" all-important. In 
62. lbid., pp. 125-126. 
63. Ibid., p. 211. 
64. Kants Leben, pp. 369-370. I n the Problem of Knowledge, 
Pt, П, Cassirer begins his 
study of biological knowledge with a chapter treating of the problem about the dassification 
and systematization of 'Watural Forms"—there is no question about their existence or the 
vaUdity of the concept. 

28 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
his attempt to solve this problem Kant was limited by the undeveloped 
state of biological science in his time. He "spoke as the logician of Lin­
naeus' descriptive science, just as . . . he had appeared as logician for the 
Newtonian system. He tracked down the hidden problem contained in 
Linnaeus' work." β 5 That "problem of form" became the problem of knowl­
edge in the subsequent century and, in Cassirer's opinion, it remains the 
essential problem today. "In this respect," he claims for his master, "Kant 
stood nearer to modern biology than he did to that of his own day . . . 
'fornvconcepts' . . . must be retained." *' 
The Continuing Relevance of Kants Emphasis on Form to Theoretical 
Biology in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries 
It is advisable to note in Cassirer's account of the later nineteenth- and 
twentieth<entury developments in biological theory what he actually says 
in substantiation ofhis claim that Kant's philosophy is thus closely relevant. 
Our intention is not to trace out the far-flung ramification of the thought 
of Kant but to see what Cassirer himself saw there and related to the cen­
tral inspiration of his own thinking. 
When Cassirer concludes his chapter on "Developmental Mechanics and 
the Problem of Cause," he singles out the Kantian idea of form as the 
essential thought in the theory of Roux: "Developing organisms are, in 
substance, 'sehScontained complexes of activities that are determining and 
productive of form . . . ' " 6 T Again, in dismissing the topic "vitalism" 
Cassirer says that "the theoretical biology of the past decade has begun 
to define the method and the goal with ever increasing clarity. Here we 
encounter chiefly the idea of 'wholeness' as a special category of biological 
knowledge." 0 8 More recendy still Emil Ungerer urged that though much 
might be said against the metaphysical idea of purpose, nevertheless, "that 
character of maintaining wholeness has significance in the realm of life 
itsehV'68 And Cassirer adds for his own part: "AU this is in the Kantian 
65. Problem of Knowledge, 
p. 127 (Cassirer's italics). 
66. ftid., p. aio 
67. Ibid* p. 187 (quoting from Roux). 
68. Ibid., p. 212. 
69. D>id., p. 2x3 (Cassirer's itaUcs). 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
29 
manner and leans on the Critique of Judgment, which Ungerer minutely 
analyzed in a work of his own, comparing the Critique with the results 
of modern biology. He arrived at the conclusion that the latest phase of 
biology more than any other prior to it has brought into currency the 
fundamental view which Kant had advocated." 7 0 Finally the contempo­
rary Bertalanffy is quoted directly on this theme, declaring: " 'That phe­
nomena in the organism are chiefly "whole-forming" or "system-forming" 
in character and that it is the task of biology to establish whether and 
to what extent they are so can hardly be a matter of dispute.'" 7 1 
As a student of modern biological science Cassirer held that the char­
acter of "whole-forming" or "system-forming" pertains to the world itself 
of living nature. "Form" in this case is no longer a regulative idea but a 
genuinely constitutive principle, no less original and valid than the intui­
tive forms of space and time and the inteUectual forms or categories of 
understanding. The barriers had fallen down between the views of organic 
nature and empirical physical reality. There may be realms or different 
orders within the whole of what we call the Universe, but the acknowledg­
ment of these "universes of discourse" does not involve us in an antinomy 
or conflict of reason. We have seen another case of the role of form in "mak­
ing" nature—perhaps there are other cases and other realms where form is 
disclosed as an essential character of the experience and hfe of man. 
P U R E 
C O N C R E T E 
F o R M S 
A N D 
T H E R E A L M 
O F 
A R T 
"The artist is just as much a discoverer of the forms of nature as the scientist 
is a discoverer of facts or natural laws." In that statement from the Essay 
on Man 7 2 one sees the connection in Cassirer's own thinking between 
the theme of art as human selfcexpression and the theme of organic Ufe. 
ш art man is the "maker" in a perfecdy unmistakable sense, for culture 
is his own production and yet it is a discovery, too, of "forms of na­
ture.' There is no gutf then between Nature and Culture—in respect to 
forms. 
70. Ibid., p. 214. 
71. Ibid., p. 215. 
72. Essay, pp. x43-14<l· 

30 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
Goethe 
The movement of Cassirer's thought from a "critique of reason" to a "cri­
tique of culture" 7 8 is one of the most interesting aspects of his developing 
philosophy. It is foreshadowed in his earlier study of Kant relating the 
"cognizance" of organic nature to the aesthetic judgment. We noted, too, 
in Cassirer's study of the Enlightenment how Shaftesbury's aesthetic of 
form was brought into close relation with Leibniz' conception of form. But 
before Cassirer's own concept of form would be complete, the magic of 
Goethe's imagination had to weave its spell, revealing the inexhaustible 
significance, too, of Kant's notion of the schema, that union of the sen­
suous-intuitive and the intellectual concept. For the Critique of Judgment 
seemed to Cassirer an inevitable sequel to the other Critiques and in it 
were explored these great problems of the systematization of empirical 
physical science, the reality of purpose in nature and the peculiar character 
of art as being both human expression and revelation of reality. How Cas­
sirer explored this last theme still remains to be studied. 
The importance of Goethe to Cassirer cannot be overestimated. There 
was an "elective affinity" between them and a strange bond between Goethe 
himself and Kant through the medium of the Critique of Judgment. Goethe 
testified to this in words quoted by Cassirer: 
"Here I saw my most disparate preoccupations placed alongside one 
another, art and the works of nature dealt with as on a par, the aesthetic 
and the teleological judgments mutually illuminating each other. . . . 
I rejoiced to learn that the art of poesy and the science of nature with 
its comparative method are closely related, both of them coming under 
one and the same power of judgment." 7 4 
Perhaps Cassirer himself learned to read Kant's Critique of Judgment 
through the poetic imagination of Goethe. 
It is the poet of Dauer und Wechsel who is recalled in Cassirer's words 
about Goethe's way of thought being exemplified in his biological theory 
of metamorphosis. 
In the connection and indissoluble correlation between permanence and 
change he sought the distinguishing characteristic of the "ideal way 
73. See below, p. 76. 
74. Kants Leben, p. 292. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
31 
of thinking," which he himsetf had adopted and which he contrasted 
sharply with the analytical method . . . The "ideal mode" of thought 
. . . is that which allows the "eternal to be seen in the transitory," and 
he said that through it we should be raised gradually to the proper 
viewpoint, "where human understanding and philosophy are one." . . . 
This peculiar intermingling of being and becoming, of permanence and 
change, was comprehended in the concept of form, which became for 
Goethe the fundamental biological concept.75 
Form, in Goethe's conception of it, as relevant to living beings and their 
metamorphoses, has a peculiar characteristic. If one thinks of formone 
ordinarily has in mind a spatial or geometrical pattern which is illustrated 
in various examples that are the changes as it were upon the essence. This 
is static form. But Cassirer explains: 
Form belongs not only to space but to time as weU, and it must assert 
itself in the temporal. . . . It is remarkable how everything developed 
logically and consistently from this one original and basic concept of 
Goethe.7· 
One may now recall that Kant's schema, too, is a form involved in time 
and that the further problem of the Critique of Judgment concerned that 
combination of sensuous intuition and the intellectual form. Cassirer also 
notes how Goethe appropriated a term used by Spinoza "intuitive know­
ing" and gave it an entirely new meaning to suit his own purposes.77 In 
Spinoza "intuitive knowledge" is God's prerogative, but Goethe makes it 
available to man. It is thanks to this "intuitive understanding" which is 
tantamount to "genius" that man can apprehend the truth about nature 
and the Hfe-forms. 
And this accords weU with the theory of aesthetic "genius" which Kant 
had developed. Cassirer credited Shaftesbury originaUy with the new con­
ception of genius as the "productive, formative, creative" agency in art— 
a conception which direcdy influenced German intellectual history in the 
eighteenth century, "and notably Lessing and Kant." 7 8 Here, too, is "'a 
purposive activity . . . a self-maintaining activity, and one which further 
75. ProbUm of Knowledge, pp. 138-139. 
76. Ibid., pp. 139-140. 
77· Ibid., p. 141. Sec also the reference to Plotinus in Kants Leben, as well as to Spinoza, 
PP· 299, 373-376» and Das Erkenntnisproblem, 
3, 15-16. 
78. Philosophy of the EnUghtenment, pp. 318-319. 

32 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
strengthens those very powers of mind themselves.'" 7 9 Thus the aesthetic 
activity in man and the teleological formation in nature are assimilated to 
each other exactly as Goethe had said. And another sort of unity is dis­
closed here, a rapport between man and nature, both exhibiting the same 
form-giving character and mutually expressing each other's meanings, 
art in nature, nature in art. It is in Goethe's thought about genius, as that 
which sees connections and unity in diversity, that Cassirer finds the ful­
fillment of Kant's intention, the "indissoluble correlation" not only of per­
manence and change but also of man and nature, form and content, intui­
tion and intelligence. The nub of the matter is in this tribute to Goethe: 
There prevails in his writings a relationship of the "particular" to the 
"universal" such as can hardly be found elsewhere in the history of phi­
losophy or of natural science . . . the particular and the universal are 
not only intimately connected but . . . they interpenetrate one another. 
The "factual" and the "theoretical" were not opposite poles to him, . . . 
"The highest thing would be . . . to realize everything factual as being 
itself theoretical." 8 0 
This thought of Goethe, the realization of the ideal in fact and the actual­
ity of idea, is identical with what Kant had first pointed out in the "schema" 
of empirical knowledge and then explored further in his discussion of pur­
pose and art in the Critique of Judgment which Goethe liked so well. 8 1 
When Cassirer prepares the reader of his Essay on Man for the second 
part treating of "Man and Culture," he chooses Goethe's language for the 
title of his chapter, "Facts and Ideals." 
Hegel 
Inevitably the language and the project foreshadowed in this view of 
Goethe remind one of Hegel: the Ideal is Actual and the Actual is Ideal. 
79. Problem of Knowledge, p. 143 (quoting Kant), Critique of Judgment, Sec. 49. 
80. Problem of Knowledge, 
p. 145 (quotation from Goethe's Maximen und 
Reflexionen, 
N0. 575). 
81. Cassirer's view of the epochal importance of the Critique of Judgment should be re­
called at this place—notably in Kants Leben und Lehre and in the opening section of the 
third volume of Das Erkjcnntnisproblem. See above, pp. 14-15 and 21 ff. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
33 
The Hegel of the Phenomenology of the Spirit especially portrays man 
moving of necessity, in a dialectical manner, toward that goal of the identity 
of the factual and the theoretical. And Cassirer sees Hegel in this respect 
foUowing out the thought of Kant toward the universal as the system that 
expresses the truth of the particulars, the "concrete universal" as it was 
called. Hegel, too, was moving under the speU of Goethe no less than fol­
lowing the argument of Kant or Schelling. It is organic nature that properly 
answers to man's quest, where spirit in man finds an objective manifesta­
tion that is akin to it and revelatory of it. The "world of understanding" 
is but a world of law, the physical world, but there is a realm of Ufe in 
which the forms themselves become transformed and where we cannot 
think simply of absolute law and mechanical structure but must conceive 
of changing form that interprets temporal change. The organic order is 
abo . the mathematical-physical order and it is a dialectical stage toward 
the completely spiritual order of existence. From sense perception to physi­
cal science, to biological knowledge, to the cultural expressions of spirit 
in art and in the ethical life, philosophy and religion—the dialectic carries 
one onward irresistibly toward that "highest thing" of Goethe, that absolute 
identity in and including difference, the concrete realization of spirit. 8 2 
What is the difference then between Cassirer and Hegel? It will help to 
define the philosophy of the former if we consider this question. 
There is an obvious difference in respect of temper and spirit. Hegel 
unites in a remarkable way an enthusiasm and conviction with elaborate, 
subde, rational argument. He is not merely rationalizing hut discovering 
as he goes, and he carries the reader who can follow his inventions of lan­
guage with him in an exciting adventure. But he arrives—he touches the 
goal of absolute knowledge, journey's end: the system of the spirit is com­
plete. An inexhaustible enthusiasm, too, is ever present in Cassirer but it 
is as an undercurrent of his lifework, keeping him patiently studying the 
Factum, what has actually been achieved by mankind, the history, the 
culture, the art, religion, science, and many things besides which condition 
such achievements but which have little or no merit in the eyes of civilized 
man who appropriates the useful form of his cultural heritage but fails to 
appreciate the role of such things as myth and even of language, tending 
to regard the latter, for example, as only a medium for expressing some­
thing that exists beforehand and not realizing that language is formative 
of the very world we live in. Cassirer studies these phenomena of the spirit 
82. See Das Erkjmntnisproblem, 
3, 291. 

/ 
34 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
in situ, so to speak, and reaUy seeks to find the form in each set of contents 
as an artist tends to appreciate the character of the material which he is to 
make expressive of a meaning. The striking difference between Cassirer 
and Hegel is symbolized in the phrase used above^assirer wants to 
discover the actual forms so far realized by man, whereas Hegel gives the 
impression that he knows it all. The very structure of Cassirer's book on 
Symbolic Forms shows that he believed himseif only started on a program 
and that there was no end to the task because no one can determine the 
limits of the spirit and life itself. His book came out in parts^Part I , Lan­
guage; Part I I , Myth and Religion; Part I I I , Science—and additional parts 
were to be expected as one progressed far enough in the quest for truth. 
Cassirer's attitude is in essence that the philosopher has "an unending task" 
never to be regarded as complete.83 The Ideal remains ideal and is not aU 
made factual. This is Kantian in tone and meaning, and Cassirer when he 
compares Kant and Hegel gives us the best possible characterization of 
what philosophy meant to himself in contradistinction from Hegel. 'Thi-
losophy is not content [in Hegel] to reveal and make inteUigible each dis­
tinctive and ideal formative principle obtaining in the various cultural 
forms: science, morality, reHgion, art; it superposes its own deUverances 
upon all of them as a higher and all<mbracing form . . ." The fault here 
"is that philosophy deprives them of their autonomous and independent 
value and subordinates them to its own systematic purpose. Here is the 
point of contrast with Kant.. . ." 8 4 
There are, however, significant and illuminating points pf agreement 
between Cassirer and Hegel. Both eschew further talk about "things in 
themselves" as if there could be something inteUigible transcendent to the 
phenomena. Keep the unknown out of it; stick to the known and the 
knowable. Thus both thinkers prize rationaUty but they also conceive of 
reason as not at aU separate from sensuous intuition. Hegel's logic, Cas­
sirer declares appreciatively, is "the logic of intuitive understanding." And 
the "form of thinking," he continues, is rightly discerned to be that of 
proceeding "not from the parts to the whole but from the whole to the 
parts." 8 5 
It is reasonable to suppose from these commendatory words that Cassirer 
learned much from Hegel and that he reaUzed his own position through 
8 j . Das Erkenntniiproblem, 
3,369-370. 
84. Ibid., p. 373. 
85. Ibid., pp. 364-365. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
35 
a characteristically patient study of his work. Surely the memory of Hegel 
echoes in these words of the Essay on Man: "Our objective is a phenome-
nology of human culture!' The very words define his own position over 
against that of the "phenomenology of the Spirit." 8 6 
3. T O W A R D 
T H E D E V E L O P M E N T 
O F 
A 
P H E N O M E N O L O G Y 
O F 
C U L T U R E 
This development of Cassirer's thought into a phenomenology of culture 
was dictated in part by his artistic nature and interests. Sensitive to poetry 
and the fine arts, gifted in the understanding and effective use of various 
languages, humanist in spirit, he could hardly do otherwise than extend 
his view to these characteristic manifestations of human genius and thus 
move toward an even more comprehensive philosophy of form. 
Besides the artistic Cassirer there was the historical-minded Cassirer. For 
he had a particular genius of his own which also led him toward such an 
ampler philosophy. This was the historical genius, the power of imagina­
tion that brings the forms and ways of human existence of the past into 
life again, effecting a "resurrection of the past," he called it when in an 
eloquent passage on the meaning of history he rendered a tribute to Herder 
which is fully deserved by Cassirer himsetf.87 He had prdcisely such gifts 
and he employed them wonderfully well. In consequence whenever he 
treats of the various forms of human achievement and seh%expression he 
presents them in a historical dimension that imparts depth and richness 
to his portrayal. "Li order to possess the world of culture we must inces-
sandy reconquer it by historical recollection." 8 8 He sought to possess that 
world. And his successful reconquest through "historical recollection" is 
a matter of record in his various studies of ancient culture and of the cul­
ture of the Renaissance as weU as the eighteenth century. He made these 
86. Essay, p. 52 (author's italics). The pertinence of Hegel's Phenomenology of the Spirit 
is emphasized in the essays in The Philosophy of Ernst Cassirer by Fetix Kaufmann, p. 188; 
Robert S. Hartman, pp. 306, 310; M. F . Ashley Montagu, p. 376; W . M. Urban, pp. 421, 435; 
Helmut Kuhn, p. 571; Harry Slochower, p. 642; Walter M. Solmitz, p. 756; Fritz Kaufmann, 
p. 825; in Cassirer's " 'Spirit* and 'Life' in Contemporary Philosophy," ibid., p. 875; and the 
third volume of Philosophie der symbolischen Formen, Vorrede, vU. 
87. Essay, p. 177. 
88. Ibid 4 p. 185. 

36 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
e p o c h s l i v e a g a i n i n t h e p r e s e n t a n d i n c l u d e d t h e m i n h i s v i s i o n o f h u m a n 
e x i s t e n c e . 
T H E 
N E W 
H l S T O R I C A L 
P o i N T 
O F V l E W 
: l T S 
D l S C O V E R E R S , 
H E R D E R 
A N D 
M O N T E S Q U I E U 
Cassirer's a p p r o a c h to t h e s t u d y o f t h e p h e n o m e n a o f c u l t u r e w a s m a d e 
b y 
w a y o f h i s t o r y . He t e l l s us p l a i n l y w h o w a s h i s guide—Herder w h o 
w a s 
v e r y e a r l y o n e o f h i s " r i c h sources o f i n s p i r a t i o n . " All 
h i s l i f e 
t h e r e a f t e r 
Cassirer p a i d h i s g r a t e f u l h o m a g e t o Herder. He r e g a r d e d Herder's essay 
Auch eine Philosophie der Geschichte zur Bildung der Menschheit as a 
g r e a t p i o n e e r w o r k i n t h e n e w a r t a n d science o f h i s t o r y t h a t w a s t o 
flourish 
i n t h e c o m i n g n i n e t e e n t h c e n t u r y . 8 9 For "Herder d e f i n i t e l y b r o k e t h e speU 
o f a n a l y t i c a l t h i n k i n g a n d o f t h e p r i n c i p l e o f i d e n t i t y . " 9 0 And "Herder's 
a c h i e v e m e n t is i n f a c t o n e o f t h e g r e a t e s t i n t e l l e c t u a l t r i u m p h s o f t h e 
p h i ­
l o s o p h y o f t h e Enlightenment" 9 1 (1932). Again i n t h e last v o l u m e o f t h e 
Problem of Knowledge 
9 2 (1940), Cassirer e n d s h i s a c c o u n t o f h i s t o r y w i t h 
a n e n d o r s e m e n t o f Friedrich Meinecke's v i e w a t t r i b u t i n g t h e n e w d i r e c t i o n 
t o t h e g e n i u s o f " t h e y o u n g Herder." 
0 8 
What w a s 
t h i s n e w 
d i r e c t i o n ? We m a y 
t r e a t t h i s q u e s t i o n a f t e r 
t h e 
f a s h i o n o f Cassirer h i m s e l f in more historico. For Herder's i n s i g h t 
w a s 
n o t w h o l l y a n d a b s o l u t e l y 
n e w 
b u t t h e o u t c o m e 
i t s e t f o f a 
c o n s i d e r a b l e 
f e r m e n t o f t h o u g h t a b o u t t h e n a t u r e o f h i s t o r y . A 
f r e s h i n t e r e s t i n 
t h e 
s u b j e c t 
h a d d e v e l o p e d 
w i t h 
t h e e m p i r i c a l t u r n o f 
t h o u g h t t h a t 
g a i n e d 
a s c e n d e n c y i n eighteenuVcentury Europe. Previously t h e o l d e r r a t i o n a l i s t i c 
i d e a l o f k n o w l e d g e h a d l e d t o a r e l a t i v e d i s p a r a g e m e n t o f h i s t o r y because 
it h a d t o d o w i t h so m u c h t h a t s e e m e d u t t e r l y c o n t i n g e n t a n d 
a c c i d e n t a l . 
There c o u l d b e n o necessary t r u t h s i n t h a t s p h e r e . But i n s p i t e o f t h a t i n ­
f e r i o r i t y o f h i s t o r y as c o m p a r e d w i t h science a n d m e t a p h y s i c s 
t h e 
h u m a n 
i n t e r e s t in it w a s v e r y g r e a t . This w a s e s p e c i a l l y t h e case in m a t t e r s p o l i t i c a l 
89. Ibid., p. 177. 
90. Philosophy of the Enlightenment, p. 231. 
91. Ibid., p. 233. 
92. Chap. 12, ' T h e Rise of Historicism: Herder," pp. 217 ff. 
93. Ibid., p. 225. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
37 
and social at a time when criticism of the existing forms of government 
was rife and men were wondering how human affairs had come to such 
a pass and what they themselves could do about the existing state of things. 
They devised a history of civilization by postukting an original "state of 
nature" and then tracing the rise or the fall of man from the original con­
dition to that in which they found themselves. But they were more inter­
ested in the principles they could learn for their own guidance and practice 
than in what actually happened. Theirs was unhistorical history. This had 
been the case with Grotius, Hobbes, Locke, and Rousseau. In a sense it 
was pardy true even of the empirical-minded Hume. Thucydides, Polybius, 
Machiavelli had been his models and yet Hume's essential interest like 
theirs was in the utility of history. He studied historically in order to learn 
some general truths of politics, economics, morals, the arts and sciences, 
and religion, all of which, as expressions of man's interest and life, threw 
valuable light upon the subject of "human nature." Thus in Hume the 
historical interest which was very real was stiU subordinate to the concern 
of the "moral philosopher." 
But Hume was an interesting case of a man at a critical juncture in the 
progress of both philosophy and history. For he had discovered that no 
rational "demonstration" of any matter of fact is possible, or, to put it other­
wise, that any inference to the existence of some event remote from the 
present, whether it be of something in the past or in the future, is logically 
without warrant from reason. Precisely because of that lack of reason which 
cannot guarantee the necessity of any belief as to fact or existence Hume 
saw an obligation to do thoroughgoing research for empirical evidence— 
and that meant historical research as well as the research in natural science. 
Men like Hume were thus led to explore the historical world with the 
same zest as once the humanists of the Renaissance explored the art, litera­
ture, and philosophy of the classical world. 
Montesquieu 
The first great inspiration in this field of historical study was Montesquieu. 
He was a genuine innovator. His Greatness and Decline and Rome, his 

38 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
Persian Letters, and notably his last work, thc Spirit of the Laws (1749), 
developed a new method and theory of history in the course of writing a 
history of institutions. On the score of method he warned those who worked 
in history against the inveterate "habit of mind" (as Hume called it) of 
expecting the uniform repetition elsewhere of any observed conjunction 
of circumstances in the present. "To transfer into far4)ff centuries aU the 
ideas of the century in which one is living is the most fecund of aU sources 
of error." 9 4 Montesquieu was interested in the fundamental laws or con­
stitutions of political and social systems and he had the same moral con­
cern as his contemporaries about the present plight of European society 
ruled by monarchies, but though he had a republican ideal he did not write 
in order to recommend it as an ideal but reaUy searched for the "spirit" 
of each known system of government whether it be in the present or the 
past. He felt it abso 
ely necessary to visit various countries in Europe 
to study the actual working of their institutions, notably England where 
he spent two years. In regard to the past he searched for the facts of actual 
record. But he differed from most of those who ransacked the records in 
not taking his story from them, not even from a Thucydides or Polybius 
or MachiaveUi. They were all interpreters and each historian must be his 
own interpreter in performing the role of seeing aU the facts in relation 
to each other and in some kind of unity. This synthesis calls for imagina­
tion. Yet it has to be an imagination of what actually existed, not an illustra­
tion of a preconceived thesis of the historian. Thus each nation's laws should 
be studied in the total situation of time, place, and circumstance and by 
reference to what the people thought, felt, and believed about themselves 
and thcir world. "Many things govern men: climate, religion, laws, maxims 
of government, the examples of the past, morals, manners—whence there 
is formed a resultant general spirit of the nation." β β 
This thought of "a general spirit of the nation" was destined not long 
afterward to take wings. In Montesquieu it is still close to earth. This spirit 
of thc nation or the spirit of its laws is a unity that emerges from a con­
geries of particulars and manifests itself in a form of government or con­
stitution. Montesquieu Umited himsetf to those determinate political forms 
94. Montesquieu, De l'Esprit des lois, Oeuvres completes (Paris, i 8 6 6 ) , Bk. i , Chap. 2, p. 
191; Bk. 30, Chap. 14, p. 488. For a discussion of the common trend away from the mechani­
cal conception of nature and toward the biological and historical in the thought of Hume, 
Buffon, and Montesquieu see C . W. Hendel, "The Status of Mind," |oumal of Philosophy, 31, 
N0. 9 (April 26, 1934), 228 ff. 
95. Montesquieu, op. cit., Bk. 19, Chap. 4. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
39 
that express each in its own destinctive way the spirit of each particukr 
nation." 
Cassirer wrote pages of appreciation of Montesquieu and concluded with 
these words of high praise: "Of aU the thinkers of his circle he has the most 
profound historical sense, the purest intuition of the manifold forms of his­
torical phenomena." He noted, too, that while Herder attacked Montes­
quieu's method and his "premises," nevertheless he had "admired his 'noble 
gigantic work' . . ." 9 7 
Herder, "the Copernicus of History" 
But Herder was the true genius who had "the clearest insight" into an 
even larger historical task of synthesis and shaping disjecta membra of the 
past into a living whole which will have meaning to the present.98 Cassirer 
quotes a vivid passage from his favorite essay of Herder, Another Phi-
hsophy of History for the Education of Humanity: " Ί cannot persuade 
mysetf that anything in aU the kingdom of God is only a mere means; 
aU is at once means and end.'" That is a transference of Kant's "kingdom 
of ends" to the world of men. In such a world " 'every nation has its center 
of feUcity in itsetf alone, as every sphere has its center of gravity. . . . 
Is not the good distributed throughout the whole world? Simply because 
no one form of humanity and no one spot of earth could contain it aU, it 
was divided into a thousand forms, transformed—an eternal Proteus!— 
in every region of the world and in every century . . . and yet a plan of 
striving forward is always visible—my great theme.'" 
9 9 
Enthusiasm and youthful dreams are in these words; and Cassirer as if 
in long-lingering sympathy saw fit to recaU a stiU more intimate account 
of the magnificent intentions of Herder:" 'If I could venture to be a phi­
losopher,' " Herder had written in his diary in 1769, " 'my book would 
be . . . living logic, aesthetics, history, and art! Develop a splendid art 
96. See C . W. Hendel, Chap. "The Role of Philosophy in Civihzation," in Philosophy in 
American Education (New York, Harper, 1945), pp. 182-184. 
97. Philosophy of the EnUghtenment, pp. 215-216. See the whole account of Montesquieu, 
pp. 209 ff. 
98. Essay, p. 177. 
99. Problem of KnowUdge, pp. 221^22. 

4 0 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
from every sense! Draw a science from every faculty of the mind! And 
make of thcm all ä history of learning and science in general! And a history 
of the human spirit in general, throughout the ages and in aU peoples! 
Whatabook!'" 1 0 0 
These eloquent passages reveal what Herder meant to Cassirer. His 
own first piece of philosophical work had been a study of Leibniz in whose 
philosophy he first saw the new conception of synthesis. As he later ex­
pressed it, "the new whole is organic, not mechanical: its nature does not 
consist in the sum of its parts but is presupposed by its parts and constitutes 
the condidon of the possibility of their nature and being." In this thought 
of Leibniz, Cassirer went on to say, "the rigid concept of form . . . breaks 
down." 1 0 1 And Herder's "metaphysics of history is based on Leibniz's 
central doctrine." 1 0 2 
Herder united in his own thought, then, the joint influences of Leibniz 
and Kant who were so important likewise to Cassirer himsetf. As a fellow 
pupil separated as it were only by time and space, Cassirer felt a great 
partiality for Herder. Thus he commented on the undue severity of Kant, 
who had been Herder's teacher, for his two critical reviews of that essay 
of Herder on the philosophy of history, and he vindicated the younger 
man as a "philosopher-poet" who should be treated as such and not held to 
"rigorof proof." 1 0 3 
And Herder and that other poet Goethe had an affinity for each other, 
too, which gratified and inspired Cassirer, who quotes the enthusiastic 
letter Goethe had sent to Herder upon the perusal of his books: I "have 
regaled myself with them. God knows how you make one feel the reality 
of that world! A compost heap teeming with life! . . . Your way of gather­
ing gold, not by just sifting it out of the dirt but by having the dirt itsetf 
brought to life again in the form of plants, is ever close to my heart." 1 0 4 
But the "books" here mentioned were not that work dreamed of in Her­
der's youth, the work which was to be a "living logic, aesthetic, history and 
art." The book was never written but the dream was to be Cassirer's own 
dream for years which he turned into a reality in the Philosophy of Sym-
bolic Forms. And the congeniality of his ownmind with that of Herder, 
together with his long-enduring admiration of his imaginative predecessor, 
ioo. Ibid., p. 220. 
ioz. Philosophy of the Enlightenment, 
pp. 31, 34. 
102. Ibid., pp. 230-231. See also above, p. 23, and Problem of Knowledge, 
pp. 203-204. 
103. Kants Leben, pp. 243-245. 
104. Problem of Knowledge, 
p. 219. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
4i 
evoked at last the characterization which places Herder in a seat of honor 
alongside of the master Kant, for Cassirer writes that "Herder may be 
called the Copernicus of history." 1 0 5 
P R O B L E M S 
A B O U T 
T H E " H l S T O R Y 
O F 
T H E H v M A N 
S P I R I T " 
The Ranf^ing of Logic with other Forms of the Spirit 
How could Cassirer who held so tenaciously to the Kantian "critique of 
reason" have any traffic with Herder's notion of a "living logic," etc. ? Could 
he abide a ranking of logic with aesthetics, history, and art when "transcen­
dental logic" had been as fundamental to his own philosophy as it had 
been to that of Kant? If the forms of art and other forms of the cultural 
expression of man are to be assimilated with the "constitutive" forms of 
knowledge and experience, how can it be done except at the cost of lower­
ing logic itself to the status of being simply an expression of man's sub­
jectivity? This Cassirer would never do and his philosophy emerged out 
of his long struggle with this problem, alwaysin an endeavor, it scems, to 
reconcile the disparate inspiration of his own thinking, the two Coperni-
cuses, the one of philosophy, the other of history. 
The Problem of the Ordering of Herder's Thousand Protean Forms 
and the Rejection of a Solution in National Terms 
Another question had to have immediate attention before Cassirer could 
make any progress. It was not a question about the relation of the thought 
of Kant and that of Herder but lay entirely within the circle, so to speak, 
of Herder's philosophy of history. It was the problem created by Herder's 
generous figure of "a thousand Protean forms" of the spirit. This was a 
most unmanageable number for a philosophic mind which must seek order 
105. Ibid., p. 218. 

42 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
and unity in such a manifold—in art, history, rehgion, science, logic, and 
philosophy itsetf. 
There was one tempting suggestion of a solution that was impkcit in the 
passage where Herder imagined every nation as a sphere having its own 
center of gravity and being seh>contained. The desired unity and organiza­
tion might thus be national, with all the phenomena envisaged as the ex­
pression of the spirit of a nation. Previously Montesquieu, as we have seen, 
had introduced the idea of a national spirit in connection with the laws 
and constitution—and Hume had partly foUowed him in his own historical 
writing. Why not, then, treat aU the phenomena, not only laws but abo 
art, morals, history itself, as forms of the national spirit? Now as a matter 
of fact. Herder himsetf had no such "nationaUst" point of view. While 
he was interested in and appreciative of the individuality of nations, laws, 
morals, systems of society, and beUefs, his goal was "a history of the hu­
man spirit in general." The influence of Herder then would never lead 
Cassirer to take a "national" approach to the solution of his problem. And 
Cassirer's great tribute to Lessing, whom he Unked with Herder as he 
closed his account of the Enlightenment, is ample evidence of his own at­
titude, for Lessing was preeminent in judging aU human affairs in terms 
of a universal perspective.106 
Cassirer also had the warning example of Hegel before him. Hegel like 
Herder had been deeply impressed by Montesquieu, and in his own Phi-
losophy of Right he developed the notion of the national constitution as 
the "concrete" realization of the spirit. Further he had demonstrated a 
phenomenology and dialectic of the spirit throughout universal history in 
his introduction to the Philosophy of History. But Cassirer eschewed 
Hegel's philosophy for the following explicit reason: "If philosophy is to 
be the authentic and complete consciousness which Spirit has of itself . . . 
it must truly grasp everything within itself, aU creative spiritual achieve­
ment in the whole of 'objective spirit' as it presents itself in religion and in 
art, morality, law, in science and in the state. Philosophy must not Umit it-
seM only to designating the conditions of the culture of spirit but must 
possess itsetf of its entire content in the form of thought." 1 0 7 "On this 
view," Cassirer continues, "it foUows that philosophy provides the founda­
tion for the other culture-forms only in the sense that it forthwith dis­
penses with them and takes from them their own autonomous and in-
106. Philosophy of the Enlightenment, pp. 357 ff. 
z07. 'Critical and Absolute Idealism," Das Erkenntnisproblem, 
3,365. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
43 
dependent worth and aU this is done to make them subservient to its own 
systematicpurpose. . . . Thetaskofthecriticalphilosophy,onthecontrary, 
is to show the unity of reason precisely in the different basic lines along 
which the world is constructed and formed in its scientific, artistic, moral 
andreligious aspects."108 That was Cassirer's choice, the way of a Kantian, 
not Hegel's way. 
The Hypothesis of Cultural Forms and the New Varieties of Form It 
Suggested 
The concept of "culture-forms" provides the solution for the problem of 
Herder's "history of the human spirit in general." Those myriad expres­
sions and activities of the protean human spirit must somehow be ordered 
through some principle or set of principles. National unity as a principle 
is rejected as well as Hegel's philosophy which makes aU things merely 
phenomena of philosophy as if philosophy were not only a manifestation 
of spirit but the essential and complete manifestadon thereof. What now 
appears as the true principle of organization for a phenomenology of spirit 
is the various culture-forms themselves. They are types of creative activity 
and expression. As types they maintain themselves through time and 
manifest themselves variously in many places. The type in this case is not 
to be thought of as a "substantial" thing but rather as a "function" of the 
human spirit. The universal function of art, for instance, is the same in an 
ancient and in a modern civilization and not only for man in the civUized 
condidon but in prehistory as well. It is a human function and it persists 
in the history of mankind. Sek>expression in art is thus recognizable as art 
and not as something else in many different modes of expression of differ­
ent peoples of the world. And there is a permanence and a continuity of 
every such cultural form not only in art but also in rehgion, science, 
moraUty. 
The concept of typical "function" was thus a key to the solution of the 
problems confronting Cassirer. It not only enabled him to organize the 
"thousand Protean forms" in accordance with a principle but, as any good 
theoretical concept would do, it disclosed a wider range of data or facts 
108. Ibid., pp. 37^373· 

1 
44 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
to bc taken into the reckoning. The types of cultural forms of art, history, 
religion, and science are all quite familiar to man already civilized and 
living in the state. But "long before man had discovered this form of social 
organization," the civilized state, Cassirer reminds us, man "had made 
other attempts to organize his feelings, desires, and thoughts. Such organ­
izations and systematizations are contained in language, in myth, in reli­
gion, and in art." 1 0 9 Moreover, we must also remember that "Man lived 
in an objective world long before he lived in a scientific world." 1 1 0 We 
must have imagination enough to include in our study of cultural forms 
the prescientific and precivilized manifestations of man's genius. And Cas­
sirer tells us in that same work that "The philosophy of symbolic forms 
starts from the presupposition" that the nature of man is defined by his 
work. "It is this work, it is the system of human activities, which defines 
and determines the circle of 'humanity.'" 1 1 1 
New fields for exploration thus appeared. There is the universe of myth, 
for example, to which the philosopher Schelling had drawn attention, and 
there is also magic. Are these phenomena of man to be regarded as merely 
primitive, as imperfect versions of forms which supplant them in the ra­
tional and civilized mode of existence—magic giving up the ghost as it 
were to science, and myth passing into religion? Or are these genuine au­
tonomous forms ? Has myth a discoverable function and logic of its own ? 1 1 2 
How are we to explain the persistence of the mythical consciousness even 
in highly developed civilization and culture? Myth may perhaps have a 
permanent use and value. 
What shall we say, too, of language? It is another function of human 
existence wherever man is found. It may be too much taken for granted, 
being the means by which men live, work, and communicate with each 
other. But language is an art and through it men disclose meanings to 
each other. They even discover themselves to themselves through it. That 
philosopher-poet of antiquity Plato had compared thought itself to a con­
versation within the soul, and he regarded language as a subject worthy 
of the philosopher's inquiry, as his Seventh Letter and the dialogue Cratylus 
witness. The philosophers o£ the Enlightenment had also been aware or, 
language as a philosophical problem, though they tended to interest them-
109. Essay, p. 63. 
I LO. rbid., p. 208. 
i n . Ibid., pp. 67^>8. 
112. Ibid., "Myth and Religion." 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
45 
selves only in its role as the bearer of concepts for discursive reasoning and 
science. But what are we to think of language when it functions neither 
as the instrument of rational knowledge nor as a merely practical signal 
for action but in its interpretive capacity as an art for the communicating 
of meaning? 
Some beginnings had been made in the study of this function of lan­
guage. Herder himself was to be remembered for the suggestions of a theory 
though "it did not proceed from a general theory of knowledge, nor from 
an observation of empirical facts," but rested "on his profound intuition 
of the character and development of human culture." 1 1 3 However, a great 
philosopher-scientist, Wilhelm von Humboldt, had observed facts about 
language and conceived a suitable theory to interpret them, and his work, 
Cassirer declares, "was more than a notable advance in linguistic thought. 
It marked also a new epoch in the history of the philosophy of language."1X4 
"Language" was the subject with which the Philosophy of Symbolic 
Forms would begin. The subject of "Mythical Thinking" followed. And 
after his own exploring of these new fields Cassirer returned to the former 
subject of the theory of knowledge, which was now regarded in the light 
of the phenomenology of culture which he had developed, so that the title 
of that third part became "The Phenomenology of Knowledge.** 
F U R T H E R 
P R O B L E M S 
The "Deduction" of the Culture-forms 
But though we see adumbrated the structure of the work on the Philosophy 
of Symbolic Forms, we have not yet seen the final solution of the problems 
which Cassirer had been facing. Questions stUl remain for consideration 
and answer. One is raised by the discovery that language and myth are dis­
tinct and autonomous cultural forms. More such discoveries can doubtless 
be made. How is one to determine once and for aU what are the forms ? Their 
"specification" must be a matter of principle and not simply a work of im-
z13. Ibid., p. 40. 
t14. Ibid., p. 121. See also Cassirer's 'T4aturalbtische und humanistische Begründung der 
Kulturphilosophie," Göteborgs Kungl. 
Vetenikaps-och 
Vitterhets-SamhäUets Handlingar, Ser. 
A , N 0 . 3 (i939)>P· 18. 

φ 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
agination. Can tiiere be a "deduction" so to speak, of the cultural forms? 
When Kant confronted a similar problem in regard to the logical forms 
he had recourse to Aristode's table of categories, assuming that reason was 
able at one stroke to specify exhaustively its own forms of meaning. While 
there was no such comparable organon of meanings in the present case, 
a Kantian faith remained strong in Cassirer that aU the forms are reaUy 
organic with each other in the consciousness of man and that they are 
members of a logical system, a whole which specifies them as its constituent 
parts. The very nature of human consciousness is to seek unity and synthesis 
and to identify the parts as elements of a whole of which it is already in 
possession in Idea. Call this faith or call it a postulate, it inspires a research, 
"an inquiry which will accomplish for the totality of cultural forms what 
the transcendental critique has done for pure 
cognition."116 
The Reconciliation of the Cognitive Forms and the Expressive Forms 
But a second question stares us in the face as soon as we attempt to equate 
the "critique of culture" with Kant's "transcendental critique of cognition." 
What is the relation between the culture forms and the forms of knowl­
edge? This was the still unsolved problem encountered earlier in connec­
tion with Herder's "living logic" and the logic of Kant. Which of the two 
is being assimUated to the other, the logical forms of cognition to lan­
guage, myth, history, art, religion, or these forms to the forms of knowl­
edge? The answer now is that this way of putting the question does not 
reaUy do justice to the situation, for it is not a case of subordinating one 
to the other but of a mutual assimilation or even, to use an expression of 
Cassirer's, an "interpenetration" of the forms. Organized thought in its 
scientific form is an expression of man's spirit and in that aspect as a mode 
of expression it is one among many other cultural forms. On the other 
hand, aU expression in language, art, history, religion is "making" some­
thing of the materials of experience, and primary experience is itself a 
"mode of knowledge." In its making are involved the categories of knowl­
edge as weU as the sensuous contents and forms. Thus the forms such as 
language, art, history which organize experience are also kinds of knowl-
115. See beIow, p. 84. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
47 
edge.116 They articulate and reveal the world of experience. They offer 
many "universes of discourse."117 Thus there is at one and the same time 
an extension of the meaning of knowledge to include the deUverances 
of culture and an inclusion of knowledge within man's total life of self-
expression and discovery of his world. "Our perspectives widen, if we con­
sider that cognition . . . is only one of the many forms in which the mind 
can apprehend and interpret being." 1 1 8 In this fashion the critique of cul­
ture and that of reason are finally reconciled by Cassirer. 
But a question remains—what is the third thing or mediating factor be­
tween the cultural form and the form of knowledge that makes possible 
their assimilation with each other in the way indicated? They must par­
ticipate in something which is common to both kinds of form. But there 
is nothing common in a "substantial" sense. That cannot be found among 
the cultural forms themselves other than the forms of knowledge. The 
solution of this problem is the key which would open the way to "a sys­
tematic philosophy of human culture in which each particular form would 
take its meaning solely from the place in which it stands . . . the uni-
versitas of the human spirit." 1 1 9 
4. T H E S Y M B O L I C 
F U N C T I O N A N D T H E F O R M S 
In the essay "Cassirer: His Life and Work," 1 2 0 Dimitry Gawronsky recalls 
that "Cassirer once told how in 1917, just as he entered a street car to ride 
home, the conception of the symbolic forms flashed upon him; a few min­
utes later, when he reached his home, the whole plan of his new voluminous 
work was ready in his mind, in essentially the form in which it was carried 
out in the course of the subsequent ten years." Now it is a matter of record 
that the concept of symbolic form had already been attained by Cassirer. In 
his Substanzbegriff und Funfyionsbegriff (1910) the mathematical symbol 
was said to effect a transformation of the concrete sense impressions that 
116. Essay, pp. 136, 167-170, 205-206. 
z17. Kants Leben, p. 305, and Essay, pp. 152, 2:1-213, 221. 
118. See below, p. 77. 
119. See below, pp. 82-83. 
120. Philosophy of Ernst Cassirer, p. 25. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
imparts to thcm whatever "objective" value they have in knowledge.121 
It was argued that in physics, too, the given individual impression is made 
to serve as a "symbol" o£ the whole pervasive system of things in which it 
has its place and membership.122 In this symbolic function the old notion 
that knowledge is somehow representative of reality had "new meaning" 
and a tenable form. And here, toward the end of his argument in the book, 
Cassirer envisaged it as applying to "every particular phase of experi­
ence." 1 2 3 Now we can understand why he said at the very beginning of 
the Philosophy of Symbolic Forms that his project had its inception in the 
investigations to which he had been led in Substanzbegriff und Functions-
begriff. 
But the significance of the concept of symbolic form had also been seen 
in the province of art and in the realm of life. In his Kants Leben und 
Lehre, "the manuscript of which was ready for the printer in the spring 
of 1916" (though it was not published until 1918), Cassirer had said: "The 
work of art is a unique and detached thing, independent and possessing 
its own end within itsetf—and yet there is portrayed therein a new 'whole,' 
a new total image of reality and the spiritual cosmos itself. The individual 
does notrcfer in this instance to some static abstract universal beyond itsetf 
but is this very universal itself because it grasps the sum and substance of 
it symbolically." And "in the realm of objective existence" there is "in the 
phenomenon of the organism a symbolic counterpart (exactly as in the case 
oftheworkofart)." 
1 2 4 
It was not until after that had been written that the symbolic function 
perceived earlier in science and in art could be conceived as a general theory 
relating to all the forms. What Cassirer had been waiting for, one may 
hazard the guess, was the spark of genius that bridged a gap where tension 
had been long developing. Whoever dares to speak of "mythical thinking" 
as "thinking," of art as "knowledge" and "insight" and "leading to an 
objective view of things," and of history too as objective truth and broadly 
that every such "feature of our experience has a claim to reaUty," is strain­
ing and stretching very far the meanings of knowledge and reality. 1 2 5 Is 
121. Substanzbegriff und Funktionsbegriff, p. 197. Swabey trans., p. 149. 
122. Ibid., p. 373. Swabey trans., p. 281. See the later argument in Problem of 
Knowledge, 
pp. 69, 71, 104-106, 109, u z , 114, 
116. 
123. Substanzbegriff und Funktionsbegriff, p. 376 ff. Swabey trans., pp. 284 ff. 
124. Kants Leben, pp. 328 and 363. 
125. T h c quoted phrases are taken from the finished expression of Cassirer's thought in 
the Essay on Man (pp. 77,143, 169, 170, 187, 204-206), but the same ideas are expressed in 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
49 
not history, for example, which comes nearest of all these to being called 
a "science," still only a "hermeneutic," a mode of interpretation—not knowl­
edge in any adequate sense? It is "a branch of semantics."126 As to art, 
is it not true merely symbolically? The religious life is of course replete 
with symbols. But symbolic representation and truth seem entirely different 
things. So the mind would stay fixed in this convention until the tension 
of its own thought broke through the distinction with the crucial questions. 
Is not all representation whatsoever symbolic, whether it be in language, 
myth, art, religion, history, or science ? Why are they not all alike manifesta­
tions of a varying function of symbolizing which man practices and in 
which he follows intuitively and sometimes consciously the forms of human 
"creativity"? 
The difficulty and the waiting may have been caused by that hard and 
fast separation between science as objective knowledge and the other fea­
tures of human experience which seem to be only expressive of subjectivity. 
There was where the trouble lay. The solution would come with the 
realization that scientific knowledge is no less symbolic throughout and 
that it has to be interpreted accordingly. If such were the case Cassirer 
would then be obliged to recast his own theory of knowledge at the same 
time as he resolved the difficulty over the unity and system of the cultural 
forms as a whole. According to Gawronsky's understanding it was seven 
years then after Cassirer had first defined the function-concept that this 
flash of a solution came to him and it was another twelve years before he 
could bring out the third part of a new study of knowledge in the Phe-
nomenology of Knowledge. It may have been the necessary rethinking and 
reformulation of his views of scientific thought that took the time. But 
above aU it was also requisite that he define the general meaning of "sym­
bol" so that it would be suitable for application to scientific knowledge, and 
in this process the study of science could contribute significantly to the 
understanding of the nature of symbolic function and fofm in general. 
But it was the master Kant, too, who would have to be appeased in 
imagination. Cassirer now had his own position and he had won it by a 
magnificent labor of thought. He had studied advanced modern mathe-
the very last paragraph of the study Zur Einsteiiischen 
Relativitätstheorie 
(1921) where the 
reference is to history, painting, architecture, music, alongside of mathematics and physics. (Scc 
Swabey trans., p. 456.) It should be recalled that the first volume of Symbolic 
Forms 
ap­
peared shordy after, in 1923. 
126. Essay, p. 195. 

50 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
matics from within, as it were, traveting in that reahn of knowledge with 
the mathematicians themselves and taking his cues from them. Now Kant 
had said that there was only as much science in anything as there was mathe­
matics. Yet of aU modes of knowledge mathematics is itsetf most clearly 
a science of symbols. It is a "universal symbolic language" where "the pure 
symboUsm of number supersedes and obliterates the symboUsm of com­
mon speech."1,7 Cassirer, fortified with such modern knowledge, dared 
then to place his philosophy in a dramatic contrast with that of his old 
master Kant. We can see this in a passage of the Essay on Man where he teUs 
of the change he would make in the very language of Kant. He selected 
for this purpose one of the most important and most difficult of passages 
where Kant ruled out the possibiUty of an "intuitive understanding" 
(Goethe, we recaU, reasserted the possibiUty) and confined man to the "dis­
cursive understanding" which is dependent upon two heterogeneous ele­
ments. "Concepts without intuitions are empty; intuitions without concepts 
are blind." Then Cassirer speaks for himsetf: "Instead of saying that the 
human inteUect is an intellect which is 'in need of images' [Kant had writ­
ten " . . . ein der Bilder bedürftiger Verstand"] we should rather say that 
it is in need of symbols." 1 2 8 
The words of this declaration of independence can be a trifle misleading, 
however, if read out of context Cassirer does not mean that one is to dis­
pense with images and substitute instead "symbols." Both image and sym­
bol are necessary to understanding. Both have a role in the symboUzing 
function. They are,distinct, as Cassirer says in the Symbolic Forms, and 
the difference is precisely that between "passive images" of something 
given and "symbok" created by the inteUect itsetf. 1 2 8 bnages are given but 
symbols are made. Made of what? Of the images, the content of percep­
tion and experience. The inteUect takes images and makes them serve as 
symbok. This is quite plain in the case of language. Words are sensuous 
images seen or heard but they are used with meaning and so they are em­
ployed as symbok. The very last sentence of the present book on Language 
leaves the reader with this thought: "language shows itse*f to be at once 
a sensuous and an inteUectual form of expression."180 Indeed, this com­
bination obtains throughout the reahn of the intellectual Ufe: "And so we 
127. Essay, pp. 213^15, 2x7. 
128. lbid., pp. 56^57. See also Cassirer's attention to that passage in Kant in his Kants 
Leben, 
P* 375» and Erkenntnisproblem, 
3,363 ff. 
129. See below, pp. 75, 87, 107. 
x30. See below, p. 319· 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
51 
ке tfaat the very highest and purest spiritual acdvity . . . is conditioned 
and mediated by certain modes of sensory acdvity." 1 3 1 
These statements reaffirm that unity of the sensuous and inteUectual 
which Kant had signalized in the schema and which Cassirer has persisted 
in maintaining throughout his argument. It is with the intellectual part 
of this whole, however, that we are now concerned—what is involved when 
an image, or any content, is used to serve as a symbol? The function of 
symbohzing must therefore be examined. 
There have been many prior notions of the nature of symbols. In regard 
to language, for instance, it had been supposed in the eighteenth century 
that the rnind notes simUar properties or things and pins the hbel of a 
word upon each one of the images; this word-label thenceforward serves 
to recaU any one of them upon occasion. This is a word-for-thing sym­
bohzing—the abstract, general idea being represented by the name or word. 
Here language only serves to recapitulate what has been given and never 
to reveal or to develop a meaning. But knguage actually serves man better 
than that—it is a means to new knowledge and discovery. And the reason 
is that much more is involved in the funcdon of symbol in language than 
is realized. Nothing is really a symbol if it is only a mark of something 
ak*eady given and enabUng us to taUt about it again. The "it" we denote 
with a word is only perceived in the first instance in the Üght of our whole 
previous experience of the world. It is identified as what it is, even in space 
and time, by the reladons of whatever is "given" with other known con­
tents of experience. There is such a whole always present in the moment 
of remarking upon a given content, and any symbol derives its own signifi­
cance from that whole of experience which in a manner it represents.1*3 
The case of language only exempUfies what is universaUy the case. Such 
symbolic representation is universal because it is inherent in the very char­
acter of human consciousness. Cassirer retains here the Kantian conception 
of consciousness as a knowing of many contents of experience together 
in unity, but he adds to this notion of synthetic unity a symboUc intent 
to express the meaning of the experience in and through some particular 
content which is made representative of the whole. The particubtr symbol 
is fuU of meaning conferred upon it by the totaLty of man's experience. 
But the adjective "symbohc" does not belong solely to the image or content 
131. Sce below, p. 88. 
132. F<>r detailed discussion of Language see the essays of M. F . Ashley Montagu and 
W. M. Urban in the Phäotophy 
of Erntt 
Castirer, pp. 361-367 and 401-432. 

52 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
taken as representative or expressive of meaning, for it pertains no less 
to the forms in which meaning is inteUigible so that they are "symbolic 
forms" in virtue of their part in the symbolizing function. Cassirer never 
forgets, it seems, the insight of Kant in the conception of schema. For every 
schema of understanding is a phenomenon of imagination which is at once 
intellectual and sensuous; thanks to the latter aspect there is sense or mean­
ing (Bedeutung) through reference to objects; thanks to the former there 
is agreement with the categories or forms through which anything what­
soever has meaning to the human mind. The last sentence of Kant in 
the "Schematism" expresses it thus: "The meaning comes to the categories 
from the sensibility but the understanding is what realizes the meaning 
at the same time as it restricts such meaning to its natural forms." 1 3 3 The 
term "natural" has been inserted in this paraphrase of Kant because Cas­
sirer himsetf introduces it in the text of the Symbolic Forms. "We have 
acquired a new foundation for [our] investigation. We must go back to 
'natural' symbolism, to that representation of consciousness as a whole 
which is necessarily contained or at least projected in every single mo­
ment and fragment ofconsciousness, if we wish to understand the artificial 
symbols, the 'arbitrary' signs which consciousness creates in language, art 
and myth. The force and effect of these mediating signs would remain a 
mystery if they were not ultimately rooted in an original spiritual process 
which belongs to the very essence of consciousness. We can understand 
how a sensuous particular, such as the spoken sound, can become the vehicle 
of a purely intellectual meaning, only if we assume that the basic function 
of signification is present and active before the individual sign is produced, 
so that this producing does not create signification, but merely stabilises it, 
appUes it to the particular case."134 This basic symbolic function has vari­
ous "natural" directions—and the symbolic forms are precisely those direc­
tions in which meaning is realized in human consciousness. 
Susanne K. Langer's comment is here very apposite and revealing: Cas­
sirer's "emphasis on the constitutive character of symbolic renderings in the 
making of 'experience' is the masterstroke."135 It abolishes the Kantian 
disparity between the regulative ideas and the constitutive forms—aU are 
constitutive. 
133. Critique 
of Pure Reason, A147-148, B186-188. 
j34. Sec bclow, pp. 105-106. 
135. The Philosophy 
of Ernst Cassirer, p. 393. But Carl H . Hamburg appears to differ, re­
taining a distinction between constitutive form and cultural form. Ibid., p. 94. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
53 
Seeing a "natural symbolism" in human consciousness and in the very 
consdtuting of aU experience, Cassirer is ready to include science as one 
of the "artificial" symbolisms along with language, art, and myth. Thus 
he found Heinrich Hertz' theory of symbok in science a point of depar­
ture for the exposition of his own general theory in the present book. 1 8 6 
While there are the basic forms, such as space, time, and the categories of 
understanding, there are special constructive forms for each science and 
every theoretical construction within a science. The meanings of concepts 
depend upon the whole structure of the scientific system in which they 
are used and they vary with the general theory within which they are 
conceived. The consequences of this view Cassirer expresses pithily in his 
later Essay: "The facts of science always imply a theoretical, which means 
a symbolic, element." 1 3 7 Later in the same work, in the chapter on "Sci­
ence," the statement is expanded, that "We must refer our observations to 
a system of weU4>rdered symbols in order to make them coherent and inter-
pretable in terms of scientific concepts."138 
Thus in every case "symbolic form" is a condition either of the knowl­
edge of meaning or of the human expression of a meaning. In art the im­
age or the content has its significance in virtue of the formal structure 
according to which the creation of the work of art is made. There is the 
form of painting and the form of music, and so on. And besides the generic 
form of an art there is the "individual form" of a style, even of the indi­
vidual artist. Always some "universe of discourse" is involved in anything 
that has significance. Here then, as it is in organic Ufe, the "whole is prior 
to the parts." Thus "Uke aU the other symboUc forms art is not the mere 
reproduction of a ready-made, given reality. . . . It is not an imitation but 
a discovery of reaUty." 1 3 6 "Myth combines a theoretical element and an 
element of artistic creation." 1 4 0 Mythical thinking has its own distinctive 
symboUc forms of construction: they are modes both of expressing a theory 
of Ufe and of portraying it in the manner of an art. 
And to return to language, the subject of the first book, it should be 
dearer now how fallacious were those older nominalist views of the func-
tionpf language. Language is symbolic in the same way as myth, art, and 
136. See the comment of Hebnut Kuhn in the PkUosophy of Ernst 
Cassirer, p. 559. 
137. Essay, p. 59. 
138. Ibid., p. 217. 
139. Ibid., p. 143. Consult the entire chapter of the Essay on "Art." 
z40. Ibid., p. 75. 

54 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
science are. It is not a case of a pomt-for-pomt correspondence of terms 
with each identified thing or property. The properties and objects are only 
definite by virtue of the system of thought and experience which Ues be­
hind the intent to designate the words that serve as symbols. A world of 
thought is drawn upon when a word is used with meaning. Hence the 
"diversity of language is that of w0rld4rad00k" and each language has 
its own "inner Unguistic form" and forms even more particular stUL 1 4 1 
In a sense language may be considered the basic activity or "artifice" to 
which all other cultural forms may be related. "Art may be defined as 
symbolic language."142 History, too, is a "symbolic reconstruction" where 
the historian or artist "tries to penetrate into the sense of aU the various 
symboUc idioms." 1 4 8 Of science itself it can be said "that aU truly strict 
and exact thought is sustained by the symbolics and semiotics on which it 
isbased." 1 4 4 
Nevertheless it is the symbolicconcept that is the truly universal one, 
not the semantic.145 To stress the latter would tend to rob the other sym­
bolic forms of their autonomy of which Cassirer was so jealous, and for 
this reason too, that he would not confine within a phUosopher's rubrics 
the varied creativity of the human mind and the ways in which men may 
find, discover, and have revealed to them things not dreamed of in their 
philosophy. 
5. C O N S E Q U E N C E S F O B 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
This essay in interpretation cannot daim to be an exact account of the way 
Cassirer progressed toward his goal in the phUosophy of symboUc forms. 
The order in which the questions are here presented and the themes de­
veloped may not have been precisely those of his own experience. We have 
141. See below, p. 159. 
142. Essay, p. 168. 
143. Ibid., p. 177. 
144. See below, p. 86. 
145. The comparison of Cassirer's idealistic theory qf symbolism with other contemporary 
theories of Unguage and symboUsm is made by several authors in the PhUosophy 
of 
Ernst 
Cassirer: 
Carl H . Hamburg, pp. 8 1 ^ 4 ; W . M. Urban, esp. pp. 408-411; David Bidney, pp. 
502^06. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
55 
construed his own statements in various works to make a story, paying 
particular attention to the "rich sources of inspiration" which he so abun­
dantly acknowledged. Least of all could one pretend that this portrayal 
catches Cassirer at his actual moments of original insight, for the process of 
origination is veiled from view. We have given here one "symbolic" render­
ing of the making of Cassirer's "image-world." To do full justice to the 
inspiration of this very philosophy itself one needs to study the other essays 
in interpretation available, notably those in the collective volume, The 
Philosophy of Ernst Cassirer.14* 
One further venture of interpretation may be taken which is quite in 
accord with Cassirer's own intention. In his foreword to the last volume 
of Symbolic Forms, dated July 1929, he said: "In the original plan of this 
book a special concluding section was contemplated in which the relation­
ship of the basic ideas of 'the philosophy of symbolic forms' to the whole 
of contemporary philosophy would be presented in careful detail and the 
position critically established and justified." Then Cassirer added that he 
eventually felt obliged to renounce this discussion of other presentrday 
philosophy because it would have made the whole work too large, though 
some comparative study would admittedly be very fruitful, indeed it 
seemed even necessary. He could promise one such study, however, for 
separate publication, to be entitled " 'Life* and 'Spirit—Towards a Critique 
of the Philosophy of the Present." Here some "consequences" of his posi­
tion would be shown. 1 4 7 This turned out to be a discussion of Scheler's 
philosophical anthropology as set forth in his work, The Place of Man in 
the Cosmos. The essay enabled Cassirer to state by contrast his own view 
of man and cosmos and of the relation of Spirit and Life. But such a single 
encounter with only one other philosopher was hardly sufficient to show 
the "consequences" of his thought generally for philosophy in the modern 
world. An attempt will be made, therefore, in the conclusion to the present 
essay, to indicate more of those consequences. The resultant views and posi-
146. See as especially relevant to "symbolic form" Carl H . Hamburg, pp. 73-119; Robert 
S. Hartmann, pp. 289-333; M. F . Ashley Montagu, pp. 361-377; Susanne K . Langer, pp. 
381-400; W. M. Urban, pp. 403-44r; Helmut Kuhn, pp. 547-574; Felix Kaufmann, pp. 201¬
213; FoUce Lcandcr, pp. 337~357"» D. Gawronsky, pp. 24-27, 30, 32-35; David Bidney, pp. 
512-515, 535-544; Harry Slochowcr, pp. 652^>59; Konstandn Reichardt, pp. 682^>88; J. H . 
Randall, Jr., pp. 726^728; W . H . Werkmeister, pp. 792^98; Fritz Kaufmann, pp. 805-811, 
823-854. 
147. Cassirer subsequendy reversed the order of topics in thc tide to " 'Spirit' and 'Lifc.' '* 
Sec the transbtion by R. W. BrettaU and P. A . Schilpp in Philoiophy 
of Ernst 
Cassirer, pp. 
857ff. 

56 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
tions are to be gleaned from the Symbolic Forms and from some of the 
subsequent writings. 
T H E 
U N I V E R S E 
O F 
F O R M 
The argument has traveled from the forms of intuition and the logical 
forms in their combination to "schemas" which imaginatively unite sense 
intuitions and inteUigible forms, and thence to a unity of these two mo­
ments more "concrete" than in Kant's "abstract schema." These truly con­
crete forms are exempUfied both in nature, that is, in the "natural forms" 
of the organic world which is studied scientifically in biology, and in the 
forms of art which also disclose living reality. Man and nature are thus 
affiliated through art and life, as in the vision of Goethe. For man ranges 
more widely than in the objective world of scientific law and he explores 
other worlds in imagination according to forms congenial to his conscious­
ness. He articulates these worlds in objective form and expresses himsetf 
through a variety of cultural forms among which are art and science them­
selves. Language is a primordial form which is both expressive of man 
and revelatory of the nature of reality. Myth and religion have a twofold 
character, the character both of art and of theoretical knowledge. Science 
itsetf, too, seeming so purely theoretical by nature, is nevertheless an 
achievement representing man's persistent quest for unity and the com­
prehension of aU that enters into his experience. Looking at the entire 
scene we have a system of cultural forms where aU the distinct forms relate 
to each other while the whole sustains them aU in mutuaUy enhancing 
interrelationships. 
T H E 
S Y M B O L I C 
F U N C T I O N 
O F 
C O N S C I O U S N E S S . 
That system of forms is related to human consciousness which is in essence 
activity. For consciousness takes some given content as signifying a universe 
of meaning beyond itself and of which the content is a symboUc represen-

57 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
tation. The various forms are the different structures of such meaning. 
Consciousness functions in accordance with these forms which are char­
acteristic of itsetf. It is "form-giving" to whatever is "given" to it, 
T H E 
R E J E C T I O N 
O F 
P o S I T I V I S M 
A N D 
E M P I R I C I S M 
Some i m p l i c a t i o n s o f t h i s p o s i t i o n a r e i m m e d i a t e l y a p p a r e n t . From the very 
f i r s t , so t o s p e a k , c o n s c i o u s n e s s i s a s y m b o l i z i n g a c d v i t y . Hence one never 
finds 
i n i t a n y t h i n g b a r e l y " g i v e n " w i t h o u t m e a n i n g a n d r e f e r e n c e beyond 
i t s e t f . There is n o c o n t e n t w h i c h i s n o t c o n s t r u e d a c c o r d i n g to s o m e form. 
Whatever h u m a n c o n s c i o u s n e s s a p p r o p r i a t e s f o r a n y p u r p o s e 
w h a t s o e v e r , 
w h e t h e r t o g a i n k n o w l e d g e 
o r t o h a n d l e i m a g i n a d v e l y i n a r t , is 
a l r e a d y 
possessed o f f o r m a t t h e v e r y t a k i n g . Hence Cassirer rejects t h e p o s i t i v i s m 
w h i c h a s s u m e s t h a t h a r d facts o r sense d a t a a r e g i v e n a t t h e s t a r t a n d t h a t 
t h e y a r e b o t h t h e bases f o r a n d t h e c r i t e r i o n o f a l l c o n s t r u c t i o n s o f t h o u g h t 
w h i c h m u s t b e r e f e r r e d b a c k t o e i t h e r t h e p e r c e p t i o n s o r t h e f a c t s f o r t h e i r 
t r u t h .
1
4
8 If t h e p o s i t i o n h e r e c r i t i c i z e d b e c a l l e d b y t h e n a m e o f e m p i r i c i s m 
i t is also r e j e c t e d i n t h i s g u i s e because i t i n v o l v e s a m i s t a k e n n o t i o n o f 
ex­
p e r i e n c e as c o n s i s t i n g s i m p l y o f a n a r r a y o r a g g r e g a t i o n o f 
p e r c e p t i o n s . 1 4 9 
On t h a t score t h e v e r y 
first s e n t e n c e o f Kant's i n t r o d u c t i o n t o t h e Critique 
of Pure Reason r e m a i n e d a b s o l u t e l y v a l i d f o r Cassirer: "Experience is w i t h ­
o u t d o u b t t h e first p r o d u c t w h i c h o u r u n d e r s t a n d i n g b r i n g s f o r t h . . . 
. "
1
5
0 
The p r i m a r y e x p e r i e n c e i s i t s e t f f o r n v c o n s t i t u t e d . Whatever w e m a k e o f i t 
t h e r e a f t e r h a s t o b e j u d g e d b y r e f e r e n c e t o t h e f o r m i n w h i c h i t is cast. This 
m e a n s t h a t i n k n o w l e d g e t r u t h i s w h a t e v e r is i n a c c o r d a n c e w i t h t h e f o r m 
o f 
u n d e r s t a n d i n g . 
N o 
P R I V I L E G E D 
S T A T U S 
F O R 
S c i E N C E 
But Cassirer extends the concept of the form-giving agency beyond "under­
standing" in Kant's sense. Experience serves as material for art as weU as 
148. See Problem of Knowledge, 
pp. 7, 38, 243, 246, 253-254. 
149. Ibid., the comparison of Comte and Mill, pp. 7 ff., 113, 253-254, 319. 
150. Critique, A 1-2. 

58 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
for science. The symboUc function of consciousness is exercised in that case 
in producing works of art. Now just as scientific theory is not to be judged 
by referring back to the experience which it reconstructs but by its own 
standards of theoretical completeness, so art is not to be judged in terms 
of its "imitation" of perception. Nor is it properly judged by the criterion 
of theoretical knowledge. Each formation or construction must be evalu­
ated according to its own criterion of satisfaction. It has its own autonomy 
of form. Hence there is no privileged status for science over art or any other 
symbolic formation which constitutes some kind of interpretation of ex­
perience. 
T H E 
V l E W 
O P 
R E A L I T Y 
The old alternatives are gone. On the one hand sense perceptions had been 
taken to be the touchstone of reality; on the other, the theoretical ideas of 
scientific thought. Or else there was a choice posited between the real as 
phenomenal being and as the ideal. But there need be no more of these dual­
isms. 
The illusion of an original division between the inteUigible and the 
sensuous, between "idea" and "phenomenon," vanishes. True, we still 
remain in a world of "images"—but these are not images which repro­
duce a self-subsistent world of "things"; they are [whole] image-worlds 
whose principle and origin are to be sought in an autonomous creation 
of thc spirit. Through them alone we see what we call "reality," and 
in them alone we possess it: for the highest objective truth that is ac­
cessible to the spirit is ultimately the form of its own activity. . . . in 
aU this, the human spirit now perceives itself and reality. 1 3 1 
T H E 
P R O B L E M 
O F 
O B J E C T I V I T Y 
This passage provokes a question: Is this not a repetition in new dress of 
the older idealism? What is this spirit if not the spirit of Hegel's "phc-
151. Sec below, pp. 110-111. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
59 
nomenology of spirit"? Or, is itnot, perhaps, simply BerkeIeyan ideaUsm 
when one recaUs other phrases, such as this one teUing that the task of the 
whole work on symboUc form is "the specification . . . of pure subjec­
tivity"? 
1
M 
Let us consider the latter question first. It appears as if Cassirer were 
simply looking within the mind and then projecting outwardly into the 
objective world the forms discovered in inner consciousness. But that kind 
of subjectivism was farthest from Cassirer's intentions. He consistendy 
proceeded by identifying the various significant forms of knowledge or 
culture in the historical world and then studying how such authentic and 
objective reaUties could be conceived to be possible. But over and above 
such evidendy outward-looking procedure, Cassirer had profounder rea­
sons for eschewing any subjectivism. He never relinquished the position 
of Kant's "Refutation of IdeaUsm" in the Critique of Pure Reason, where 
it is argued that the possibiUty of our very consciousness of ourselves is 
conditioned by our consciousness of an object and that there is only a "self 
in so far as there is a world of objects having objective unity and relation­
ship with each other so as to constitute "one world." The consciousness of a 
subject and the consciousness of an object are absolutely correlative with 
and indispensable to each other. Consequendy the first thing Cassirer insists 
upon in regard to aU phenomena as understood or appreciated is their 
objective character. What is known or represented in symboUc form is ob­
jective because it "bears the stamp of inner necessity."153 This was what 
Kant had demonstrated in respect to the scientific representation of phe­
nomena in a space-time order which is characterized by such necessary 
connections as cause and effect. But even Kant himself, Cassirer avers, 
learned that "scientific objectivity" is "too narrow." 1 6 4 The concept of ob­
jectivity itsetf must be enlarged so as to be applicable to all "the many forms 
in whkh the mind can apprehend and interpret being." 1 6 5 
Now what determines thc necessary and objective character of anything 
for consciousness is precisely the element of form. It is the "conformity" of 
the factual with the theoretical that enables the former to have its "inner" 
or rational necessity. Accordingly it is said kter in the Essay on Man: 
"Every work of art has an intuitive structure, and that means a character of 
152. See below, Foreword, p. 69. 
153. See below, p. i n . 
154. See below, p. 79. 
155. See bclow, p. 77. 

6o 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
rationality." 1 5 β Hence we can very properly speak of objectivity in art. 
Yet we should not measure the objective validity by the standard of cogni­
tion. Art has its own formal necessity. So does every other form in and 
through which humanity interprets experience^s in "the development 
of our ethical ideas and ideals" and "the civilizing process" to which Cas­
sirer makes a passing, but very suggestive allusion. 1 5 7 There is also objec­
tivity in ethics. Cassirer was, in fact, in most thoroughgoing opposition to 
every sort of subjectivism in philosophy. 
T H E 
M E A N I N G 
O F 
S U B J E C T I V I T Y 
A N D 
S U B J E C T 
Nevertheless, Cassirer retained the concept of subjectivity. This might rea­
sonably be thought a lingering trace of Kant's early subjectivism, as it has 
been called, when he ascribed the forms of intuition and understanding to 
the knowing subject because such formal elements of experience were not 
discoverably "given" in sense perception. But Cassirer, as we have seen, 
foUowed with the keenest interest Kant's development in the later Critiques 
and the second edition of the first Critique and he found good reason still 
to exalt the "subject," and especially the "freedom" of man. It is in the 
spirit of Kant that Cassirer writes: "The ethical world is never given; it 
is forever in the making." 1 6 8 And the making is man's work, when he 
prescribes for himself action out of respect for the law of his own concep­
tion. Here is the clearest and most striking manifestation of the free spon­
taneity of the human spirit. It is the being capable of such moral judgment 
and action who is also the judge that poses the questions to physical nature 
and then passes judgment on the resulting evidence from experience or 
experiment. Judgment in aU its forms testifies to a "subject" not to be lost 
among the phenomena of the world which are objectively real for it. Here 
is something else essential, the subject or spirit. 
156. Essay, p. x67. 
157. Ibid* pp. 60, 61, 63. 
158. Ibid., p. 61. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
6l 
T H E CORRELATION O P SUBJECT AND W o R L D 
Thanks to the symboUc forms through which consciousness is form-giving, 
man articulates his experience in an objective order. 7л science he knows 
a world of law. But he also knows himself with it. And in whatever form 
he makes, construes, creates-"in aU this the human spirit now perceives 
itsdf and reaUty." There is here "a synthesis of world and spirit.""· 
" S P I R I T " AND 
" L l F R " 
The term "spirit" is alone adequate to express the significance of man's 
own acdvity and being in this affair. First it had been "understanding" 
that had such importance, then the subject, now it is spirit. The order of 
thought here seems to paraUel that of Hegel to whom Cassirer refers with 
appreciation in his critique of Scheler's theme of "man in the cosmos." 
Hegel had treated the reladonship between spirit and Ufe as a dialectical 
advance over the relationship between subject and object in the reahn of 
nature. 1 6 0 In the philosophy of Scheler, however, Ufc and spirit seemed 
to stand in an unresolved opposition to each other. But, Cässirer says, they 
cannot "belong to entirely disparate worlds," for "how is it possible that 
they nevertheless can accomplish a perfecdy homogeneous piece of work, 
that they cooperate and interpenetrate in constructing the specifically hu­
man world, the world of 'meaning'? Is this interpenetration . . . nothing 
more than a 'happy accident'?" 1 6 1 The question is rhetorical: Cassirer him-
setf maintains spirit and Ufe to be cooperating and interpenetrating. 
159. See below, p. i n . See the comment of M. F . Ashley Montagu, Philosophy of 
Ernst 
CassircTj p. 376, on the pertinence of Hegel's Phenomenology 
of 
Spirit. 
160. See above, p. 33. 
161. Philosophy of Ernst 
Cassirer, p. 864. 

б2 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
C A S S I R E R 
A N D 
H E G E L 
I N 
C O N T R A S T 
Wherein lies the difference, then, between Cassirer and Hegel whose "ob­
jective idealism," as he says, "completely maintains its ground, in the face 
of all the criticism which the nineteenth and twentieth centuries' 'philoso­
phy of life' has urged against i t ? " 1 8 2 He refers to the Hegel of the Phe-
nomenology of Spirit, where it was written, " 'The strength of the Spirit 
is only as great as its expression; its depth only as deep as in its revelation 
it dares to expand and lose itself.'" 1 6 3 So far Cassirer agrees. He had also 
written in the foreword of his third volume on Symbolic Forms that in 
its "first approach" his own phenomenology was in agreement with that 
of Hegel, however much he "departed from him when it came to estabUsh-
ing his position and carrying it out into detail." 1 6 4 
The difference is seen, then, in what follows in the two respective phi­
losophies. Hegel advances from the engagement of spirit with life to the 
ultimate resolution of the dialectic where Spirit has "absolute knowledge" 
of itself. But Cassirer keeps the twain ever twain, spirit and its other. 
It is never forgotten that in the constitution of whatever appears as "given" 
at any stage, even the highest, there is always a factor not contributed by 
the form-giving activity of consciousness.169 Cassirer sees the unsolved 
problem of Kant, that the human understanding is "an image-needing 
one." Expand "understanding" to "spirit," and it stiU remains the case in 
every instance that the human spirit needs images which it uses symboli­
cally to disclose meaning beyond them. There is no leaping clean out of an 
image-world so that spirit knows ultimately itsetf. There is always the 
added phrase "and reaUty," the reahty of the phenomenal world. To Cas­
sirer there is an "endless task" ahead, and the course for man is one of 
discovering the inexhaustible possibilities of the formative role of the hu­
man spirit in the course of experience and history. 
162. Ibid., p. 875. 
163. Ibid., p. 875. 
164. Philosophie 
der symbolischen 
Formen, 
3, vii. 
165. See above, p. 57. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
бЗ 
A 
M O D I F I E D 
P H I L O S O P H I C A L 
I D E A L I S M 
In the beginning of the first part of Symbolic Forms Cassirer identified his 
philosophy with classic idealism. Itretained the essential concept of the rela­
tion of thought and being which Plato had introduced into philosophy, 
namely, that thought "no longer runs parallel to being, a mere reflection 
'about' being, but by its own inner form it now determines the inner form 
of being." 1 8 8 This has been shown by Cassirer in the reahn of knowledge 
and in the universes of art, myth and religion, language. The showing of it 
constitutes a kind of ideahstic "phenomenology of culture." 
C R I T I Q U E 
O P N A T U R A L I S T I C 
T H E O R Y 
O F 
C U L T U R E 
A N D A 
N S W 
H U M A N I S M 
From the standpoint of this phenomenology Cassirer takes a critical view 
of the "naturaUsdc philosophy of culture" which started from the "world-
image" of Darwin and Spencer and was chiefly represented by Taine, 
Comte, Spengler. This view tended toward a cultural determinism with 
its "laws" of history. Even though Hegel's philosophy of history was con­
ceived as a phenomenology of freedom it offered no real opposition to this 
other trend because the freedom meant was, as Cassirer says, "only con­
summated for the absolute subject, not for the finite subject," that is, for 
man himsetf.187 A "humanistic philosophy of culture" is needed, there­
fore, to do justice to man and his freedom. The whole gamut of cultural 
phenomena bears witness to man's "wiU to formations." "What man 
achieves is the objectification, the intuition of himself, in and through the 
theoretical, aesthetic, and ethical form which he gives to his existence. This 
is exhibited even in the very first promptings of human speech and it is 
unfolded and developed in rich and many-sided forms in poetry, in the fine 
arts, in religious consciousness, in philosophical concepts."168 Such had 
166. See below, p. 74. 
167. *'Naturaustischc und humanistische Begründung der Kulturphilosophie" (1939), ibid., 
ρ. 14. 
168. Ibid., pp. x5-17. 

«4 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
been the insight of Goethe, Herder, and Humboldt. They had aU prized 
the free personality of man and human individuaUty. They produced "the 
new humanism." 
T H E 
E T H I C A L 
T A S K 
Cassirer carries on the theme into the scene of the present world where 
there is "once again an outbreak of uncertainty over the destiny and future 
of human culture." A philosopher cannot avoid attending to such crises in 
the Ufe of mankind and must have some theory with which to meet the 
need of the times. "AU that can be said here," said Cassirer, writing in 
Sweden in 1939, "is that culture wUl exist and progress only so long as we 
do not renounce or cripple our own form-shaping powers, which in the last 
analysis are to be brought out of ourselves." The mode of expression, "we" 
and "ours," prepares us for the next admonidon, "that we must learn our 
own subjective responsibiUty in these affairs." 1 0 9 The Cassirer who wrote 
that was moved by the deepest impulse of the thought of Flato and by the 
ethical example of that great figure, the ideal philosopher, Socrates. Some 
have said of Cassirer that he neglected to address himself to the actual 
social and political exigencies of the contemporary world. 1 7 0 The Myth 
of the State (1946) was something of an answer to that question. It was 
written for the people of the American civilization in which Cassirer had 
found a home and where he perceived work for him to do as a phUosopher. 
There was a current tendency to explain the second World War by refer­
ence solely to the evU purpose of foreign governments which had seemed 
to gain and hold their power by false propaganda that enUsted the aUegiance 
of their several nations—but to the phUosopher the source of the trouble 
was deeper, and indeed universal, in a myth which had been recurrent 
in western history and was not by any means confined to one or more na­
tions of the present era. It behooved a free nation contending with the 
potent effects of that "myth of the state" to understand it weU and to reaUze 
that it might become resurgent in any society if care be not taken with the 
z69. mid., p. 28. 
x70. See the remarks of Hehnut Kuhn in Philosophy 
of Ernst 
Cassirer, pp. 573r574, of 
Harry Slochower, ibid., p. 656, and Fritz Kaufmann, ibid., pp. 837^44. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N 
culture and education of man. There was implicit in this book therefore 
that ethical imperative which had been expressed openly in the Essay on 
Culture written in Sweden four years earlier: We must learn our own per­
sonal responsibility in this matter. And the ideal to keep in mind was that 
of a genuinely "humanistic" culture. And it was the object of the Essay on 
Man to show what this meant in aU the forms of human culture—myth, 
religion, hmguage, art, history, science. Here Cassirer taught a different 
phUosophical anthropology from that to which many in America were 
committed by their biological or naturalistic view of man. 1 7 1 He coined 
a new characterization of man as "the symboUc animal," insisting on man's 
active search for and creation of ideal meaning in human existence. He 
interpreted the record of history as itseU! a mode of se&discovery :-"History 
as weU as poetry is an organon of our sek>knowledge . . . " 1 7 2 And the last 
paragraph of his book contains a summons to an ethical task, for "Human 
culture taken as a whole may be described as the process of man's progres­
sive setf-Uberation."178 
x71. Cassirer repeatedly drew attention to the biological view of OxkulI, on which be 
based his own conception of man. See especially Probktn 
of Knowledge, 
pp. 200-203, 205, 
and Essay on Man, pp. 23 ff. 
172. Essay, p. 206. 
173. ttnd., p. 228. 

The Philosophy of 
Symbolic Forms 


Foreword by the Author 
I FijRST projected this work, whose first volume I am here submitting, at 
the dme of the investigations summed up in my book Substanzbegriff und 
Fun\tionsbegriff 
(Berlin, 1910). These invesdgations dealt essentiaUy 
with the structure of mathematical and scientific thought. When I at­
tempted to apply my findings to the problems of the cultural sciences, it 
gradually became clear to me that general epistemology, with its traditional 
form and Umitations, does not provide an adequate methodological basis 
for the cultural sciences. It seemed to me that before this inadequacy could 
be made good, the whole program of epistemology would have to be 
broadened. Instead of investigating only the general premises of scientific 
cognition of the world, it would also have to differentiate the various fun­
damental forms of man's "understanding" of the world and apprehend 
each one of them as sharply as possible in its specific direction and char­
acteristic spiritual form. Only when such a "morphology" of the human 
spirit was established, at least in general oudine, could we hope to arrive 
at a clearer and more reliable methodological approach to the individual 
cultural sciences. It seemed to me that the theory of scientific concepts 
and judgments which defines the natural "object" by its constitutive traits, 
and apprehends the "object" of cognition*as contingent on the function 
of cognition, must be ampHfied by an analogous specification of pure sub­
jectivity. This subjectivity does not consist solely in the cognition of nature 
and reality, but is everywhere at work where the phenomenal world as 
a whole is placed under a specific spiritual perspective, which determines 
its configuration. It seemed necessary to show how each of these configura­
tions fulfiUs its own function in the growth of the human spirit and how 
each one is subject to a particular law. From my work with this problem 
developed the plan of a general theory of cultural forms, which will be 
expounded more fully in my Introduction. As for the detailed arrange­
ment of this study, this first part is Umitcd to an analysis of hnguistic form; 
a second volume which, I hope, wiU appear in approximately one year 
is designed to embody the sketch of a phenomenology of mythical and 
religious thinking; while in the third and last volume I expect to deal with 
epistemology proper, i.e., the morphology of scientific thinking. 
69 

F O R E W O R D 
A study of thc purely philosophical content of hmguage from the stand­
point of a definite philosophical "system" is indeed a bold venture that has 
scarcely been undertaken since the first, fundamental works of Wilhelm 
von Humboldt. Humboldt, as he wrote to Wolf in 1805, thought he had 
discovered how to use language as a vehicle by which to journey through 
the heights and depths and diversity of the whole world. However, this 
pretension seems to have been brgely nullified by the trends of Unguistics 
and Unguistic philosophy in the nineteenth century. At times, language 
seemed to be becoming the principal weapon of skepticism rather than a 
vehicle of philosophical knowledge. But even if we disregard those in­
ferences of the modern critique of language, according to which the phi-
fosophy of kmguage is synonymous with the negation of its spiritual con­
tent, we find an increasing conviction that a philosophical elucidation of 
language, if possible at aU, would have to be undertaken by psychological 
means. The ideal of an absolutely universal, "philosophical" grammar, 
which the empiricists and rationaUsts of the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries had pursued in different ways, seemed shattered once and for 
aU since the emergence of scientific comparative Unguistics: the unity of 
language could no longer be sought in its logical content, but only in its 
genesis and in the psychological laws governing this genesis. Wundt's 
great work on language, in which he once again attempted to subject the 
totality of Unguistic phenomena to a specific interpretation, derives the 
principle of this interpretation from the concept and methodology of 
ethnic psychology. Along the same Unes of thought Steinthal, in his EtnUH-
tung in die Psychologie und Sprachwissenschaft (1871), had attempted to 
use Herbart's concept of apperception as the foundation of inquiry into 
knguage. Subsequendy Marty (1908), in conscious opposition to the view 
of Steinthal and Wundt, returned to the idea of a "universal grammar and 
phUosophy of language," which he looked upon as the framework of a 
"descriptive theory of signification." But he too attempted to buUd this 
theory of signification by purely psychological means; indeed, he expressly 
Umits the scope of Unguistic philosophy to those problems of Unguistic 
k w which are "either of a psychological nature or which at least cannot be 
solved without having recourse primarily to psychology." Thus, despite the 
resistance to this view among Unguists—particularly Karl Vossler^>sy-
chologism and positivism seemed to have been established as a methodolog­
ical ideal, if not a universal dogma, in this field. To be sure, this dogma was 
stiU combatted by philosophical ideaUsm which, however, did not restore 

F O R E W O R D 
71 
language to the autonomous position it had enjoyed in the works of Hum­
boldt. For, instead of regarding it as an independent cultural "form" with 
its specific underlying law, these philosophical idealists attempted to reduce 
it to the general aesthetic function. In this sense, Benedetto Croce subor­
dinated the problem of Unguistic expression to the problem of aesthetic 
expression, while Hermann Cohen's phUosophical system treats logic, 
ethics, aesthetics and finaUy religion as independent links, but touches on 
the problems of language only occasionaUy and in connection with the 
problems of aesthetics. 
From these circumstances it foUows that in the present work I have not 
been able to pursue any charted philosophical course, but have been com­
pelled throughout to seek my own methodological path. However, the 
development of Unguistic science since the days of WiUielm von Humboldt 
provided me rich sources of inspiration. In Humboldt the idea of a truly 
universal inquiry into language may stiU strike us as a mere postulate of 
idealistic phUosophy, but since then it seems to have approached a con­
crete, scientific realization. True, this very wealth of empirical material 
creates an ahnost insuperable difficulty for phUosophical inquiry. For it 
can neither disregard empirical particulars nor can it wholly submit to 
them and stiU remain entirely faithful to its own mission and purpose. In 
the face of this methodological dilemma, the only possibility was to formu­
late the questions asked of linguistics with systematic universality, but in 
each case to derive the answers from actual empirical inquiry. It was 
necessary to seek as broad as possible a view, and not only of one Unguistic 
family, but of different families widely divergent in their logic and struc­
ture. The linguistic literature which it was necessary to consult became so 
vast that the goal I originally set myself receded farther and farther into 
the distance and I often doubted whether it lay within my reach. If I 
nevertheless continued, it is because, as the diversity of linguistic phenom­
ena opened up before me, the particulars seemed more and more to cast 
Ught upon one another and to fit as though of their own accord into a 
general picture. The following investigation is concerned not with the 
study of any particular phenomena, but with the development and elucida­
tion of this general picture. If the fundamental epistemological idea by 
which it is oriented is confirmed, if the description and characterization 
of the pure form of language, here attempted, proves sound, many par­
ticulars which I have overlooked or misinterpreted will easily be supplied 
or rectified in a future treatment of the subject. In working on this book I 

7 2 
F O R E W O R D 
myself have become too keenly aware of the difficulty of the problem and 
the limitations of my own powers, not to welcome the criücism of ex­
perts in the field; in order to facilitate this criticism I have, in interpreting 
and evaluating linguistic data, always expressly indicated my authorities 
and sources so as to make immediate verification possible. 
It remains for me only to express my thanks to aU those who have helped 
me in the preparation of this book, either by the general interest they have 
taken in it or by their expert advice. In my attempt to gain a more accurate 
insight into the structure of the so-called "primitive" languages, I have 
been guided from the first by the works of Carl Meinhof, and by those 
of Boas and SeIer on the American Indian languages. After my call to 
Hamburg in 19191 had at my disposal the well-stocked library of Meinhof's 
Institute for African and South Sea Languages, and moreover, in many 
difficult problems I was able to avail myself of Professor Meinhof's cordially 
proffered and extremely helpful advice. I aho owe thanks to my colleagues 
Professor Otto Dempwolfl and Professor Heinrich Junker for insights 
gained through conversation with them. Finally Ernst Hoffmann in 
Heidelberg and Emil WoIff in Hamburg assisted me far beyond any mat­
ter of detail. Above aU these two men, themselves in the midst of philo­
logical and linguistic inquiries, share with me the fundamental view on 
which this book rests: the conviction that language, like aU basic func­
tions of the human spirit, can be elucidated by philosophy only within a 
general system of philosophical idealism. I also owe heartfelt thanks to 
Ernst Hoffmann for reading the proofs of this first volume despite the 
heavy pressure of his own work. Unfortunately, certain important sug­
gestions which he offered me in the process could not*for technical reasons, 
be included in the published book, but I hope to make use of them in a 
future treatment of the subject. 
ERNST CASSIRER 
Hamburg, April 1023 

Introduction and Presentation of the Problem 
i. The Concept of Symbolic Form and the System of Symbolic Forms 
' Рншкоршсль speculation began with thc concept of being. In the very 
moment when this concept appeared, when man's consciousness awakened 
to thc unity of being as opposed to the multiplicity and diversity of existing 
things, the specific philosophical approach to the world was born. But 
even then man's thinking about the world remained for a long while im­
prisoned within the sphere of existing things, which it was seeking to re­
linquish and surpass. The philosophers attempted to determine the begin­
ning and origin, the ultimate "foundation" of all being: the question was 
stated clearly, but the concrete, determinate answers given were not ade­
quate to this supreme, universal formulation. What these thinkers called 
the essence, the substance of the world was not something which in princi­
ple went beyond it; it was a fragment taken from this very same world. 
A particular, specific and hmited existing thing was picked out, and 
everything eke was genetically derived from it and "explained by it." Much 
as these explanations might change in content, their general form re­
mained within the same methodological limits. At first a particular ma¬
* terial substance, a concrete prima materia, was set up as the ultimate 
foundation of aU phenomena; then the explanations became more ideal 
and the substance was replaced by a purely rational "principle," from 
which everything was derived. But on closer inspection this "principle" 
hung in midair between the "physical" and "spiritual." Despite its ideal 
coloration, it was closely connected with the world of existing things. The 
number of the Pythagoreans, the atom of Democritus, though far removed 
from the original substance of the Ionians, remained a methodological 
hybrid, which had not found its true nature and had not, as it were, chosen 
its true spiritual home. This inner uncertainty was not definitely overcome 
, untU Plato developed his theory of ideas. The great systematic and his­
torical achievement of this theory is that here, for the first time, the essen­
tial inteUectuaI premise for any philosophical understanding and explana­
tion of thc world took on expUcit form. What Pkto sought for, what he 
73 

74 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
O F T H E P R O B L E M 
called "idea," had been effective as an immanent principle in the earliest 
attempts to explain the world, in the Eleatic philosophers, in the Pythago­
reans, in Democritus; but Plato was the first to be conscious of this principle 
and its significance. Plato himself took this to be his philosophical achieve­
ment. In his late works, where he sees the logical implications of his doc­
trine most clearly, he characterizes the crucial difference between his 
, speculation and that of the Pre^>ocratics: the Pre-Socratics identified being 
with a particular existing thing and took it as a fixed point of departure, 
while he for the first time recognized it as a problem. He no longer simply 
inquired into the order, condition and structure of being, but inquired into 
the concept of being and the meaning of that concept. Compared with 
the sharpness of Plato's question and the rigor of his approach, all earlier 
speculations paled to tales or myths about being.1 It was time to abandon 
• these mythical, cosmological explanations for the true, dialectical explana­
tion of being, which no longer clings to its mere facticity but discloses its in­
teUigible meaning, its systematic, teleological order. And with this, thought, 
which in Greek philosophy since Parmenides had appeared as a concept 
interchangeable with that of being, gained a new and profounder mean­
ing. Only where being has the sharply defined meaning of a probUm, 
does thought attain to the sharply defined meaning and value of a principU. 
It no longer runs paraUel to being, a mere reflection "about" being, but by 
its own inner form, it now determines the inner form of being. 
* The same typicalprocess was repeated at different stages in the historical 
development of idealism. Where a materialist view of the world contented 
itself with some ultimate attribute of things as the basis of aU cognition— 
idealism turned this very same attribute into a question for thought. And 
this process is discernible not only in the history of philosophy but in the 
specialized sciences as weU. The road does not lead solely from "data" to 
"laws" and from laws back to "axioms" and "principles": the axioms and 
principles themselves, which at a certain stage of knowledge represent the 
ultimate and most complete solution, must at a hter stage become once 
more a problem. Accordingly, what science designates as its "being" and 
its "object," ceases to appear as a simple and indivisible set of facts; every 
new type or trend of thought discloses some new phase in this complex. 
The rigid concept of being seems to be thrown into flux, into general move­
ment, and the unity of being becomes conceivable only as the aim, and no 
longer as the beginning of this movement. As this insight develops and 
I . Cf. especially The Sophists 243 C ff. 

C O N C E P T A N D S Y S T E M 
O F S Y M B O L I C 
F O R M S 
75 
, gains acceptance in science itsd& tfae naIve copy theory of knowkdge is 
discredited The fundamental concepts of each science, the instruments 
with which it propounds its questions and formuktes its solutions, are 
regarded no longer as passive images of something given but as symboL· 
created by the inteUect itsetf. 
Mathematicians and physicists were first to gain a clear awareness of this 
symboUc character of their basic implements.8 Thenew ideal of knowkdge, 
to which this whole development points, was briUiandy formukted by 
Heinrich Hertz in the introduction to his PrincipUs of Mechanics. He 
deckres that the most pressing and important function of our natural sci­
ence is to enable us to foresee future experience—and he goes onto describe 
the method by which science derives the future from the past: We make 
"inner fictions or symbols" of outward objects, and these symbok are so 
constituted that the necessary logical consequences of the images are al­
ways images of the necessary natural consequences of the imaged objects. 
Once we have succeeded in deriving images of the required nature from 
our past experience, we can with them as modek soon develop the con­
sequences which wiU be manifested in the outward world much later 
or as consequences of our own intervention. . . . The images of which 
we are speaking are our ideas of things; they have with things the one 
essential agreement which hes in the fuUiUment of the stated require­
ment, but further agreement with things is not necessary to their pur­
pose. ActuaUy we do not know and have no means of finding out 
whether our ideas of things accord with them in any other respect than 
in this one fundamental relation.8 
The epistemology of the physical sciences, on which the work of Hein­
rich Hertz is based and the theory of "signs" as first fuUy developed by 
' Hehnholtz, was still couched in the language of the copy theory of knowl-
edge^)ut the concept of the "image" had undergone an inner change, fa 
pkce of the vague demand for a simikrity of content between image and 
thing, we now find expressed a highly complex logical rektion, a general 
inteUectual condition, which the basic concepts of physical knowledge must 
satisfy. Its value hes not in the reflection of a given existence, but in what 
it accompUshes as an instrument of knowledge, in a unity of phenomena, 
2. This is discussed in greater detail in my book Zur Einstein'schen 
Relativitätstheorie 
(Berlin, B. Cassirer, 192'); cf. especially the first section on "Massbegriffe und Denkbegrific" 
3. H . Hertz, Die Prinzipien 
der Mechanik. 
(Leipzig, F» A . Barth, 1894), p. z ff. 
/ 

уб 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
O F T H E 
P R O B L E M 
which the phenomena must produce out of themselves. A system of physical 
concepts must reflect the relations between objective things as well as the 
nature of their mutual dependency, but this is only possible in so far as 
these concepts pertain from the very outset to a definite, homogeneous in­
tellectual orientation. The object cannot be regarded as a naked thing in 
itself, independent of the essential categories of natural science: for only 
within these categories which are required to constitute its form can it 
be described at aU. 
In this sense, Hertz came to look upon the fundamental concepts of 
- mechanics, particularly the concepts of mass and force, as "fictions" which, 
since they are created by the logic of natural science, are subordinate to 
the universal requirements of this logic, among which the a priori require­
ment of clarity, freedom from contradiction, and unambiguousness ofrefer-
ence takes first place. 
With this critical insight, it is true, science renounces its aspiration and 
its claim to an "immediate" grasp and communication of reality. It reaUzes 
that the only objectivization of which it is capable is, and must remain, 
mediation. And in this insight, another highly significant idealistic conse­
quence is implicit. If the object of knowledge can be defined only through 
the medium of a particular logical and conceptual structure, we are forced 
to conclude that a variety of media will correspond to various structures 
of the object, to various meanings for "objective" relations. Even in "na­
ture," the physical object wiU not coincide absolutely with the chemical 
object, nor the chemical with the biological—because physical, chemical, 
biological knowledge frame their questions each from its own particular 
standpoint and, in accordance with this standpoint, subject the phenomena 
to a special interpretation and formation. It might also seem that this con­
sequence in the development of idealistic thought had conclusively frus­
trated the expectation in which it began. The end of this development 
seems to negate its beginning^he unity of being, for which it strove, 
threatens once more to disintegrate into a mere diversity of existing things. 
The One Being, to which thought holds fast and which it seems unable 
to relinquish without destroying its own form, eludes cognition. The mcre 
its metaphysical unity as a "thing in itsetf" is asserted, the more it evades 
aU possibility of knowledge, until at last it is relegated entirely to the 
sphere of the unknowable and becomes a mere "X." And to this rigid 
metaphysical absolute is juxtaposed the reahn of phenomena, the true 
sphere of the knowable, with its enduring multiplicity, finiteness and rela-

C O N C E P T 
A N D S Y S T E M 
O F S Y M B O L I C 
F O R M S 
77 
tivity. But upon closer scrutiny the fundamental postulate of unity is not 
discredited by this irreducible diversity of the methods and objects of 
knowledge; it merely assumes a new form. True, the unity of knowledge 
can no longer be made certain and secure by referring knowledge in aU 
its forms to a "simple" common object which is related to aU these forms 
as the transcendent prototype to the empirical copies. But instead, anew 
task arises: to gather the various branches of science with their diverse 
methodologies—with aU their recognized specificity and independence— 
into one system, whose separate parts precisely through their necessary di¬
, versity wUl complement and further one another. This postulate of a purely 
functional unity replaces the postulate of a unity of substance and origin, 
which ky at the core of the ancient concept of being. 
And this creates a new task for the philosophical cridque of knowledge. 
It must follow the special sciences and survey them as a whole. It must 
ask whether the inteUectual symbols by means of which the speciaUzed 
discipUnes reflect on and describe reaUty exist merely side by side or 
whether they are not diverse manifestations of the same basic human func­
tion. And if the latter hypothesis should be confirmed, a philosophical 
critique must formulate the universal conditions of this function and de­
fine the principle underlying it. bistead of dogmatic metaphysics, which 
seeks absolute unity in a substance to which aU the particukrs of existence 
are reducible, such a philosophical critique seeks after a rule governing the 
concrete diversity of the functions of cognition, a rule which, without 
negating and destroying them, wiU gather them into a unity of deed, the 
unity of a sehnx>ntained human endeavor. 
But again our perspectives widen if we consider that cognition, how­
ever universaUy and comprehensively we may define it, is only one of the 
many forms in which the mind can apprehend and interpret being. Тл giv­
ing form to multiplicity it is governed by a specific, hence sharply deUmited 
principle. AU cognition, much as it may vary in method and orientation, 
aims ultimately to subject the multiplicity of phenomena to the unity of 
, a "fundamental proposition." The particular must not be left to stand 
alone, but must be made to take its place in a context, where it appears 
; as part of a logical structure, whether of a teleqlogical, logJcal or causal 
character. Essentially cognition is always oriented toward this essential 
' aim, the articulation of the particular into a universal law and order. But 
beside thisinteUectual synthesis, which operates and expresses itseLf within 
a system of scientific concepts, the Ufe of the human spirit as a whole 

78 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
O F T H E 
P R O B L E M 
knows other forms. They too can be designated as modes of "objectiviza-
tion": i.e^ as means of raising the particular to the level of the universally 
valid; but they achieve this universal validity by methods entirely different 
from the logical concept and logical law. Every authentic function of the 
human spirit has this decisive characteristic in common with cognition: 
it does not merely copy but rather embodies an original, formative power. 
, It does not express passively the mere fact that something is present but 
contains an independent energy of the human spirit through which the 
simple presence of the phenomenon assumes a definite "meaning," a par-
vj ticular ideational content. This is as true of art as it is of cognition; it is as 
true of myth as of religion. AU live in particular image-worlds, which do 
not merely reflect the empirically given, but which rather produce it in 
accordance with an independent principle. Each of these functions creates 
its own symbolic forms which, if not similar to the intellectual symbols, 
enjoy equal rank as products of the human spirit. None of these forms can 
simply be reduced to, or derived from, the others; each of them designates 
a particular approach, in which and through which it constitutes its own 
aspect of "reality." They are not different modes in which an independent 
reality manifests itsetf to the human spirit but roads by which the spirit 
proceeds towards its objectivization, i.e., its self-revelation. If we consider 
' art and language, myth and cognition in this light, they present a common 
problem which opens up new access to a universal philosophy of the cul­
tural sciences. 
The "revolution in method" which Kant brought to theoretical philoso­
phy rests on the fundamental idea that the relation between cognition and 
its object, generally accepted until then, must be radicaUy modified. In­
stead of starting from the object as the known and given, we must begin 
with the law of cognition, which alone is truly accessible and certain in a 
primary sense; instead of defining the universal qualities of being, like 
ontological metaphysics, we must, by an analysis of reason, ascertain the 
fundamental form of judgment and define it in aU its numerous ramifica­
tions; only if this is done, can objectivity become conceivable. According 
to Kant, only such an analysis can disclose the conditions on which aU 
%nowledge of being and the pure concept of being depend. But the object 
which transcendental analytics thus places before us is the correlate of the 
synthetic unity of the understanding, an object determined by purely 
logical attributes. Hence it does not characterize aU objectivity as such, 
but only that form of objective necessity which can be apprehended and 

C O N C E P T 
A N D S T S T E M 
O F S Y M B O L I C 
F O R M S 
79 
described by the basic concepts of science, particularly the concepts and 
principles of mathematical physics. When in the course of the three critiques 
Kant proceeded to develop the true "system of pure reason," he himsetf 
found this objectivity too narrow. In his idealistic view, mathematics and 
physics do not exhaust aU reality, because they are far from encompassing 
aU the workings of the human spirit in its creative spontaneity. In the 
reahn of ethical freedom, whose basic k w is developed by the Critique of 
Practical Reason, in the realm of art and the realm of organic natural 
forms, as represented in the Critique of Judgment, a new aspect of this 
reaUty appears. This gradual unfolding of the critical-ideaUstic concept of 
reaUty and the critical-idealistic concept of the spirit is among the most 
characteristic traits of Kantian thinking, and is indeed grounded in a kind 
of law of style that governed this thinking. He does not set out to designate 
the authentic, concrete totaUty of the spirit in a simple initial formula, to 
deUver it ready-made, as it were; on the contrary, it develops and finds it-
setf only in the progressive course of his critical analysis. We can designate 
and define the scope of the human spirit only by pursuing this analytical 
process. It Ues in the nature of this process that its beginning and end are 
not only separate from each other, but must apparendy conflict—however, 
the tension is none other than that between potency and act, between the 
mere "potentiaUty" of a concept and its full development and effect. From 
the standpoint of this latter, the Copernican revolution with which Kant 
began, takes on a new and amplified meaning. It refers no longer solely to 
the function of logical judgment but extends with equal justification and 
right to every trend and every principle by which the human spirit gives 
form to reaUty. 
The crucial question always remains whether we seek to understand the 
function by the structure or the structure by the function, which one we 
choose to "base" upon the other. This question forms the living bond con­
necting the most diverse reahns of thought with one another: it constitutes 
their inner methodological unity, without ever letting them kpse into a 
factual sameness. For the fundamental principle of critical thinking, the 
principle of the "primacy" of the function over the object, assumes in each 
special field a new form and demands a new and dependent explanation. 
• Along with the pure function of cognition we must seek to understand 
the function of linguistic thinking, the function of mythical and reUgious 
thinking, and the function of artistic perception, in such a way as to dis­
close how in aU of them there is attained an entirely determinate forma-

8o 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
O F T H E 
P R O B L E M 
tion, not exactly of the world, but rather making for the world, foran ob­
jective, meaningful context and an objective unity that can be apprehended 
as such. 
' 
Thus the critique of reason becomes the critique of culture. It seeks to 
understand and to show how every content of culture, in so far as it is 
more than a mere isolated content, in so far as it is grounded in a universal 
principle of form, presupposes an original act of the human spirit. Herein 
the basic thesis of idealism finds its true and complete confirmation. As 
long as philosophical thought limits itself to analysis of pure cognition, 
the naive-realistic view of the world cannot be wholly discredited. The 
, object ofcognition is no doubt determined and formed in some way by 
cognition and through its original law—but it must nevertheless, so it 
would seem, also be present and given as something independent outside 
of this relation to the fundamental categories of knowledge. If, however, 
we take as our starting point not the general concept of the world, but 
rather the general concept of culture, the question assumes a different form. 
For the content of the concept of culture cannot be detached from the fun­
damental forms and directions of human activity: here "being" can be 
• apprehended only in "action." Only in so far as aesthetic imagination and 
perception exist as a specific pursuit, is there a sphere of aesthetic objects — 
and the same applies to aU those other energies of the spirit by which a 
definite universe of objects takes on form. Even religious consciousness-
convinced as it is of the "reality," the truth, of its object—transforms this 
reality into a simple material existence only at the lowest level, the level of 
purely mythological thinking. At higher levels of contemplation it is more 
or less clearly aware that it only possesses its object in so far as it relates 
r itself to that object in a special way. What ultimately guarantees objectivity 
itself is the way in which it is approached, the specific direction that the 
spirit gives itself in relation to a proposed objective context. Philosophical 
thought confronts aU these directions—not just in order to follow each one 
of them separately or to survey them as a whole, but under the assumption 
that it must be possible to relate them to a unified, ideal center. From the 
-standpoint of critical thinking, however, this center can never lie in a 
given essence but only in a common project. Thus, with aU their inner 
diversity, the various products of culture—language, scientific knowledge, 
myth, art, religion—become parts of a single great problem<omplex: they 
become multiple efforts, aU directed toward the one goal of transforming 

C O N C E P T 
A N D 
S Y S T E M 
O F S Y M B O L I C 
F O R M S 
81 
the passive world of mere impressions, in which the spirit seems at first 
imprisoned, into a world that is purtexpression of the human spirit. 
ш seeking the proper starting point for a philosophical study of language, 
modern philosophy has devised the concept of "inner linguisdc form." A 
similar "inner form" may be sought in religion and myth, in art and sci­
entific cognition. And this form would not mean only a sum or retrospec­
tive compendium of the particular phenomena in these fields, but the law 
determining their structure. True, we can find this law only through the 
phenomena themselves from which we "abstract" it; but this very abstrac­
tion shows that the law is a necessary constituent factor of the content and 
existence of the particular. 
Throughout its history philosophy has been more or less aware of the 
need for such an analysis and critique of the particular forms of culture; 
but it has direcdy undertaken only parts of this task, and then usually 
more with a negative than a positive intention. The purpose of this critique 
was often not so much to describe and explain the positive achievements 
of each particular form, as to refute false claims. Since the days of the 
Greek Sophists there has been a skeptical critique of language, as well as 
of myths and of rational knowledge. This essentiaUy negative attitude be­
comes understandable when we consider that in the course of its develop­
ment every basic cultural form tends to represent itself not as a part but as 
the whole, laying claim to an absolute and not merely relative validity, not 
contenting itsetf with its special sphere, but seeking to imprint its own 
characteristic stamp on the whole reahn of being and the whole life of the 
spirit. From this striving toward the absolute inherent in each special 
sphere arise the conflicts of culture and the antinomies within the concept 
of culture. 
Science had its origin in a form of thinking which, before it could operate 
in its own right, was compelled to work with those first inteUectual as­
sociations and distinctions which found their earliest expression and deposit 
in language and general linguistic concepts. But though science uses lan­
guage as a material and foundation, it must at the same time go beyond 
knguage. A new "logos," guided and governed by a principle other than 
that imbedded in the concepts of language, appears and becomes more 
and more sharply defined and independent. Beside this logos the products 
of language seem to be mere impediments and barriers, which must be 
progressively overcome by the force and specificity of the new principle. 

82 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
O F Т Н Б 
P R O B L E M 
The critique of knguage and of the Unguistic form of thinking becomes 
an integral part of advancing scientific and philosophical thought 
And in the other fields this typical course of development is repeated. 
The particular cultural trends do not move peacefully side by side, seek­
ing to complement oneanother; each becomes what it is only by demon­
strating its own pecuUar power against the others and in batde with the 
others. Religion and art are so close to one another in their purely his­
torical development, and so permeate one another, that sometimes the 
two seem indistinguishable in content and in their inner formative prin­
ciple. It has been said that the gods of Greece owed their origin to Homer 
and Hesiod. But as it progressed, the reUgious thought of the Greeks 
moved farther and farther away from its aesthetic beginning and source. 
After Xenophanes, it rebelled more and more resolutely against the 
mythical-poetic and the sensuous-plastic concepts of the gods, which it 
rejected as anthropomorphic. Тл such spiritual struggles and conflicts, 
which have increased in intensity and significance in the course of history, 
the ultimate decision seems to rest with phUosophy alone, as the supreme 
authority and repository of unity. But the dogmatic systems of meta­
physics satisfied this expectation and mission only in part. For they them­
selves usuaUy stand in the midst of the batde, and not above it: despite the 
conceptual universaUty towards which they strive, they stand only for one 
side of the conflict, instead of encompassing and mediating the conflict 
itsetf in aU its breadth and depth. For most of them are nothing other than 
metaphysical hypostases of a definite logical, or aesthetic, or reUgious prin­
ciple, ш shutting themselves up in the abstract universality of this principle, 
they cut themselves off from particular aspects of cultural life and the 
concrete totality of its forms. PhUosophical thought might avoid this danger 
of occlusion only if it could find a standpoint situated above aU these 
forms and yet not merely outside them: a standpoint which would make 
it possible to encompass the whole of them in one view, which would seek 
to penetrate nothing other than the purely immanent relation of aU these 
forms to one another, and not their relation to any external, "transcendent" 
being or principle. Then we could have a systematic phUosophy of human 
culture in which each particukr form would take its meaning solely from 
the place in which it stands, a system in which the content and significance 
of each form would be characterized by the richness and specific quaUty 
of the relations and concatenations in which it stands with other spiritual 
energies and ultimately with totaUty. 

C O N C E P T 
A N D S T S T E M 
O F S Y M B O L I C 
F O R M S 
S3 
Ever since the beginnings of modern philosophy and pardcularly since 
the emergence of modern philosophical ideahsm, there has been no lack 
of attempts to estabUsh such a system. Though Descartes' programmatic 
Discours de la mithode and his Regulae ad directionem ingenii reject as 
futile the attempts of the old metaphysics to survey the totality of things 
and penetrate the ultimate secrets of nature, they insist all the more emphat­
ically that it must be possible to deal exhaustively with the universitas of the 
human spirit and to survey it by means of thought. "Ingenii limites de-
finire," to define the area and limits of the spirit—this maxim of Descartes 
has become the watchword of all modern philosophy. But the concept of 
"spirit" is still divided and ambiguous, for it is used sometimes in a broader, 
sometimes in a more restricted sense. The philosophy of Descartes starts 
from a new and comprehensive concept of consciousness, but then, with the 
term cogitatio, lets this concept relapse into synonymity with pure thought. 
For Descartes, and for aU the rationalists, the systems of spirit and of rea­
son coincide. They hold that philosophy can be said to encompass and 
permeate the universitas, the concrete totality of the spirit, only if it can 
be deduced from a logical principle. Thus the pure form of logic becomes 
again the prototype and model for every form of the human spirit. And 
just as in Descartes, with whom the systems of classical idealism began, 
so likewise in Hegel with whom they ended, this methodic relationship is 
stiU evident. More sharply than any thinker before him, Hegel stated that 
we must think of the human spirit as a concrete whole, that we must not 
stop at the simple concept but develop it in the totality of its manifestations. 
And yet in his Phenomenology of Spirit, with which he endeavored to 
fuUill this task, he intended merely to prepare the ground for logic. AU the 
diverse forms of the spirit set forth in the Phenomenology seem to culmi­
nate in a supreme logical summit—and it is only in this end point that they 
attain to their perfect "truth" and essence. Rich and varied as they are in 
content, their structure is subordinated to a single and, in a certain sense, 
uniform law—the law of dialectical method, which represents the unchang­
ing rhythm of the concept's autonomous movement. AU cultural forms 
culminate in absolute knowledge; it is here that the spirit gains the pure 
element of its existence, the concept. AU the earlier stages it has passed 
through are, to be sure, preserved as factors in this culminate state, but by 
being reduced to mere factors they are, on the other hand, negated. Of 
aU cultural forms, only that of logic, the concept, cognition, seems to enjoy 
a true and authentic autonomy. The concept is not only a means of rep-

8 4 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
O F T H E 
P R O B L E M 
resenting the concrete Ufe of the spirit, it is also the truly substantial ele­
ment in the spirit itself. So that, with aU Hegel's endeavor to apprehend 
the specific differentiations of the spirit, he ultimately refers and reduces 
its whole content and capacity to a single dimension—and its profoundest 
content and true meaning are apprehended only in rektion to this dimen­
sion. 
Indeed, this ultimate reduction of aU cultural forms to the one form of 
logic seems to be implied by the concept of philosophy itself and particularly 
by the fundamental principle of philosophical idealism. For if we renounce 
this unity, a strict systematic understanding of these forms would seem 
to be unattainable. The only counterpart to the dialectical method is pure 
empiricism. If we can find no universal law by virtue of which one cul­
tural form necessarily issues from another, until at last the whole cycle 
of forms has been comprehended—then, it would seem, the totality of 
these forms can no longer be looked upon as a seltcontained cosmos. Then 
the particular forms simply stand side by side: their scope and specific 
character can be described, but they no longer express a common ideal con­
tent. The philosophy of these forms would then necessarUy amount to their 
history, which, according to its object, would define itsetf as history of lan­
guage, history of religion and myth, history of art, etc. At this point a 
strange dilemma arises. If we hold fast to the postulate of logical unity, the 
universality of the logical form threatens ultimately to efface the individual­
ity of each special province and the specificity of its principle—but if we 
immerse ourselves in this individuality and persevere in our examination 
of it, we run the risk of losing ourselves and of finding no way back to the 
universal. An escape from this methodological dilemma is possible only 
if we can discover a factor which recurs in each basic cultural form but in 
no two of them takes exacdy the same shape. Then, in reference to this prin­
ciple, we might assert the ideal relation between the individual provinces 
—between the basic functions of language and cognition, of art and religion 
—without losing the incomparable particularity of any one of them. If we 
can find a medium through which aU the configurations effected in the 
separate branches of cultural life must pass, but which nevertheless retains 
its particular nature, its specific character—we shaU have found the neces­
sary intermediary link for an inquiry which will accomplish for the totality 
of cultural forms what the transcendental critique has done for pure cogni-
tion. Our next question must therefore be: do the diverse branches of cul­
tural Ufe actually present such an intermediate field and mediating func-

T H E 
P R O B L E M 
O F 
M E A N I N G 
tion, and if so, does this function disclose typical traits, by means of which 
it can be recognized and described? 
2, Universal Function of the Sign. The FrobUm of Meaning 
In seeking an answer to this question we shaU first go back to the concept 
of the "symbol," as Heinrich Hertz characterized it from the standpoint of 
natural science. What the physicist seeks in phenomena is a statement of 
their necessary connection. But in order to arrive at this statement, he must 
not only leave behind him the immediate world of sensory impressions, but 
must seemingly turn away from them entirely. The concepts with which 
he operates, the concepts of space and time, of mass and force, of material 
point and energy, of the atom or the ether, are free "fictions." Cognition 
devises them in order to dominate the world of sensory experience and 
survey it as a world ordered by law, but nothing in the sensory data them­
selves immediately corresponds to them, yet although there is no such corre­
spondence—and perhaps precisely because there is none—the conceptual 
world of physics is entirely seh>contained. Each particular concept, each 
special fiction and sign is like the articulated word of a language meaning­
ful in itself and ordered according to fixed rules. In the very beginnings of 
modern physics, in Galileo, we find the metaphor that the "book of nature" 
is written in mathematical language and can be read only through mathe­
matical ciphers. And since then, the entire development of exact natural 
science shows that every step forward in the formulation of its problems 
and concepts has gone hand in hand with the increasing refinement of its 
system of signs. A clear understanding of the fundamental concepts of 
Galileo's mechanics became possible only when the universal logical locus 
of these concepts was, as it were, determined and a universally valid mathe­
matical-logical sign for them was created in the algorism of the differential 
calculus. And then, taking as his point of departure the problems connected 
with the discovery of the analysis of infinity, Leibniz was soon able to 
formulate the universal problem inherent in the function of symbolism, 
and to raise his universal "characteristic" to a truly philosophical plane. In 
bis view, the logic of things, i.e^ of the material concepts and relations on 
which the structure of a science rests, cannot be separated from the logic 

86 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
O F T H E 
P R O B L E M 
of signs. For the sign is no mere accidental cloak of the idea, but its neces­
sary and essential organ. It serves not merely to communicate a complete 
and given thought<ontent, but is an instrument, by means of which this 
content develops and fully defines itsetf. The conceptual definidon of a 
content goes hand in hand with its stabilization in some characteristic sign. 
Consequently, all truly strict and exact thought is sustained by the sym-
bolics and semiotics on which it is based. Every "law" of nature assumes 
for our thinking the form of a universal "formula"-and a formula can be 
expressed only by a combination of universal and specific signs. Without 
the universal signs provided by arithmetic and algebra, no special rektion 
in physics, no special law of nature would be expressible. It is, as it were, 
the fundamental principle of cognition that the universal can be perceived 
only in the particukr, while the particular can be thought only in reference 
to the universal. 
This mutual relation is not hmited to science but runs through all the 
other fundamental forms of cultural activity. None of them can develop 
its appropriate and peculiar type of comprehension and configuration 
without, as it were, creating a definite sensuous substratum for itsetf. This 
substratum is so essential that it sometimes seems to constitute the entire 
content, the true "meaning" of these forms. Language seems fuUy definable 
as a system of phonetic symbols—the worlds of art and myth seem to con­
sist entirely in the particular, sensuously tangible forms that they set be­
fore us. Here we have in fact an aU^mbracing medium in which the most 
diverse cultural forms meet. The content of the spirit is disclosed only in 
its manifestations; the ideal form is known only by and in the aggregate 
of the sensible signs which it uses for its expression. If it were possible to 
achieve a systematic survey of the various directions which this kind of 
expression has taken; if it were possible to show their typical and con­
sistent features as well as their special gradations and inner differences, the 
ideal of a "universal characteristic," formulated by Leibniz for cognition, 
would be fuUiUed for the whole of cultural activity. We should then pos­
sess a kind of grammar of the symboUc function as such, which would 
encompass and generally help to define its special terms and idioms as 
we encounter them in language and art, in myth and religion. 
The idea of such a grammar impUes a broadening of the traditional 
and historical concept of idealism. IdeaUsm has always aimed at juxtapos­
ing to the mundus sensibilis another cosmos, the mundus intelligibilis, 
and at defining the boundary between these two worlds. But the usual 

T H E 
P R O B L E M 
O F 
M E A N I N G 
87 
means of drawing this boundary was to say that the intelligible world is 
governed by the principle of pure action, while the sensible world is domi­
nated by the principle of receptivity. The free spontaneity of the mind 
prevails in the former, the confinement, the passivity of the senses in the 
latter. But for the "universal characteristic" which now stands before us 
in the broadest outlines as problem and project, this opposition is no longer 
irreconcilable and exclusive. For the senses and the spirit are now joined 
in a new form of reciprocity and correlation. Their metaphysical dualism 
seems bridged, since it can be shown that precisely the pure function of 
the spirit itself must seek its concrete fuUiUment in the sensory world. 
Within the sensory sphere, a sharp distinction must be made between mere 
"reaction" and pure "action," between "impression" and "expression." 
Dogmatic sensationalism underestimates the importance of the purely in­
tellectual factors and moreover, though it insists on sensibility as the basic 
factor in the life of the spirit, it by no means encompasses either the whole 
concept of sensibiUty or its whole effect. Dogmatic sensationalism presents 
an inadequate and distorted picture of sensibiUty, which it limits to "im­
pressions," to the immediate givenness of simple sensations. In so doing, it 
fails to recognize that there is also an activity of the sensibiUty itsetf, that, 
as Goethe said, there is also an "exact sensory imagination," which operates 
in the most diverse spheres of cultural endeavor. We find indeed that, be­
side and above the world of perception, aU these spheres produce freely 
their own world of symbols which is the true vehicle of their immanent 
development—a world whose inner quality is still wholly sensory, but 
which already discloses a formed sensibiUty, that is to say, a sensibility 
governed by the spirit. Here we no longer have to do with a sensible world 
that is simply given and present, but with a system of diverse sensory factors 
which are produced by some form of free creation. 
The process of language formation shows for example how the chaos 
of immediate impressions takes on order and clarity for us only when we 
"name" it and so permeate it with the function of linguistic thought and 
expression. In this new world of linguistic signs the world of impressions 
itself acquires an entirely new "permanence," because it acquires a new in­
tellectual articulation. This differentiation and fixation of certain contents 
by words, not only designates a definite intellectual quality through them, 
but actuaUy endows them with such a quality, by virtue of which they 
are now raised above the mere immediacy of s04:alled sensory qualities. 
Thus language becomes one of the human spirit's basic implements, by 

88 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
O F T H E 
P R O B L E M 
which we progress from the world of mere sensation to the world of in­
tuition and ideas. It contains in germ that inteUectual effort which is 
afterwards manifested in the formation of scientific concepts and in the 
logical unity of their form. Here lies the first beginning of that universal 
function of separation and association, which findsits highest conscious 
expression in the analyses and syntheses of scientific thought. And beside 
the world of linguistic and conceptual signs stands the world of myth 
and art, incommensurate with it and yet related in spiritual origin. For 
deeply rooted as it is in sensibility, mythical fantasy also goes far beyond 
the mere passivity of sensation. If we judge it by the ordinary empirical 
standards provided by our sensory experience, its creations cannot but seem 
"unreal," but precisely in this unreality lies the spontaneity and inner free­
dom of the mythical function. And this freedom is by no means arbitrary 
and lawless. The world of myth is no mere product of whim or chance, it 
has its own fundamental laws of form, which are at work in all its particu­
lar manifestations. And when we consider art, it is immediately clearthat 
the conception of an aesthetic form in the sensible world is possible only 
because we ourselves create the fundamental elements of form. AU under­
standing of spatial forms, for example, is ultimately bound up with this 
activity of their inner production and with the law governing this produc­
tion. And so we see that the very highest and purest spiritual activity known 
to consciousness is conditioned and mediated by certain modes of sensory 
activity. Here again the authentic and essential life of the pure idea comes 
to us only when phenomena "stain the white radiance of eternity." We 
can arrive at a system of the manifold manifestations of the mind only by 
pursuing the different directions taken by its original imaginative power. 
In them we see reflected the essential nature of the human spirit—for it 
can only disclose itself to us by shaping sensible matter. 
Another indication that the creation of the various systems of sensuous 
symbols is indeed a pure activity of the mind is that from the outset aU 
these symbols lay claim to objective value. They go beyond the mere phe­
nomena of the individual consciousness, claiming to confront them with 
something that is universally vaUd. This claim may possibly prove un­
warranted in the light of subsequent critical inquiry with its more highly 
developed concept of truth; but the mere fact that it is made belongs to 
the essence and character of the particular cultural forms themselves. They 
themselves regard their symbols not only as objectively valid, but for the 
most part as the very core of the objective and "real." It is characteristic, 

T H E 
P R O B L E M 
O F 
M E A N I N G 
89 
for example, of the first seemingly naive and unreflecting manifestations 
of linguistic thinking and mythical thinking, that they do not clearly dis­
tinguish between the content of the "thing" and the content of the "sign," 
but indifferently merge the two. The name of a thing and the thing itsetf 
are inseparably fused; the mere word or image contains a magic force 
through which the essence of the thing gives itself to us. And we need 
only transfer this notion from the real to the ideal, from the material to the 
functional, to find that it contains a kernel of justification. In the immanent 
development of the mind the acquisition of the sign really constitutes 
a first and necessary step towards knowledge of the objective nature of the 
thing. For consciousness the sign is, as it were, the first stage and the first 
demonstration of objectivity, because through it the constant flux of the 
contents of consciousness is for the first time halted, because in it something 
enduring is determined and emphasized. N0 mere content of consciousness 
as such recurs in strictly identical form once it has passed and been re­
placed by others. Once it has vanished from consciousness, it is gone for­
ever as that which it was. But to this incessant flux of contents, conscious­
ness now juxtaposes its own unity and the unity ofits form. Its identity 
is truly demonstrated not in what it is or has, but in what it does. Through 
thesign that is associated with the content, the content itself acquires a 
new permanence. For the sign, in contrast to the actual flow of the par­
ticular contents of consciousness, has a definite ideal meaning, which en­
dures as such. It is not, like the simple given sensation, an isolated particu­
lar, occurring but once, but persists as the representative of a totality, as 
an aggregate of potential contents, beside which it stands as a first "uni­
versal." In the symbolic function of consciousness—as it operates in kn-
guage, in art, in myth—certain unchanging fundamental forms, some of 
a conceptual and some of a purely sensory nature, disengage themselves 
from the stream of consciousness; the fluxof contents is replaced by a setf-
containedand enduring unity of form. 
Here, however, we are not dealing with an isolated act, but with a 
progressive process of determination. At the first level, the fixation of the 
content through the linguistic sign, the mythical or artistic image, seems 
to do no more than hold it fast in the memory, it does not go beyond 
simple reproduction. At this level the sign seems to add nothing to the 
content to which it refers, but merely to preserve and repeat it. Even in 
the history of the psychological development of art it has been thought 
possible to identify a phase of mere "recoUective art," in which all artistic 

0 0 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
0 F T H E 
P R O B L E M 
endeavor was directed solely towards stressing certain features of what 
was perceived by the senses and presenting it to the memory in a man-made 
image.4 But the more clearly the particular cultural forms disclose their 
specific energy, the more evident it becomes that aU apparent "reproduc­
tion" presupposes an original and autonomous act of consciousness. The 
reproducibiUty of the content is itself bound up with the production of 
a sign for it, and in producing this sign the consciousness operates freely 
and independently. The concept of "memory" thus takes on a richer and 
deeper meaning. In order to remember a content, consciousness must 
previously have possessed itself of that content in a way differing from 
mere sensation or perception. The mere repetition of the given at another 
time does not suffice; in this repetition a new kind of conception and 
formation must be manifested. For every "reproduction" of a content em­
bodies a new level of "reflection." By the mere fact that it no longer takes 
this content as something simply present, but confronts it in imagination 
as something past and yet not vanished, consciousness, by its changed 
relation to the content, gives both to itsetf and the content a changed ideal 
meaning. And this occurs more and more precisely and abundandy as the 
world of representations stemming from the " I " becomes differentiated. 
The " I " now exercises an original formative activity aU the whUe develop­
ing a deeper understanding. 
The Umits of the "subjective" and "objective" worlds become for the 
first time reaUy clear. One of the essential tasks performed by the general 
critique of knowledge is to ascertain the laws governing this deUmitation 
in the purely theoretical sphere, where it is effected by the methods of 
scientific thought. This critique shows that the "subjective" and "objec­
tive" were not from the very beginning strictly separate spheres, fully 
defined in content, but that both became defined only in the process of 
cognition and in accordance with its methods and conditions. The cate­
gorical distinction between " I " and "not-I" proves to be an essential and 
constant function of theoretical thinking, whereas the manner in which 
this function is fulfilled, the boundary between the "subjective" and "ob­
jective" contents varies with the level of cognition. For theoretical science, 
the enduring and necessary elements in experience are "objective"^>ut 
which contents are said to be enduring and necessary depends on the 
general methodological standard applied to the experience and_on the 
level of cognition at that time, that is, on the totality of its empiricaUy and 
4. Cf. W . Wundt, Die Kunst, Vol. 3 in Völkerpsychologie, 
2d ed. pp. 115 ff. 

T H E 
P R C B L E M 
O F 
M E A N I N G 
91 
theoreticaUy assured insights. Seen in this context, the way in which we 
apply the conceptual opposition of "subjective" and "objective" in giving 
form to the world of experience, in constructing nature, appears to be 
not so much the solution to the problem of cognition, as its perfect expres-
sion.6 
But this opposition is manifested in aU its richness and diversity only 
when we foUow it beyond the Umits of theoretical thinking and its specific 
concepts. Not only science, but language, myth, art and religion as weU, 
provide the building stones from which the world of "reaUty" is constructed 
for us, as weU as that of the human spirit, in sum the W0rld4>f-the-I. Like 
scientific cognition, they are not simple structures which we can insert 
into a given world, we must understand them as functions by means of 
which a particular form is given to reality and in each of which specific 
distinctions are effected. Each function makes use of different instruments, 
each one presupposes and applies entirely different standards and criteria; 
and the result is different also. The scientific concept of truth and reality 
is different from that of religion—similarly, each sphere not only designates 
but actuaUy creates its particukr and irreducible basic relation berween 
"inside" and "outside," between the I and the world. Before a decision 
can be reached with regard to aU these diverse, overlapping and conflict­
ing views and aspirations, they must first be differentiated with critical 
rigor and precision. The achievement of each one must be measured by 
itself, and not by the standards and aims of any other—and only at the end 
of this examination can we ask whether and how aU these forms of con­
ceiving the world and the I are compatible with one another—whether, 
though they are not copies of one and the same self-subsistent "thing," they 
do not complement one another to form a single totaUty and a unified sys­
tem. 
For the phUosophy of language this approach was first envisaged and 
carried out with full clarity by Wilhelm von Humboldt. For Humboldt, 
the phonetic sign which represents the material of aU language formation 
is in a sense the bridge between the subjective and objective, because in it 
the essential factors of the two are combined. For on the one hand the 
sound is spoken, that is, produced and formed by ourselves; but on the 
other hand, as a sound heard, it is a part of the sensible reality that sur-
5. For more detailed treatment see my book, Substanzbegriff 
und Funkßonsbegriff 
(Berlin, 
B. Cassirer, 1910), ch. 6. Eng. trans, by W m . C . and M. C . Swabey, Substance and 
Function 
(Chicago, Open Court Publishing Co., 1923). 

02 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
O F T H E 
P R O B L E M 
rounds us. We apprehend and know it as something both "inward" and 
"outward"-as an inward energy which assumes objective form in the out­
ward world. 
In speech the energy of the mind breaks a path through the lips, but its 
product returns through our own ears. The idea is translated into true 
objectivity without being withdrawn from subjectivity. Only language 
can do this; and without this translation into an objectivity which re­
turns to the subject—and such a translation occurs, even though silently, 
wherever language is at work—the formation of concepts and hence 
aU true thought would be impossible. . . . For language cannot be 
regarded as a substance which is present, which can be apprehended 
as a whole or gradually communicated; it is something which must be 
constantly produced, and while the laws according to which it is pro­
duced are defined, its scope and in a certain sense the manner in which 
it is produced remains indeterminate. . . . Just as the particular sound 
mediates between the object and the man, so the whole language 
mediates between him and the nature that works upon him from within 
and without. He surrounds himself with a world of sounds in order to 
assimilate and elaborate the world of objects.6 
In this critical, idealistic view of language, Humboldt mentions a factor 
which occurs in every type and form of symbolism. In each one of its 
freely projected signs the human spirit apprehends the object and at the 
same time apprehends itself and its own formative law. And this peculiar 
interpenetration prepares the way for the deeper determination both of 
subject and object. On the first level of this determination, it appears as 
though the two antithetical factors simply stood separately, side by side 
and juxtaposed. In its earliest formations, speech can equally well be in­
terpreted as a pure expression of the inward or the outward, as an ex­
pression of mere subjectivity or mere objectivity. In the first case the spoken 
sound seems to be nothing other than an expression of excitement and 
emotion, in the second case it seems to be mere onomatopoeic imitation. 
The various speculations on the "origin of language" do indeed move be­
tween these two extremes, neither of which reach the core and essence of 
6. W. V . Humboldt, "Einleitung zum Kawi-Werfc," 
Wer\e, 
ed. Albert Leitzmann, 
Gesammelte 
Schriften, 
ed. Königlich Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 7, N0. 1, 
55 ff. See Über die Kawi-Sprache 
auf der Insel Java (3 vols. Berlin, 1836-39), Vol. 1, " E i n ­
leitung." 

T H E 
P R O B L E M 
O P " R E P R E S E N T A T I O N " 
93 
language itsetf. For what fenguage designates and expresses is neither ex­
clusively subjective nor exclusively objective; it effects a new mediation, 
a particular reciprocal rehttion between the two factors. Neither the mere 
discharge of emotion, nor the repetition of objective sound stimuU yields 
the characteristic meaning and form of language: fonguage arises where 
the two ends are joined, so creating a new synthesis of " I " and "world." 
An analogous relation is created in every truly independent and original 
function and consciousness. Art can no more be defined as the mere ex­
pression of inward Ufe than as a reflection of the forms of outward reality; 
in it, too, the crucial and characteristic factor is to be sought in how, through 
it, the "subjective" and "objective," pure emotion and pure form, merge 
with one another and so gain a new permanence and a new content. In 
aU these examples we see more sharply than is possible if we limit ourselves 
to the purely intellectual function, that in analyzing the cultural forms we 
cannot begin with a rigid dogmatic distinction between the subjective and 
objective, but that they are differentiated and their spheres defined only 
through these forms themselves. Each particular cultural energy contributes 
to this definition in its particular way and plays its own characteristic part 
in establishing the concepts of the I and of the world. Cognition, language, 
myth and art: none of them is a mere mirror, simply reflecting images of 
inward or outward data; they are not indifferent media, but rather the true 
sources of hght, the prerequisite of vision, and the weUsprings of aU forma­
tion. 
3. The Problem of "Representation" and the Structure of 
Consciousness 
ш analyzing language, art, myth, our first problem is: how can a finite and 
particular sensory content be made into the vehicle of a general spiritual 
"meaning"? If we content ourselves with considering the material aspect 
of the cultural forms, with describing the physical properties of the signs 
they employ, then their ultimate, basic elements seem to consist in an 
aggregate of particular sensations, in simple qualities of sight, hearing, or 
touch. But then a miracle occurs. Through the manner in which it is con­
templated, this simple sensory material takes on a new and varied Ufe. 

94 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
O F T H E 
P R O B L E M 
When the physical sound, distinguished as such only by pitch and intensity 
and quality, is formed into a word, it becomes an expression of the finest 
inteUectual and emotional distinctions. What it immediately is, is thrust 
into the background by what it accomplishes with its mediation, by what 
it "means." The concrete particular elements in a work of art also disclose 
this basic relation. No work of art can be understood as the simple sum 
of these elements, for in it a definite law, a specific principle of aesthetic 
formation are at work. The synthesis by which the consciousness combines 
a series of tones into the unity of a melody, would seem to be totally differ­
ent from the synthesis by which a number of syllables is articulated into 
the unity of a "sentence." But they have one thing in common, that in 
both cases the sensory particulars do not stand by themselves; they are 
articulated into a conscious whole, from which they take their quaUtative 
meaning. 
7i we attempt a broad initial survey of the basic relations which con­
stitute the unity of consciousness, our attention is first drawn to certain 
mutuaUy independent "modes" of combination. The factor of "juxtaposi­
tion" as it appears in the form of space, the factor of succession as in the 
form of time—the combination of material properties in such a way that 
one is apprehended as a "thing," the other as an "attribute," or of succes­
sive events in such a way that the one appears as a cause of the other: aU 
these are examples of such original types of relation. Sensationalism strives 
in vain to derive them from the immediate content of particular impres­
sions. "Five tones on a flute" may, to be sure, according to Hume's weU-
known psychological theory, "add up to" the idea of timeout this re­
sult is possible only if "succession," the characteristic factor of relation and 
order, has been tacitly drawn into the content of the particular tones, so 
that the universal structure of time is taken as a premise. For psychological 
as weU as epistemological analysis, the basic forms of relation prove to be 
just such simple and irreducible "qualities" of consciousness as the simple 
sensory qualities, the elements of sight, hearing or touch. And yet phUo­
sophical thought cannot contentitself with accepting the diversity of these 
relations as such, as a simple given fact. In dealing with the sensations it 
may suffice to list their principal classes and consider them as an uncon­
nected multiplicity; but when we come to the relations, it would seem 
that the operation of their particular forms becomes inteUigible to us only 
when we think of them as connected by a higher synthesis. Since Plato in 
The Sophists formulated this problem of the κοινωνία των ytvS>v> the sys-

T H E 
P R O B L E M 
O F 
" R E P R E S E N T A T I O N " 
95 
tematic "community" of pure ideas and formal concepts, it has remained 
alive throughout the history of philosophy. The critical and the meta­
physical-speculative solutions to the problem differ in that they presuppose 
different concepts of the "universal" and hence a different notion of the 
logical system itself. The former view goes back to the concept of the 
analytic universal, the latter aims at a synthetic universal. In the critical 
view we content ourselves with gathering all the possible forms of con­
nection into a systematic concept and thus subordinating them to definite 
fundamental kws; in the metaphysical view we seek to understand how 
the concrete totality of particukr forms develops from a single original 
principle. The metaphysical view admits of only 00c*initial point and one 
end point, which are connected with one another by the constant applica­
tion of one and the same methodical principle to a s y n t h e t i c 4 l e d u c t i v e 
demonstration—the critical view not only tolerates but encourages several 
different dimensions of inquiry. It raises the problem of a unity which 
from the outset makes no claim tosimpUcity. The different modes in 
which the human spirit gives form to reaUty are recognized as such, and 
no attempt is made to fit them into a single, simply progressing series. 
And yet, in such an approach we by no means abandon theMeaof a con­
nection between the particukr forms as such; this approach sharpSnvon_ 
the contrary, the idea of the system by replacing the concept of a simple 
system with the concept of a complex system. Each form, in a manner of 
speaking, is assigned to a special plane, within which it fulfiUs itsetf and 
develops its specific character in total independence^>ut precisely when 
aU these ideal modes are considered together, certain analogies and certain 
typical relations appear, which can be singled out and described as such. 
The first factor we encounter is a difference, which we may term the 
difference in the quality and modality of forms. By the "quality" of a 
given relation we here understand the particular type of combination by 
means of which it creates series within the whole of consciousness, the 
arrangement of whose members is subject to a special law. Thus, for ex­
ample, the rektion of simultaneity as opposed to succession constitutes 
such an independent quaUty. On the other hand, one and the same form 
of rektion can undergo an inner transformation if it occurs within a dif­
ferent formal context. Each particular rektion belongs—regardless of its 
particukrity—to a totality of meanings which itsetf possesses its own 
"nature," its self<ontained formal law. Thus, for example, the universal 
rektion which we caU "time" is just as much an element of theoretical sci-

o6 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
O F T H E 
P R O B L E M 
encific cognition as an essential factor in certain structures of the aesthetic 
consciousness. Time, as explained in the beginning of Newton's Mechanics 
as the stable basis of all motion and the uniform measure of aU change, 
seems at first sight to have nothing more than the name in common with 
the time that governs a work of music and its rhythmic measures—and 
yet this unity of nomenclature involves a unity of meaning at least in so 
far as both posit that universal and abstract quality which we term "suc­
cession." But the consciousness of natural laws as laws of the temporal form 
of motion and the consciousness of musical measure have each their own 
specific mode of succession. Similarly, we can interpret certain spatial 
forms, certain complexes of lines and figures, in one case as an artistic 
ornament and in another as a geometrical figure, so endowing one and the 
same material with entirely different meanings. The spatial unity which 
webuild in aesthetic vision and creation, in painting, sculpture and architec­
ture, belongs to an entirely different sphere from the spatial unity which is 
represented in geometrical theorems and axioms. In the one case we have 
the modality of the logical-geometric concept, in the other the modality of 
artistic imagination—in the one case, space is conceived as an aggregate 
of mutually independent relations, as a system of "causes" and "conse­
quences"; in the other, it is conceived as a whole whose particular factors 
are dynamically interlocked, a perceptual, emotional unity. And the con­
sciousness of space can assume stiU other forms: for in mythical thin\ing 
we find again a very special approach to space, a manner of articulating 
and "orienting" the spatial world that differs sharply and characteristically 
from the spatial articulation of the cosmos in empirical thinking. 7 Like­
wise, the general form of causality appears in a totally different light ac­
cordingly as wc consider it on the plane of scientific or of mythical think­
ing. Myth also knows the concept of causality, which it employs both in 
its general theogonies and cosmogonies and in its interpretations of all 
sorts of particular phenomena which it "explains" mythically on the basis 
of this concept. But the ultimate motive of this "explanation" is entirely 
different from that which governs the study of causality by theoretical, 
scientific concepts. The problem of the origin as such is common to 
science and myth; but the type and character, the modality of the origin 
changes as soon as we move from the one province to the other—as soon 
7. Cf. my study, Die Begriffsform 
in mythischen 
Denken, 
Studien der Bibliothek. Warburg, 
Vol. / (Leipzig, Berlin, B. G . Tcubner, 192a). 

T H E 
P R O B L E M 
O F 
" R E P R E S E N T A T I O N " 
97 
as we use the origin and learn to understand it as a scientific principle, 
rather than as a mythical potency. 
We see, then, that in order to characterize a given form of relation in its 
concrete application and concrete meaning, we must not only state its 
qualitative attributes as such, but also define the system in which it stands. 
If we designate the various kinds of relation—such as relation of space, 
time, causality, etc.—as R 1 } R 2, R 3, we must assign to each one a special 
"index of modality," μ1} μ 2, μ3, denoting the context of function and 
meaning in which it is to be taken. For each of these contexts, language as 
well as scientific cognition, art as well as myth, possesses its own constitu­
tive principle which sets its stamp, as it were, on all the particular forms 
within it. The result is an^extraordinary diversity of formal relations, 
whose richness and inner involvements, however, can be apprehended 
only through a rigorous analysis of each fundamental form. But even 
aside from such an analysis, the mbstgeneral survey of consciousness as a 
whole reveals certain fundamental conditions of unity, prerequisites for 
synthesis, combination, and statement. It lws^n^the^rerymrture of con­
sciousness that it cannot posit any content without, by this simple act, 
positing a complex of other contents. Kant—in his treatise on negative 
quantities^once formulated the problem of causality as the endeavor to 
understand why because something is, something else, of a totally dif­
ferent nature, ought to be and is. If with dogmatic metaphysics we take 
the concept of absolute being as our starting point, this question must seem 
ultimately insoluble. For an absolute being implies ultimate absolute 
elements, each of which is a static substance in itself, and must be con­
ceived for itsetf. But this concept of substance discloses no necessary or 
even intelligible transition to the multiplicity of the world, to the diversity 
of its particular phenomena. Even in Spinoza the transition from substance 
as that which in se est et per se concipitur, to the multiplicity of particular, 
dependent and changeable modi is not deduced but arrived at by stealth. 
Metaphysics, as its history shows, is confronted more and more by a logical 
dilemma. It must either take seriously the fundamental concept of being, 
in which case aU relations tend to evaporate, aU the multiplicity of space, 
time, causality threatensto disperse into mere iflusion—or it must, in recog­
nizing these relations, turn them into mere "accidents" of being. But here 
metaphysics encounters a characteristic difficulty, for it becomes increas­
ingly apparent that it is these "accidents" which are accessible to cognition, 

9» 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
O F T H E P R O B L E M 
which can be apprehended in its forms, while the naked "essence," which 
is supposedly the foundation of the particular qualities and relations, be­
comes lost in the void of mere abstraction. What is ostensibly the "whole of 
reality" contains nothing but its definition and proves ultimately to have 
lost all independent, positive concretion. 
This dialectic of metaphysical ontology can be avoided only if, from the 
very start, "content" and "form," "element" and "relation" are conceived 
not as terms independent of one another, but as concurrent and mutuaUy 
determining one another. The modern, "subjective" trend in speculation has 
brought this general methodological approach increasingly to the fore. For 
the question assumes a new form once it is removed from the reahn of 
absolute being to the sphere of consciousness. Every "simple" quality of 
consciousness has a definite content only in so far as it is apprehended in 
complete unity with certain qualities but separately from others. The func­
tion of this unity and this separation is not removable from the content of 
consciousness but constitutes one of its essential conditions. Accordingly 
there is no "something" in consciousness that does not eo ipso and without 
further mediation give rise to "another" and to a series of others. For what 
defines each particular content of consciousness is that in it the whole of 
consciousness is in some form posited and represented. Only in and 
through this representation does what we caU the "presence" of the content 
become possible. This is immediately evident when we consider even the 
simplest instance of this presence, the temporal relation and the temporal 
"present." Nothing seems more certain than that every truly immediate 
content of consciousness has reference to a definite "now" in which it is con­
tained. The past is "no longer" in the consciousness, the future is "not yet" 
in it: neither seems to belong to its concrete reaUty, its true actuality, but 
to dissolve into mere logical abstractions. And yet the content which we 
designate as the "now" is nothing but the eternaUy fluid boundary dividing 
the past from the future. This boundary cannot be posited independendy 
of what it bounds: it exists only in this act of division itsetf, not as some­
thing that could be thought before this division and detached from it. The 
temporal moment, in so far as we mean to define it as temporal, can be 
apprehended only as the fluid transition from past to future, from no-
longer to not-yet, and not as static substantial being. Where the now is 
interpreted differendy, that is, absolutely, it represents no longer an element 
of time, but the negation of time. It seems then to halt and so negate the 
movement of time. For a school of thought Uke that of the Eleatic phUoso-

T H E 
P R O B L E M 
O F 
" R E P R E S E N T A T I O N * * 
99 
phers, which is oriented toward an absolute being in which it strives to 
persist, the flying arrow is at rest, because in every indivisible "now" it 
has only one single, unequivocaUy defined and invisible "position." But if 
the temporal moment is to be conceived as pertaining to temporal motion, 
it must not be removed from it and opposed to it, but truly situated in it: 
and this is only possible if in thinking the moment as a particukr, we 
concurrently think the process as a whole, and if both, moment and process, 
merge into a perfect unity for consciousness. The form of time itsetf can 
be "given"W us only when the temporal sequence is represented as run­
ning forward and backward. If we think a particular cross section of con­
sciousness, we can apprehend it, not by dweUing exclusively in this cross 
section, but only by going beyond it into the various related directions by 
means of definrte spatial, temporal, or quaUtative ordering functions. Qnly 
because in this waywe^can_ascertain in the actual content of conscious­
ness something that is not, in the given something that is not given—does 
there exist for us that unity which on the one hand we designate as the 
subjective unity of consciousness, and on the other as the objective unity 
of the object. 
The psychological and epistemological analysis of the spatial conscious­
ness takes us back to the same original function of representation. We can 
apprehend a spatial "whole" only by presupposing the formation of various 
temporal series: even though the simultaneous synthesis of consciousness 
constitutes a specific and original part of consciousness in general, it can 
only be completed and represented on the basis of the successive synthesis. 
If specific elements are to be combined into a spatial whole, they must pass 
through the sequence of consciousness and be rekted to one another in 
accordance with a definite rule. Neither the sensationaUst psychology of 
the EngUsh nor the metaphysical psychology of Herbart was able to ex­
plain inteUigibly how the consciousness of spatial synthesis originates in 
the consciousness of temporal synthesis—how a consciousness of "together­
ness" can be shaped from a mere sequence of visual, tactile and motor 
sensations, or from a complex of simple sequences of percepts. But despite 
their entirely different points of departure, these theories have one thing 
in common: they aU recognize that space in its concrete configuration and 
articulation is not "given" as a ready-made possession of the psyche, but 
comes into being only in the process or, one might say, in the general 
movement of consciousness. However, this process itsetf would disintegrate 
into isokted and unrelated particukrs, permitting no synthesis into one 

100 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
O F T H E 
P R O B L E M 
result, if there were not, here again, the general possibility of apprehending 
the whole in the part and the part ш the whole. Leibniz defined conscious­
ness as an "expression of the many in the one," and here again this mul-
torum in uno expressio is the determining factor. We intuit spatial con-
figurations only by combining into one idea complete groups of sensory 
perceptions which mutually displace one another in immediate sensory 
experience, and on the other hand by diffusing this unity through the di­
versity of its particular components. It is only by this interplay of con­
centration and analysis that spatial consciousness is constructed. Form then 
appears as potential motion, while motion appears as potential form. 
In his inquiries into the theory of vision, which form the starting point 
of modern physiological optics, Berkeley compared the development of 
spatial perception to the development of language. There is a kind of natu­
ral language, i.e., a fixed relationship between signs and meanings, which 
alone, in his belief, makes spatial perception possible. It is not by copying 
a ready-made material model of "absolute space" in our minds, but by learn­
ing to use the different, intrinsically incommensurate impressions of the 
diverse sensory spheres, particularly those of sight and touch, as repre­
sentatives and signs for one another, that we create our world of space as 
a world of systematically related perceptions. In line with his sensationalist 
approach, Berkeley interpreted this language of the mind, which he proved 
to be a condition of spatial perception, exclusively as a language of the 
senses. But on closer scrutiny this interpretation negates itself. For it lies 
in the very concept of language that it can never be purely sensuous, but 
represents a characteristic interpenetration and interaction of sensuous and 
conceptual factors; in language it is always presupposed that individual 
sensory signs be filled with general intellectual meaning content. The same 
is true of every other kind of "representation"—that is, of every instance 
where one element of consciousness is represented in and through another. 
We may suppose the sensory foundation of the idea of space to lie in certain 
visual, motor and tactile sensations, but the sum of these sensations con­
tains no trace of that characteristic form of unity which we call "space." 
The notion of space is manifested rather in a kind of coordination which 
enables us to pass from any one of these qualities to their totality. In every 
element that we posit as spatial, our consciousness posits an infinite num­
ber of potential directions, and only the sum of these directions constitutes 
the whole of our spatial intuition. The spatial "picture" that we possess of 
a particular empirical object, a house for example, takes form only when 

T H E 
P R O B L E M 
O F " R E P R E S E N T A T I O N * * 
I O I 
\ 
\ we amplify a particular, rektively limited perspective view in this sense; 
Ϊ employing the partial perspective only as a starting point and stimulus, 
we construct from it a highly complex totaHty of spatial relations. Under­
stood in this light, space is by no means a static vessel and container into 
which ready-made "things" are poured; it is rather a sum of ideal func­
tions, which complement and determine one another to form a unified re­
sult. Just as in the simple temporal "now" earlier and later are expressed 
as the basic temporal directions, similarly in every "here" we posit a 
"there." The particular place is not given prior to the spatial system but 
only in reference to it and in correlation with it. 
A third form of unity which is situated above spatial and temporal unity 
is the form of objectifying synthesis. When we combine a sum of determi­
nate properties into the whole of a constant thing with diverse and variable 
characteristics, this combination presupposes simultaneous and successive 
syntheses, but that is not aU. The relatively constant must be distinguished 
from the variable—certain spatial configurations must be apprehended 
before the concept of the thing as the constant "vehicle" of the variable 
properties can take form. On the other hand, the idea of this "vehicle" 
adds to the intuition of spatial simultaneity and temporal succession a char­
acteristic new factor of independent importance. Empiricist analysis has 
indeed attempted again and again to deny this independence. It sees in 
the idea of the thing nothing other than a purely outward form of com­
bination and attempts to show that the content and form of the "object" 
are exhausted in the sum of its attributes. But here we find the same funda­
mental fallacy as in the empiricist dissection of the concept and conscious­
ness of the I . When Hume explains the self as a "bundle of perceptions," 
this explanation—aside from the fact that it merely speaks of combination 
as such but says nothing whatsoever concerning the particular form and 
type of synthesis that constitutes the self—negates itsetf because in the con­
cept of perception the concept of the setf, which was supposedly analyzed 
and dissected, is contained in its undissected totality. What makes the par­
ticular perception a perception, what distinguishes it as a "perceptual" qual­
ity from any material quality is precisely its "appurtenance to the self." This 
relation to the setf does not arise through the synthesis of a number of 
perceptions but is an original characteristic of each one. A closely analogous 
relation prevails in the synthesis of diverse "properties" into the unity of 
a "thing." When we combine the sensations of extension, sweetness, rough­
ness, whiteness into the idea of "sugar" as a unified whole, this is possible 

1 0 2 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
O F T H E P R O B L E M 
only because each one of these qualities is originally thought ш reference 
to this whole. The whiteness or sweetness, etc., is not apprehended merely 
as a condition within me, but as a "property" and objective quality, because 
I have already attained the desired function and perspective of the "thing." 
Thus the particular can be posited only on the basis of a universal schema 
which is merely filled with new concrete content as our experience of the 
"thing" and its "attributes" progresses. The point as a simple and particu­
lar position is possible only "in" space, i.e., logically speaking, under pre­
supposition of a system comprising aU designations of position; the idea 
of the temporal "now" can be defined only in relation to a sequence of mo­
ments and to the order of succession that we call "time"—and the same is 
true of the relation between the thing and its properties. AU these relations 
(the detailed definition and analysis of which are the business of specialized 
epistemology) disclose the same fundamental characteristic of conscious­
ness, namely, that the whole is not obtained from its parts, but that every 
notion of a part already encompasses the notion of the whole, not as to 
content, but as to general structure and form. Every particular belongs 
from the outset to a definite complex and in itself expresses the rule of this 
complex. It is the totality of these rules which constitutes the true unity 
of consciousness, as a unity of time, space, objective synthesis, etc. 
The traditional language of psychology offers no entirely adequate term 
for this state of affairs, because it is only recently, in the development of 
the modern "gestalt psychology," that this discipline has torn itsetf away 
from a fundamental sensationaUsm. For the sensationalist approach, which 
sees aU objectivity as encompassed in the "simple" impression, synthesis 
consists merely in the "association" of impressions. This term is broad 
enough to cover aU relations that can possibly exist in the consciousness; 
but by its very breadth it obscures their specific character. It fails to dis­
tinguish between relations of the most diverse quality and modality. "As­
sociation" means the fusion of elements into the unity of time or of space, 
into the unity of the ego or the object, into the whole of a thing or of a 
sequence of events—into series whose members are connected by the 
criterion of cause and effect and into series whose members are connected 
by the criterion of "means" and "end." "Association" also passes as an ade­
quate term for the logical law by which particulars are synthesized into the 
conceptual unity of cognition, or for the forms of configuration which 
prove effective in the development of the aesthetic consciousness. But here 
again, it is evident that this term designates only the naked fact of com-

T H E 
P R O B L E M 
O F 
" R E P R E S E N T A T I O N " 
XÖ3 
bination as such, but does not say anything whatsoever regarding its spe­
cific character and kw. The diversity of the paths and directions by which 
consciousness arrives at its syntheses is totaUy obscured. If we designate 
the "elements" as a, b, c, d, etc., their combinations, as we have seen, form 
a precisely graduated and internally differentiated system of diverse func­
tions: F (a, b), (c, d), etc. This system, however, is by no means stated in 
the aUeged generic term "association" which, on the contrary, levels and 
hence negates it. And the term has stiU another essential faiUng. However 
closely they may combine and "fuse," the contents that are brought to­
gether in association remain separable, both as to meaning and origin. Тл 
the course of experience they are articulated into increasingly stable organ­
izations and groups; however, their existence as such is not given by the 
group, but precedes it. Yet it is precisely this rektion of the "part" to the 
"whole" that is fundamentally surpassed in the true syntheses of conscious­
ness. Here the whole does not originate in its parts, it constitutes them and 
gives them their essential meaning, ω thinking of any Umited segment of 
space we also think of its orientation to the whole of space; in every particu­
kr moment of time we encompass the universal form of succession; and in 
positing any particukr attribute we posit the general rektion of "substance" 
and "accident," hence the characteristic form of the object. It is precisely 
this interpenetration, this interdetermination which association, since it 
states merely the contiguity of ideas, leaves unexplained. The empirical 
rules it sets up regarding the mere flow of ideas faU to make inteUigible the 
specific and fundamental forms in which ideas combine, or the unity of 
"meaning" that arises among them. 
The rationalistic theory of knowledge set out to save and demonstrate 
the independence of this "meaning." One of its essential historical achieve­
ments is to have estabUshed by one and the same intellectual operation a new 
and deeper view of consciousness as such and a new concept of the "object" 
of knowledge. It confirmed Descartes' dictum that the unity of the objec­
tive world, the unity of substance, could not be apprehended by percep­
tion, but only by the reflection of the mind on itsetf, by inspectio mentis. 
This fundamental theory of rationaUsm stands in the sharpest antithesis 
to the empiricist theory of "associations"-but it too fails to overcome the 
inner tension between two fundamentaUy different elements of conscious­
ness, between its mere "matter" and its pure "form." For here too the 
synthesis of the contents of consciousness is based upon an activity which 
in some way approaches the particular contents from outside. According 

104 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
O F T H E 
P R O B L E M 
to Descartes, the "ideas" of outward perception, the ideas of lightness and 
darkness, roughness and smoothness, colored and resonant, are essentially 
given only as pictures (velut picturae) and, in this sense, as merely sub­
jective events. What leads us beyond this stage, what enables us to progress 
from the diversity and variability of impressions to the unity and con­
stancy of the object, is the function of judgment and "unconscious infer­
ence," which is totally independent of the impressions. Objective unity is 
a purely formal unity, which can neither be heard nor seen as such, but 
can be apprehended only in the logical process of pure thought. Descartes' 
metaphysical dualism is ultimately rooted in his methodological dualism: 
the theory of the absolute division between the substance of extension and 
the thinking substance, is merely a metaphysical expression for an andthesis 
which is discernible in his account of the pure function of consciousness. 
And even with Kant, in the beginning of his Critique of Pure Reason, 
this antithesis between sensibility and thought, between the "material"and 
"formal" determinants of consciousness, retains its full force—though nere 
he goes on to say that perhaps the two are connected in a common/root 
unknown to us. The principal objection to this formulation is that the an­
tithesis expressed in it is a product of abstraction; the particular fsctors 
of knowledge are logically evaluated, whereas the unity of the matter and 
form of consciousness, of the "particular" and the "universal,"oPsensor> 
"data" and pure "principles of order," constitutes precisely that originally 
certain and originally known phenomenon which evcty/analysis of con­
sciousness must take as its point of departure. If we wished to characterize 
this process by a mathematical metaphor and symbol, despite the fact 
that it goes beyond the sphere of the mathematical, we might, in con­
tradistinction to mere "association," choose the term "integration." The 
element of consciousness is related to the whole of consciousness not as an 
extensive part to a sum of parts, but as a differential to its integral. Just as 
the differential equation of a moving body expresses the trajectory and 
general law of its motion, we must think of the general structural laws 
of consciousness as given in each of its elements, in any of its cross sections 
—not however in the sense of independent contents, but of tendencies and 
directions which are already projected in the sensory particular. This, pre­
cisely, is the nature of a content of consciousness; it exists only in so far as 
it immediately goes beyond itself in various directions of synthesis. The 
consciousness of the moment contains reference to temporal succession; 
the consciousness of a single point in space contains reference to space as 

I D E A T I O N A L 
C O N T E N T 
O F T H E S I G N 
105 
the s u m and totaUty of aU possible designations of posidon; and there 
are coundess analogous relations through which the form of the whole 
is expressed in the consciousness of the particular. The "integral" of con­
sciousness is constructed not from the sum of its sensuous elements (a, b, 
c, d . . . ) , but from the totaUty, as it were, of its differentials of relation 
andform(drx,dr2,drs . . . 
).ThefullactuaUtyofconsciousnessismerely 
the unfolding of what was present as "potency" and general possibility in 
each of its separate factors. Here, in the most general terms, Ues the critical 
solution of Kant's question as to how it is thinkable that because "some­
thing" is, something "other," totally different from i t , must also be. The 
relation, which inevitably seemed more and more paradoxical the more 
sharply it was examined and analyzed from the standpoint of absolute 
being, becomes necessary and immediately inteUigible when i t is considered 
from the standpoint of consciousness. For here there is not from the very 
Start an abstract "one," confronted by an equaUy abstract and detached 
"other"; here the one is "in" the many and the many is "in" the one: in 
the sense that each determines and represents the other. 
4. Ideational Content of the Sign. Transcending the Copy Theory 
of Knowhdge 
So far we have aimed at a kind of critical "deduction," an explanation and 
justification of the concept of representation, in the beUef that the rep­
resentation of one content in and through another is an essential premise 
fbr the structure and formal unity of consciousness. The foUowing study, 
however, wiU not deal with this general logical significance of the rep­
resentative function. We shaU seek to pursue the problem of signs, not 
backward to its ultimate "foundations," but forward to its concrete un­
folding and configuration in the diverse cultural spheres. 
We have acquired a new foundation for such an investigation. We must 
go back to "natural" symbolism, to that representation of consciousness 
as a whole which is necessarily contained or at least projected in every 
single moment and fragment of consciousness, if we wish to understand 
the artificial symbols, the "arbitrary" signs which consciousness creates 
in language, art, and myth. The force and effect of these mediating signs 

io6 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
O F T H E 
P R O B L E M 
would remain a mystery if they were not ultimately rooted in an original 
spiritual process which belongs to the very essence of consciousness. We 
can understandhow a sensuous particukr, such as the spoken sound, can 
become the vehicle of a purely inteUectual meaning, only if we assume that 
the basic function of signification is present and active before the individual 
sign is produced, so that this producing does not create signification, but 
merely stabiHzes it, applies it to the particular case. Since every particular 
content of consciousness is situated in a network of diverse relations, by 
virtue of which its simple existence and seh>representation contain reference 
to other and stiU other contents, there can and must be certain formations 
of consciousness in which the pure form of reference is, as it were, sensu­
ously embodied. From this foUows the characteristic twofold nature of 
these formations: their bond with sensibUity, which however contains 
within it a freedom from sensibiUty. In every linguistic "sign," in every 
mythical or artistic "image," a spiritual content, which intrinsicaUy points 
beyond the whole sensory sphere, is translated into the form of the sensu­
ous, into something visible, audible or tangible. An independent mode 
of configuration appears, a specific activity of consciousness, which is dif­
ferentiated from any datum of immediate sensation or perception, but 
makes use of these data as vehicles, as means of expression. Thus the "natu­
ral" symbolism which we have found embedded as a fundamental char­
acteristic of consciousness is on the one hand utilized and retained, while 
on the other hand it is surpassed and refined. For in this "natural" symbol­
ism, a certain partial content of consciousness, though distinct from the 
whole, retained the power to represent this whole and in so doing to 
reconstitute it in a sense. A present content possessed the power of evoking 
another content, which was not immediately given but merely conveyed 
by it. It is not the case, however, that the symbolic signs which we encoun­
ter in language, myth, and art first "are" and then, beyond this ^eing," 
achieve a certain meaning; their being arises from their signification. Their 
content subsists purely and whoUy in the function of signification. Here 
consciousness, in order to apprehend the whole in the particular, no longer 
requires the stimulus of the particukr itsetf, which must be given as such; 
here consciousness creates definite concrete sensory contents as an expres­
sion for definite complexes of meaning. And because these contents which 
consciousness creates are entirely in its power, it can, through them, freely 
"evoke" aU those meanings at any time. When, for example, we Unk a 
given intuition or idea with an arbitrary Unguistic sound, we seem, at first 

I D E A T I O N A L 
C O N T E N T 
O F T H E 
S I G N 
107 
sight, to have added nothing whatever to its content. And yet, on doser 
scrutiny, the content itsetf takes on a different "character" for conscious­
ness through the creation of the linguistic sign: it becomes more definite. 
Its sharp and clear inteUectual "reproduction" proves to be inseparable 
from the act of Unguistic "production." For the function of language is 
not merely to repeat definitions and distinctions which are already present 
in the mind, but to fbrmukte them and make them inteUigible as such. 
Thus in every sphere, it is through the freedom of spiritual action that the 
chaos of sensory impressions begins to clear and take on fixed form for us. 
The fluid impression assumes form and duration for us only when we 
mouUi it by symboUc action in one direction or another, ш science and 
language, in art and myth, this formative process proceeds in different 
ways and according to different principles, but aU these spheres have this 
in common: that the product of their activity in no way resembles the mere 
material with which they began. It is in the basic symbolic function and 
its various directions that the spiritual consciousness and the sensory con­
sciousness are first truly differentiated. It is here that we pass beyond pas­
sive receptivity to an indeterminate outward material, and begin to place 
upon it our independent imprint which articulates it for us into diverse 
spheres and forms of reaUty. Myth and art, knguage and science, are in 
this sense configurations towards being: they are not simple copies of an 
existing reaUty but represent the main directions of the spiritual move­
ment, of the ideal process by which reaUty is constituted for us as one and 
many—as a diversity of forms which are ultimately held together by a 
unity of meaning. 
Only when we are oriented towards this goal do the specifications of 
the various systems of signs, and the use which the inteUigence makes of 
them, become inteUigible. K the sign were nothing but a repetition of 
a determinate and finished, particukr intuitive or ideational content, we 
should be faced with two questions. What would be accompUshed by a 
mere copy of something already present? And how could such an exact 
copy be accompUshed? For it is obvious that a copy can never approach 
the original and can never repkce it for the eye of the spirit. K we took 
an exact reproduction as our norm, we should be driven to an attitude of 
fundamental skepticism toward the value of the sign as such. Ji, for ex­
ample, we regarded it as the true and essential function of knguage to 
express once again, but merely in a different medium, the very same reaUty 
that Ues ready-made before us in particukr sensations and intuitions—wc 

io8 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
O F T H E 
P R O B L E M 
should be struck at once by the vast inadequacy of all languages. Measured 
by the limitless richness and diversity of intuitive reality, aU linguistic sym 
boU would inevitably seem empty; measured by its individual concretion, 
they would inevitably seem abstract and vague. If language attempts to 
compete with sensation or intuition in this respect, it cannot but fall far 
behind. The πρωτον ψενδός of the skeptical critique of language is pre­
cisely that it takes this standard as the only valid and possible one. In reality 
the analysis of language—^particularly if it starts not from the mere par­
ticular of the word, but from the unity of the sentence—shows that aU 
linguistic expression, far from being a mere copy of the given world of 
sensation or intuition, possesses a definite independent character of "signi­
fication." 
And the same relation applies to signs of the most diverse type and 
origin. In a sense it can be said of them aU that their value consists not so 
much in what they stabilize of the concrete, sensuous content and its im­
mediate factuality, as in the part of this immediate factuality which they 
suppress and pass over. Similarly, artistic delineation Becomes what it is 
and is distinguished from a mere mechanistic reproduction, only through 
what it omits from the "given" impression. It does not reflect this impres­
sion in its sensuous totality, but rather selects certain "pregnant" factors, 
i.e., factors through which the given impression is amplified beyond it­
self and through which the artistic<onstructive fantasy, the synthetic 
spatial imagination, is guided in a certain direction. What constitutes the 
true force of the sign, here as in other fields, is precisely this: that as the 
immediate, determinate contents recede, the general factors of form and 
relation become aU the sharper and clearer. The particular as such is seem­
ingly limited; but precisely thereby that operation which we have called 
"integration" is effected the more clearly and forcefully. We have seen 
that the particular of consciousness "exists" only in so far as it potentially 
contains the whole and is, as it were, in constant transition towards the 
whole. But the use of the sign liberates this potentiality and enables it to 
become true actuality. Now, one blow strikes a thousand connected chords 
which aU vibrate more or less forcefully and clearly in the sign. In positing 
the sign, consciousness detaches itseH more and more from the direct sub­
stratum of sensation and sensory intuition: but precisely therein it reveals 
its inherent, original power of synthesis and unification. 
Perhaps this tendency is most clearly manifested in the functioning of 
the scientific systems of signs. The abstract chemical "formula," for ex-

I D E A T I O N A L 
C O N T E N T 
O F T H E S I G N 
I O Q 
ample, which is used to designate a certain substance, contains nothing of 
what direct observation and sensory perception teach us about this sub­
stance; but, instead, it places the particular body in an extraordinarily rich 
and finely articulated complex of relations, of which perception as such 
knows nothing. It no longer designates the body according to its sensuous 
content, according to its immediate sensory data, but represents it as a 
sum of potential "reactions," of possible chains of causaUty which are de­
fined by general rules. In the chemical formula the totaUty of these neces­
sary relations fuses with the expression of the particular, and gives this 
expression of the particukr an entirely new and characteristic imprint. 
Here as elsewhere, the sign serves as an intermediary between the mere 
"substance" of consciousness and its spiritual "form." Precisely because 
it is without any sensuous mass of its own, because, in a manner of speak­
ing, it hovers in the pure ether of meaning, it has the power to represent 
not the mere particulars of consciousness but its complex general move­
ments. It does not reflect a fixed content of consciousness but defines the 
direction of such a general movement. SimUarly, the spoken word, con­
sidered from the standpoint of physical substance, is a mere breath of wind; 
but in this breath there lies an extraordinary force for the dynamic of ideas 
and thought. This dynamic is both intensified and regulated by the sign. 
It is one of the essential advantages of the sign^s Leibniz pointed out in 
his Characteristica generalis, that it serves not only to represent, but above 
aU to discover certain logical rektions^hat it not only offers a symboUc 
abbreviation for what is abready known, but opens up new roads into the 
unknown. Herein we see confirmed from a new angle the synthetic power 
of consciousness as such, by virtue of which every concentration of its 
contents impels it to extend its limits. The concentration provided by the 
sign not only permits us to look backward, but at the same time opens up 
new perspectives. It sets a rektive Umit, but this Umit itsetf embodies a 
chaUenge to advance and opens up the road to this advance by disclosing 
its general rule. This is eminendy borne out by the history of science, which 
shows how far we have progressed toward solving a given problem or com­
plex of problems, once we have found a fixed and clear "formuk" for it. 
For example: Most of the questions solved in Newton's concept of fluxion 
and in the algorism of Leibniz' differential calculus were known before 
Leibniz and Newton and approached from the most diverse directions— 
from the angles of algebraic analysis, geometry, and mechanics. But aU 
these problems were truly mastered only when a unified and comprehensive 

1 1 0 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
O F T H E 
P R O B L E M 
symbolic expression was found for them: for now they no longer formed 
a loose and fortuitous sequence of separate questions; the common prin­
ciple of their origin was designated in a definite, universally applicable 
method, a basic operation whose rules were established. 
In the symbolic function of consciousness, an andthesis which is given 
and grounded in the simple concept of consciousness is represented and 
mediated. AU consciousness appears to us in the form of a temporal process 
—but in the course of this process certain types of "form" tend to detach 
themselves. The factor of constant change and the factor of duration tend 
to merge. This universal tendency is realized in different ways in the 
products of language, myth and art, and in the intellectual symbols of 
science. AU these forms seem to be an immediate part of the living, con­
stantly renewed process of consciousness: yet, at the same time, they reveal 
a spiritual striving for certain fixed points or resdng places in this process. 
In them consciousness retains a character of constant flux; yet it does not 
flow indeterminately, but articulates itself around fixed centers of form and 
meaning. In its pure specificity, each Such form is an avrb καθ* αντόίη the 
Platonic sense, detached from the mere stream of ideas—but at the same 
time in order to be manifested, to exist "for us," it must in some way be 
represented in this stream. In the creation and application of the various 
groups and systems of symbolic signs, both conditions are fumlled, since 
here indeed a particular sensory content, without ceasing to be such, ac­
quires the power to represent a universal for consciousness. Here neither 
the sensationalist axiom, "Nihil est in intellectu, quod non ante fuerit in 
sensu," nor its intellectualistic reversal applies. We no longer ask whether 
the "sensory" precedes or foUows the "spiritual," for we are dealing with 
the revelation and manifestation of basic spiritual functionsin the sensory 
material itsetf. 
What would seem to constitute the bias of "empiricism" as well as ab­
stract "idealism" is precisely that neither of them fully and clearly deveJops 
this fundamental relation. One posits a concept of the given particular but 
faUs to recognize that any such concept must always, explicitly or im-
plicidy, encompass the defining attributes of some universal; the other 
asserts the necessity and vaUdity of these attributes but fails to designate 
the medium through whichthey can be represented in the given psycho­
logical world of consciousness. If, however, we start not with abstract 
postulates but from the concrete basic form of spiritual Ufe, this dualistic 
antithesis is resolved. The iUusion of an original division between the in-

I D E A T I O N A L 
C O N T E N T 
O F T H E 
S I G N 
I I I 
tclligiblc and thc sensuous, between "idea" and "phenomenon," vanishes. 
True, we stiU remain in a world of "images"^>ut these are not images 
which reproduce a setf-subsistent world of "things"; they are image-worlds 
whose principle and origin are to be sought in an autonomous creation of 
the spirit. Through them alone we see what we call "reaUty," and in them 
alone we possess it: for the highest objective truth that is accessible to the 
spirit is ultimately the form of its own activity. In the totality of its own 
achievements, in theknowledge of the specific rule by which each of them 
is determined and in the consciousness of the context which reunites all 
these special rules into one problem and one solution: in aU this, the human 
spirit now perceives itself and reality. True, the question of what, apart 
from these spiritual functions, constitutes absolute reaUty, the question of 
what the "thing in itseh?' may be in this sense, remains unanswered, except 
that more and more we learn to recognize it as a fallacy in formulation, an 
inteUectual phantasm. The true concept of reaUty cannot be squeezed into 
the form of mere abstract being; it opens out into the diversity and rich­
ness of the forms of spiritual lije—hnt of a spiritual Ufe which bears the 
stamp of inner necessity and hence of objectivity. In this sense each new 
"symbolic form"-not only the conceptual world of scientific cognition but 
also the intuitive world of art, myth, and languagc^onstitutes, as Goethe 
said, a revelation sent outward from within, a "synthesis of world and 
spirit," which truly assures us that the two are originally one. 
And here new light is cast upon a last fundamental antithesis, with 
which modern philosophy has struggled since its beginnings and which 
it has formulated with increasing sharpness. Its "subjective" trend has led 
philosophy more and more to focus the totaUty of its problems in the con­
cept of life rather than the concept of being. But though this seemed to 
appease the antithesis of subjectivity and objectivity in the form manifested 
by dogmatic ontology, and to prepare the way for its ultimate reconcUiation 
—now, in the sphere of life itself, a stiU more radical antithesis appeared. 
The truth of Ufe seems to be given only in its pure immediacy, to be en­
closed in it—but any attempt to understand and apprehend Ufe seems to 
endanger, if not to negate, this immediacy. True, if we start from the 
dogmatic concept of being, the duaUsm of being and thought becomes more 
and more pronounced as we advance in our investigations—but here there 
remains some hope that the picture of being developed by cognition wiU 
retain at least a remnant of the truth of being. Not aU being, to be sure, 
but at least a part of it would seem to enter into this picture^he substance 

112 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
O F T H E 
P R O B L E M 
of being would seem to penetrate the substance of cognition and in it 
create a more or less faithful reflection of itsetf. But the pure immediacy 
of life admits of no such partition. It, apparently, must be seen whoUy or 
not at aU; it does not enter into our mediate representations of it, but re­
mains outside them, tundamentally different from them and opposed to 
them. The original content of life cannot be apprehended in any form of 
representation, but only in pure intuition. It would seem, therefore, that 
any understanding of spiritual Ufe must choose between the two extremes. 
We are called upon to decide whether to seek the substance of the human 
spirit in its pure originality, which precedes aU mediate configurations— 
or whether to surrender ourselves to the richness and diversity of these 
mediate forms. Only in the first approach do we seem to touch upon the 
true and authentic center of life, which however appears as a simple, seh> 
enclosed center; in the second, we survey the entire drama of spiritual 
developments, but as we immerse ourselves in it, it dissolves more and 
more manifesdy into a mere drama, a reflected image, without independ­
ent truth and essence. The cleavage between these two antitheses—it would 
seenv^annot be bridged by any effort of mediating thought which itself 
remains entirely on one side of the antithesis: the farther we advance in the 
direction of the symbolic, the merely figurative, the farther we go from 
the primal source of pure intuition. 
Philosophical mysticism has not been alone in its constant confrontation 
of this problem and this dUemma; the pure logic of idealism has repeatedly 
seen it and formulated it. Plato's remarks in his Seventh Epistle on the rela­
tion of the "idea" to the "sign" and on the necessary inadequacy of this 
relation, strike a motif which has recurred in aU manner of variations. In 
Leibniz' methodology of knowledge, "intuitive knowledge" is sharply dis­
tinguished from mere "symbolic" knowledge. Even for the author of the 
characteristica universalis, aU knowledge through mere symbols becomes 
"bUnd knowledge" (cogitatio caeca) when measured by intuition, as the 
pure vision, the true "sight" of the idea.8 True, human knowledge can 
nowhere dispense with symbols and signs; but it is precisely this that char­
acterizes it as human, i.e., limited and finite in contradistinction to the 
ideal of the perfect, archetypal and divine intellect. Even Kant, who as­
signed its exact logical position to this idea by defining it as a mere border¬
Une concept of cognition, and who believed that in so doing he had criti-
o 
8. Cf. G. W. Lcibniz, "Meditationes de cognitione, veritate et ideis," Die 
Philosophischen 
Schriften 
von Gottfried 
Wilhelm 
Leibniz, 
ed. C. J. Gerbardt (Berlin, i88o), 4, 422 ff. 

I D E A T I O N A L 
C O N T E N T 
O F T H E 
S I G N 
" 3 
cally mastered it^even Kant, in a passage which constitutes the purely 
methodical cUmax of the Critique of Judgment, once again sharply devel­
ops the antithesis between the intellectus archetypus and the intellectus 
ectypus, between the intuitive, archetypal intellect and the discursive in­
tellect "which is dependent on images." From the standpoint of this an­
tithesis it would seem to follow that the richer the symbolic content of 
cognition or of any other cultural form becomes, the more its essential 
content must diminish. All the many images do not designate, but cloak 
and conceal the imageless One, which stands behind them and towards 
which they strive in vain. Only the negadon of aU finite figuration, only a 
return to the "pure nothingness" of the mystics can lead us back to the true 
primal source of being. Seen in a different light, this antithesis takes the 
form of a constant tension between "culture" and "Ufe." For it is the 
necessary destiny of culture that everything which it creates in its constant 
process of configuration and education 9 removes us more and more from 
the originality of Ufe. The more richly and energetically the human spirit 
engages in its formative activity, the farther this very activity seems to 
remove it from the primal source of its own being. More and more, it ap­
pears to be imprisoned in its own creations—in the words of language, in 
the images of myth or art, in the intellectual symbols of cognition, which 
cover it Uke a delicate and transparent, but unbreachable veU. But the 
true, the profoundest task of a philosophy of culture, a philosophy of lan­
guage, cognition, myth, etc., seems precisely to consist in raising this veU— 
in penetrating from the mediate sphere of mere meaning and characteriza­
tion to the original sphere of intuitive vision. But on the other hand the 
specific organ of philosophy—and it has no other at its disposal—rebels 
against this task. To philosophy, which finds its fulfillment only in the 
sharpness of the concept and in the clarity of "discursive" thought, the 
paradise of mysticism, the paradise of pure immediacy, is closed. Hence 
it has no other solution than to reverse the direction of inquiry, mstead of 
taking the road back, it must attempt to continue forward. If aU culture 
is manifested in the creation of specific image-worlds, of specific symbolic 
forms, the aim of philosophy is not to go behind aU these creations, but 
rather to understand and elucidate their basic formative principle. It is 
solely through awareness of this principle that the content of life acquires 
its true form. Then life is removed from the sphere of mere given natural 
existence:it ceases tb be a part of this natural existence or a mere biological 
9. The German Bildung 
means both formation and education. 
Trans. 

114 
P R E S E N T A T I O N 
O F T H E 
P R O B L E M 
process, but is transformed and fulfilled as a form of the "spirit." In truth, 
the negadon of the symbolic fbrms would not help us to apprehend the 
essence of life; it would rather destroy the spiritual form with which for 
us this essence proves to be bound up. If we take the opposite direction, we 
do not pursue the idea of a passive intuidon of spiritual reality, but situate 
ourselves in the midst of its activity. If we approach spiritualUfe, not as the 
static contemplation of being, but as functions and energies of formation, 
we shall find certain common and typical principles of formation, diverse 
and dissimilar as the forms may be. If the philosophy of culture succeeds 
in apprehending and elucidating such basic principles, it will have fuhiUed, 
in a new sense, its task of demonstrating the unity of the spirit as opposed 
to the multiplicity of its manifestations—for the clearest evidence of this 
unity is precisely that the diversity of the products of the human spirit 
does not impair the unity of its productive process, but rather sustains and 
confirms it. 

V O L U M E 
i : The Phenomenology 
of Linguistic Form 


Chapter ι 
The Problem of Language in the History 
ofPhilosophy1 
I . The ProbUm of Language in the History of PhUosophical 
Idealism (Pktto, Descartes, Leibniz) 
PmLOsoPHicAL inquiry into the origin and nature of language is as old as 
that into the essence and origin of being, For it is characteristic of the earli­
est conscious reflection on the world as a whole that there was as yet no 
distinction between language and being, word and meaning, but that they 
stil 
ormed an indivisible unity. Because language itself is a necessary con­
dition of reflection, because philosophical awareness arises only in and 
through language, the human spirit always finds language present as a 
given reality, comparable and equal in stature to physical reality. From the 
moment when man first turns his attention to it, the world of language 
assumes for him the same specificity and necessity, the same "objectivity" 
as the world of things. Like the world of things, it confronts him as a 
whole, possessing its own self<ontained nature and laws, in which there is 
nothing individual or arbitrary. For this first level of reflection, the char­
acter and meaning of words, like the character of things or the immediate 
character of sensory impressions, involves no free activity of the spirit. The 
I . A comprehensive work on the history of the philosophy of language is still a desideratum: 
the most recent (eleventh) edition (1920) of Friedrich Überweg's Grundriss 
der Geschichte 
der 
Philosophie 
Usts, in addition to the general works on the history of philosophy, an abundance 
of monographs on the history of logic and epistemology, on the history of metaphysics, natural 
philosophy, ethics, philosophy of religion, and aesthetics, but mentions no single work on 
the history of the phUosophy of language. The ancient period alone has been treated in any 
detail, in the well-known works of Lersch and Steinthal and in the literature on classical 
grammar and rhetoric. It goes without saying that the brief historical introduction that 
foUows makes no claim to fill this gap; it purports merely to trace the most important stepi 
in the philosophical development of the "idea of language" and suggest certain Unes that 
might be followed in a detailed study. 
»»7 

n 8 
L A N G U A G E 
I N T H E H I S T O R Y 
O F 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
word is not a designation and denomination, or a spiritual symbol of 
reality; it is itself a very real part of reality. The mythical view of language 
which everywhere precedes the philosophical view of it is always char­
acterized by this indifference of word and thing. Here the essence of every 
thing is contained in its name. Magical powers attach directly to the word. 
He who gains possession of the name and knows how to make use of it, 
has gained power over the object itself; he has made it his own with aU 
its energies. AU word magic and name magic is based on the assumpdon 
that the world of things and the world of names form a single undiffer­
entiated chain of causality and hence a single reality. The same form of 
substantiality and the same form of causality prevail in both, linking them 
into one seh>enclosed whole. 
This characteristic "wholeness" of the mythical picture of the world, 
in which aU the differentiations of things are dissolved into a mythical-
magical chain of causality, carries with it a significant consequence for 
man's approach to language. As soon as myth rises above the level of the 
most primidve magical "practice," which strives to obtain a specific effect 
by the use of a specific means, which accordingly links one particular with 
another in immediate action—as soon as mythical thinking seeks, even in 
the crudest, most imperfect form, to understand its own activity, it has 
penetrated to the sphere of universality. Once it becomes a form of knowl-
edge, the tendency towards unity is essential to it as to aU other knowledge. 
If the spiritual entities and forces in which myth lives are to be susceptible 
of domination by man, they must disclose certain enduring and determinate 
features. Hence man's very first sensory and practical step toward the mas­
tery of the things in his natural environment contains the germ of the idea 
that they are governed by a theoretical necessity. As mythical thinking ad­
vances, the particular demonic forces cease to be mere particular forces, mere 
"gods of the moment" or "particular gods"—a kind of hierarchical order 
appears among them. The mythical view of language develops in the 
same direction, rising from the perception of the particular force con­
tained in the individual word and individual magical formula to the idea 
of a universal potency possessed by the word as such, by "speech" as a 
whole. It is in this mythical form that the concept of language as a unity 
is first engendered. It recurs with characteristic uniformity in the earliest 
religious speculation of the most disparate regions. Vedic religion looks 
upon the spiritual power of the word as one of its essential sources: his use 
of the holy word makes the sage or priest lord over aU being, over gods 

P H I L O S O P H I C A L 
I D E A L I S M 
lip 
and men. In the Rigveda the commander of the word 1 equated with the 
soma, the all-nourishing force, and designated as "he who governs aU 
things with power." For at the base of the human wprd which comes into 
being and passes away, Ues the eternal, imperishable word, the celestial 
Vac. " I go," says this Heavenly Discourse in a hymn, "with the Rudras, 
with the Vasus, I go with the Ädityas and the All-gods. . . . I am the 
queen, the assembler of treasures, the wise, the first of the worshipful ones. 
In manifold places did the Gods divide me, who dwell in many abodes, 
causing me to penetrate many regions. Through me he eats food who per­
ceives, who breathes, who hears what is spoken. . . . I blow forth even as 
the wind, reaching aU beings, beyond heaven, beyond this earth. Such have 
I become through my greatness." 
a 
At first sight the concept of the logos as it first appears in Greek specula­
tion seems closely related to this mythical view of the dignity and omnipo­
tence of the heavenly word. For here too the wor4 is eternal and im­
perishable; here too the unity and permanence of reality are built upon 
the unity and indestructibility of the word. For Heraclitus, the logos is 
the "hebnsman of the cosmos." Like the cosmos which it governs, it was 
created by god and no man, but always was and always will be. Yet 
though Heraclitus stiU speaks the language of myth, an entirely new tone 
is discernible within it. For the first time the mythical view of the cosmic 
process is clearly and consciously confronted by the fundamental 
phUosophical-speculative idea that the universe is subordinate to a unified 
and indivisible law. The world is no longer the plaything of demonic 
powers who govern it according to their whim and fancy, but is subject to 
a universal rule which binds together every particular reality and event 
and assigns to them their unchanging measure. "The sun will not trans­
gress his measures; otherwise the Furies, ministers ofJustice, will find 
him out." 3 And it is this one intrinsically immutable law of the cosmos 
which is expressed in the world of nature as in the world of language, in 
different form yet intrinsically the same. "That which is wise is one: to 
understand the purpose which steers aU things through aU things— 
2. Rigveda, 
x, 125. Eng. trans, by Edward J. Thomas, Vedic Hymns 
(London, J. Murray, 
I 0 2 3 ) > ΡΡ· 88-89. On thc mythical and religious significance of the Vac cf. particuUrly 
Brihadäranyahfl 
Upanishad /, 5, 3ff. in Deussen, Sechzig 
Upanishad's 
des Veda (3d ed. 
Leipzig, 1921), pp. 401 St. 
3. Heraclitus, Fragment 94, in H . Diels, Die Fragmente der Vorso\rati\er. 
Eng. trans, by 
Kathleen Freeman, in Anciüa to the Fre-Socratic 
Philosophers 
(Cambridge, Harvard Univ. 
Press, 1948). 

1 2 0 
L A N G U A G E 
I N T H E H I S T O R Y 
O F 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
tv το σοφόν, 4πίστασθαι γνώμην, ότέη έκνβέρνησε πάντα Βια, ττάντων 
(Fragment 41). With this the magic-mythical field of forces has turned into 
a context of meaning. But this context is not divulged to us as long as we 
content ourselves with apprehending the One Being as broken into frag­
ments, shattered into a multipkcity of particular "things," but only when we 
perceive and apprehend it as a living whole. Language also combines both 
views: according to our approach, it offers us a merely accidental and par­
ticular view of reality or a truly speculative and universal view. И we con­
sider the logos of language only in the form in which it is represented and 
crystallized in the particular word—we find that every word limits the object 
it is meant to designate and by this limitadon falsifies it. Through fixation 
in the word, the content is lifted out of the continuous stream of becoming 
in which it stands; hence it is not apprehended according to its totality but 
only according to a onesided determination. If we wish to regain a deeper 
knowledge of the true nature of the thing, there is no other way than to 
supplant this particular determination by another, that is, to oppose to each 
word embodying a specific individual concept, its own antithesis. Indeed 
we find, in language taken as a whole, that every meaning is linked with 
its opposite, and that only the two together become an adequate expression 
of reaUty. The spiritual synthesis, the union that is effected in the word, 
resembles the harmony of the cosmos in that it is a harmony "of opposing 
tension": πσλίντροπος άρμονίη οκωσπερτόξου κοΧ λύρης (Fragment 51)· 
And here, in an intensified form, we encounter the fundamental law of the 
cosmos. For what in reality appears as an opposition becomes in the ex­
pression of language a contradiction—and only in such an interplay of thesis 
and antithesis, of statement and contradiction is it possible to reproduce 
the true law and the inner structure of reaUty. Thus, on the basis of 
Heraclitus' general view of the world, we canunderstand the fundamental 
form of his style, whose reputed "obscurity" is not accidental and arbitrary, 
but the adequate and necessary expression of his thöught. Heraclitus* 
linguistic style and his style of thought condition one another: the two rep­
resent in different aspects the same basic principle of his philosophy, the 
principle of the iv διαφερόμενον εαντφ. Both suggest that "invisible har­
mony" which, as Heraclitus says, is better than visible harmony, and it is 
by this standard that they should be measured. Heraclitussituates the par­
ticular object in the constant stream of becoming, in which it is both pre­
served and destroyed; and fbr him the particular word is related to "speech" 
as a whole in the same way. Consequendy, even the ambiguity inherent 

P H I L O S O P H I C A L 
I D E A L I S M 
121 
in the word is not a mere deficiency of language, but is an essential and 
positive factor in its power of expression. For in this ambiguity it is mani­
fested that the limits of language, as of reality itself, are not rigid but fluid. 
Only in the mobile and multiform word, which seems to be constandy 
bursting its own limits, does the fullness of the world-forming logos find 
its counterpart. Language itself must recognize all the distinctions which 
it necessarily effects as provisional and relative distinctions which it will 
withdraw when it considers the object in a new perspective. "God is day-
night, winter-summer, war-peace, satiety-famine. But he changes hke 
(fire) which when it mingles with the smoke of incense, is named accord­
ing to each man's pleasure" (Fragment 67). And similarly: "Immortals 
are mortal, mortals are immortal: (each) lives the death of the other, and 
dies their life" (Fragment 62). He who would speak with inteUigence 
must not permit himself to be misled by the diversity of words but must 
penetrate behind them to that which is common to aU, the ξυνόν καΙ θεΐον.* 
For only when contradictories are understood and Unked in this way, can 
the word become the guide of knowledge. It becomes understandable that 
most of the "etymologies" with which Heraclitus plays embody this two­
fold sense: they join word and thing per antiphrasin rather than by any 
similarity. "The bow is called Life, but its work is death" (τώι oZv τόξωι 
δνομα βίος, ίργον Si θμνατος. Fragment 48). Every particular content of 
language both reveals and conceals the truth of reality; it is at the same 
time both pure definition and mere indication.5 In this view of the world, 
language is like the sybil who, as Heraclitus said, utters unadorned, un­
licensed words with raving mouth, but who nevertheless "reaches out 
over a thousand years with her voice, through the (inspiration of the) god" 
(Fragment 92). It contains a meaning which is hidden from it, which it 
can only surmise in image and metaphor. 
This approach to language expresses a general conception of reaUty and 
spirit, which, though indefinite and unclarified, is fully sek>contained— 
but the immediate successors of HeracUtus, who made his doctrine their 
own, gradually submerged this meaning which had originaUy been in­
herent in it. In the discursive approach to the problem of language, what 
4. ξύν v6ut Xiyovras 
Ισχυριζΐσθαι 
χρη 
τωι 
ξννώι 
νάντων, 
ίκωστερ 
νόμωι 
x6Xts, 
καΙ 
xoKi> Ισχνροτέρωί. 
τρέφονται 
yap •*arres oI άνθρώνβιοι 
νόμοι йжЬ ivbt τοΰ Oelov. κρατεΐ 
yap 
τοσούτον όκόσον 40eKei καΛ έξαρκεΐ 
πάσι 
καΙ wepiyivirai 
(Fragment 114)· 
5. Cf. in particular Fragment 32: ί*" τ » νοφόν μοΰνον X4yeaO<u ούκ ίθέ\α 
καΙ cWXet Zy*bt 
ίνομα. 
("That which alone ύ wise is one; it is wiUing and unwiUing to be called by tbe name 
of Zeus.") 

1 2 2 
L A N G U A G E 
I N T H E 
H I S T O R Y 
O F 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
Heraclitus, with his profound metaphysical intuition, sdU sensed as an 
immediate unity, broke down into heterogeneous components, into separate 
and conflicting logical theses. The two principles which the Heraclitean 
metaphysics had seen as a compelling unity: the doctrine of the identity 
of word and being and the doctrine of the antithesis between word and 
being were now developed independently. For the first time the problem of 
language was formulated with true conceptual sharpness—but at the same 
time these philosophers shattered Heraclitus' fundamental thought and 
refashioned it as small negotiable coin, transferring it from the realm of 
symbolic signification to that of abstract concepts. What for him was a 
carefully guarded secret, at which he dared only hint remotely, now be­
came the actual object of philosophical discussion and controversy. In his 
Memorabilia Xenophon shows us the Athenians of the fifth century dis­
cussing the ορθάτης των ονομάτων over their wine.8 
Is there a natural or only a mediate and conventional connection between 
the form of language and the form of reality, between the essence of words 
and that of things ? Is the inner structure of reality itsetf expressed in words, 
or do they reveal no law other than that imprinted on them by the caprice 
of the first coiners of speech? And if the latter is true, but some connection 
is still presumed to exist between word and meaning, between speech and 
thought, must not the arbitrary character which inevitably attaches to the 
word, also cast doubt upon the objective clarity and objective necessity of 
thought? In defending their thesis that aU knowledge is relative and that 
man is the "measure of aU things," the Sophists would therefore seem to 
have drawn their most effective weapons from the study of language. From 
the first, they were very much at home in that middle region of words that 
is situated between man and things; here they entrenched themselves for 
the struggle against the claims of pure, allegedly universal thought. Their 
audacious play with the ambiguity of words did indeed put the world of 
things at their mercy, enabling them to dissolve its determinateness in the 
free movement of the spirit. Thus the first conscious reflection on language 
and its first conscious mastery by the spirit resulted in the flowering of 
eristics; but this reflection on the meaning and origin of speech also gave 
rise to the reaction which brought about a new fundamental approach and 
a new methodology of the concept. 
6. Xenophon, Memorabilia, 
Bk. 3, ch. 14, sec. 2; for further historical material on this ques­
tion cf. Chajim Steinthal, Geschichte 
der Sprachwissenschaft 
bei den 
Griechen 
und 
Römern 
(2d ed. Berlin, 1890), /, 76 ff. 

P H I L O S O P H I C A L 
I D E A L I S M 
i23 
For while the Sophists emphasized the ambiguous and arbitrary factor 
in words, Socrates stressed the concrete, unequivocal factor which though 
not given in them as a fact, Ues ktent in them as a postukte. This supposed 
unity of the signification of words was the point of departure for his char­
acteristic question, the question of r i Ion, the search for the identical and 
enduring meaning of the concept. Though the word may not immediately 
contain this meaning in itsetf, stiU, it constandy suggests it^and the aim 
of Socratic "induction" is to understand this suggestion, to foUow it out, 
and so progress toward the truth. Behind the fluid, mdeterminate form of 
the word one should strive to find the enduring identical concept, the eidos 
in which alone the possibiUty of speech as weU as of thought is grounded. 
Plato's thinking is rooted in these basic Socratic assumptions. They de­
termine his approach to words and knguage. ш his youth he studied vith 
Cratylus who, in opposition to the Sophists, represented the positive side 
of HeracUtean thought, since he looked upon words as the true and au­
thentic instruments of knowledge, expressing and encompassing the es­
sence of things. HeracUtus had asserted an identity between the whole of 
knguage and the whoU of reason; Cratylus transferred this identity to the 
rektion between the particular word and its conceptual content. But this 
transfer, this conversion of the metaphysical content of the HeracUtean 
logos into a pedantic and abstruse etymology and philology, was precisely 
that reductio ad absurdum which Pkto was to develop with aU his dialecti­
cal and styUstic mastery in the Cratylus. With surpassing irony Pkto tears 
down the thesis that there is a "naturally" correct term for every existing 
thing (ονόματος ορθότητα etva* έκάστφ των όντων φνσ-ei ττεφυκνΜν), 
eHminating it forever in this naive form. But for Pkto this insight does not 
end aU rektion between word and knowledge; rather, the immediate and 
untenable relation of simikrity is repkced by a deeper, a mediated rektion. 
In the structure and development of dialectical knowledge the word retains 
a unique pkce and value. The fluid boundaries of the word, the fact that 
its content at aU times is only rektively fixed, spur the dialectician to raise 
himsctf, through opposition and the struggle with opposition, to the pos­
tulate of the pure concept with its absolutely fixed signification, to the 
ßeßcuorqs of the reahn of ideas.7 But it was only in his old age that Pkto 
fuUy developed this fundamental view, in the positive as weU as the nega­
tive sense. Perhaps the strongest argument for the authenticity of Pkto's 
Seventh Epistie is that in this respect it ties in direcdy with the conclusion 
7- Cf. particobrly Cratyhu 386A, 438Dff. 

124 
L A N G U A G E 
I N T H E 
H I S T O R Y 
O F 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
of the Cratylus, to which for the first time it brings full methodic ckrity 
and rigorous systematic proof. 
The Seventh Epistle distinguishes four stages of knowledge which only 
in their totality yield the vision of true being, of the object of knowledge, as 
the γνωστον καΙ όληθώς δν. The lower levek consist in the name, in the 
verbal definition of the object, and in its sensory copy, δνομα, λόγος, and 
ei8wXov. For example, we can apprehend the nature of the circle in these 
three ways: first, by uttering the name of circle; second, by explaining what 
is meant by this name, let us say, by "defining" the circle as a figure whose 
circumference is at aU points equidistant from its center; and finally by 
taking some sensuous figure, whether drawn in the sand or turned on a 
lathe, as an image or model of the circle. None of these three representa­
tions, the word, the definition, or the model, attains to the true essence of 
the circle, for they aU belong not to the realm of being but to the realm of 
becoming. The word is variable and ephemeral, it comes into being and 
passes away; the drawing can be effaced, the turner's model destroyed— 
all these determinate forms faU completely to capture the circle as such 
(avros ό κνκλος). And yet it is only through these inadequate preliminary 
stages that the fourth and fifth stages, scientific cognition and its object, 
are reached. In this sense, name and image, δνομα and «δωλον, are sharply 
distinguished from rational insight, ίπυττημη—and yet they are its pre­
suppositions, the vehicles and intermediaries by virtue of which we can 
steadily progress to knowledge (8i &v την έπ^ττημην άνάγκη παρα-
γίγνΐσθαι). 
The knowledge of the object and the object itself both surpass 
and encompass, transcend and synthesize these three stages.8 
In the Seventh Epistle Plato attempted, for the first time in the history 
of thought, to define and deUmit the cognitive value of language in a purely 
methodical sense. Language is recognized as a firstbeginning of knowledge, 
but as no more than a beginning. Its content is even more ephemeral and 
variable than that of sensory perception; the phonetic form of the word 
or of the sentence built out of ονόματα and ρηματα grasps even less of the 
true content of the idea than is captured by the material model or image. 
And yet a certain relation between wordand idea remains: just as sensory 
contents are said to "strive" toward the ideas, a direction and spiritual 
8. Scc Seventh 
Epistle, 
342a ff.; concerning thc authenticity of the Seventh 
EpisUe, 
u . 
particularly Willamowitz, Platon, 
1, 641ff.; 2, 282if., and the penetrating analysis of the 
philosophical stage in Jul. Stcnzel, "Über den Aufbau der Erkenntnis i m V I I . Pktonischen 
Brief," Sokjrates (1847), pp. 63ff., and E. Howald, Die^Briefe 
Phtons 
(Zurich, 1923), p. 34. 

P H I L O S O P H I C A L 
I D E A L I S M 
» 5 
tendency towards the ideas is to be discerned in the formadons of language. 
Plato's system was eminently suited to this appreciation of the relative value 
of language, because for the first time it fully recognized a basic principle 
essential to all language. All language as such is "representation"; it rep­
resents a specific "meaning" by a sensuous "sign." As long as philosophical 
thought confines itsetf to what is merely existent, it can find no analogy 
or adequate expression for this characteristic relationship. For in things 
themselves, whether we consider them in their facticity as aggregates of 
"elements," or whether we study the causal connections between them, 
there is nothing which corresponds to the relation of "word" to "mean­
ing," of the "sign" to the "signification" intended in it. But for Plato, who, 
as he shows us in the Phaedo, had characteristically reversed the formula­
tion of the question, the way of philosophical thinking leads not from 
πράγματα to λόγοι but from λόγοι to πράγματα, since the reaUty of things 
can be apprehended only in the truth of concepts 9—for Pkto, the concept 
of representation assumed for the first time a truly central importance, since 
it is precisely in this concept that the problem fundamental to the doctrine 
of ideas is ultimately epitomized, and through it the rektion between 
"idea" and "phenomenon" is expressed. From the standpoint of idealism 
the "things" of common experience, sensuous, concrete objects themselves 
becomes "images," whose truth content Ues not in what they immediately 
are, but in what they mediately express. And this concept of the image, of 
the €ΐδωλορ creates a new spiritual intermediary between the form of kn­
guage and the form of cognition. In order to define the relation between the 
two clearly and sharply, in order to delimit the "sphere" of the word from 
the sphere of pure concepts, and at the same time to maintain the connec­
tion between them, Plato now need only invoke the central principle of 
the theory of ideas, the principle of "participation." The darkness sur­
rounding Heraclitus* metaphysical doctrine of the unity of word and mean­
ing and the opposition between them, seems dispeUed at one stroke by this 
new methodic concept of μέθεξις.
10 Participation contains a factor of iden­
tity as weU as a factor of nonidentity; it implies on the one hand a neces­
sary relationship, a unity of the elements, and on the other hand a sharp 
fundamental division and distinction between them. The pure idea of 
9. Cf. Phto, Phaedo 99D ff. 
10. For the methodic position of the concept of μ4θ*ζα in the whole of Plato's philosophy, 
cf. Ernst Hoffmann's excellent arüde, "Mcthexis und Metaxy bci Pkton," i n Sokrates (1919), 
pp. 48 if. 

12б 
L A N G U A G E 
I N T H E 
H I S T O R Y 
O F 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
"equality" remains something other than the equal stones or pieces of 
wood by which it is represented, an ίτερον—ζηά yet, from the standpoint 
of the relative, sensory view of the world, this "other" can be apprehended 
only in this representation. In the same sense, the physical-sensory content 
of the word becomes for Pkto the vehicle of an ideal significadon, which 
as such cannot be encompassed within the limits of knguage but remains 
outside them. Language and word strive for the expression of pure being; 
but they never attain to it, because in them the designation of something 
other, of an accidental "attribute" of the object, is mixed with the desig­
nation of this pure being. Accordingly, what constitutes the characteristic 
power of knguage is also its characteristic weakness, that makes it in­
capable of representing the supreme, truly philosophical content of cog­
nition.
1 1 
The history of logic and epistemology shows, to be sure, that the sharp 
boundary which Plato drew between the two significations of the λόγος, 
between the concept "as such" and its representative in language, tends 
gradually to disappear. This is the case even in the first systematization of 
logic—although it is surely an exaggeration to say that Aristotle borrowed 
from language the fundamental distinctions underlying his logical doc­
trines. However, the very word "categories" indicates how closely the 
analysis of logical forms and that of linguistic forms were related for 
Aristodc. The categories represent the most universal relations of being, 
and at the same time the highest classifications of statement (γένηοτ 
σχήματα της κατηγορίας). The categories are, from an ontological stand­
point, the basic specifications of actuality, the ultimate "predicates" of be­
ing; however these predicates can be arrived at not only through things, 
but also through the universal form of predication. And indeed, the struc­
ture of the sentence and its division into words and classes of words seem, 
in krge part, to have served Aristode as a model for his system of categories. 
In the category of substance we clearly discern the grammatical significa­
tion of the "substantive"; in quantity and quality, in the "when" and 
"where," we discern the signification of the adjective and of the adverbs 
of time and place—and above aU the four last categories, of ττονάν and 
ττάσχζΐν, e\€iv and κβΐσθαι, seem to become fully transparent only when 
I i . Cf. in particular Seventh 
Epistle, 
3420343a: "wp6s yip 
τούτοα 
rußra 
[scil. 
бгоил, 
\6yos, 
ΐϊδωλον] 
ούχ ήττον hrixtipet 
το woi6v τι wtpl ίκαστο* 
9η\οΰ*
 
τ
0 
έκάστον 
Ciä 
τό τών \6ywv 
aaUtvis. 
ύν ivexa 
*οδν #x<w ouo>i» τοΚμήση 
wori 
ttt αΰτό TiBiveu 
τά 
»€νοημίνα 
i*" αύτοΟ . . ." 

P H I L O S O P H I C A L 
I D E A L I S M 
i27 
we consider them in reference to certain fundamental distincdons which 
the Greek language makes in its designation of verbs and verbal action.12 
Here logical and grammatical speculation seemed to be in thoroughgoing 
correspondence, to condition one another—and mediaeval philosophy, bas­
ing itself on Aristode, clung to this correspondence between the two. 1 8 
However, when modern thinkers began to attack the Aristotehan logic, 
when they contested its right to be caUed "the" system of thought, the close 
aUiance into which it had entered with language and universal grammar, 
proved to be one of its most vumerable points. AssaiUng it at this point, 
Lorenzo VaUa in Italy, Lodovico Vives in Spain, Petrus Ramus in France 
attempted to discredit the Scholastic-Aristotelian philosophy. At first the 
controversy was hmited to the sphere of Unguistic study: it was precisely 
the "phUologists" of the Renaissance who, on the basis of their deepened 
understanding of language, demanded a new "theory of thought." They 
argued that the Scholastics had seen only the outward, grammatical struc­
ture of language, while its real kernel, which is to be sought not in gram­
mar but in styUstics, had remained closed to them. The great styUsts of the 
Renaissance attacked syllogistics and its 'Ъагагош" forms, not so much 
from the logical as from the aesthetic angle. But gradually this batde of 
the rhetoricians and stylists against the mere "dialecticians"—exemplified 
by Valla's Dialectical Disputations—took on a new form. As Renaissance 
scholars went back to the actual classical sources, the Scholastic notion 
of dialectic was replaced more and more by the original Platonic concep­
tion, mvoking Plato's dialectic, the Renaissance thinkers now demanded 
a return from words to "things"^uid among the "factual sciences" the 
fundamental view of the Renaissance, which was becoming more and 
more decisive, accorded primacy to mathematics and the mathematical 
study of nature. Thus even pure phUosophers of language expressed an in­
creasingly conscious and resolute demand for a new orientation, as opposed 
to the orientation toward grammar.14 They held that a truly systematic, 
conception and formation of language could be obtained only through the 
appUcation of the method and standards of mathematics. 
Descartes, who provided the universal philosophical foundation for the 
12. Cf. particularly Fr. A . Trendelenburg, De AristoteUs 
Categortit 
(BerUn, 1833) and 
"Geschichte der Kategorienlehre," Historische 
Beiträge 
zur Philosophie, 
1 (1846), 23 ff. 
13. Cf., e.g., Joannes Duns Scotus, 'Tractatus de modis significandi seu grammatica specu-
htiva," Opera omnia, cd. L . Wadding (Paris, L . Vives, 1891^5), Vol. /. 
14. For historical documentation see my book, Das Erkenntnisproblem 
in der 
Philosophie 
und Wissenschaft 
der neueren Zeit (3d ed. Berlin, B. Casiirer, 1922), /, 120-135. 

128 
L A N G U A G E 
I N T H E 
H I S T O R Y 
O F 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
Renaissance ideal of knowledge, saw the theory of language in a new light. 
In his principal systematic works Descartes gives us no independent phil­
osophical study of language—but in a letter to Mersenne, the only place 
where he touches on the problem, he shows a very characteristic approach, 
which was to be highly significant in the ensuing period. The ideal of the 
unity of knowledge, the sapientia humana which always remains one and 
the same, regardless of how many objects it encompasses, is here extended 
to language. To the demand for a mathesis universalis is added the demand 
for a lingua universalis. Since only the One identical, fundamental form of 
knowledge, the form of human reason, recurs in all branches of knowledge 
reaUy deserving of the name, aU speech must be based upon the one, uni­
versal, rational form of knguage, which, though cloaked by the abundance 
and diversity of verbal forms, cannot be hidden entirely. For just as there 
is a very definite order among the ideas of mathematics, e.g., among num­
bers, so the whole of human consciousness, with aU the contents that can 
ever enter into it, constitutes a strictly ordered totality. And similarly, just 
as the whole system of arithmetic can be constructed out of relatively few 
numerical signs, it must be possible to designate the sum and structure of 
aU intellectual contents by a limited number of linguistic signs, provided 
only that they are combined in accordance with definite, universal rules. 
True, Descartes refrained from carrying out this plan: for since the crea­
tion of the universal knguage would presuppose the analysis of aU the 
contents of consciousness into their ultimate elements, into simple, con­
stitutive "ideas," it could be undertaken successfully only after this analysis 
itself has been completed and the goal of the "true philosophy" thus at­
tained.16 
Descartes' immediate successors, however, did not let themselves be 
deterred by the critical caution expressed in these words of the founder 
of modern philosophy. In rapid sequence they produced the most diverse 
systems of artificial universal language, which, though very different in 
execution, were in agreement in their fundamental idea and the principle 
of their structure. They aU started from the notion that there is a limited 
number of concepts, that each of these concepts stands to the others in a 
very definite factual relation of coordination, superordination or subordina­
tion, and that a truly perfect language must strive to express this natural 
hierarchy of concepts adequately iu a system of signs. Starting from this 
15. See R. Descartes' letter to Mersenne of November 20, 1629, i n Correspondance, 
cd. 
Adam-Tannery, 1, 80 f l . 

P H I L O S O P H I C A L 
I D E A L I S M 
120, 
premise, Delgarno for example, in his Ars signorum, classified all concepts 
under seventeen supreme generic concepts, each of which is designated by 
a specific letter; all the words falling under the category in question begin 
with this letter; similarly, the subclassifications distinguished within the 
common genus are each represented by a special letter or syllable affixed to 
the first letter. Wilkins, who strove to complete and perfect this system, 
established forty principal concepts in place of the original seventeen and 
expressed each of them by a special syllable, consisting of a consonant and 
a vowel.1* All these systems pass rather hastily over the difficulty of dis­
covering the "natural" order of fundamental concepts and of clearly and 
exhaustively determining their mutual relations. More and more their 
authors transformed the methodic problem of classifying concepts into a 
purely technical problem; thcy were sadsfied to work with any purely 
conventional classification of concepts as a basis and, by progressive dif­
ferentiation, make it serve for the expression of the concrete cognitive and 
perceptual contents. 
It was only with Leibniz, who restored the problem of language to the 
context of universal logic (which he recognized to be the prerequisite for 
aU philosophy and aU theoretical cognition in general) that the problem of 
a universal language was seen in a new depth. He was fully aware of the 
difficulty to which Descartes had pointed, but he believed that the progress 
which philosophical and scientific knowledge had made since then pro­
vided him with entirely new means of surmounting it. Any "character­
istic," which is not content to remain an arbitrary sign language but aspires 
to be a characteristica realis, representing the true fundamental relations 
of things, demands a logical analysis of the contents of thought. But this 
"alphabet of thought" no longer seems an unlimited, insoluble problem 
so long as one goes consistendy along the road laid down by the newly 
established theory of combinations and the newly established mathematical 
analysis instead of starting with random, more or less accidental classifica­
tions of the whole conceptual substance. Algebraic analysis teaches us that 
every number is constructed from definite original elements, that it can 
be broken down into "prime factors" and represented as their product, 
16. U for example the letter P designates the general category of "quantity," the concepts 
of size i n general, of space and measure, are expressed by Pe, Pi, Po, etc. Cf. George Delgarno, 
Ars signorum 
vulgo character universalis 
ct lingua philosophica 
(London, i 6 6 i ) , and Wilkins, 
An Essay towards 
a Real Character and в Philosophical 
Language 
(London, i668). A brief 
oudine of the systems of Delgarno and Wilkins is given b y L · Couturat i n La Logique 
de 
Leib­
niz 
(Paris, P. Alcan, 1901), nn. 3 and 4, pp. 544 ff. 

i30 
L A N G U A G E 
I N T H E 
H I S T O R Y 
O F 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
and this applies to any content of cognition. The breakdown into prime 
numbers has its parallel in the breakdown into primitive ideas—and it is 
one of the basic tenets of Leibniz' philosophy that essentially the two can 
and must be effected in accordance with the same principle and method.17 
It is true that the form of a truly universal characteristic seems to presup­
pose the content and structure of knowledge as given, while on the other 
hand it is only through this same characteristic that the structure of knowl­
edge is inteUigible and comprehensible for us. But for Leibniz this vicious 
circle is resolved by the fact that we are not dealing with two separate 
problems, approached successively, but that the two are seen in pure, factual 
correlation. The progress of analysis and of characteristic demand and 
condition one another: for every logical position of unity and every logical 
differentiation effected by the inteUect exists for it in true clarity and sharp­
ness only when fixed in a specific sign. Leibniz grants Descartes that the 
true universal language of knowledge is dependent upon knowledge it­
self, i.e., upon the "true philosophy," but he adds that nevertheless the 
language need not await the completion of the philosophy and that the 
analysis of ideas and the system of signs would develop hand in hand. 1 8 
Here he expresses only that general methodic conviction, one might say 
that methodic experience, which he had found confirmed in the discovery 
of the analysis of infinity. The algorism of the differential calculus had 
proved to be not merely a convenient means of represendng what had al­
ready been discovered, but a true organ of mathematical inquiry, and 
Leibniz expected language in general to perform the same service for 
thought, not merely foUowing in its footsteps, but progressively prepar­
ing its path. 
Leibniz' rationalism achieves its ultimate confirmadon and completion 
in the contemplation of knguage, which is seen purely as a means of 
cognition, an instrument of logical analysis; but at the same time this 
rationalism itself, in comparison to that of Descartes, gains a kind of con­
crete form. For the correlation here asserted between thought and speech, 
thrusts the relation between thought and sensation into a new light. True, 
sensation must be progressively transformed into the distinct ideas of the 
understanding^mt on the other hand, from the standpoint of the finite 
17. For further details see my book, Leibniz' 
System in seinen wissenschaftlichen 
Grund~ 
hgen 
(Marburg, N . G. Elwert, 1902), pp. 105 fT., 487 ff., and Couturat, especially chs. 3-5. 
18. See Leibniz* remarks on Descartes' letter to Mersenne, Opuscules et fragments 
incditt 
de Leibniz, 
ed. Couturat (Paris, F. Alcan, 1903), pp. 27 ff. 

P H I L O S O P H I C A L 
I D E A L I S M 
i3i 
spirit, the converse relation abo appUes. Even our "most abstract" ideas 
always contain an admixture of imagination, and though it is true that 
we can further analyze this element of imagination, yet our analysis never 
arrives at an ultimate hmit but rather can and must continue ad infinitum.
1 9 
Here we are at the juncture where the fundamental idea of Leibniz' logic 
merges with the fundamental idea of his metaphysics. For this metaphysics 
the hierarchy of being is determined by the hierarchy of cognition. The 
monads, the only truly substantial entities, are differentiated only by the 
varying degree of clarity and distinctness of their perceptual contents. 
Only the supreme, divine being is characterized by perfect cognition, which 
is no longer in any sense representative but purely intuitive, i e , which 
no longer contemplates its objects mediately through signs, but intuits 
them immediately in their pure and original essence. By comparison, even 
the highest stage to which the knowledge of the finite spirit can raise it­
self, even the distinct cognition of figures and numbers, appears only as 
inadequate knowledge: for instead of apprehending the spiritual contents 
themselves, it must, for the most part, content itself with their signs. In 
any mathematical demonstration of any length, we must have recourse 
to such representation. И for example we think of a regular thousand-
sided figure, we do not constandy have in mind the nature of the sides, 
their equahty and number; we rather use these words, whose meaning is 
only dimly and imperfectly present to us, instead of the ideas themselves, 
since we remember having known their meaning, and do not regard a 
closer explanation as necessary for the moment. Here then we are dealing 
not with a purely intuitive cognition but with a "bUnd" or symbolic cogni­
tion which, like algebra and arithmetic, governs ahnost aU the rest of our 
knowledge.20 Thus we see how according to Leibniz' project of universal 
characteristic, language, in striving more and more to encompass the totaUty 
of knowledge, both limits this totaUty and draws it into its own contin­
gency. But this contingency has by no means a purely negative character; 
it contains within it a very positive factor. Just as every sense perception, 
however obscure and confused, includes within it a true, rational content 
19. *'Lcs plus abstraitcs pensees oot bcsoin de quelque imagination: et quand on considcrc 
ce que c'est que les pensees confuses (qui ne manquent jamais d'accompagner кя plu> d i i -
tinctes que nous puissions avoir) comme sont ccllcs de couIeurs, odeurs, saveurs, de U chalcur, 
du froid etc. on reconnoist qu'elles enveloppent toujours l'infinL" Reponse aux renexions de 
Bayle, Philos. Schriften, 
ed. Gerhardt, 4, 5 6 j . 
30. See Leibniz, "Meditariones de cognitione, veritate et ideis" (1684)> Phihs. 
Schriften, 
4 
422fi-

132 
L A N G U A G E 
I N T H E H I S T O R Y 
O F 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
of cognition, which merely requires to be unfolded and "developed," so 
every sensuous symbol is the vehicle of a purely spiritual signification, 
which to be sure is given only "virtually" and implicidy in it. The true 
ideal of the "EnUghtenment" consists not in casting off these sensuous 
cloaks at one stroke, not in casting away these symbols, but in graduaUy 
learning to understand them for what they are, in being master of them 
and permeating them with the human spirit. 
But so broad and universal is the logical and metaphysical funcdon 
which Leibniz here attributes to language that the specific content of 
knguage itsetf isin danger of being submerged in this very universaUty. 
The plan of a "universal characteristic" is not hmited to any single field; 
it is meant to encompass aU types of groups and signs, from the simple 
phonetic signs and word signs to the numerical signs of algebra and the 
symbok of mathematical and logical analysis. It seeks to embrace both 
those forms of expression that seem to originate in a natural, involuntarUy 
erupting "instinct," and those which have their source in a free and sek> 
conscious creation of the spirit. With this however the specific character 
of language as a language of sounds and words, seems not so much ac­
knowledged and expkined, as ultimately negated. If the aim of the uni­
versal characteristic were achieved, if every simple idea were expressed by 
a simple sensuous sign and every complex idea by a corresponding combina­
tion of such signs, the specific and accidental character of the particukr 
languages would be dissolved into a single, universal basic knguage. 
Leibniz does not locate this basic knguage, this lingua adamica, as he caUs 
it, borrowing an old term of the mystics and of Jacob Boehme,21 in a 
paradisiacal human past; he looks upon it as an ideal concept, which our 
cognition must progressively approach in order to attain to the goal of 
objectivity and universaUty. La his opinion, it is in this ultimate, supreme, 
definitive form that knguage wiU appear as what it essentially is: the word 
wiU no longer be a veU over the meaning, it wiU appear as a true witness 
to the unity of reason which is a necessary postukte underlying the phil­
osophical understanding of any particukr spiritual reaUty. 
2 i . O n the idea of the hngua adamica, cf. Leibniz, PhiIos. Sehriften, 
7, 198-199, 204-205; 
Nouvcaux 
etsms tur l'entendement, 
Bk. 3, ch. 2 {Philot. 
Schriften, 
5, 260). 

P O S I T I O N 
I N T H E 
S Y S T E M S 
O F 
E M P I R I C I S M 
133 
2. The Position of the Problem of Language in the Systems 
of Empiricism (Bacon, Hobbes, ЬосЦе, Ber\eley) 
Philosophical empiricism scems to open up a new approach to language, 
for, in accordance with its fundamental tendency, it strives, not to relate 
the fact of language to a logical ideal, but rather to understand it in its 
sheer facticity, in its empirical origin and purpose. Instead of losing lan­
guage in a logical or metaphysical utopia, it seeks to know it solely in its 
psychological reality and function. Yet even empiricism in its formulation 
of the problem borrowed an essential presupposition from the rationaUstic 
systems it opposed, since at first it considered language exclusively as an 
instrument of cognition. Locke explicitly stresses that his plan for a critique 
of the understanding did not originaUy call for special critique of language, 
that it became evident to him only gradually that the question of the mean­
ing and origin of concepts could not be separated from the question of the 
origin of names.22 But once he had recognized this relationship, language 
became for him one of the most important witnesses to the truth of the 
fundamental empiricist attitude. Leibniz once said that nature loved to 
reveal its ultimate secrets at some point, to set them before our eyes in 
visible demonstrations, as it were. Locke looked upon language as such a 
demonstration of his general view of spiritual reality. "It may also lead 
us a little towards the original of aU our notions and knowledge," he be­
gins his analysis of words, 
if we remark how great a dependence our words have on common 
sensible ideas; and how those which are made use of to stand for actions 
and notions quite removed from sense, have their rise from thence, 
and from obvious sensible ideas are transferred to more abstruse signifi­
cations, and made to standfor ideas that come not under the cognizance 
of our senses: e.g., to "imagine, apprehend, comprehend" . . . , etc, 
are aU words taken from the operations of sensible things and applied to 
certain modes of thinking. Spirit, in its primary signification, is "breath"; 
angel, a "messenger": and I doubt not but, if we could trace them to 
their sources, we should find, in aU languages, the names which stand 
22. John Lockc, An Ettay Concerning 
the Human 
Understanding, 
Bk. 3, ch. 9, tec. 21. 

i34 
L A N G U A G E 
I N T H E 
H I S T O R T 
O F 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
for things that faU not under our senses to have had their first rise firom 
sensible ideas. By which we may give some kind of guess what kind 
of notions they were, and whence derived, which fiUed their minds 
who were the first beginners of languages; and how nature, even in 
the naming of things, unawares suggested to men the originals and 
principles of aU their knowledge . . . we having, as has been proved, 
no ideas at aU but what originaUy come either from sensible objects 
without, or what we feel within ourselves from the inward workings 
of our own spirits, of which we are conscious to ourselves within.
2 8 
Here we have the fundamental systematic thesis upon which aU empir­
icist discussion of the problem of language is direcdy or indirecdy based. 
Once again the analysis of language is not an end in itsetf, but is intended 
to prepare the way for the main undertaking, the analysis of ideas. For 
Unguistic denominations never immediately express things themselves, 
but refer solely to the ideas of the spirit, to the speaker's own perceptions. 
This universal principle of knguage had aheady been formukted by 
Hobbes, who beUeved that with this formuktion he had definitively with­
drawn the phUosophy of knguage from the sphere of metaphysics. Since 
names are signs for concepts and not signs for objects themselves, the whole 
question as to whether they designate the matter or the form of things, 
or something composed of the two, could be set aside as empty meta­
physical speculation.24 Locke bases his investigations on this decision, to 
which he returns again and again and which he ampUfies in aU its aspects. 
The nature of objects—as he too stresses—is never expressed in the unity 
of the word; what is expressed is only the subjective operation by which 
the human spirit proceeds to coUect its simple sensory ideas into one con­
cept In so doing, the spirit is not bound by any substantial model, by 
any real property of things. It can arbitrarUy stress one or another percep­
tual content, or combine different groups of simple elements into complex 
ideas. It is the diversity of these subjective Unes of connection and division 
that differentiates the various cksses of Unguistic concepts and significa­
tions. Hence these can never be anything more than reflection of the sub­
jective process of combination and separation; they can not reflect the 
objective character of reaUty and its structure according to real or logical-
metaphysical genera and species.26 The theory of definition thus takes a 
23. Locke, Essay, Bk. 3, ch. t , tec. 5. 
24. T h . Hobbet, Elementorum 
phSotophm, 
seeth prima, De corpore, P t L ch. 2, и с 5. 
35. Locke, Essay, e*p. Bk. 3, ch*. 2 and 6. 

P O S I T I O N 
I N T H E 
S T S T E M S 
O F 
E M P I R I C I S M 
135 
new form contrasting with that of rationalism. The antithesis between 
nominal definition and real definition, between verbal explanation and 
factual explanation vanishes: for a definition can only claim to give the 
denotation of the name of the thing, not to portray its ontological reality 
and structure. For not only is the nature of every particular thing unknown 
to us, but we cannot connect any specific representation with the general 
concept of what a thing as such should be. The only concept of the "nature" 
of a thing to which we can attach a clear meaning, has no absolute, but 
only a relative signification; it contains within it a reference to ourselves, to 
our psychological organization and our powers of cognition. To define 
the nature of a thing means for us nothing other than to develop the simple 
ideas which are contained in it and which enter as elements into the general 
idea of it.
a e 
In its expression this fundamental attitude seems to go back to the 
Leibnizian form of analysis and the postulate of a universal "alphabet of 
thought"—but behind this identity of expression a sharp systematic op­
position is concealed. For between the two conceptions of language and 
cognition stands the crucial change of signification that has taken place in 
the term "idea." On the one side the idea is understood in its objective-
logical sense, on the other side, in its subjective-psychological sense; on the 
one side stands its original Platonic concept, on the other, its modern 
empiricist and sensationalist concept. Among the rationalists, the reduc­
tion of aU contents of cognition to their simple ideas and the designation 
of these ideas signifies a return to ultimate and universal principles of 
knowledge; among the empiricists, it stands for the derivation of aU com­
plex intellectual notions from the immediate data of the inward or out­
ward senses, from the elements of "sensation" and "reflection." But with 
this, the objectivity of language, as of aU cognition, has become a problem 
in an entirely new sense. For Leibniz and aU rationalists the ideal being 
of concepts and the real being of things are indissolubly correlated: for 
"truth" and "reality" are one in their foundation and ultimate root.*7 AU 
empirical existence and all empirical events are related and ordered in ac­
cordance with the demands of the inteUigible truths^nd herein consists 
their reaUty, herein consists what distinguishes being from appearance, 
16. Cf. especially J. d'Alemberc, 'Xssai sur les elements de phi1osophie ou sur les principes 
dcs connoissanccs humaines," Oeuvret, 1, scc. 4. 
27. ". . . h verite etant une m i m e chose avec l'etrc." Descartes, Meditationes 
de 
prima 
phihsophm 
. . . , Vol. 5. 

i36 
L A N G U A G E 
I N T H E H I S T O R Y 
O F 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
reality from dream.28 For the empiricists this mutual relation—this "pre-
established harmony" between the ideal and the real, between the realm 
of the universal, necessary truths and the realm of particular, factual reality 
—is suspended. The more sharply they defined language not as an expres­
sion of things but as an expression of concepts, the more imperiously the 
question was bound to rise as to whether the new spiritual medium here 
recognized did not falsify rather than designate the ultimate, "real" ele­
ments of being. From Bacon to Hobbes and Locke we can progressively 
foUow the development and increasing acuteness of this question, until 
at last in Berkeley it stands before us in full clarity. In the case of Locke, 
even though cognition was founded in the particular data of sensory per­
ception and the perception of self, it embodied a tendency towards "uni­
versality": and the universaHty of the word corresponded to this tendency 
toward the universal in cognition. The abstract word becomes the ex­
pression of the "abstract universal idea," which, beside the particular sensa­
tions, is here stiU recognized as a psychological reality of a specific type 
and of independent importance.29 However, the progress and implications 
of the sensationaUst view led beyond this relative recognition, and at least 
indirect toleration, of the "universal." The universal now has no more 
real foundation in the realm of ideas than in the realm of things. But this, 
in a manner of speaking, places the word and all language totally in the 
void. Neither in physical nor psychological reality, neither in things nor 
ideas, is there any model or "archetype" for what is expressed in them. AU 
reaUty—psychological as weU as physical—is by nature concrete and in-
dividuaUy determined: in order to apprehend it, we must therefore free 
ourselves above aU from the false and illusory, the "abstract" universaUty 
of the word. This inference is resplutely drawn by Berkeley. Every reform 
of philosophy must primarUy base itself upon a critique of language, must 
above aU dispel the iUusion in which the human mind has from time 
immemorial been confined. 
28. Cf. fcg. Leibniz, Hauptschriften 
xur 
Grundlegung 
der 
Philosophie, 
ed. Cassirer-
Buchenau, 
1,100,287,349; 
2,402 ff., etc. 
29. " A distinct name for every particular thing would not be of any great use for the 
improyement of knowledge, which, 
though founded 
in particular 
things, 
enlarges 
itself 
by 
general 
views; 
to which things reduced into general names are properly subservient . . . 
Words become general by separating from them the circumstances of time and pbce, and 
any other ideas that may determine them to t h b or that particular existence. By this way of 
abstraction they are made capable of representing more individuak than one; each of w h k b , 
having i n i t a conformity to tbat abstract idea, is (as we caU i t ) of that s o r t " Locke, 
Essay, 
Bk. 3, ch. 3, secs. 4 ^ . 

P O S I T I O N 
I N T H E S Y S T E M S 
O F 
E M P I R I C I S M 
137 
It cannot be denied that words are of excellent use, in that by their 
means all that stock of knowledge which has been purchased by the 
joint labours of inquisitive men in aU ages and nations may be drawn 
into the view and made the possession of one single person. But at the 
same time it must be owned that most parts of knowledge have been 
so strangely perplexed and darkened by the abuse of words, and general 
ways of speech wherein they are delivered, that it may almost be made 
a question whether language has contributed more to the hindrance 
or advancement of the sciences . . . It were, therefore, to be wished 
that.every one would use his utmost endeavors to obtain a clear view 
of the ideas he would consider; separating from them aU that dress and 
incumbrance of words which so much contribute to blind the judgment 
and divide the attention. In vain do we extend our view into the 
heavens and pry into the entrails of the earth, in vain do we consult the 
writings of learned men and trace the dark footsteps of antiquity. We 
need only draw the curtain of words to behold the fairest tree of knowl­
edge, whose fruit is excellent, and within the reach of our hand. 8 0 
But on closer scrutiny, this radical critique of language contains within 
it a critique of the sensationalist ideal of cognition urx>n which it is based. 
From Locke to Berkeley there was a peculiar reversal in the empiricist posi­
tion on the problem of knowledge. Locke found in language a confirma­
tion of his fundamental approach to knowledge, and invoked it as a 
witness to his general thesis that there could be nothing in the understand­
ing which was not previously in the senses: but now it becomes evident 
that the distinctive and essential function of the word has no place within 
the sensationalist system. The system could be sustained only by negating 
and excluding this function. The structure of language is no longer used 
to elucidate the structure of cognition, but constitutes its exact antithesis. 
Far from having even a conditional and relative truth content, language 
is a magic mirror which falsifies and distorts the forms of realitv in its 
own characteristic way. Empiricism had undergone a dialectical develop­
ment which is strikingly illustrated by a comparison of the two historical 
extremes in the empiricist philosophy of language. Berkeley, on the one 
hand, strives to negate the truth content and cognition content of laneuage, 
which he regards as the root of all the human spirit's error and self-
30. G. Berkeley, A Treatise 
Concerning 
the Principles 
of Human Knowledge, 
Introduction, 
pan. 2x^t4. 

i38 
L A N G U A G E 
I N T H E 
H I S T O R Y 
O F 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
deception; Hobbes, on the other hand,had imputed not only truth, but 
all truth to language. Hobbes' concept of truth culminates in the thesis 
that truth Hes not in things, but solely in words and the use of words: 
veritas in dicto, non in re consistit?
1 Things are and subsist as real particu­
lars which are manifested to us in concrete, particular sensations. However, 
neither the particular thing nor the particular sensation can ever constitute 
the true object of \nowledge: for knowledge deserving of the name is not 
mere historical knowledge of the particular, but philosophical, i.e., neces­
sary knowledge of the universal. Hence, while sensation and memory are 
limited to material facts, all science is oriented toward general relations 
and inferences, toward deductive combinations.83 And the organ and 
instrument it employs can be none other than the word. For our spirit can 
obtain deductive insight only into those contents which are not, like things 
or sensations, given to it from outside but only into those which it creates 
and freely produces out of itself. It does not enjoy such freedom toward 
the real objects of nature, but only toward their ideal representatives or 
denominations. Thus, not only is the creation of a system of names prereq­
uisite to any system of knowledge—but aU true knowledge consists in 
creating names and combining them into sentences and judgments. Truth 
and falsehood are not attributes of things, but attributes of fonguage—a 
spirit deprived of language would consequendy lack aU power over these 
attributes and would be unable to distinguish and juxtapose the "true" 
and the "false." 8 8 In Hobbes' nominalistic view, language is a source of 
error only to the extent that it is also the condition of conceptual knowledge 
in general, the source of aU universaUty and aU truth. 
Berkeley's critique of language, however, seems to have depriveduni-
versality of its last support, and thus the rationalistic method, which is stiU 
unmistakable throughout the writings of Hobbes, seems at last to have 
been definitively confuted and eradicated. But as Berkeley strove to extend 
his system from these first beginnings, a new and characteristic reversal 
took place within it. The living "logos" in language, which he had at first 
denied and forcibly suppressed, seems to have gradually freed itsetf from 
the constraint of the sensationaUst schema into which Berkeley attempted 
to force aU speech and thought. Through his study and analysis of the 
31. Hobbes, De corporc, Pt. 1: "Computatio sive fogica," ch. 3, sec. 7. 
32. Hobbes, Leviathan, 
Pl. 1: "De hominc," ch. 5, sec. 6. 
33. "De homine," ch. 4: "Verum 
et Falsum 
attributa sunt oon rcrum, sed OrationU; ubi 
autem Oratio non est, i b i ncque Verum est neque 
Fduum." 

P H I L O S O P H T 
O F 
T H E 
F R E N C H 
E N L I G H T E N M E N T 
l j 9 
function of the sign, and through the new positive evaluation which the 
sign acquired for him, Berkeley was led, step by step and unawares, to 
a new fundamental view of cognition. He himself, particularly in his 
last work, the Siris, took rhe decisive step: he freed the "idea" from all 
its sensationalist-psychological implications and restored it to its funda­
mental Platonic signification. And in this last phase of his system, lan­
guage also regained a dominant, truly central position. Whereas previously 
the value of language had been contested on general grounds implicit 
in Berkeley's psychology and metaphysics, we now witness, in the final 
form of this same metaphysics, a dramatic and noteworthy reversal: aU 
reality, spiritual as weU as sensory, is transformed into language; the sensa­
tionalist view of the world has gradually changed into a purely symbolic 
view. What we designate as thc reality of perceptions and bodies is, 
more profoundly understood, nothing other than the sensuous sign lan­
guage in which an all^mbracing, infinite spirit communicates itself to our 
finite spirit. 9 4 In the struggle between metaphysics and language, language 
has come ofI victorious—in the end, language which had at first been 
driven from the threshold of metaphysics is not only readmitted, but be­
comes the crucial determinant of metaphysical form. 
3. The Philosophy of the French Enlightenment {Condillac, 
Maupertuis, Diderot) 
Yet in the history of empiricism the last phase of Berkeley's system re­
mained an isolated episode The general development was in a different 
direction, tending more an<! more clearly to replace the logical and meta­
physical perspectives in wbich the relation of speech to thought had for 
the most part been considei:d up until then, by purely psychological per­
spectives. This meant an ir.dubitable gain for the concrete study of lan­
guage; instead of merely considering the nature of language as a whole, 
thinkers began to take an increasing interest in the individuality, the 
spiritual specificity of the particular languages. While the logical approach, 
as though impelled by its method, turned persistently to the problem of 
34. For more detailed discussion and documentation, see my book, Das 
Brhjenntmsproblem, 
a. 315 ff. 

що 
L A N G U A G E 
I N T H E 
H I S T O R T 
O F 
P H I L O S O P H T 
a universal language, psychological analysis chose the opposite road. Even 
Bacon, in the treatise De dignitate et augmentis scientiarum, had caUed 
for a universal form of "philosophical grammar" in addition to the usual 
empirical study of language and grammatica litteraria. But this philosoph­
ical grammar should not strive to disclose any necessary reladonship be­
tween words and the objects they designate: tempting as such an under­
taking may seem, it would prove exceedingly dangerous and elusive in 
view of the elasticity of words and the uncertainty of aU purely etymologi­
cal investigations. However, it would provide the most noble form of gram­
mar, if someone versed in a large number of languages, popular as weU 
as learned, were to treat of their various pecuUarities, and show wherein 
consisted the advantages and deficiencies of each. A study of this sort 
would make it possible to establish an ideal plan for a perfect language 
by comparison of the individual languages, and would also provide the 
most significant insights into the spirit and customs of the various nations. 
In his development of this idea, and in his brief characterizations of the 
Greek, Latin and Hebrew languages, Bacon anticipated a project which 
was to be fuUy realized only with WUhehn von Humboldt.*5 The phU­
osophical empiricists, however, foUowed this lead only in so far as they 
looked more and more closely into the specific character of concepts within 
each particular knguage. H the concepts of knguge are not simply signs 
for objective things and processes, but signs for the idea that we form of 
them, they must reflect not so much the nature of things as the individual 
type and direction of our apprehension of things. This is particukrly true 
where it is not a question of stabUizing simple sensory impressions in 
words, but where the word serves to express a complex total perception. 
For every such perception, and accordingly every name which we ascribe 
to such "mixed modes," as Locke caUs them, goes back ultimately to the 
free activity of the spirit. The spirit is purely passive in rektion to its 
simple impressions, and need merely receive them in the form given from 
outside, but when it comes to combining these simple ideas, it represents 
its own nature far more than that of the objects outside it. There is no need 
to inquire after the real model of these combinations; the types and species 
of the "mixed modes" and the names we give them are created by the 
understanding without modek, without any immediate Unk with real 
35· Sec F. Bacon, De dignitate et augmentit scientiarum, Bk. 6, ch. i : 'lnnumera tunt 
ejusmodi, quae justum volumen complere possint Non abs re igitur fucrit grammatica phik*o-
phantem a simpha ct Utteraria diitinguere, et desideratam ponere." 

P H I L O S O P H Y 
O F 
T H E 
F R E N C H 
E N L I G H T E N M E N T 
L4i 
existing things. The same freedom which Adam possessed when he created 
the first names for complex perceptions according to no model other than 
his own thoughts—this same freedom has existed ever since for aU men. 8 8 
Here, as we see, we have come to the point where the system of the em­
piricists accorded a certain recognition to the spontaneity of the spirit, 
though, for the present this recognidon was only condidonal and mediate. 
And this essential curtaihnent of the copy theory of knowledge could not 
but react immediately upon the general view of language. U language, in 
its complex conceptual terms, is not so much a reflection of material reality, 
as a reflection of mental operations, this reflection can and must be effected 
in an infinite diversity of ways. If the content and expression of the concept 
are not dependent on the substance of the particular sensory percepts, but 
rather on the form of their combination, every new Unguistic concept 
fundamentally represents a new spiritual creation. Consequently, no con­
cept of one language is simply "transferable" to another. Locke already had 
insisted on this inference; he stressed that in a close comparison of differ­
ent languages one almost never found words which fully corresponded 
to one another, and which fully coincided in their whole sphere of mean­
ing. 3 7 Thus from a new angle, the idea of a "universal" grammar is ex­
posed as a delusion. More and more resolutely, thinkers deJared that in­
stead of seeking a universal grammar, one should seek out and strive to 
understand the specific stylistic of each separate language. The emphasis in 
the study of language shifted from logic to psychology and aesthetics. This 
is particularly evident in that thinker who, as no other empiricist, com­
bined the sharpness and clarity of logical analysis with the keenest feeling 
for individuality, for the finest shadings and nuances of aesthetic expres­
sion. In his "Letter on the Deaf and Dumb" Diderot develops Locke's ob­
servation; but what in Locke had been in isolated apercu is now supported 
by an abundance of concrete examples from the field of linguistic and par­
ticularly of Uterary expression, and set forth in a style which is itself an 
immediate proof that every truly original spiritual form creates its proper 
linguistic form. Beginning with a specific stylistic problem, the problem of 
linguistic "inversion," Diderot progresses methodically and yet with the 
freest movement of thought to the problem of the individuality of linguistic 
form. In characterizing the incomparable uniqueness of poetic genius, 
Lessing had recalled the saying that one might sooner take from Hercules 
36. Locke, Essay, Bk. 2, ch. 22, secs. 1 ff.; Bk. 3, ch. 5, secs. 1-3; ch. 6, sec. 51, etc. 
37. Locke, Essay, Bk. 2, ch. 22, sec. 6; Bk. 3, ch. 5, sec. 8. 

142 
L A N G U A G E 
I N T H E H I S T O R Y 
O F 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
his club than from Homer or Shakespeare a single verse—and Diderot 
ako starts from this dictum. The work of a true poet is and remains un­
translatable—we may render the thought, we may even have the good 
fortune to find here and there an equivalent expression; but the general 
treatment, the tone and sound of the whole, remains a single, subde and 
untranslatable "hieroglyph." 8 8 And such a hieroglyph, such a formal and 
styHstic law, is not only realized in each particular art, in music, painting, 
sculpture, but also dominates each particular language, setting upon it its 
spiritual seal, its intellectual and emotional stamp. 
Here the study of language comes into direct contact with the central 
problem which dominated the cultural sciences throughout the seventeenth 
and eighteenth centuries. The concept of subjectivity underwent the same 
characteristic transformation that we encounter in the theory of art and 
artistic creation. Out of the narrow,empiricist-psychological conception of 
subjectivity there graduaUy arose a deeper and more comprehensive view, 
which removed subjectivity from the sphere of mere accidental facticity 
and arbitrary action and recognized its specific spiritual "form," i.e., its 
specific necessity. In the aesthetic theory of the seventeenth and eighteenth 
century this whole current of thought was focused more and more clearly 
and consciously in a single center. Both in thought and language, the new 
notion of a spiritual life far surpassing mere empirical-psychological reflec­
tion was epitomized in the concept of genius. In Diderot's "Lettre sur les 
sourds et muets" the concept of genius, though not expUcidy stressed, 
constitutes the animating principle of aU theoretical discussion of language 
and art; it is the point of ideal unity toward which such discussion is 
oriented. And this is merely one example: in the most diverse quarters this 
concept was introduced into the study of knguage. ш England the 
empiricabpsychological method which strove to dissect spiritual processes 
into their sensory and material factors had, by the kte seventeenth century, 
ceased to dominate aU intellectual Ufe; it shared the field with another 
view, which was oriented towards the "form" of these processes and 
strove to apprehend them in their original and indivisible totality. From 
the standpoint of systematic phUosophy this attitude found its center in 
English Pktonism, in Cudworth and the Cambridge school; it achieved 
its finished Uterary expression in Shaftesbury. AU outward formation of 
sensuous material things—S haftesbury held this conviction in common 
38. D . Diderot, 'Xettre tur let tourdt et muets," Oemret, ed. Naigeon (Paris, z798), 2, 
32aff. 

P H I L O S O P H Y 
O F 
T H E 
F R E N C H 
E N L I G H T E N M E N T 
4 3 
with the English Platonists—must be based on certain inner proportions, 
or "Ulterior numbers" as Shaftesbury called them, for form can never be 
created from matter, it is and remains unborn and imperishable, a pure 
ideal unity, which imprints itself upon multiplicity and so gives it definite 
form. It is these inner spiritual proportions, and not the accidental existence 
and accidental properties of empirical things, that the true artist represents 
in his work. Such an artist is indeed a second creator, a true Prometheus 
under Jupiter. "Like that sovereign artist or universal plastic nature, he 
forms a whole, coherent and propordonal in itself, with due subjection 
and subordinacy of constituent parts. . . . The moral artist who can thus 
imitate the Creator, and is thus knowing in the inward form and structure 
of his fellow-creature, wiU hardly, I presume, be found unknowing in him­
self, or at a loss in those numbers which make the harmony of a mind." 
What the study of every natural organism reveals to us, becomes irrefutable 
certainty as soon as we consider our own self, the unity of our conscious­
ness: namely, that truly self-subsistent being does not take its form from 
its parts, but is and operates as a formed whole prior to any division. In 
his setf, each one of us can immediately apprehend an individual principle 
of form, his own characteristic "genius," which he finds again, in the par­
ticular as in the whole, as the always different and yet intrinsically idendcal 
form-giving power, the "genius of the universe." The two ideas are parallel 
and interdeterminant^orrecdy understood and interpreted, empirical 
subjectivity necessarily surpasses itself and culminates in the concept of the 
"universal spirit." 8 9 
The part played by this aesthetic-metaphysical concept of "inner form" 
in the philosophy of language can be seen in a work emanating from the 
immediate circle of the English Neoplatonists and clearly reflecting their 
general approach. In its general plan, Harris' Hermes or a philosophical 
inquiry concerning universal grammar (1751) seems to remain within the 
tradidon of the rationalistic theories of language, to pursue for example, 
the same ideal as the Grammaire gineWale et raisonnie of Port Royal. Once 
again, Harris strives to create a grammar which, without regard for the 
particular idioms of the diverse languages, wiU lay down universal prin­
ciples identical for aU languages. He strives to base the organization of 
knguage upon a general logic and a general psychology which wiU make 
39. See Shaftesbury "Soliloquy or Advice to an Author," Characteristics 
of Men, 
Manners, 
Opinions, Times, etc., cd. J. M . Robertson (London, G. Richards, 1900), /, 135 f l . ; cL "Moral­
ists," ibid., Vol. 2, sec. 5. 

Ц4 
L A N G U A G E 
I N * T H E 
H I S T O R Y 
O F 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
this organization seem necessary. Our psychological faculties, for example, 
disclose an original division into those of representation and those of ap¬
petition; accordingly, every sentence must either be a "sentence of assertion 
or a sentence of volition." On the basis of this logic and psychology, it 
must in general be possible to demonstrate unequivocally why language 
contains precisely these and no other parts of speech and why these parts 
take this form and no other. Of particular interest is Harris' attempt to 
derive a general schema of tense formation from a logical and psychological 
analysis of the perception of time. 4 0 But the farther he proceeds, the more 
evident it becomes that the psychology upon which he relies for his study 
and classification of linguistic forms is a pure "structure psychology," 
sharply opposed to the sensationalist psychology of elements. In his de­
fense of "universal ideas" against their empiricist critics, Harris shows his 
kinship with the Cambridge school: 4 1 "For my own part," he remarks, 
"when I read the detail about Sensation and Reflection, and am taught 
the process at large how my Ideas are aU generated, I seem to view the hu­
man Soul in the light of a Crucible, where Truths are produced by a kind 
of logical Chemistry. They may consist (for aught we know) of natural 
materials, but are as much creatures of our own, as a Bolus or Elixir." 4 2 
To the empiricist belief in the production of "form" out of matter he op­
poses his own, based on Plato and Aristotle, in which he insists on the 
absolute primacy of form. AU sensible forms must be based on pure, in­
teUigible forms, which are "prior" to the sensible forms. 4 3 And in this 
connection Harris—who, as Shaftesbury's nephew, had no doubt long been 
close to his ideas—goes back to Shaftesbury's centra*, concept, the concept 
of "genius." Every national language has its own spirit; each contains a 
characteristic formative principle: "We shall be led to observe, how Na­
tions, like single Men, have their peculiar Ideas; how these peculiar Ideas 
become the genius of their language, since the Symbol must of course corre­
spond to its Archetype; how the wisest nations, having the most and best 
Ideas, wiU consequently have the best and most copious Languages." Just 
as there is a nature, a genius of the Roman, the Greek, the English people, 
40. J. Harris, Hermes 
(3d ed. London, 1771), Bk 1, ch. 6, pp. 97ff.; on the above see 
especially Bk. 1, ch. 2, pp. 17 ff.; ch. 3, pp. 24 ff. 
41 Ibid., Bk. 3, ch. 4, pp. 350 ff. Compare with R. Cudworth, The True InteUectual 
System 
of the Universe 
(London, 1678), Bk. 1, ch. 4. 
42. Harris, Bk. 3, ch. 5, pp. 404 ff. 
43. Bk. 3, ch. 4, pp. 380 ff. 

P H I L O S O P H Y 
O F 
T H E 
F R E N C H E N L I G H T E N M E N T 
there is a genius of the Latin, the Greek, the English language.44 Here we 
encounter, perhaps for the first time so exphcitly formulated, the new 
notion of the "spirit of language," which was soon to dominate the whole 
philosophical approach to language. In Rudolf Hildebrand's masterly 
articles on Geist and Genie in Grimm's Lexicon we can follow step for 
step how this concept entered into German cultural history and gained 
recognition in German linguistics.45 A direct road leads from Shaftesbury 
and Harris to Hamann and Herder. As early as 1768, Hamann wrote to 
Herder in Riga that he had ordered Hermes for him from the pubUsher 
and speaks of it as "a work which struck me as indispensable for your 
plan" (the discussion of language in the fragments on recent German 
literature). 4 6 And Herder himself, who in his Kritisches Wäldchen in­
vokes Harris' aesthetic theory in attacking Lessing's Lao\oon, also refers 
repeatedly to his theory of language. In his preface to the German transla­
tion of Monboddo's work on the origin and development of language he 
expressly states that Monboddo and Harris had opened up a new and 
certain approach to language: "Enough . . . the path is broken: the prin­
ciples of our author and his friend Harris strike me as the only true and 
secure ones, and moreover, his first attempts at comparing the languages 
of several different peoples at different cultural levels, wiU always remain 
the pioneer work of a master. Some day (though certainly not too soon) 
a philosophy of the human understanding, developed out of its most char­
acteristic work, the different languages of the earth, wiU be a possibility." 4 7 
Perhaps Herder was most attracted to Harris' ideas on language by the 
very feature which he had stressed in his judgment of Harris' aesthetic 
theory. In his dialogue on art, to which Herder expressly refers in his 
earliest discussion of aesthetic problems,48 Harris restored the Aristotelian 
distinction between epyov and ένέμγεια to the center of artistic theory. 
44. Bk. 3, ch. 5, pp. 409 ff. 
45. Cf. Jacob Grimm, Deutsches 
Wörterbuch, 
4, N0. 1, sec. 2, cols. 2727 ff. and 3401 ff. 
46. J. G. Hamann to Hcrder, September 7,1768, Schriften, 
ed. Fr. Roth (Berlin, 1821-43), 
J,386. 
47. J. G. V . Herder, "Vorrede zur Übersetzung des Monboddo" (1784), Werke, 
ed. В. 
Suphan (Berlin, 1877-1900), 15, 183; Herder expresses a similar judgment on Harris i n his 
Metakritik, 
(i799)» «d. B. Suphan, 21, 57. As early as 1772, Herder in his Allgemeine 
deutsche 
Bibliothek., ed. B. Suphan, 5, 315, expressed the desire for a German version of cxcerpts from 
Hermes. 
48. Herder, Kritische 
Wälder, 
3, 19 (ed. Suphan, j , 159 ff.), i n conjunction w i t h J. Harris, 
"Concerning Music, Painting and Poetry," Three 
Treatises 
(London, 1744). 

146 
L A N G U A G B 
I N T H E 
H I S T O R T 
O F 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
Thence it was taken into the theory of language, where at length it was 
rigorously formulated by Wimehn von Humboldt Language like art 
cannot be conceived as a mere work of the spirit, but must be regarded as 
a form of spiritual energy. The "energetic" theory of language and the 
energedc theory of art fused in the concept of genius as it developed in 
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. For the decisive factor in this 
development was the tendency to trace aU culturd reality back to the orig­
inal creadve process in which it is rooted, to reduce all cultural "products" 
to basic forms and formative trends.49 At first glance this tendency seems 
to have been operative in those empiricist and rationalist theories of the 
origin of language which, instead of regarding language as a divine work 
springing ready-made from the hand of God, interpreted it as a free crea­
tion of human reason. But since in these theories reason retains the char­
acter of subjective, arbitrary reflection, the "formation" of language be­
comes tantamount to its "invention." In inventing the first linguistic signs, 
in developing them into words and sentences, man effects a conscious, 
purposive process. The French Enlightenment liked to draw a direct com­
parison between this gradual progress of language and the methodic devel­
opment which mankind accompUshes in science, particularly in mathe­
matics. For CondiUac aU the special sciences are merely a continuation of 
the same process of analyzing ideas which begins with the formation of 
language. The initial language of phonetic signs is augmented by a lan­
guage of general symbob, particularly of an arithmeticd and algebraic 
character, the "knguage of calcuktion"; in both these languages, ideas are 
analyzed, combined, and ordered according to the same principle. The 
sciences as a whole are nothing other than welkvdered languages (langues 
bien jaites)y and similarly, our language of words and sounds is merely the 
first science of reality, the first manifestation of that original impulse to­
wards knowledge, which moves from the complex to the simple, from the 
particular to the universal.60 In his "Philosophical Reflections on the Origin 
of Languages" Maupertuis attempted to follow this development of kn­
guage in detaU, to show how, from its first primitive beginnings, when 
knguage possessed only a few terms for complex sense perceptions, it 
progressively increased its store of denominations, word forms and parts 
of speech by conscious comparison and differentiation of the parts of 
49. Cf. m y book, Freiheit 
und 
Form, 
Studien 
zur 
deutschen 
Geistesgeschichte 
(Berlin, 
B. Cassirer, 1922), especially chs. 2 and 4. 
50. E. B. de CondiUac, "La Languc des calcuU," Ocuvrcs 
(Paris, 1798), V o l . 2 j . 

L A N G U A G E 
A S 
A N 
E X P R E S S I O N 
O F 
E M O T I O N 
4 7 
these perceptions.61 To this view of language, which makes it the product 
of abstract radocination, Herder opposes a new conception of "linguistic 
reason." Here again the profound relation between the fundamental cul­
tural problems appears with surprising sharpness: for the struggle which 
now begins corresponds blow for blow with the battle which Lessing had 
waged in the Held of art against Gottsched and French classicism. Though 
the formations of language are also "regular" in the highest sense, they 
cannot be derived from, or measured by, an objective, conceptual rule. 
They too, through the agreement of the parts to a whole, are purposively 
constructed throughout—but they are governed by that "purposivcness 
without purpose" which precludes aU mere fancy and aU merely subjective 
"intention." Consequendy, in knguage as in artisdc creation, the factors 
which shun one another in mere abstract reflection interpenetrate to form 
a new unity—a unity which for the present, to be sure, merely confronts 
us with a new problem, a new tas\. The antitheses of freedom and neces­
sity, individuaUty and universality, "subjectivity" and "objectivity," spon­
taneity and causality, themselves required a deeper definition and a new 
fundamental explanaton before they could be employed as philosophical 
categories by which to elucidate the "origin of the work of art" and the 
"origin of language." 
4. Language as an Expression 0/ Emotion. The Problem of the 
"Origin of Language" (Giambattista Vico, Hamann, Herder, 
Romanticism) 
Despite all their essential differences, the empiricist and rationalist, the 
psychological and the logical theories of languages, as formulated up to this 
point, have one basic trait in common. They all consider language essen­
tially in its theoretical content, in its relation to knowledge as a whole 
and its contribution to the development of knowledge. Whether it is 
interpreted as the immediate work and indispensable organ of reason, or 
as a mere veU which conceals the basic contents of knowledge, the true and 
"original" perceptions of the spirit: in either case the goal of language, by 
51. P. L. de Maupertuis, 'deflexions phUosophiques sur 1'0rigine dcs langues et la signi­
fication des mots," Oeuvrcs (Lyon, 1756), /. 259 S. 

148 
L A N G U A G E 
I N T H E H I S T O R Y 
O F 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
which its positive or negative value is determined, is seen as theoredcal 
cognition and its expression. Words are signs for ideas—v/hxch are re­
garded either as objective and necessary contents of cognition or as sub­
jective representations. But as philosophy brought a new breadth and 
depth to the concept of "subjectivity"; as this concept gave rise, more and 
more clearly, to a truly universal view of the spontaneity of the spirit, 
which proved to be as much a spontaneity of feehng and will as of cogni­
tion—it became necessary to stress a new factor in the achievement of lan­
guage. For when we seek to foUow language back to its earhest beginnings, 
it seems to be not merely a representative sign for ideas, but also an emo­
tional sign for sensuous drives and stimuU. The ancients knew this deriva­
tion of language from emotion, from the πάθος of sensation, pleasure and 
pain. In the opinion of Epicurus, it is to this prima*, source, which is com­
mon to man and beast and hence truly "natural," that we must return, in 
order to understand the origin of language. Language is not the product 
of a mere convention or arbitrary decree; it is as necessary and natural as 
immediate sensation itse*f. Sight, hearing, and the feelings of pleasure and 
pain are characteristic of man from the very first, and so likewise is the 
expression of our sensations and emotions. Men's sensations varied with 
their physical spiritual and ethnic constitution and accordingly different 
sounds necessarily arose, which only gradually with a view to simplifica­
tion and mutual understanding were contracted into more general types of 
words and languages.62 In the same way, Lucretius traces the supposed 
wonder of the creation of language back to the general and particular laws 
of human nature. The special field of language develops from the genera*, 
impulse for sensory-mimic expression, which is innate in man, which is 
not a product of reflection but unconscious and unwilled. 6 8 
In its theory of language as in its natural philosophy and epistemology, 
modern philosophy hearkened back to Epicurus. In the seventeenth cen­
tury the old "theory of natura*. sounds" underwent a highly remarkable 
renewal, equaUy original in its form and in its theoretical justification, 
particularly with that thinker who first attempted a comprehensive, sys¬
. 52. Cf. Diogenes Laertius, Bk. 10, sec 24, par. 75: t9tv καΙ τα όνδματα 
ίξ άρχήί 
u3| Bicti 
ytvie8a^ 
άλλ' airhs 
ται φύσβα 
των 
άνΒρώχων, 
κα0* ίκαστα 
ίθνη tSui νασχούσαι 
χάθη 
καΙ t6uj, \αμβανούσα% 
φαντάσματα, 
tSlm 
τ6ν dipa 
ίκχέμχΐΐν, 
ortW6pevov 
ύφ' 
έκαστα» 
τώνχαθων 
καΙ των φαντασμάτων, 
&s Λ» xore 
καΙ 4 wapä rob$ r6xovs 
των έθνων Suuf>opa 
έίψ 
ΰστβρον 
Si κοινω* καθ
1 ίκαστα 
ίθνη 
τα tSia ri64jvai, xpbt το ται ίηλώσβα 
$rrov 
άμ~ 
φιβόΧουι 
yeviaßai 
αλλ^λοι» καΙ συντομωτίρωί 
δηλουμίνα*. 
53. See Lucretius, De rerum natura, Bk. 5» U. 1026ff. 

L A N G U A G E 
AS 
A N 
E X P R E S S I O N 
O F 
E M O T I O N 
i49 
tematic outline of the cultural sciences. In his Principi di scienza miova 
d'intorno alla commune natura delle nazioni, Giambattista Vico posed the 
problem of language within the sphere of a general metaphysic of the 
spirit. Beginning with the "poetic metaphysic" which was intended to 
disclose the origin of poetry and of mythical thinking, he passed through 
the intermediary link of "poetic logic," in which he strove to explain the 
genesis of poetic tropes and metaphors, to the question of the origin of 
language, which for him was synonymous with the question of the origin 
of "literature" and of the sciences in general. He too rejected the theory 
that the original words of language were attributable solely to convention; 
he too insisted on a "natural" relation between them and their meanings. 
If the present phase in the development of language, if our lingua volgare 
no longer reveals this relation, the reason is simply that it has moved far­
ther and farther away from its true source, the language of the gods and 
heroes. But even in the present obscurity and fragmentation of language, 
the original relation of words to what they mean is apparent to the truly 
philosophical eye. Since nearly aU words are derived from natural properties 
of things or from sensory impressions and feelings, the idea of a "universal 
dictionary," showing the meanings of words in all the different languages 
and tracing them aU back to an original unity of ideas, is not presumptuous. 
Vico's own attempts in this direction reveal, to be sure, aU the naive fancy 
of a purely speculative "etymology," totally unhampered by critical or 
historical scruples.94 AU the original words were monosyllabic roots, which 
either reproduced a natura' sound by onomatopoeia, or immediate expres­
sions of emotion, interjections of pain or pleasure, joy or grief, surprise 
or terror.68 Vico found support for this theory that the first words were 
simple monosylbbic interjections, in the German language which he— 
54. H o w widespread this naive conception o£ the meaning and purpose of 
"etymology" 
remained even among the philologists of the eighteenth century is shown, for example, by the 
reconstruction of the original language undertaken by Hemsterhuis and Ruhnken of the 
celebrated Dutch school of philologists. For detaiU, see T h . Benfey, Geschichte 
der 
Sprach-
wissenschajt 
(Munich, 1869), pp. 255 ff. 
55. Cf. the characteristic example in Vico, La Scienza nmva (Napoli, 1811), 2,70 ff., Bk. 2: 
"Della sapienza poetica" sec. 2, ch. 4: "Scguitarono a formarsi le voci umane con 
l'lnttrjezione, 
che sone voci articolatc all empito di passioni violente, che 'n tutte le lingue sono 
monosilhbe. 
Onde non e fuori del verisimile, che da primi fulmini incominciata a destarsi negli uomini b 
maraviglia, nascese la prima Interjeziorie da quella di Giove, fotmata con la voce pa, e che poi 
resto raddoppiata pape, Intcrjezione d i maraviglia; onde poi nacque a Giove i l titolo d i Padre 
degli uomini et degH Dei," etc. Eng. trans, by T . G. Bergin and M . H . Fisch, The New 
Science 
of Giambattista Vico (Ithaca, Cornell Univ. Press, 1948), p. 135. 

i5o 
L A N G U A G E 
I N T H E 
H I S T O R Y 
O F 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
Uke Fichte after him—regarded as a true original language, a lingua madre, 
because the Germans had never succumbed to foreign conquerors and had 
so kept the purity of their nadon and language intact from time imme­
morial. The formation of interjections is followed by that of pronouns 
and particles, which in their primitive form also go back to monosyllabic 
roots; next the nouns developed, and only then the verbs, the uldmate 
creadon of language. In Vico's view the speech of children and persons 
afHicted with pathological speech disturbance makes it clear that nouns pre­
cede verbs and belong to an earlier Unguistic stratum.56 
Strange and baroque as this theory may seem if we consider only its 
particubr interpretadons, it embodies an approach which was to prove 
extremely fruitful for future inquiry into the problem of language. A 
stadc relation between sound and meaning had been replaced by a dynamic 
relation: language was considered in terms of the dynamics of speech, 
which in turn was related to the dynamics of feeling and emotion. As the 
eighteenth century turned from reason to feeling, in which it came to 
see the true foundadon, the original creadve potency of spiritual Ufe, there 
was a revival of interest in Vico's theory of theorigin of language. It is no 
accident that Rousseau should have been first to take up this theory and 
attempt to develop it in detaU.57 But in another and profounder sense, 
Vico's ideas influenced that eighteentbcentury thinker who stood closest 
to his symboUc metaphysic and his symbolic view of history, and who 
Uke him regarded poetry as the mother tongue of the human race. Al­
though this man, Johann Georg Hamann, sought no radonal foundation 
for his views, though his ideas seem to defy aU logical system, they never­
theless in spite of him, one might say, shaped themselves into an immanent 
system, since he persistendy related all problems to the one basic problem 
of language. Here from the very first Hamann's thinking, although with 
its emphasis on immediate feeling and momentary impression it stood in 
constant danger of losing itse*f in peripheral particulars and accidents, 
found a specific center which it not so much defined as continuously cir­
cumscribed. " I speak," he himself said, "neither of physics nor of theology; 
with me language is the mother of reason and reveladon, its A and 
"Even if I were as eloquent as Demosthenes, I would merely have to re­
peat a single maxim three times: reason is language, λόγο?. This is the 
bone I gnaw on, and on it I wiU gnaw myse*f to death. For me these depths 
are stiU shrouded in darkness; I am stiU waidng for an apocalypdc angel 
56. Ibid., 2,73 ff. 
57. J . J. Roujscau, "Essai tur l'origmc des bnguet," Oeuvres (Paris, x877), Vol. /. 

L A N G U A G E 
AS 
A N 
E X P R E S S I O N 
O F 
E M O T I O N 
with a key to this abyss."58 Here lies for Hamann the true essence of rea­
son, with its unity and inner contradiction. "What Demosthenes calls 
actio, Engel mimicry, Batteaux imitation of nature's beauty, is for me lan­
guage, the organon and criterion of reason, as Young puts it. Here lies pure 
reason and at the same time its critique." 5 9 But this reality, through which 
the divine logos seems to manifest itse*f to us, evades everything that we 
call "reason." Of language as of history we can say that it is "like nature 
a sealed book, a veiled testimony, a riddle that cannot be solved unless 
we plough with a heifer other than our reason." 6 0 For language is not 
a collection of discursive conventional signs for discursive concepts, but 
is the symbol and counterpart of the same divine life which everywhere 
surrounds us visibly and invisibly, mysteriously yet revealingly. For 
Hamann as for Heraclitus, everything in it is at once expression and con­
cealment, veiling and unveiling. All creation, nature as weU as history, 
is nothing other than a message of the creator to the creature through the 
creature. 
It belongs to the unity of divine revelation, that the spirit of God 
should have abased itself and divested itself of its majesty through the 
human stylus of the holy men who were driven by it, just as the Son 
of God condescended by taking the form of a servant, and just as aU 
creation is a work of supreme humility. To admire the all-wise God 
only in nature is perhaps an insult similar to that shown an intelligent 
man by the rabble who judge his value by his cloak. . . . The opinions 
of the philosophers are variants of nature and the dogmas of the theolo­
gians are variants of Scripture. The author is the best interpreter of his 
words; he may speak through creatures—through events^>r through 
blood and fire and incense, wherein consists the language of the god­
head. . . . The unity of the author is reflected even in the dialect of his 
works; in aU of them there is One tone of immeasurable sublimity and 
depth.61 
Into these depths which, according to his own admission, remained in 
darkness for Hamann, Herder cast new light. Herder's prize "Essay on 
58. Hamann an Jacobi, Briefwechsel 
mit Jacobi, ed. Gildemeister (Gotha, 1868), p. 122; an 
Herder, August 6, 1784, Schriften, 
ed. Fr. Roth, 7, 151 £f. 
59. Hamann an Scheffner, February 11,1785, Schriften, 
7, 216. 
60. Hamann, "Sokratische Denkwürdigkeiten," Schriften, 
2, 19. 
61. Hamann, "Kleeblatt hellenistischer Briefe," Schriften, 
2, 207, "Aesthetica i n nuce," 
Schriften, 
2, 274ff. Concerning Hamann's theory of language and its position within the 
w h o k of bis "symboUc philosophy," see R. Unger's excellent Hamanns 
Sprachlehre 
im 
Zusammenhang 
seines Denzens 
(Munich, 1905). 

152 
L A N G U A G E 
I N T H E 
H I S T O R Y 
O F 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
the Origin of Language** exerted a erucial influence on the cultural history 
of the eighteenth century, primarily because in it he arrived at an entirely 
new methodic synthesis of two sharply antagonisdc interpretations of cul­
tural life. Herder was influenced by Hamann; but in the period preceding 
the prize essay he had been a disciple of Kant and through him of Leibniz. 
In speaking of his treatise Vom Ernennen und Empfinden der men­
schlichen Seele (On the Cognition and Feeling of the Human Soul), 
which is close to the prize essay both in conception and development,Haym 
writes that it is imbued with the spirit of Leibnizian philosophy from one 
end to theother, indeed, that it is nothing other than a summation of this 
philosophy as reflected in Herder. 8 2 But how was it possible to unite the 
two extreme poles in the approach to language, how was it possible to 
reconcile Hamann and Leibniz? How could the opinion that language 
was the supreme achievement of the analytic mind, the specific organ for 
the formation of "distinct" concepts, be fused with the belief that its origin 
evades aU reflective understanding and must rather be sought in the dark­
ness and unconscious poetic creation of feeling? Here Herder's problem 
begins and he solves it by a new approach to the problem of knguage. 
Even if all knguage is rooted in feeling and its immediate, instinctive 
manifestations, even if it originates not in the need for communication 
but in cries, tones, and wild, articulated sounds—even so, such an aggregate 
of sounds can never constitute the speciflc "form" of language. This form 
comes into being only with the operation of a new "human function," 
which from the very outset distinguishes the man from the beast. Herder's 
conception of this specifically human faculty of "reflection," and the role 
he assigns to it, are clearly derived from that fundamental concept which 
connects Leibniz' logic with his psychology. According to Leibniz, the 
unity of consciousness is made possible only by the unity of spiritual action, 
the unity of synthesis by which the spirit apprehends itself as an enduring 
and identical monad, and by which, when it encounters the same content 
at different times, it recognizes it to be one and the same. It is this form of 
"recognition" that Leibniz calls apperception, Herder "reflection," and 
Kant "synthesis of recognition." 
Man demonstrates reflection when the force of his soul works so freely 
that in the ocean of sensations that flows into it from aU the senses, he 
can, in a manner of speaking, isolate and stop One wave, and direct 
his attention toward this wave, conscious that he is so doing. He dem-
6a. R. H a y m , Herder (BerUn, x88rHfe), i, 665. 

L A N G U A G E 
AS 
A N 
E X P R E S S I O N 
O F 
E M O T I O N 
X53 
onstrates reflection when, emerging from the nebulous dream of images 
flitting past his senses, he can concentrate upon a point of wakefulness, 
dwell voluntarily on One image, observe it calmly and lucidly, and 
distinguish characteristics proving that this and no other is the object. 
He demonstrates reflection when he not only knows aU attributes vividly 
and clearly, but can recognize one or more distinguishing attributes: 
the first act of this recognition yields a dear concept; it is the soul's 
First judgment—andwhat made this recognition possible? A char­
acteristic which he had to isolate and which came to him clearly as a 
characteristic of reflection. Forward! Let us cry €νρηκα\ The first char­
acteristic of reflection was the word of the soul. With it human speech 
was invented! 6 3 
In this way, it is possible for Herder to interpret language entirely as a 
product of immediate sensation and at the same time entirely as a product 
of reflection: because reflection is not something external that is merely 
added to the content of feeling; it enters into feeling as a constitutive factor. 
It is "reflection" which makes the ephemeral sensory stimulus into a de­
terminate, differentiated and hence spiritual "content." Here perception 
is not, as in Maupertuis and CondiUac, a ready-made, self-contained psy­
chological content, to which expression in word and concept is merely 
appended; here the mere impressions are synthesized into "ideas" and 
named in one and the same act. An artificial system of signs is no longer 
juxtaposed to perceptions considered as natural data; here perception it­
self, by virtue of its spiritual character, contains a specific factor of form 
which, when fully developed, is represented in the form of words and 
language. Hence language—though Herder goes on to speak of its "inven­
tion"—is never merely made, but grows in a necessary process from within. 
It is a factor in the synthetic structure of consciousness itself, through which 
the world of sensation becomes a world of intuition: it is not a thing that is 
produced but a specific type of spiritual generation and formation. 
Here the general concept of linguistic form has undergone a decisive 
transformation. Herder's prize essay marks the transition from the older 
rationalistic concept of "reflective form," which dominated the philosophy 
of the Enlightenment, to the Romantic concept of "organic form." The 
new concept was first definitely introduced into philology in Friedrich 
Schlegel's essay Über die Sprache und Weisheit der Indier (On the Lan­
guage and Wisdom of India). It would be unjust to suppose that the 
63. Herder "Über den Ursprung der Sprache" (1772), Wcrkje, ed. B. Supban, 
5,34ff. 

i54 
L A N G U A G E 
I N T H E 
H I S T O R Y 
O F 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
designation of knguage as an organism was a mere image or poetic meta­
phor. PaIe and vague as this term may seem to us today, Friedrich Schlegel 
and his epoch formed a very concrete picture of the position of language 
within man's spiritual Ufe as a whole. The Romantic concept of the or­
ganism did not refer to a single fact of nature, a specific, Umited group of 
objective phenomena, with which, it is true, linguistic phenomena can be 
compared only very indirectly and inaccurately. For them, the "organism" 
signified not a particukr class of phenomena, but a universal specuktive 
principle, a principle which indeed constitutes the ultimate goal and 
systematic focus of Romantic speculation. The problem of the organism 
was a center to which the Romantics repeatedly found themselves drawn 
back from the most diverse fields. Goethe's theory of metamorphoses, 
Kant*s critical philosophy, Schelling's "system of transcendental idealism" 
and the beginning of his natural philosophy, seemed to move together 
in this one point. In the Critique of Judgment this concept seems to be the 
true medius terminus resolving the dualistic opposition within the Kantian 
system. Nature and freedom, being and moral law, which previously had 
been considered not only as separate but as antagonistic, were now related 
to one another through this middle l i n k ^ n d this relation disclosed a new 
content in both of them. Kant saw this content in systematic terms, pri­
marily he considered the two extremes from a critical-transcendental 
point of view, as "perspectives" from which to contemplate and interpret 
the whole phenomenal world; for Schelling, however, the concept of the 
organic became the vehicle for an aU^mbracing speculative metaphysic 
Nature and art, like nature and freedom, were united in the idea of the 
organic This idea bridged the chasm that seemed to divide the uncon­
scious growth of nature from the conscious creation of the spirit—here 
for the first time man gained an intimation of the true unity of his own 
nature, in which intuition and concept, form and object, ideal and material 
are originally one and the same. "Hence the unique radiance surrounding 
these problems—a radiance which the mere phUosophy of reflection, con­
cerned only with analysis, can never develop, whereas pure intuition, or 
rather the creative imagination, long ago invented the symboUc knguage 
which we need only interpret in order to discover that the less merely 
reflective thought we give nature, the more comprehensibly it speaks to 
us." 6 4 
64. F. W . v. Scheffing, ldeen xn einer Phtk>sophie der Natur (1797) SämmÜichc Wcrkß 
(Stuttgart and Augsburg, 1857), я, 47. 

W I L H E L M 
V O N 
H U M B O L D T 
155 
It is only in the light of this general systematic significance which the 
idea of the organic assumed for the philosophy of Romandcism, that we 
can understand the role it was destined to play in philological speculation. 
The philosophy of language had also revolved around sharp antagonisms; 
but now there was a new intermediary between "subjectivity" and "ob­
jectivity," between "individuality" and "universality." In connection with 
organic life the concept of "individual form" had already been coined by 
Leibniz—and Herder had extended it to the whole breadth of cultural life, 
from nature to history, from history to art and the concrete study of art 
styles. Everywhere, a "universal" was sought: however, this universal is 
not conceived as a self<ontained reality, as the abstract unity of a genus 
juxtaposed to its individuals, but as a unity which exists only in a totality 
of specific individuals. This totaUty and the law, the inner relationship 
expressed in it: these have become the true universal. For the philosophy 
of language this new conception of the universal meant abandonment of 
the quest for a basic, original language behind the diversity and historical 
contingency of the individual languages; it also meant that the true uni­
versal "essence" of language was no longer sought in abstraction from dif­
ferentiation, but in the totaUty of differentiations. It was through this 
fusion of the idea of organic form with the idea of totality that Wilhelm 
von Humboldt arrived at his philosophical view which implied a funda­
mental new approach to the problem of language.65 
5. Wilhelm von Humboldt 
Early in his career, language became the center of Wilhelm von Hum­
boldt's cultural interests and endeavors. "Fundamentally," he wrote as early 
as 1805 in a letter to Wolf, "everything I do is language study. I believe 
that I have discovered the art of using language as a vehicle by which to 
explore the heights, the depths and the diversity of the whole world." Hum­
boldt practiced this art in a vast number of monographs on language and 
the history of language, cuhninating in the brilliant introduction to his 
65. The following discussion of Wilhehn von Humboldt's philosophy of language is based 
i n part on my monograph "Die Kantischcn Elemente i n Wilhelm von Humboldt's Sprach¬
philosophie," published i n Festschrift 
xu Paul Hensels 60. 
Geburtstag. 

i56 
L A N G U A G E 
I N T H E 
H I S T O R Y 
O F 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
work on the Ravi language. It is true that Humboldt does not, in aU parts 
of his writings on the phUosophy and science of language, seem fuUy aware 
of the implications of his "art." Not infrequently it goes beyond anything 
that he himsetf defines in sharp and clear concepts. But even the much 
criticized obscurity of certain of his ideas always carries a productive 
content, which often cannot be captured in a simple formula, an abstract 
definition, but proves fruitful only when considered in the context of 
Humboldt's whole concrete view of language. 
In any exposition of Humboldt's ideas it is, therefore, necessary to group 
them around certain systematic centers, even when he himsetf did not 
signalize these centers as such. Fundamentally, Humboldt was a thoroughly 
systematic thinker; but he was hostile to any purely external technique of 
systematization. In his endeavor to set the whole of his view of language 
before us at eyery point of bis inquiry, he resists any clear and sharp analysis 
of this whole. His concepts are never the pure, detached products of logical 
analysis, they embody a note of aesthetic feeling, an artistic mood, which 
animates his work but at the same time cloaks the articulation and struc­
ture of his ideas. If we seek to disclose this structure, we find three great 
fundamental antitheses which determine Humboldt's thinking, and for 
which he hoped to find a critical and speculative synthesis in the study of 
language. 
For Humboldt language primarily represents the opposition between the 
individual and the "objective" spirit, and its resolution. Each individual 
speaks his own language—and yet, precisely in the freedom with which he 
employs it, he is aware of an inner spiritual constraint. Language is every­
where an intermediary, first between infinite and.finite nature, then be­
tween one individuai and another—simultaneously and through the same 
act, it makes union possible and arises from this union. 
We must free ourselves completely from the idea that it can be separated 
from what it designates, as for example the name of a man from his 
person, and that Uke a conventional cipher it is a product of reflection 
and agreement or in any sense the work of man (as we tend to think of 
concepts in common experience), not to say the work of the individual. 
Like a true, inexplicable wonder, it bursts forth from the mouth of a 
nation, and no less amazingly, though this is repeated every day and 
indifferently overlooked, it springs from the babble of every chUd; it 
is the most radiant sign and certain proof that man does not possess 

W I L H E L M 
V O N 
H U M B O L D T 
>5? 
an intrinsically separate individuality, that I and Thou are not merely 
complementary concepts, but that if we could go back to the point of 
separation, they would prove to be truly identical, that in this sense 
there are spheres of individuality, from the weak, helpless, perishable 
individual down to the primeval clan of mankind, because otherwise 
all understanding would be eternally impossible.66 
In this sense a nation is also a cultural form of mankind, characterized by 
a specific language and individualized in relation to ideal totality. 
Individuality is shattered, but in so miraculous a way that by its very 
division it arouses a sense of unity, indeed it appears as a means of 
creating unity, at least in the idea . . . For striving deep within him 
after that unity and totality, man seeks to surpass the barriers of his 
individuality, but since, like the giant who obtains his strength only 
from contact with mother earth, he possesses power only in his in­
dividuality, he must enhance it in this higher striving. Thus he con­
tinuously progresses in an inherently impossible striving. And here, 
in a truly miraculous way he is aided by language, which binds as it 
individualizes, and beneath the cloak of the most individual expression 
holds the possibility of universal understanding. The individual, wher­
ever, whenever and however he lives, is a fragment broken off from his 
whole race, and language demonstrates and sustains this eternal bond 
which governs the destinies of the individual and the history of the 
world. e T 
Elements of Kant and Schelling are strangely intermingled in this first 
metaphysical sketch of Humboldt's philosophy of language. On the basis 
of the critical analysis of the cognitive faculties, Humboldt seeks to arrive 
at the point where the antitheses, subjectivity and objectivity, individuality 
and universality, resolve themselves in pure indifference. But he does not 
seek this ultimate unity by the intellectual approach which aspires to raise 
us immediately over all the barriers of the "finite," analyticaWiscursive 
concept. Like Kant as a critic of cognition, Humboldt as a critic of lan­
guage stands in the "terrible bathos of experience." Again and again he 
stresses that if it is not to be chimerical, the philosophy of language, though 
destined to lead us into the ultimate depths of humanity, must begin with 
66. Humboldt, "Über die Verschiedenheit des menschlichen Sprachbaues" ("Vorstudie zur 
Einleitung zum Kawi-Werk"], Werke, Gesammelte Schrijlen 
(Akademie ed.), 6, No. i , 125 ff. 
67. Ibid. 

i58 
L A N G U A G E 
I N T H E 
H I S T O R Y 
0 F 
P H I L O S O P H Y 
the dry mechanical analysis of its physical aspect. For that original accord 
between world and man, upon which depends aU possibiUty of a knowl­
edge of truth, and which we must consequently presuppose as a universal 
postulate in any investigation of particular objects, can only be regained 
bit by bit, through the study of phenomena. In this sense the objec­
tive is not the given but always remains to be achieved.68 Here Hum­
boldt applies the Kantian critique to the philosophy of language. The 
metaphysical opposidon between subjectivity and objectivity is replaced 
by their transcendental correlation. In Kant the object, as "object in ex­
perience," is not something outside of and apart from cognition; on the 
contrary, it is only "made possible," determined and constituted by the 
categories of cognition. Similarly, the subjectivity of language no longer 
appears as a barrier that prevents us from apprehending objective being 
but rather as a means of forming, of "objectifying" sensory impressions. 
Like cognition, language does not merely "copy" a given object; it rather 
embodies a spiritual attitude which is always a crucial factor in our per­
ception of the objective. Since the naive-realistic approach lives and moves 
among objects, it takes too little account of this subjectivity; it does not 
readUy conceive of a subjectivity which transforms the objective world, 
not accidentally or arbitrarily but in accordance with inner laws, so that 
the apparent object itself becomes only a subjective concept, yet a concept 
with a fuUy justified claim to universal validity. In this view with its 
orientation towards things, the diversity of languages is merely a diversity 
of sounds, which are regarded as mere means of entering into a reladon 
with things. But it is precisely this empirical-realistic approach which ob­
structs the extension of our knowledge of language, and makes what 
knowledge we have dead and barren.69 The true ideality of language 
exists only in its subjectivity. Hence it was and always wiU be futile to at­
tempt to exchange the words in the various languages for universally valid 
signs such as mathematics possesses in its lines, numbers, and algebraic 
symbols. For such a system would express only a small part of what can be 
thought, it would serve only to designate such concepts as are formed by 
purely rational construction. But the substance of inner perception and 
sensation can be stamped into concepts only by man's individual rep-
68. Humboldt, "Über das vergleichende Sprachstudium i n Beziehung auf die verschiedenen 
Epochen der SprachentwickIyng" (1820) Werkjc, 4, 27 ff. 
69. Humboldt, "Über die Verschiedenheit des menschlichen Sprachbaues," Wer\e, 6, 
N0.1, 
119ff. 

W I L H E L M VON H U M B O L D T 
resentative faculty, and that is inseparable from his language. "The word 
which is required to make the concept into a citizen of the world of thought 
adds to it some of its own signification, and in defining the idea, the word 
confines it within certain limits. . . . Because of the mutual dependency 
of thought and word, it is evident that the languages are not really means 
of representing the truth that has already been ascertained, but far more, 
means of discovering a truth not previously known. Their diversity is not 
a diversity of sounds and signs, but of world outlook." For Humboldt this 
idea provides the foundation and ultimate aim of all philosophy of lan-
guage. Historically, it discloses a noteworthy process which once again 
teaches us how the truly fruitful philosophical ideas propagate themselves 
even outside the immediate formulation given to them by their authors. 
For here Humboldt, through the intermediary of Kant and Herder, had 
found his way back from Leibniz' narrow view of language to a deeper, 
more comprehensive, universal-idealistic view implicit in the general prin-
ciples of the Leibnizian philosophy. For Leibniz the universe is given only 
in its reflection by the monads, and each one of them represents the totality 
from an individual "point of view"; while on the other hand it is precisely 
the totality of these perspective views and the harmony among them that 
constitutes what we call the objectivity of appearances, the reality of the 
phenomenal world. Similarly for Humboldt each single language is such 
an individual view of the world, and only the totality of these views con-
stitutes the objectivity attainable by man. Accordingly, language is sub-
jective in relation to the knowable, and objective in relation to man as an 
empirical-psychological subject. For each language is a note in the harmony 
of man's universal nature: "once again the subjectivity of all mankind 
becomes intrinsically objective."
 7 0 
This conception of objectivity, not as a given which need merely be 
described but as a goal which must be achieved by a process of spiritual 
formation, brings us to the second basic idea underlying Humboldt's view 
of language. Any inquiry into language must proceed "genetically": this 
does not mean that we must pursue its temporal genesis and seek to ex-
plain its development by specific empirical-psychological "causes," but that 
we must recognize the finished structure of language as something derived 
and mediated, which we can understand only if we are able to reconstitute 
70. Humboldt, "Über das vergleichende Sprachstudium," Werfe, 4, 21 ff.; cf. "Grundzüge 
dcs allgemeinen Sprachtypus," Werfe, 5,386 ff., and "Einleitung zum Kawi-Werk," Werfe, 7, 
N0. ι 59ff. 

l60 
L A N G U A G E I N T H E H I S T O R Y O F P H I L O S O P H Y 
it out of its factors and determine the type and direction of these factors. 
Language broken down into words and rules remains a dead product of 
scientific analysis—for the essence of language never resides in those ele-
ments isolated by abstraction and analysis, but solely in the spirit's eternally 
repeated endeavor to make the articulated sound an expression of thought. 
In each particular language this endeavor begins at certain specific centers, 
from which it spreads out in different directions—and yet these diverse 
products ultimately join to form, not indeed the material unity of one 
product, but the ideal unity of a lawful activity. The content of the spirit 
can be conceived only in activity and as activity—and the same is true of 
every particular content which only the spirit makes knowable and pos-
sible. What we call the essence and form of a language is consequently 
nothing other than the enduring, uniform element which we can demon-
strate not in any one phenomenon, but in the endeavor of the spirit to 
raise the articulated sound to the level of an expression of thought.
7 1 Even 
what might seem to be the actual substance of language, the simple word 
detached from the context of the sentence, does not like a substance com-
municate something already produced, or constitute a seh>contained con-
cept, but merely stimulates us to form such a concept, independently and 
in a specific way. 
Men do not understand one another by relying on the signs for things, 
nor by causing one another to produce exactly the same concept, but 
by touching the same link in each other's sense perceptions and con-
cepts, by striking the same key in each other's spiritual instrument, 
whereupon corresponding, but not identical concepts arise in each of 
them. . . . When . . . the link in the chain, the key of the instrument 
is touched in this way, the whole organism vibrates and the concept 
that springs from the soul stands in harmony with everything surround-
ing the individual Hnk, even at a great distance from i t .
7 3 
Thus, here too objectivity is guaranteed by harmony in the infinitely varied 
production of words and concepts, and by the simplicity of the reality they 
reproduce. Hence the true vehicle of linguistic meaning is never to be 
sought in the particular word, but only in the sentence; for the sentence 
reveals the original force of synthesis upon which all speech and all under-
standing are essentially based. This general view is most sharply and suc-
7x. Humboldt, "Einleitung zum Kawi-Wcrk," Wer\e, 7, N0. t, 46ff. 
72. Ibid., pp. 169 ff. 

W I L H E L M VON H U M B O L D T 
l6l 
cinctly expressed in Humboldt's famous dictum that language is not a 
work (ergon) but an activity (energeia) and that consequently the only 
true definition of it must be a genetic one. In a strict sense this definition 
applies to every particular instance of speech: but fundamentally it is only 
the totality of these instances that we can regard as language; it is only 
in the function and its general exercise in accordance with certain specific 
laws that we can find its substantiality and ideal essence.
73 
With the concept of synthesis we reach the third of the great oppositions 
in the light of which Humboldt considers language. This distinction, the 
differentiation of matter and form, which dominates Humboldt's general 
view, is also rooted in Kantian thought. For Kant, form is a mere expres-
sion of relation, but for this very reason, since all our knowledge of phe-
nomena ultimately dissolves into a knowledge of temporal and spatial 
relations, it constitutes the truly objectifying principle of knowledge. The 
unity of form is the synthetic unity in which the unity of the object is 
grounded. "The conjunction of a manifold can never be given us by the 
senses," it is always "a spontaneous act of the faculty of representation . . . 
we cannot represent anything as conjoined in the object without having 
previously conjoined it ourselves. Of all mental notions, that of conjunction 
is the only one which cannot be given through objects, but can be originated 
only by the subject itself."
7 4 In order to characterize this form of con-
junction, grounded in the transcendental subject and its spontaneity, yet 
strictly "objective," because necessary and universally valid, Kant himself 
had invoked the unity of judgment and so indirectly that of the sentence. 
For him judgment is "nothing but the mode of bringing given cognitions 
under the objective unity of apperception": but in language this unity 
is expressed in the copula of judgment, in the little word of relation "is," 
which conjoins subject and predicate. Only by this "is" do we posit a neces-
sary content of our judgment, do we state that the representations in ques-
tion necessarily belong to each other and are not merely connected by for-
tuitous, psychological associations.
75 Humboldt's concept of form extends 
what is here said of a single linguistic term to the whole of language. In 
every complete and thoroughly formed language the act of designating 
73. Ibid., p. 46. 
74. I. Kant, "Transzendentale Deduktion der reinen Verstandesbegriffe," 5 15· in Kritik, äer 
reinen Vernunft (2d ed.), pp. 129ff. Eng. Trans, by J. M. D. Mciklcjohn, Everyman cd. 
(London, Dent, 1950), 5 11, p. 93. 
75. Ibid., § 19, pp. 141 ff.; Eng. Trans. $ 15, p. 99. 

102 
L A N G U A G E I N T H E H I S T O R Y O F P H I L O S O P H Y 
a concept by definite material characteristics must be augmented by a 
specific endeavor and a specific formal determination which place the con-
cept in a definite category of thought, designating it for example as sub-
stance, attribute or activity. This transference of the concept to a definite 
category of thinking is "a new act of the linguistic sehSconsciousness, 
through which the particukr instance, the individual word, is rchted to 
the totaHty of possible instances in language or speech. Only by this opera-
tion, carried out with the greatest possible purity and depth and firmly 
embedded in the language itself, is an adequate fusion and articulation 
created between its independent activity, arising from thought and that 
purely receptive activity which foUows from outward impressions."
76 
Here again matter and form, receptivity and spontaneity—Uke the above-
mentioned antitheses "individual" and "universal" "subjective** and "ob> 
jective"-are not disjoined parts out of which the process of language is 
composed, but factors in the genetic process itsetf, which necessarily belong 
together and can only be separated in our analysis. The priority of form 
over matter, which Humboldt asserts with Kant and which he finds most 
clearly and sharply expressed in the inflected languages, is hence regarded 
as a priority of value and not as a priority of empirical-temporal existence, 
since in actual language, even in the so<aUed "isokting** knguages, both 
determinants, the formal and the materia^ necessarily operate conjoindy, 
not one without the other or before the other.
77 
Here we have suggested only the bare outline of Humboldt*s view of 
bnguage, its inteUectual frame as it were. What gave this view its fertility 
and importance was the manner in which it was filled out by Humboldt's 
Unguistic researches, the twofold movement by which he persistently 
passed from the phenomenon to the idea, from the idea to the phenomenon. 
The basic principle of the transcendental method: the universal appUca-
tion of philosophy to science, which Kant had demonstrated for mathe-
matics and mathematical physics, now seemed confirmed in a totally new 
field. The new philosophical view of knguage demanded and made pos-
sible a new approach to Unguistic science. Throughout his general survey 
of knguage, Bopp reverts to Humboldt—the very first sentences of his 
Comparative Grammar, pubhshed in 1833, invoke Humboldt's concept of 
76. Humboldt '*Vorwort zum Kawi-Werke^ Wer\e, 7, N0. i , 109. 
77. Cf. Humboldt's remarks on the Chinese language in "Lettrc a M. Abel Remusat sur h 
nature des formes grammaticales en general et sur le genie de b langue chinoise en particulier," 
Werke, 5, 284ff.; on the grammatical structure of the Chinese hnguage, Wcrkje, 5, 309ff. 

A U G U S T S C H L E I C H E R 
l63 
the "Hnguistic organism** in defining the function of the new science of 
comparative linguistics.
78 
6. August ScMeicher and the Development of the Scientific View 
of Language 
However, as philological speculation gave way to the empirical study of 
knguage, it was felt that the very breadth of the concept of the organism 
gave it a vagueness and ambiguity which threatened to make it unfit for 
specific, concrete tasks. Philosophical speculation had seen this concept 
essentiaUy as a mediation between opposite extremes, so that it appeared to 
partake of the nature of both extremes. Could such a concept, which seemed 
to take on all colors, continue to be used as a foundation, no longer of a gen-
eral metaphysic of language, but of a specific methodology? When it came 
to deciding whether, from the standpoint of method, the kws of language 
should be designated as scientific or historical laws; to determining the 
relative importance of material and of spiritual factors in language forma-
tion; and finaUy, to defining the part played by conscious and unconscious 
factors in language formation—the mere concept of a Hnguistic organism 
seemed inadequate. For precisely its hovering middle position between 
"nature" and "spirit," between unconscious action and conscious creation, 
enabled it to move back and forth between the two perspectives. Only a 
slight shift in emphasis in either direction was required to disturb its fluid 
equilibrium and give it a changed, or indeed an opposite methodological 
significance. 
The history of linguistics in the nineteenth century reveals concretely 
the process which we have here attempted to suggest in a general, schematic 
form. In this period the science of language passed through the same 
transition as did history and the cultural sciences. The concept of the "or-
ganic" retained its central position; but its meaning changed radicaUy 
once the biological concept of development prevaUing in modern natural 
78. "In this book I intend to give a comparative description of the organism of the 
languages named in the title, a compendium of aU their reUted features, an inquiry into their 
physical and mechanical laws, and into the origin of the forms designating grammatical re-
ktions." F. Bopp, Vergleichende Grammatik, des Sanskrit, Zend, Griechischen, etc. (Berlin, 
1833), p. I. 

164 
L A N G U A G E 
I N T H E H I S T O R Y OF P H I L O S O P H Y 
science was opposed to the concept of development dominant in Romantic 
philosophy, ш the field of biology, the speculative concept of organic form 
was graduaUy replaced by its purely scientific concept, and this immediately 
affected the study of language. This transformation is most clearly and 
typically reflected in the scientific development of August Schleicher. In 
his view of language and its history, Schleicher not only took the step from 
Hegel to Darwin, but also passed through all the intermediary stages. 
In him we see not only the beginning and the end, but also the separate 
phases of that process by which the speculative study of language became 
a purely empirical study, and by which for the first time the concept of 
hnguistic law acquired distinct content. 
In his first important work, the Sprachvergleichende Untersuchungen 
(investigations in Comparative Philology), Schleicher starts from the 
proposition that the true essence of language as articulated sound expressing 
spiritual life, is to be sought in the relationship between expression of 
signification and expression of relation. Each language is characterized 
by the manner in which it expresses signification and relation—no third 
essential element of language is conceivable. On this presupposition, lan-
guages are divided into three main types: the isolating (monosyllabic), 
agglutinative, and inflected languages. Signification is the material dement, 
the root; relation is the formal .element, the change effected in the root. 
Both factors are necessary constituents which must be contained in a lan-
guage; but although neither can be totally lacking, the relation between 
the two can vary exceedingly, it can be merely implicit, or more or less 
explicit. The isolating languages express only signification in words, while 
relation is expressed by the position of the words and by the stress; the 
agglutinative languages possess specific syllables of relation in addition to 
the syUables of signification, but the two are connected only outwardly, 
for the designation of relation is attached only materially and superficially 
to the root, which undergoes no internal change. Only in the inflected lan-
guages are the two basic elements not merely attached to one another, but 
truly combined and intermingled. The first is characterized by the un-
differentiated identity of relation and signification, or one might say, by 
pure relation; the second is characterized by differentiation into syllables 
of relation and syllables of signification, relation merges into a distinct 
phonetic existence of its own; in the third, finally, this difference is negated 
and bridged: here there is a return to unity, but to a unity which is far 
higher because it presupposes the difference out of which it grew, and con-

A U G U S T S C H L E I C H E R 
l65 
tains within it this surpassed difference. So far, Schleicher has strictly 
foUowed Hegel's dialectical schema, which dominates his view both of 
knguage as a whole and of its inner articulations. But even in Sprachver¬
gleichende Untersuchungen this attempt at a dialectical classification is 
accompanied by an attempt at classification in the spirit of the natural 
sciences. From the systematic standpoint, Schleicher expressly points out, 
linguistics shows an unmistakable similarity to the natural sciences. The 
habitus of a family of languages can, Hke that of a family of plants or 
animals, be reduced to certain specific criteria. "In botany certain char-
acteristics—seed-leaves, types of blossom—prove valuable as bases of classi-
fication, precisely because these characteristics usually run paraUel to others, 
and the phonetic laws seem to fulfiU this function in the classification of 
languages within a single linguistic family, e.g., the Semitic or Indo-
Germanic family." For the present, however, his investigation does not 
follow this empirical path, but takes a purely speculative direction. The 
monosyUabic languages, in which the word is in no way articulated, re-
semble the simple crystal which in contrast to the higher, articulated or-
ganisms appears as a strict unity; the agglutinative languages, which have 
achieved articulation into parts, but have not yet fused these parts into a 
true whole, correspond to the organic reahn of plants; while the inflected 
languages, in which the word is unity in the diversity of its articulations, 
correspond to the animal organism.
79 For Schleicher this is no mere analogy 
but a highly significant objective definition, springing from the very es-
sence of language and determining the methodology of philological sci-
ence. If the languages are natural entities, the laws according to which they 
develop must be not historical, but scientific laws. The historical process and 
the process of language formation are utterly divergent, temporally as well 
as in content. History and language formation do not proceed concomitantly 
but successively. For history is the work of the seh>conscious spirit, while 
language is the work of an unconscious necessity. History represents hu-
man freedom, creating true reality for itsetf; language partakes of man's 
unfree, natural aspect. "Language, it is true, also reveals a development, 
which in the broader sense of the word may be called history: a successive 
emergence of forces; but this development is so Httle characteristic of the 
free spiritual sphere, that it is manifested most clearly in nature." Once 
history begins and the spirit ceases to produce the word, but confronts it 
79. August Schleicher, SprachvergUichende Untersuchungen (Bonn, 1848^0), /, 7ff; 
3,5& 

l66 
L A N G U A G B I N T H E H I S T O R Y O F P H I L O S O P H Y 
and uses it as an instrument, language can no longer develop, but merely 
refines itself. Language formation occurs before history, the dedine of the 
languages begins in the historical period.
80 
Language is for the human spirit what nature is for the World Spirit: 
the condition of its otherness. "Its accord with history begins with its 
spiritualizations; from then on itgraduaIly loses its corporeal element, its 
form. Consequendy, the scientific, and not the historical, part of linguistics 
is the systematic part." The philologist, who uses language only as a means 
by which to enter into the spirit and cultural Ufe of the peoples, deals with 
history; the object of linguistics, on the other hand, is language, whose 
character can no more be determined by the human will than a nightingale 
can exchange its song for that of the lark". "That which can no more be 
organically changed by man's free will than his own physical constitution, 
does not belong to the sphere of the free spirit, but to that of nature. Con-
sequently, the method of linguistics is totaUy different from the method of 
any cultural science and is essentially similar to that of the other natural 
sciences. . . . Like the natural sciences, it aims to investigate a field in 
which we discern the rule of unalterable natural laws which man's wUl 
and whim are powerless to change in any way."
 
8 1 
From here on, only one step was needed to dissolve linguistics completely 
into natural science and linguistic kws into pure natural laws; this step 
was taken twenty-five years later by Schleicher himself in his Darwinian 
Theory and Linguistic Science. In this work, which takes the form of an 
"open letter to Ernst Haeckel," the opposition between "nature" and 
"spirit," which had hitherto governed Schleicher's view of language and 
its position in the system of the sciences, was dropped as obsolete. Schleicher 
notes that the direction of thought in the modern period is "unmistakably 
toward monism." Duahsm, construed as an opposition of spirit and nature, 
content and form, essence and appearance, had, he declared, been entirely 
superseded in the outlook of the natural sciences. For the scientific view, 
there was no matter without spirit, no spirit without matter: or rather, 
there was neither spirit nor matter in the usual sense, but only one entity 
that was both at once. From this, linguistic science must draw the plain 
inference therefore, that it too must renounce any sort of special position 
for its laws. The theory of evolution which Darwin showed valid for the 
species of animals and plants, must apply no less to the organisms of the 
80. Ibid., 3, io ff.; cf. /, 16 S. 
81. Ibid., 3, л ff.; cf, », 21 ff. and /, 24 S. 

M O D E R N L I N G U I S T I C S C I E N C E D E F I N E D 
l67 
languages. To the species of a genus correspond the languages of a family, 
to the subspecies correspond the dialects of a language, to the varieties 
correspond the subdialects, and finally, to the individuals corresponds the 
speech of the particular men who speak the language. In the linguistic 
sphere we also find the origin of species by gradual differentiation and the 
survival of the more highly developed organisms in the struggle for ex-
istence. Darwin's idea seems to have been confirmed far beyond its original 
province, and shown to be the basic principle both of the natural and 
the cultural sciences.
82 
Here, from a methodological standpoint, we find ourselves at the op-
posite extreme from Schleicher's original point of departure. Anything 
that is constructed a priori—he now expressly declares—is at best an ingen-
ious game, but utterly useless for science. Once it is recognized that "ob-
servation is the foundation of our present knowledge," once empiricism is 
granted unlimited rights, everything that has hitherto passed for philosophy 
of language is as dead as the dialectical philosophy of nature: it belongs to 
a past phase of thought, whose questions, like its solutions, lie behind us. 
True, Schleicher himself, even in this last formulation of the problem 
of language, fulfilled his stated aim only in small part:—it is easy to see 
that in turning from Hegel to Haeckel he merely exchanged one form of 
metaphysics for another. The actual step into the promised land of positiv-
ism was reserved for a later generation of scholars who, instead of attempt-
ing a total monistic or evolutionistic explanation of all reality, strove to 
apprehend the methodological problems of linguistic science in their spe-
cial character, in their sharp and clear isolation. 
7. Definition of Modern Linguistic Science and the Problem of 
Phonetic Laws 
This limitation, however, does not mean that the problem of language 
was suddenly removed from all its involvements with the methodological 
problems of historical and natural science. This would not have been pos-
sible, for even positivism, to which the solution of this problem now seemed 
to have been entrusted once and for all, remained a philosophy precisely 
82. Schleicher, Die Darwinsche Theorie und die Sprachwissenschaft (Weimar, 1873). 

i68 
L A N G U A G E I N T H E H I S T O R Y OP P H I L O S O P H Y 
in its rejection of metaphysics. And as a philosophy, it could not content it-
self with a multiphcity of mere facts or special laws governing facts, but was 
compelled to seek in this diversity a unity which can be found only in the 
concept of law itsetf. That this concept has a single signification, identical 
for the diverse spheres of knowledge, was for the present simply assumed: 
but as the method was more closely defined, this assumption inevitably 
took on the character of a problem. When we speak of linguistic, historical 
and scientific "laws," we assume that a certain logical structure is common 
to aU of them—but what seems more important from the standpoint of 
method is the specific imprint and nuance which the concept of law ac-
quires in each special field. If the sciences are to be apprehended as a truly 
systematic whole, a universal problem of knowledge must be found present 
in aU of them, but it must also be shown that in each o£ them this problem 
demands a special solution under definite particular conditions. The devel-
opment of the concept of law in modern linguistic science has been deter-
mined by both these considerations. И we now foUow the transformations 
of this concept in the hght of the general history of science and of general 
epistemoiogy, it becomes evident in a very remarkable and characteristic 
way how the different branches of knowledge exerted an ideal influence 
on one another even where we cannot speak of any immediate influence. 
The concept of linguistic law passed, almost without exception, through 
all the same phases as the concept of natural law. And this is no matter of 
superficial transference, but of profound kinship, resulting from the work-
ings in widely divergent fields of the fundamental inteUectual trends of 
thetime. 
The principles which dominated the exact natural sciences in the middle 
of the nineteenth century were most suggestively expressed in those cele-
brated sentences with which Helmholtz introduced his treatise Über die 
Erhaltung der Kraft (On the Conservation of Energy). While Helmholtz 
indicated that the intent of this work was to prove that aU happenings in 
nature can be reduced to attractive and repeUent forces, whose intensity de-
pends only on the distance between the points affecting one another, he did 
not mean to state this proposition as a mere fact, but rather to derive its 
validity and necessity from the form of our understanding of nature. The 
principle that any change in nature must have an adequate cause, is, ac-
cording to him, truly fulfilled only if we can reduce aU events to ultimate 
causes which act in accordance with an absolutely immutable law, which 
consequendy produce the same effect at aU times under the same outward 

M O D E R N L I N G U I S T I C S C I E N C E D E F I N E D 
conditions. The discovery of these ultimate immutable causes is the true 
aim of aU the theoretical natural sciences. "Now whether aU events can 
really be reduced to such causes, whether nature is fully comprehensible, 
or whether there are changes in it which evade the laws of a necessary 
causality, that is to say, which fall into the province of spontaneity or 
freedom, need not be decided here; in any case it is clear that science, whose 
purpose it is to understand nature, must assume it to be intelligible and 
continue to investigate and draw inferences under this assumption until 
perhaps compelled by irrefutable facts to recognize its limitations."
 8 8 It 
is weU known how this assumption that nature can be understood only if 
it can be fully explained on the basis of mechanical principles spread from 
the field of "inorganic" reaHty to the study of organic processes, and how 
descriptive natural science came to be wholly dominated by it. The "limits 
of natural knowledge" now coincided with the limits of the mechanical 
view of the world. To gain knowledge of any process in inorganic or 
organic nature meant nothing other than to dissolve it into its components 
and ultimately into the mechanical motion of atoms: anything that did 
not lend itsetf to such a breakdown seemed destined to remain an abso-
lutely transcendent problem for the human mind. 
Applied to language, this fundamental view—which within the natural 
sciences was stated most clearly by Du Bois-Reymond in his celebrated 
lecture Über die Grenzen des Naturer\ennens (1872) (On the Limits of 
our Knowledge of Nature)-implies that we can speak of an understanding 
of language only if we succeed in reducing its complex phenomena to 
simple changes of ultimate elements and establish universally valid rules 
for these changes. Such an inference was far removed from the older specu-
lative conception of language as an organism, which situated the organic 
process between nature and freedom, hence subjected it to no absolute 
necessity but left a certain amount of free play between the different pos-
sibilities. Bopp had sometimes expressly remarked that in language one 
shouldnot seek laws offering more solid resistance than the shores of rivers 
and oceans.
84 Here Goethe's conception of the organism prevails: lan-
guage is subordinated to a rule which, as Goethe put it, is firm and eternal, 
but also living. Now, however, since in natural science itsetf the idea of 
83. H. v. Helmholtz, Über die Erhaltung der Kraft (1847), pp. 2ff. 
84. Cf. B. Delbrück, Einleitung in das Sprachstudium (Leipzig, 1880), p. 21. Authorized 
trans, by Eva Channing, Introduction to the Study of Language (Leipzig and London, 1882), 
p. ai. 

i7O 
L A N G U A G E I N T H E H I S T O R Y O F P H I L O S O P H Y 
the organism seemed to have dissolved utterly into the concept of the 
mechanism, no room remained for such a view. It was held that though 
the absolute necessity governing aU Hnguistic development may be very 
much obscured in complex phenomena, it must stand out clearly in the 
elementary phenomena, i.e^ phonetic changes. " I f we admit of accidental 
deviations which cannot be brought into relation with one another"-wrote 
one linguist of this period, "we are, fundamentally, saying that the object 
of our investigation, language, is inaccessible to scientific knowledge."
 
8 8 
Here again a specific conception of linguistic law is built upon a general 
assumption regarding knowledge and inteUigibiHty as such, upon a spe­
cific epistemological ideal. This postulate of elementary, exceptionless laws 
was given its sharpest formulation in the Morphological Investigations of 
Brugmann and Osthoff. "AU phonetic change, in so far as it occurs mc-
chanicaUy, follows fows without exception, i.e^ the direction of the phonetic 
movement. . . is always the same in aU members of a Hnguistic family, 
and aU words in which the syllable subjected to the phonetic movement 
appears under Hke conditions, wiU without exception be affected by the 
change."
 8 8 
But even though this view of the neogrammarians became more and 
more firmly entrenched and set its characteristic stamp on aU scientific 
Hnguistics in the second hatf of the nineteenth century, the concept of 
phonetic law nevertheless graduaUy underwent the same transformations 
as we discern in the same period in the general concept of natural law. 
As the pure positivist ideal came to be more strictly formulated in sci­
ence, the insistence on explaining the natural process by the universal laws 
of mechanics receded in favor of the more modest endeavor to describe it 
in such laws. Mechanics itself—according to KirchhofPs famous definition 
—now consisted merely in a complete and unambiguous description of the 
dynamic processes occurring in nature.
8 7 What it yields is not the ulti­
mate and absolute causes of the process, but only the forms which the 
process takes. Accordingly, if the analogy between linguistic science and 
natural science is asserted, we should expect and demand nothing more 
85. Aug. Leskkn, Die DehUnation itn SUuvisch-Litauitchen uni Germanischen (Leipzig, 
1876). 
86. H. Ostfaoff and K. Brugmann, Morphologische Untersuchungen (6 vols. Leipzig, x878-
1910), ι, xiii; Le*kien, p. xxviii. 
87. G. Kirchhoff, Vorlesungen über mathematische Physik.; Vol. 1, Mechanik (Berlin, 1876), 
p.s. 

M O D E R N L I N G U I S T I C S C I E N C E 
D E F I N E D 
i7i 
from thc laws of language than just such a comprehensive expression of 
empiricaUy observed regularities. Here again, if we remain stricdy within 
the sphere of given facts, we shall not seek to disclose the ultimate forces 
of language formation, but merely to estabtish certain simiUtrities of form 
by observation and comparison. Hence the supposed "natural necessity" 
of phonetic laws takes on a different character. As late as 1878 Osthoff was 
formulating the principle that phonetic laws were without exception: 
"Everything that we have learned from the methodologically stricter 
studies of our own day makes it more and more apparent that the phonetic 
kws of language work Mindly, with a blind natural necessity, that there 
are simply no exceptions to them or exemptions from them."
 8 8 A scholar 
like Hermann Paul, however, took a far soberer and more critical view of 
the phonetic laws. "Phonetic kw," he stresses, "does not state what must 
repeatedly happen under certain general conditions, it merely notes regu-
larity within a group of specific historical manifestations."
 8 9 A view of 
this sort, which interpreted law merely as an expression of certain facts 
of Hnguistic history but not as an expression of the ultimate factors of all 
language formation, was free to ascribe observed similarities of form to 
quite divergent forces. Side by side with the elementary physical processes 
of phonetic development, the complex psychological conditions of speech 
were once more acknowledged. The constant uniformities of phonetic 
change were now generaUy attributed to the physical factors, while the 
apparent exceptions were imputed to psychological factors. Over against 
the strict and uniform workings of the physiological laws of phonetic 
change this school emphasized a tendency to form Unguistic analogies, to 
create a phonetic Unk between words of a formal grouping and to as-
similate them to one another. Yet for the present this recognition of the 
psychological or "spiritual" factors in language formation remained within 
relatively narrow bounds. For the concept of the spirit no longer meant 
what it had meant for Humboldt and ideaUstic philosophy, but itsetf bore 
88. H. Osthoff, Das Verbum in der Nominalkpmposition im Deutschen, Griechischen, 
Slawischen und Romanischen (Jena, 1878), p. 326. 
89. Hermann Paul, Principien der Sprachgeschichte (2d .ed. HaIIe, M. Niemeyer, 1886, 3d 
ed., 1898), p. 61, Eng. trans, by H. A. Strong, Principles of the History of Language (New 
York, Macmillan, 1889), p. 57. In B. Delbrück we occasionaUy find a paradoxical formulation 
of the same idea, namely that the "pure phonetic laws" are without exception but not the 
"empirical phonetic laws." See "Das Wesen der Lautgesetze" in OstwaId, Annalen der Natur-
philosophie, ι (1902), 294. 

172 
L A N G U A G E I N T H E H I S T O R T O F P H I L O S O P H Y 
an unmistakable naturalistic imprint, having been influenced by the con-
cept of mechanism. The "fundamental laws of the spirit" had been replaced 
by psychological laws governing the "mechanism of representations." It 
mattered little in principle whether these laws were formulated in terms 
of Herbart's (as in the case of Hermann Paul) or of Wundt's psychology. 
In either case the ultimate aim was to derive hnguistic laws from "laws of 
association" and to understand them on this basis.
00 The two heteroge-
neous factors in language formation would then stand on the same meth-
odological plane and pertain, one might say, to the same dimension of 
inquiry. Language, it was held, is built up in the individual's mind by 
the interaction of the various physiological mechanisms of sound produc-
tion on the one hand and of the psychological mechanism of associations 
on the other; it becomes a whole, but a whole which we can understand 
only by dissecting it into physical and psychological elements.
91 
Here language is classified as a natural process, but the mechanistic con-
cept of nature has been replaced by a broader concept, the "psychophysical" 
nature of man. In the most comprehensive and consistent discussions of 
hnguistic phenomena from the standpoint of modern psychology, this 
development is expressly emphasized. The constant interaction of phonetic 
laws and analogy formation—writes Wundt^ecomes far more com-
prehensible when we consider them not as disparate and opposing forces, 
but as conditions, both of which are in some way ultimately rooted in the 
unitary psychophysical organization of man. 
So it is that, because of the memory4ike reproduction of forms gov-
erned by phonetic law, we must presuppose on the one hand a con-
currence of the verbal associations thathave been brought in to explain 
the formation by analogy, and on the other hand that associations, 
hke aU psychological processes, are modified by repetition into auto-
matic connections, so that those phenomena which at the outset are 
characterized as psychological factors come in time to be numbered 
among the physical factors. And the change is not merely successive 
as here iUustrated, where a psychological factor thus called by us on 
the basis of certain obvious characteristics is transformed into a physical 
factor and vice versa, but from the very first the two are so intimately 
90. On this dominant position of the concept of association and of the laws of association 
see, in addition to Wundt's work, e.g., H. Paul, 3d ed., pp. 23 ff., 96 ff., etc 
91. Cf. Osthoff, Das phynologische und psychohgische Moment in der sprachliche» 
Formenbildung (BerUn, 1879). 

M O D E R N L I N G U I S T I C S C I E N C E D E F I N E D 
intertwined that they cannot be separated, because with each factor 
of one type a factor of the other type would have to be eHminated.
92 
Here the idealistic postulate of "totaHty," according to which language 
cannot be pieced together out of disparate elements but must be seen as 
an expression of the "whole" man and of his spiritual-natural being—seems 
to recur in a new form: but it soon becomes apparent that for the present 
this postulate is only vaguely formulated and inadequately fulfilled in 
what is here designated as the unity of man's "psychophysical nature." 
If we look back over the whole development of the philosophy of bnguage 
from Humboldt to the neogrammarians, from Schleicher to Wundt, we 
see that with aU its increased special knowledge and insight it has, from the 
purely methodological point of view, moved in a circle. The attempt was 
made to relate linguistics to natural science, to orient it by reference to the 
structure of natural science, in order to find the same inner certainty and 
to acquire a similar stock of exact and inviolable laws. But the concept of 
nature that was chosen as a basis proved more and more to be a unity only 
in appearance. The more sharply it was analyzed, the more apparent it 
became that this concept concealed within itself factors of quite diverse 
significance and origin. So long as the rektion between these factors was 
not understood and plainly defined, the various naturalistically colored 
concepts of language were in danger of a dialectical shift into their op-
posite. This development can be foUowed in the concept of phonetic law, 
which at first designated a strict, uniform necessity governing aU Hnguistic 
changes, but became more and more alien to this signification. Phonetic 
change and development ceased to be regarded as an expression of "blind" 
necessity, and were referred back to mere "statistical rules of chance." In 
this view the supposed laws of nature become mere laws of fashion, created 
by some individual arbitrary act, stabilized by habit and extended by 
imitation.
9 8 Thus, the very concept which was expected to provide a uni-
fied foundation for linguistic science, remained fraught with unmediated 
antagonisms which created new problems for the philosophy of language. 
How this not only shook but finally shattered the positivist schema of 
92. Wundt, Die Sprache, Vol. 1 in Völkerpsychologie (2d ed. Leipzig, Engelmann, 1904), 
/, 369· 
93. This essentially is the view of phonetic law advocated by B. Delbrück, op. cit., Annalen 
der Naturphilosophie, 1, 277 S., 297 ff. On phonetic laws seen as "laws of fashion," see also 
Fr. Müller, "Sind die Lautgesetze Naturgesetze?" in Techmer's Zeitschrift, t (Leipzig and 
New York, 1884), 211 ff. 

174 
L A N G U A G E I N T H E H I S T O R Y O F P H I L O S O P H Y 
Unguistics is shown with particular clarity by the writings of Karl Vossler. 
In his two books Positivismus und Idealismus in der Sprachwissenschaft 
(1904) {Positivism and Idealism in Linguistic Science) and Sprache als 
Schöpfung und Entwichjung (1905) {Language as Creation and Develop-
ment) Vossler shows unmistakable Hegelian influence; but no less distinct 
is the line connecting him with Wilhelm von Humboldt. Humboldt's idea 
that language must never be considered as a mere work (ergon) but as an 
activity bCnergeia), that the "facts" of language become fuUy compre-
hensible only if we trace them back to the spiritual actions from which 
they arise, i's revived here under changed historical conditions. Even in 
Humboldt this principle is intended to indicate not so much the psycho-
logical "origin" of language as its enduring form that is effective through 
aU the phases of its growth. This growth does not resemble the mere un-
folding of a given natural germ, but everywhere bears the character of 
a spiritual spontaneity which is manifested in a new way at every new 
stage. In the same sense Vossler sets the concept of language as creation 
over against the intrinsically ambiguous concept of linguistic development. 
What is taken to be the given lawfulness of a definite state of affairs, is 
a mere pejcrefaction; behind this sheer fact of existence stand the true 
constitutive acts of becoming, the constandy renewed acts of spiritual 
generation. And it is in these acts, which are the essential foundation of 
languageas a whole, that the true explanation of particular linguistic 
phenomena should be sought. The positivist approach, which seeks to 
progress trom the elements to the whole, from syllables to words and 
sentences and thence to the characteristic "meaning" of language, is ac-
cordingly reversed. We must start with the "sense" and with the uni-
versality of meaning determination, Vossler declared, in ordef to under-
stand the particular phenomena of linguistic development and history. The 
spirit that lives in human discourse constitutes the sentence, the phrase, the 
word and the syllable. И this "idealistic principle of causality" is taken 
seriously, all the phenomena described by such lower disciplines as pho-
netics, theory of inflection, morphology and syntax, must find their ulti-
mate and true explanation in the supreme discipline, i.e, styUstics. The 
grammatical rules of each language, the "laws," as well as the "exceptions" 
in morphology and syntax, are to be explained by the "style" that domi-
nates its structure. Linguistic usage, in so far as it is convention, i.e., petri-
fied rule, is represented by syntax; the linguistic usage that is living 
creation and formation, is the concern of styUstics; the road must run from 

M O D E R N L I N G U I S T I C S C I E N C E 
D E F I N E D 
175 
thc latter to the former, not from the former to the latter, since in aU cul-
tural matters it is the form of growth that enables us to understand the 
form of the existing product.
04 
In so far as we are concerned with the mere communication of the 
facts of Unguistic history, with knowledge of the given, a "methodological 
positivism" can, said Vossler, bc accepted as a principle of inquiry. What 
he rejected was merely that positivistic metaphysics which believes that 
in communicating facts it has also fulfilled the task of interpreting them. 
In its place he set a metaphysic of idealism, in which aesthetics forms the 
central link. "If the idealistic definition: language = spiritual expression 
—is justified," Vossler concludes, "the history of linguistic development can 
be nothing other than the history of spiritual forms of expression, that is 
to say, a history of art in the broadest sense of the term."
8 6 However, this 
conclusion, in which Vossler joins Benedetto Croce, represents a new prob-
lem and a new danger for the philosophy of language. Once again lin-
guistics is taken into the whole of a philosophical system, but apparently 
on condition that language be identified with one of the members of this 
system. As in the universal grammar of rationalism the specificity of 
bnguage was ultimately dissolved in universal logic, it is now in danger 
of being submerged in aesthetics, considered as the universal science of 
expression. But is aesthetics, as Vossler assumes with Croce, really the sci-
ence of expression, or is it not rather one of the sciences of expression, a 
"symbolic form," beside others of equal stature? In addition to the rela-
tions between language and art, are there not analogous relations between 
language and other forms which, like myth, build up their own world of 
spiritual meaning through the medium of their own image world? This 
question again confronts us with the fundamental methodological ques-
tion from which we started. Language stands in a focus of cultural life, a 
point at which rays of quite diverse origin converge and from which hnes 
of influence radiate to every sphere of culture. From this it follows that 
the philosophy of language can be designated as a special branch of 
aesthetics only if aesthetics has previously been detached from all specific 
relation to artistic expression, if, in other words, the scope of aesthetics 
is interpreted so universaUy that it expands to what we have here attempted 
to define as a "philosophy of symbolic forms." If language should be shown 
94. Cf. K. V05slcr, PositivUmut und ldeaUsmus in der Sprachwiaenuhttft (Heiddbcrg, 
C. Wincer, 1904), pp. 8 fi. 
95. ftnd., pp. 10 ff.j cf. pp. 14 ff. 

176 
L A N G U A G E I N T H E H I S T O R Y O F P H I L O S O P H Y 
to be a truly original and independent energy of the human spirit, it must 
take its place in the totality of these forms, but it must not be thought to 
coincide with any of the others. Despite any systematic combination into 
which it may enter with logic and aesthetics, we must assign to it a specific 
and autonomous position within this whole. 

Chapter ζ 
Language in the Phase of Sensuous 
Expression 
I. Language as Expressive Movement. Sign Language 
and Sound Language 
l N DEFiNiNG the distinctive character of any spiritual form, it is essential 
to measure it by its own standards. The criteria by which we judge it and 
appraise its achievement, must not be drawn from outside, but must be 
taken from its own fundamental law of formation. No rigid "metaphysi­
cal" category, no definition and classification of being derived elsewhere, 
however certain and firmly grounded these may seem, can relieveus of the 
need for a purely immanent beginning. We are justified in invoking a 
metaphysical category only if, instead of accepting it as a fixed datum to 
which we accord priority over the characteristic principle of form, we 
can derive it from this principle and understand it in this Ught. In this 
sense every new form represents a new "building" of the world, in accord­
ance with specific criteria, valid for it alone. The dogmatic approach, 
which starts from the being of the world as from a fixed point of unity, 
is of course disposed to subsume aU these inner diversities of the spirit's 
spontaneity under some universal concept of the world's "essence" and so 
to lose them. It creates rigid segments of being, distinguishing, for example, 
between an "inward" and "outward," a "psychic" and a "physical" reality, 
between a world of "things" and a world of "representation"—and within 
these spheres further divisions of the same sort are made. Consciousness, 
the reality of the "soul," is also dissected into a number of separate and 
independent "faculties." It is only through the advancing critique of 
knowledge that we learn not to take these divisions and distinctions as 
absolute distinctions, inherent once and for aU in things themselves, but 
177 

178 
T H E P H A S E O F S E N S U O U S E X P R E S S I O N 
to understand them as mediated by knowledge itself. Such a critique 
shows particularly that the opposition of"subject" and "object," of " I " and 
"world," is not simply to be accepted but must be grounded in the pre-
suppositions of knowledge, by which its meaning is first determined. 
And this is true not only in the world of cognition; in some sense it holds 
good for aU the truly independent basic functions of spiritual life. Philo-
sophical inquiry into artistic as well as mythical and linguistic expression 
is in danger of missing its mark if, instead of immersing itsetf freely in the 
particular forms and kws of expression, it starts from dogmatic assump-
tions regarding the relation between "archetype" and "reproduction," 
"reaUty" and "appearance," "inner" and "outer" world. The question must 
rather be whether these distinctions are not determined through art, 
through language and through myth, and whether each of these forms 
must not draw its distinctions according to different perspectives, and 
consequently set up different dividing lines. The idea of a rigid substantial 
differentiation, of a sharp duaHsm between "inner" and "outer" world, is 
in this way thrust more and more into the background. The spirit appre-
hends itself and its antithesis to the "objective" world only by bringing 
certain distinctions inherent in itsetf into its view of the phenomena and, 
as it were, injecting them into the phenomena. 
Language also reveafc a noteworthy indifference toward the division 
of the world into two distinct spheres, into an "outward" and an "inward" 
reality; so much so, indeed, that this indiffecence seems inherent in its 
nature. Spiritual content and its sensuous expression are united: the 
former is not an independent, seh>contained entity preceding the latter, 
but is rather completed in it and with it. The two, content and expression, 
become what they are only in their interpenetration: the signification they 
acquire through their relation to one another is not outwardly added to 
their being; it is this signification which constitutes their being. Here we 
have to do not with a mediated product but with that fundamental syn-
thesis from which language as a whole arises and by which aU its parts, 
from the most elementary sensuous expression to the supreme spiritual 
expression, are held together. And not only the formed and articulated 
language of words, but even the simplest mimetic expression of an inner 
process shows this indissoluble involvement, shows that the process does 
not in itsetf form a finished, closedoff sphere, out of which consciousness 
emerges only accidentally, as it were, for the purpose of conventional com-
munication to others, but that this seeming externaHzation is an essential 

L A N G U A G E AS E X P R E S S I V E M O V E M E N T 
179 
factor in its own formation, b i this sense the modern psychology of lan-
guage was right in assigning the problem of language to the general 
psychology of expressive movements.
1 From the purely methodological 
standpoint this presents an important step forward, since this emphasis 
on the act of movement and the feeUng of movement meant that funda-
mentally the concepts of the traditional sensationalist psychology had 
already been surpassed. From the sensationalist standpoint, the rigid "state" 
of consciousness is the first given, indeed in a sense, it is aU that is given: 
the processes of consciousness, in so far as they are acknowledged at 
aU in their own character, are reduced to a mere sum, a "combination" 
of states. However, to regard movement and feeling of movement as an 
element and a fundamental factor in the structure of consciousness itsetf,
2 
is to acknowledge that here again the dynamic is not based on the static 
but the static on the dynamic—that aU psychological "reality" consists in 
processes and changes, while the fixation of states is merely a subsequent 
work of abstraction and analysis. Thus mimetic movement is also an 
immediate unity of the "inward" and "outward," the "spiritual" and the 
"physical," for by what it directly and sensuously is, it signifies and "says" 
something else, which is nonetheless present in it. Here there is no mere 
"transition," no arbitrary addition of the mimetic sign to the emotion it 
designates; on the contrary, both emotion and its expression, inner tension 
and its discharge are given in one and the same act, undivided in time. 
By a process that can be described and interpreted in purely physiological 
terms, every inner stimulation expresses itself originaUy in a bodily move-
m e n t ^ n d the progressive development consists only in a sharper dif-
ferentiation of this relation: specific movements come to be linked more 
and more precisely with specific stimulations. It is true that at first this 
form of expression does not seem to be anything more than a "reproduc-
tion" of the inward in the outward. A n outward stimulus passes from 
the sensory to the motor function, which however seems to remain within 
the sphere of mere mechanical reflexes, giving no indication of a higher 
1. As early a writer as J. J. Engel attempted, !n bis 'ldeen zur Mimik," Schriften (Berlin, 
1801), vols. 7 and S, to establish a complete system of expressive movements on the basis of 
thc psychological and aesthetic investigations of the eighteenth century; on the interpretation 
of hnguage as expressive movement see Wundt, Die Sprache, Völkerpsychologie, 2d ed., 1, 
37ff. 
2. This idea of the "primacy of movement" was put forward with particular force and 
sharpness in the psychology of Hermann Cohcn; cL in particular C0hen'1 Ästhetik, des reinen 
Gefühls (Berlin, 1912), /, 143 ff. 

i8o 
ТНБ P H A S E O F S E NS U OU S E X P R E S S I O N 
spiritual "spontaneity." And yet this reflex is itself the first indication of 
an activity in which a new form of concrete consciousness of the I and of 
the object begins to develop. In his work on The Expression of the Emo-
tions in Man and Animals Darwin attempted to create a biological theory 
of expressive movements by interpreting them as a vestige of actions 
which originally served a practical purpose. According to this theory, the 
expression of a specific emotion would be merely an attenuated form of 
a previous purposive action; the expression of anger, for example, would 
be merely a pale, attenuated image of a former movement of aggression, 
the expression of fear would be the image of a movement of defense, etc. 
This view is susceptible of an interpretation which leads beyond the re-
stricted sphere of Darwin's biological formulations and places the question 
in a more general context. Every elementary expressive movement does 
actually form a first step in spiritual development, in so far as it is stiU 
entirely situated in the immediacy of sensuous life and yet at the same 
time goes beyond it. It implies that the sensory drive, instead of proceeding 
direcdy towards its object, instead of satisfying itsetf and losing itsetf in the 
object, encounters a kind of inhibition and reversal, in which a new 
consciousness of this same drive is born. In this sense the reaction con-
tained in the expressive movement prepares the way for a higher stage 
of action. In withdrawing, as it were, from the immediate form of activity, 
action gains a new scope and a new freedom; it is already in transition 
from the merely "pragmatic" to the "theoretical," from physical to ideal 
activity. 
In the psychological theory of sign language, two forms of gesture are 
usuaUy distinguished, the indicative and the imitative; these classes can 
be clearly delimited both as to content and psychological genesis. The in-
dicative gesture is derived biologically and genetically from the move-
ment of grasping. "The arms and hands," Wundt writes, 
have from the earliest development of man been active as the organs 
with which he grasps and masters objects. From this evidently original 
use of the grasping organs, in which man is superior only in degree but 
not in kind to the higher animals with analogous activities, there fol-
lows one of those gradual transformations, which are at first regressive, 
but in their consequences provide important components of a progres-
sive development, leading to the first primitive form of pantomimic 
movement. GeneticaUy considered, this is nothing other than the 

L A N G U A G E AS E X P R E S S I V E 
M O V E M E N T 
l8l 
grasping movement attenuated to an indicative gesture. We stiU find it 
among children in every possible intermediary phase from the original 
to the later form. The child stiU clutches for objects that he cannot 
reach because they are too far away. In such cases, the clutching move­
ment changes to a pointing movemenL Only after repeated efforts to 
grasp the objects, does the pointing movement as such establish itseU.* 
And this seemingly so simple step toward the independence of gesture, 
constitutes one of the most important stages in the development from the 
animal to the specifically human. For no animal progresses to the char­
acteristic transformation of the grasping movement into the indicative 
gesture. Even among the most highly developed animab, "clutchmg at 
the distance," as pointing with the hand has been caUed, has never gone be­
yond the first, incomplete beginnings. This simple genetic fact suggests 
that "clutching at the distance" involves a factor of general spiritual 
significance. It is one of the first steps by which the perceiving and desir­
ing I removes a perceived and desired content from himself and so forms 
it into an "object," an "objective" content. In the primitive instinctual 
stage, to "apprehend" an object is to grasp it immediately with the senses, 
to take possession of it. The foreign reaUty is brought into the power of 
the I—in a purely material sense it is drawn into the sphere of the I. Even 
the first beginnings of sensory knowledge are stiU entirely within this stage 
of "pointing there": at this stage man beUeves, in Plato's characteristic 
and pregnant term, that he can clutch the object with his hands (άπρΙξ τα2ν 
χΐρσΐν).* 
AU progress in conceptual knowledge and pure "theory" con­
sists precisely in surpassing this first sensory immediacy. The object of 
knowledge recedes more and more into the distance, so that for knowl­
edge critically reflecting upon itself, it comes ultimately to appear as an 
"infinitely remote point," an endless task; and yet, in this apparent dis­
tance, it achieves its ideal specification. In the logical concept, in judgment 
and inference develops that mediate grasp which characterizes "reason." 
Thus both genetically and actually, there seems to be a continuous transi­
tion from physical to conceptual "grasping." Sensory-physical grasping 
becomes sensory interpretation, which in turn conceals within it the first 
impulse toward the higher functions of signification manifested in lan­
guage and thought. We might suggest the scope of this development by 
saying that it leads from the sensory extreme of mere "indication" (Weiten) 
3. Wundt, Die Sprache, Völkerpsychologie, zd ed., /, 139 ff. 
4. Cf. Plato, TheaeletHl 1j5E. 

l82 
T H E P H A S E O F S E N S U O U S E X P R E S S I O N 
to the bgical extreme of "demonstration" (Beweisen). From the mere 
indication by which an absolutely single thing (a ro8ert in the Aristotehan 
sense) is designated, the road leads to a progressively general specification: 
what in the beginning was a mere deictic function becomes the function 
of "apodeixis." Language itseK seems to preserve this connection in the 
rektion between the terms for speaking and saying and those for showing 
and indicating. In the IndoXJermanic knguages, most verbs of "saying" 
are derived from verbs of "showing": dicere stems from the root contained 
in the Greek Ζάκνυμι (Gothic * teihan, ga-4eihan, Old High German 
xcig6n), while the Greek φημί φίσκω goes back to the root φα (Sanskrit 
bha)t which originaUy designated glitter, appear, and "make to appear." 
(Cf. φαέθω, φως, φαίνω, Lat, fori, jateri, etc)
 
6 
It would seem, however, that we shaU have to take a different view of 
the language of gestures if we start, not with the gestures of indication but 
with the second fundamental class, those of imitation. For imitation as 
such forms a counterpart to any free form of spiritual activity. In imitation 
the I remains a prisoner of outward impression and its properties; the more 
accurately it repeats this impression, excluding aU spontaneity of its own, 
the more fuUy the aim of imitation has been reaUzed. The richest and 
most highly differentiated sign knguages, those of the primitive peoples, 
show the strongest bond with outward impression. Along with the im­
mediately sensuous, imitative signs, the sign knguages of civiUzed peoples 
tend to include an abundance ofse*caUed "symbolic gestures," which do 
not direcdy mimic the object or activity to be expressed, but designate 
it only indirecdy. However, such languages—for example that of the 
Cistercian monks or the NeapoUtan sign knguage described in detaU by 
Jorio
 6—are obviously not primitive forms but highly complex construc­
tions strongly influenced by the spoken knguage. But as we go back to 
the true and independent content of the sign knguages, mere "concept 
signs" seem to give way to "thing signs." The ideal of a purely "natural" 
knguage in which aU arbitrary convention is excluded seems thus to be 
reaUzed. It is reported that in the sign knguage of the North American 
xndians, few gestures are "conventional" in origin, whUe by far the greater 
5. Cf. Fr. KIuge, EtymoU)gischet Wärterbuch der deutschen Sprache (5th cd* Strassburg, 
1894), p. 415 (s.v. xeigen); G. Curtius, Grundzüge der griechischen Etymologie (5tb ed. 
Leipzig, B. G. Teubncr, 1878), pp. 115,134, a96. 
6. Andrea de Jorio, La Mimiea degü antichi invesügata nei Gestire NapoUtano Qfapoti, 
1832); on the knguage of the Cistercian monks, see Wundt, Die Sprache, Völkcrpsychohgie, 
ad cd* /, 151 fL 

L A N G U A G E AS E X P R E S S I V E 
M O V E M E N T 
l83 
number consist in a simple reproduction of natural phenomena.
7 If we 
consider only this factor of pantomimic imitation of given objects of sense 
perception, we do not seem to be on the road to language as a free and 
original activity of the human spirit. However, it must be borne in mind 
that neither "imitation" nor "indication"-neither the "mimetic" nor the 
"deictic" function represents a simple, uniform operation of consciousness, 
but that elements of diverse origin and significance are intermingled in 
both of them. Even Aristotle calls the sounds of knguage "imitations," 
and says that the human voice is of aU organs the best suited to imitation.
8 
But for him this mimetic character of the word is not opposed to its purely 
symbolic character; on the contrary, Aristotle stresses the symbolic char­
acter of the word by pointing out that the inarticulate sound expressing 
sensation, such as we find in the animal world, becomes linguistic sound 
only through its use as a symbol.
0 The two terms merge, for Aristotle here 
uses "imitation" in a broader, deeper sense: for him it is not only the origin 
of language, but also of artistic activity. Thus understood μίμησις itself be­
longs to the sphere of ποίησις, of creative and formative activity. It no 
longer implies the mere repetition of something outwardly given, but a 
freeproject of the spirit: the apparent "reproduction" (Nachbilden) actu­
ally presupposes an inner "production" (Vorbilden). And indeed, it be­
comes evident on closer scrutiny that this factor which is pure and inde­
pendent in the form of artistic creation, extends down to the elementary 
beginnings of all apparendy passive reproduction. For this reproduction 
never consists in retracing, line for line, a specific content of reality; but in 
selecting a pregnant motif in that content and so producing a characteristic 
"outline" of its form. But with this, imitation itself is on its way to becom­
ing representation, in which objects are no longer simply received in their 
finished structure, but built up by the consciousness according to their con­
stitutive traits. To reproduce an object in this sense means not merely to 
compose it from its particular sensuous characteristics, but to apprehend it 
7. Cf. G. Mallcry, Sign Language among North American Indians (Smithsonian Institution, 
Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington, Govt Print. Off., 1881), Annual Report, N0. 1, 
P- 334. 
8. Cf. Aristotle, Rhetoric iii. 1. 1404a 20: та yap όνόματα μιμήματά έστιν, ijnjp{e & 
καΙ 4 φωνή πάντων μιμητικώτατων των μορίων ήμϊν. 
Q. Cf. v*p2 έρμηνΐΙα* (г. i6a 27): φΰστι τ&ν όνομάτων ούδέν έστιν άλλ* ίταν yivyrat 
σύμβολον ivel δηλοΰσΙ yi τι καΙ ol ατγράμματοι ψόφοι, otov θηρΙσον, ύν ούδέν έστιν ονομα. 
A definite distinction between "imitation" and "symbol" (αμοΙωμα and σύμβολον) is also 
found for example in Ammonius' Commentary on Aristotle's "De interpretatione," ed. A. Busse 
(Berhn, 1897), P· 100, 15b. 

i84 
T H E P H A S E O F S E N S U O U S 
E X P R E S S I O N 
in its structural relations which can only be truly understood if the con-
sciousness constructively produces them. Sign language represents the 
germ of this higher form of reproduction; the more highly developed 
sign languages disclose a transition from the merely imitative to the 
representative gesture, in which, according to Wundt, "the image of an 
object is more freely formed, in the same sense as creative art is freer than 
mere mechanical imitation."
1 0 
But this function of representation emerges in an entirely new freedom 
and depth, in a new spiritual actuality when for the gesture it substitutes 
the word as its instrument and sensuous basis. In the historical develop-
ment of language this process of substitution does not take place aU at once. 
Even today, among primitive peoples, the language of gestures not only 
continues to exist side by side with the language of words, butstiU de-
cisively affects its formation. Everywhere we find this characteristic per-
meation, in consequence of which the "verbal concepts" of these knguages 
cannot be fuUy understood unless they are considered at the same time as 
mimetic and "manual concepts." The hands are so closely bound up with 
the intellect that they seem to form a part of i t .
1 1 Likewise in the develop-
ment of children's speech, the articulated sound breaks away only very 
gradually from the totaUty of mimetic movements; even at rektively ad-
vanced stages, it remains embedded in this totaUty.
12 But once the separa-
tion is accomplished, language has acquired a new fundamental principle 
in the new element in which it now moves. Its truly spiritual spontaneity 
develops only in the physical medium of articulated sound. The articula-
tion of sounds now becomes an instrument for the articulation of thoughts, 
whUe the ktter creates for itsetf a more and more differentiated and sensi-
tive organ in the elaboration and formation of these sounds. Compared 
to aU other means of mimetic expression, the spoken sound has the advan-
tage that it is far more capable of "articuktion." Its very fluidity, which 
differs from the sensuous concreteness of the gesture, gives it an entirely 
new capacity for configuration, making it capable of expressing not only 
rigid representative contents, but the most subde vibrations and nuances 
10. Wundt, Die Sprache, Volhßrpsyehologie, ad ed., τ, 156. 
χι. Regarding the "manual concepts" of the Zufii Indians, see Cushing, "Manual Concepts," 
American Anthropologist, 5, 291 ff.; on the relation between sign language and verbal lan­
guage among primitive peoples, see the copious material in L. Lcvy-Bruhl, Les Fonctions 
mentales dans Us sociitis inferieures (Paris, 1910). Eng. trans., HowNatives Thin\ (London 
and New York, 1926). 
12. Cf. Cbra and WiUiam Stern, Die Kindersprache (ad cd. Leipzig, 1920), pp. 
144& 

L A N G U A G E AS E X P R E S S I V E 
M O V E M E N T 
l85 
of the representative process. If with its plastic imitation the gesture seems 
better adapted to the character of "things" than the disembodied element 
of the spoken sound, the word gains its inner freedom by the very fact that 
in it this connection is broken off, that it is a mere becoming, which can 
no longer immediately reproduce the being of objects. On the objective 
side, it now becomes capable of serving, not only as an expression of con­
tents and their qualities, but also and above aU as an expression of formal 
relations; on the subjective side, the dynamic of feeling and the dynamic 
of thought are imprinted upon it. For this dynamic the language of 
gestures, which is restricted to the medium of space and thus can designate 
motion only by dividing it into particular and discrete spatial forms, has 
no adequate organ. In the language of words, however, the particular, 
discrete element enters into a new relation with speech as a whole. Here 
the element exists only in so far as it is constantly regenerated: its content 
is gathered up into the act of its production. But now this act of sound 
production itseJf becomes more and more sharply differentiated. To the 
qualitative differentiation and gradation of sounds is added a dynamic 
gradation by stress and rhythm. Attempts have been made to prove that 
this rhythmic articulation, as particularly manifested in primitive work 
songs, represents an essential factor both of artistic and linguistic devel­
opment.
1 8 Here the spoken sound is stiU immediately rooted in the purely 
sensuous sphere; yet since what it springs from and serves to express is not 
merely passive feeling, but a simple sensory activity, it is already on its way 
to surpassing this sphere. The mere interjection, the expression of emotion 
produced by an overwhehning momentary impression, now passes into 
a coherently ordered phonetic sequence, in which the context and order of 
the activity are reflected. "The ordered unfolding of spoken sounds," writes 
Jacob Grimm in his essay " O n the Origin of Language," "requires us to 
articulate, and the human language appears as an articulated language; 
this is borne out by the Homeric epithet for men: 01 μίροπες, μίροπες 
άνθρωποι or βροτοί—from μείρομαι or μερίζω, those who divide, articu­
late their voice."
1 4 
13. Cf. Karl Bücher, Arbeit uni RAythmia (4th ed. Leipzig, r909); for the influence of 
work and "working rhythms" on the development of language cf. Ludwig Noire, Der Vr· 
sprung der Sprache (Mainz, 1877); idem, Logos-Ursprung und Wescn dcr Begriffe (Leipzig, 
1885). 
14. "Ober den Ursprung der Sprache" (1851), in Kleinere Schriften, Berlin, 1864, /, 266. 
The etymological connection set forth by Grimm is, to Ье sure, contested: for details see 
Curtius, Grundzüge der griechischen Etymologie, 5th ed., pp. 110 and 330. 

i86 
T H E P H A S E O F SENSUOUS E X P R E S S I O N 
Only now is the material of language so constituted that a new form can 
become imprinted upon it. The sensory-affective state transposes and dis­
solves itseLE into mimetic expression; it discharges itsetf in mimetic ex­
pression and therein finds its end. It is only when this immediacy is super­
seded in the course of further development that the content comes to be 
stabiUzed and formed in itsetf. A higher stage of awareness, a sharper grasp 
of its inner differentiations is now needed before it can be manifested 
clearly and concretely in the medium of articulated sounds, mhibition of 
the direct outbreak into gestures and inarticulate cries gives rise to an 
inner measure, a movement within the sphere of sensory appetition and 
representation. The road leads upwards, more and more clearly, from the 
mere reflex to the various stages of "reflection." The genesis of the articu­
lated sound, "the noise rounding itsetf into a tone"—as Goethe put it— 
presents us with a universal phenomenon which we encounter in different 
forms in the most divergent fields of cultural life. Through the particularity 
of the linguistic function, we perceive the universal symbolic function, as 
it unfolds in accordance with immanent laws, in art, in the mythical-
religious consciousness, in language and in cognition. 
2. Mimetic, Analogical, and Symbolic Expression 
It is true that, Hke the theory of art and the theory of knowledge, Hnguistic 
theory freed itsetf only gradually from the constraint of the concept of 
imitation and the copy theory. The problem of the κυριότης των ονομάτων 
stands at the center of the ancient philosophy of language. And the ques­
tion of whether language should be regarded as a φυσ« or a νόμφ 6v was 
primarily concerned not with the genesis of knguage but with its truth 
and reality content.
15 Do language and the word belong exclusively to the 
sphere of subjective representation and judgment, or is there a profounder 
bond between the world of names and the world of true being; is there an 
inner "objective" truth and rightness in names themselves? The Sophists 
denied and the Stoics affirmedsuch an objective validity of the word; but 
15. For further material concerning this original meaning of the opposition φύση and 
ρ6μψ, for which φύσα and 0cVet were substituted in the Alexandrian period, see Steinthal, 
Geschichte der Sprachwissenschaft, 2d ed., г, 76 ff., 1x4 ff., 319 fi. 

M I M E T I C AND S Y M B O L I C E X P R E S S I O N 
l87 
whether the answer was positive or negative, the form of the question it­
self remained the same. The basic assumption underlying both answers is 
that the aim of cognition is to reflect and reproduce the essence of things, 
while the aim of language is to reflect and reproduce the essence of cogni­
tion. The Sophists strive to show that both aims are unattainable: if there 
is being, says Gorgias, it is inaccessible and unknowable; if it is knowable, 
it is inexpressible and incommunicable. Just as by their nature, the senses 
of sight and hearing are restricted to their specific sphere of qualities; just 
as the one can perceive only brightness and colors and the other can per­
ceive only tones—similarly speech can never transcend itsetf to apprehend 
something "other," standing over against it, that is to apprehend "being" 
and truth.
1 6 The Stoics sought vainly to avoid this consequence by assert­
ing a natural kinship between being and cognition and a natural accord 
κατά μίμησιν between word and meaning. The view that the word pardy 
or wholly reflected reality, forming its true ίτνμον, reduced itseif to the 
absurd by shifting into its opposite in its subsequent development. Not 
only the relationship of "similarity," but also its converse was now admitted 
as a basis for etymological explanation: not only αναλογία and δμοωτη^ 
but also έναντίωσις and άντίφρασις passed as formative principles of lan­
guage. Similitudo became contrarium; "analogy" became "anomaly." The 
devastating effects of this "explanation by opposites" on the subsequent de­
velopment of etymology are weU known:
1 7 on the whole, they make it 
very plain that any explanation of knguage built on the postukte of simi-
krity must necessarily end in its antithesis and so negate itsetf. 
Even where words are interpreted as imitations not of things but of sub­
jective states of feeling, where, as in Epicurus, they are said to reflect not 
so much the nature of objects as the t8ta πάθη of the speaker,
18 the phi­
losophy of knguage, though it has changed its norm, is stiU essentially 
subordinated to the same principle. 7i the postulate of reproduction as such 
is sustained, it becomes ultimately indifferent whether what is reproduced 
is "inward" or "outward," whether it is a complex of things or of feeUngs 
and representations. Indeed, under the ktter assumption a recurrence of 
16. C t "Sextus adv. mathcmaticos," Vn, 83 ff. (Diels, Die Fragmente der Vorsokraukcr, 
76B, 554^55): «* Ύ&Ρ μηνύομ**, ion \6yos, λότγοι Й οϋκ ian τά irTOKtfaera καΧ trra· 
ούκ άρα τά 6vra μηρύομαν τοίι riKat άλλά λόγο*, ts lrepbt Ιατι τ&ρ ύτοκβψίνω». 
i7* For characteristic examples see Curtius, Grundzüge der griechischen Etymologie, 5th ed., 
pp. 5 ff.; Steinthal, op. eit., 1, 353 ff.; L. Lersch, Sprachphilosophie der Alten (Bonn, 1838-
41),j,47ff. 
18. Cf. above, pp. 148ff. 

i88 
T H E 
P H A S E O F S E N S U O U S E X P R E S S I O N 
skepticism toward language is inevitable, and in its sharpest form. For 
kmguage can claim to apprehend the immediacy of life far less than the 
immediacy of things. The slightest attempt to express this immediacy 
merely negates it. "Once the soul speaks, alas, the soul speaks no more." 
Thus language, by its pure form alone is the counterpart of the abundance 
and concretion of the world of sensation and emotion. Gorgias' contention 
that "it is the speaker who speaks, not the color or the thing,"
1 9 appHes 
to a heightened degree if we replace "objective" by "subjective" reaHty. Sub-
jective reatity is characterized by extreme individuality and concretion; 
while the world of words is characterized by the universaHty, and that is to 
say, the indeterminacy and ambiguity, of merely schematic signs. Since the 
"universal" signification of the word effaces aU the differences which char-
acterize real psychological processes, the road of language seems to lead 
us, not upward into spiritual universality, but downward to the common-
pkce: for only this, only what is not peculiar to an individual intuition or 
sensation, but is common to it and others, is accessible to language. Thus 
fcnguage remains a pseudo-value, the mere rule of a game, which becomes 
more compeUing as more players subject themselves to it, but which, as 
soon as it is criticaUy understood, must renounce aU claim to represent, 
let alone know and understand, any reality, whether of the "inner" or 
"outer"world.
2 0 
FundamentaUy, however, in the critique of knowledge as of language, 
this radical skepticism contains within it the transcending of skepticism. 
Skepticism seeks to expose the nuUity of knowledge and language—but 
what it ultmiately demonstrates is rather the nuUity of the standard by 
which it measures them. In skepticism the "copy theory" is methodicaUy 
and consistendy demolished by the sek>destruction of its basic premises. 
The farther negation is carried in this point, the more clearly a new positive 
insight foUows from it. The last sembknce of any mediate or immediate 
identity between reaHty and symbol must be effaced, the tension between 
the two must be enhanced to the extreme, for it is precisely in this tension 
that the specific achievement of symboUc expression and the content of 
the particular symboUc forms is made evident. For this content cannot be 
revealed as long as we hold fast to the belief that we possess "reaHty" as 
19. De Mdisso, Xenophane et Gorgia, ch. 6, 980 a 20: 6 7<V «Йе, »«» 4r n*, φηοί, таОтв 
«ftrot λόγφ; ή ffWf 4* tKtlvw δήλορ <btoftram ylymro, 
μ% №6ντι; äawep γάρ oioi if ίψα 
τούι φθόγγου* ytyyuffK*i, o0TMS oiM 4 έκοφ τά χρώματα dxotfet, άλΚα фв&ууоиг καΙ \έγ*ι 
i Mya>j> d W ού χρΰμα 
oi3i жр&урл. 
го. Cf. Fr. Mautbner, Beiträge xu einer КгШк. der Sprache, cspcdaQy /, 25 ff., 70,175,193. 

M I M E T I C AND S Y M B O L I C E X P R E S S I O N 
l89 
a given, seh>suf5cient being, as a totality whether of things or of simple 
sensations, prior to aU spiritual formation. If this were true, the forms 
would indeed have no other purpose than mere reproduction, and such 
reproduction would inevitably be inferior to the original. In truth, how-
ever, the meaning of each form cannot be sought in what it expresses, but 
only in the manner and modality, the inner law of the expression itself. 
hi this law of formation, and consequently not in proximity to the im-
mediately given but in progressive removal from it, lie the value and the 
specific character of linguistic as of artistic formation. This distance from 
immediate reality and immediate experience is the condition of their being 
perceived, of our spiritual awareness of them. Language, too, begins only 
where our immediate relation to sensory impression and sensory affectivity 
ceases. The uttered sound is not yet speech as long as it purports to be mere 
repetition; as long as the specific factor of signification and the wiU to 
"signification" are lacking. The aim of repetition Ues in identity—the aim 
of linguistic designation Ues in difference. The synthesis effected can only 
be a synthesis of differentclements, not of elements that are alike or simUar 
in any respect. The more the sound resembles what it expresses; the more it 
continues to "be" the other, the less it can "signify" that other. The bound-
ary is sharply drawn not only from the standpoint of spiritual content, but 
biologicaUy and genetically as weU. Even among the lower animais we 
encounter a great number of original sounds expressing feeUng and sensa-
tion, which in the development to the higher types become more and more 
differentiated, developing into definitely articulated and distinct "linguistic 
utterances," cries of fear or warning, lures or mating caUs. But between 
these cries and the sounds of designation and signification characteristic 
of human speech there remains a gap, a "hiatus" which has been newly con-
firmed by the sharper methods of observation of modern animal psychol-
ogy.
2 1 The step to human speech, as Aristotle stressed, has been taken only 
when the pure significatory sound has gained primacy over the sounds of 
21. For the "hnguage" of the highest apes cfc, e.g., B. W. Köhler, "Zur Psychologie des 
Schimpansen," Psychologische Forschung, 1 (1921), 27: "It is not easy to describe in detail 
how animals make themselves understood. It is absolutely certain that thcir phonetic utter-
ances without any exception express 'subjective' states and desires, that they are so<allcd 
affective sounds and never aim to dehneate or designate the objective. However, so many 
'phonetic elements' of human speech occur in the chimpanzee phonetics that it is assuredly 
not for peripheral reasons that they have remained without knguage in our sense. The same 
is true of the facial expression and gestures of animals: nothing about them designates any-
thing objective or fulfills any 'represenutive function.'" Cf. Eng. ed., The Mentality of Apes 
(New York, Harcourt, Brace, 1925), App 4 p. 317. 

i90 
T H E P H A S E O F S E N S U O U S E X P R E S S I O N 
affectivity and stimulation: a primacy which in the history of language 
is expressed by the circumstance that many words of the highly developed 
knguages, which at first sight seem to be mere interjections, prove, on close 
analysis, to be regressions from more complex linguistic structures, from 
words or sentences with a definite conceptual signification.
28 
In general, knguage can be shown to have passed through three stages 
in maturing to its specific form, in achieving its inner freedom. In calling 
these the mimetic, the analogical, and the truly symboucal stage, we are for 
the present merely setting up an abstract schema^>ut this schema wiU 
take on concrete content when we see that it represents a functional k w 
of linguistic growth, which has its specific and characteristic counterpart 
in other fields such as art and cognition. The beginnings of phonetic lan-
guage seem to be embedded in that sphere of mimetic representation and 
designation which lies at the base of sign knguage. Here the sound seeks 
to approach the sensory impression and reproduce its diversity as faithfully 
as possible. This striving plays an important part in the speech both of 
children and "primitive" peoples. Here knguage clings to the concrete 
phenomenon and its sensory image, attempting as it were to exhaust it 
in sound; it does not content itself with general designations but -ac-
companies every particular nuance of the phenomenon with a particular 
phonetic nuance, devised especially for this case. In Ewe and certain re-
lated languages, for example, there are adverbs which describe only one 
activity, one state or one attribute, and which consequendy can be com-
bined only with one verb. Many verbs possess a number of such qualifying 
adverbs pertaining to them alone, and most of them are phonetic reproduc-
tions of sensory impressions, ш his Grammar of the Ewe Language 
Westermann counts no less than thirty-three such phonetic images for the 
single verb "to walk," each designating a particular manner of walking: 
slouching or sauntering, limping or dragging the feet, shambling or wad¬
dUng, energetic or weary. But this, as he adds, does not exhaust the num-
ber of adverbs that quaUfy waUting; for most of these can occur in a 
doubled, usual, or diminutive form, depending or whether the subject is 
big or little.
2 8 Although this type of sound painting recedes as knguage 
22. Examples of this in A. H. Sayce, Introduction to the Science of Language (2 vols., 
London, 1880) /, 109; for the Indo-Germanic knguages see particularly K. Bragmann, 
Verschiedenheit der SattgestaUung nach Massgabe der seetischen Grundfunktionen in den 
indogermanischen Sprachen (Leipzig, 1918), pp. 24ff. 
23. D. Westermann, Grammatik, der EweSprache (Berlin, D. Reimer, 1907), pp. 83 fL, 
z29 fJ.; Eng. trans, by A. L. Bickford-Smith, A Study of the Ewe Language (London, Oxford 

M I M E T I C AND S Y M B O L I C E X P R E S S I O N 
I Q I 
develops, there is no language, however advanced, that has not preserved 
numerous examples of it. Certain onomatopoeic expressions, occur with 
striking uniformity in aU the languages of the globe. They demonstrate 
extraordinary vitality, resisting phonetic changes which are otherwise al­
most universal; and moreover, new forms have appeared even in modem 
times, in the bright Ught of linguistic history.
24 In view of aU this, it is 
understandable that particularly the empirical linguists have often been 
inclined to champion the principle of onomatopoeia, so severely chastised 
by philosophers of language, and to attempt at least a Umited rehabilitation 
of that principle.
25 The sixteenth- and seventeenth<entury philosophers of 
language stiU supposed that phenomena of onomatopoeia offered the key 
to the basic and original language of mankind, the Ungua adamica. Today, 
to be sure, the critical progress of Unguistics has more and more dispeUed 
this dream; but we stiU occasionally encounter attempts to prove that in 
the earUest period of knguage formation the significatory classes and the 
phonetic classes corresponded to one another—that the original words were 
divided into distinct groups, each of which was linked to certain phonetic 
materiah and br.ik up out of them.
2 6 And even where the hope of arriving 
in this way at a true reconstruction of the original knguage has been aban­
doned, the principle of onomatopoeia is recognized as a means of arriving 
indirectly at an idea of the relatively oldest strata of knguage formation. 
"Despite aU change," remarks G. Curtius with regard to the Indo-Germanic 
languages, 
a conservative instinct is also discernible in language. AU the peoples 
of our family from the Ganges to the Adantic designate the notion of 
Univ. Press, 1930), pp. 107&, 187ff. Very simikr phenomena are found in the knguages of 
the American natives; cf., e.g., the transition from purely onomatopoeic sounds to universal 
verbial or adverbial terms, described by Franz Boas in the Chinook language, in Handbook, of 
American Indian Languages, (Smithsonian Institution, Washington, Govt. Print. Off., 1911), 
BuUetin N0. 40, Pt. ι, pp. 575, 655 ff. 
34. A list of such rektively late onomatopoetic creations in the German language has been 
given by Hermann Paul in Principien der Sprachgeschichte, 3d ed., pp. 160 ff.; for examples 
from the Romance knguages see W. Meyer-Lubke, Einführung in das Studium der roman-
ischen Sprachwissenschaft (2d ed., Heidelberg, 1909), pp. 91 ff. 
25. See for example W. Scherer, Zur Geschichte der deutschen Sprache (Berlin, 1868), p. 38. 
26. Thus Täuber in "Die Ursprache und ihre Entwicklung," Globus, Vol. 97 (1910), dis-
tinguishes six main groups: liquid food, soUd food, atmospheric liquids, wood and forest, 
forage and watering place, animal world, and seeks to show that in the most divergent lan-
guages of the world, e.g., in Sanskrit and Hebrew, they were originally designated by 
sirnUar phonetic combinations (m + vowel; p + vowel; n + vowel; t + vowel; 1 or r; 
k + vowel). 

102 
T H E P H A S E O F S E N S U O U S E X P R E S S I O N 
standing by the phonetic group sta; in aU of them the notion of flowing 
is linked with the group plu, with only slight modifications. This can-
not be an accident. Assuredly the same notion has remained associated 
with the same sounds through aU the millennia, because the peoples felt 
a certain inner connection between the two, i.e^ because of an instinct 
to express this notion by these particular sounds. The assertion that the 
oldest words presuppose some relation between sounds and the rep-
resentations they designate has often been ridiculed. It is difficult, how-
ever, to explain the origin of language without such assumptions. In any 
case, the representation Uves Uke a soul even in the words of far more 
advanced periods.
27 
Since the Stoics, the search for tiiis soul ofthe individual sounds and sound 
classes has tempted innumerable linguists and philosophers of language. 
As late a thinker as Leibniz attempted to investigate the original meanings 
of particular sounds and sound groups.
28 And after him the subdest and 
profbundest students of knguage attempted to demonstrate the symbolic 
value of certain sounds, not only in the material expression of certain 
isolated concepts, but even in the formal representation of certain gram-
matical relations. Humboldt found this relationship confirmed in the 
choice of certain sounds for the expression of certain feeUng values—he 
held, for example, that the phonetic group st regularly designates the im-
pression of the enduring and stable, the sound 1 that of the melting and 
fluid, the sound v the impression of uneven, vaciUating motion. He also 
saw it in the elements of inflection and gave special attention to this "sym-
bolic character in grammatical sounds."
29 Jacob Grirmn also attempted 
to show that the sounds used in the Indo-Germanic languages for form-
ing words of question and answer were closely related to the spiritual 
significations of question and answer.
80 The use of certain differences and 
27. G. CurtJuf, Grundxuge der griechischen Etymologie, 5th ed. p. 96. 
28. See Leibniz, Nouveaux essais, Bk. 3, ch. 3. 
29. Cf. Humboldt, "Einleitung zum Kawi-Werk," Werke, 7, N0. 1, 76ff., and tfae work 
itself: Über die Kawi-Sprache auf der lnsel Java (hereafter cited as Kawi-Wer%), 2, i n , 153, 
and dsewhere. 
30. See Jacob Grimm, Deutsche Grammatik, Bk. 3, ch. x: "Among aU the sounds of the 
human voice, none is so capable of expressing the essence of the question, which is perceived 
at the very beginning of the word, as k, the fullest consonant of which the throat is capable. 
A mere vowel wou!d sound too indefinite, and the labial organ is not as strong as the guttural. 
T can be produced with the same force, but it is not so much expeUed as pronounced and 
has something more solid about it; it is therefore suited to the expression of the cahn, even 
an indicative answer. K questions, inquires, caUs; T shows, expkins, answers." 

M I M E T I C AND S Y M B O L I C 
E X P K E S S I O N 
i93 
gradations of vowels to express specific objective gradations, particularly to 
designate the greater or lesser distance of an object from the speaker, is 
a phenomenon occurring in the most diverse knguages and Unguistic 
groups. Almost always a, 0, u designate the greater distance, e and 1 the 
lesser.
8 1 Differences in time interval are also indicated by difference in 
vowels or by the pitch of voweh.
3 2 In the same way certain consonants and 
consonantal groups are used as "natural phonetic metaphors" to which a 
similar or identical significatory function attaches in nearly all language 
groups-^.g., with striking regularity the resonant labials indicate direc-
tion toward the speaker and the expk>sive Iinguals direction away from 
the speaker, so that the former appear as a "natural" expression of the " I , " 
thelatterofthe'Thou."
8« 
But although these last phenomena seem to retain the color of immedi-
ate sensory expression, they nevertheless burst the limits of mere mimicry 
and imitation. N0 longer is a single sensuous object or sense impression 
reproduced by an imitative sound; instead, a qualitatively graduated pho-
netic sequence serves to express a pure rektion. There is no direct material 
similarity between the form and specificity of this rektion and the sounds 
with which it is represented, since the mere material of sound as such 
is in general incapable of reflecting pure relational determinations. The 
context is rather communicated by a formal analogy between the phonetic 
sequence and the sequence of contents designated; this analogy makes 
possible a coordination of series entirely different in content. This brings 
us to the second stage which we caU the stage of analogical as opposed to 
mere mimetic expression. The transition from one to the other is perhaps 
most clearly revealed in those knguages which employ musical tones to 
differentiate word meanings or express grammatical relations. We stiU 
seem close to the mimetic sphere in so far as the pure function of significa-
tion remains inextricably bound up with the sensuous sound. Humboldt 
teUs us that in the Indo-Chinese languages the differentiations of pitch 
and accent between syllables makes speech a kind of song or recitative, 
31. Examples from various hmguage groups in Fr. Müller, Grundriss der Sprachwiaenschaft 
(Vienna, 1876-88), /, Pt 3, 94ff.; 3, sec. 1, 194, etc.; Humboldt, Kawi-Werk., 3, 153; also 
see below, Chapter 3. 
33. Sec Fr. Müller, 1, П, 94. Steimhal, Die Uande-Neger-Sprachen (Berlin, 1867), p. 117. 
33* Ια the Ural-Altaic languages, for examples, which strikingly resemble the Indo-
Germanic languages in this respect, the phonetic elements ma, mi, mo, or ta, ti, si serve as the 
basic dements of the personal pronouns: cf. Heinrich Winkler, Das Undaltaische und seine 
Gruppen (Berlin, 1885), p. 36; for the other linguistic groups, see Wundt's compilation (op. 
ώ , 
34S) on the basis of the material in Fr. Mütter, Grundrits der Sprachwissenschaft. 

i94 
ТНБ P H A S E O F S E N S U O U S E X P R E S S I O N 
and that the tonal gradations in the Siamese, for example are quite com-
parable to a musical scale.
84 And particularly in the Sudanese languages, 
the most diverse shades of meaning are expressed by tonal variations, by 
a high, middle, or low tone, or by composite shadings, such as the low-high 
rising tone, or high-low faUing tone. These variations serve as a basis both 
for etymological distinctions—i*., the same syllable serves, according to 
its tone, to designate entirely different things or actions—and for spatial 
and quantitative distinctions, i.e^ high-pitched words, for example, express 
long distances and rapidity while low-pitched words express proximity 
and slowness, etc. . . .
8 8 And purely formal relations and oppositions can 
be expressed in this same way. A mere change in tone can transform the 
affirmative into the negative form of a verb.
3 6 Or it may determine the 
grammatical category of a word; for example, otherwise identical syUables 
may be identified as nouns or verbs by the manner in which they are 
pronounced.
87 We are carried one step further by the phenomenon of 
vowel harmony which dominates the whole structure of certain languages 
and linguistic groups, particularly those of the Ural-Altaic family. Here 
vowels fall into two sharply separate classes, hard and soft. When a root 
is augmented by suffixes, the suffix vowel must belong to the same dass as 
that of the root syllable.
38 Here the phonetic assimilation of the compo-
nents of a word, hence a purely sensuous means, creates a formal Unk be-
tween these components by which they are enabled to progress from rela-
tively loose "agglutination" to a linguistic whole, to a self-contained word 
or sentence formation. In becoming a phonetic unit through the principle 
34. Humboldt, Einleitung zum Kawi-Werk," Werke. 7, N0. 1, 300. 
35. Cf. Westermann, Die Suiansprachen (Hamburg, x911), pp. 76ff.; Die Gofo-Sprache 
in Liberia (Hamburg, 1921), pp. 19 ff. 
36. Cf. Westermann, Die Gola-Sprachc, pp. 66 ff. 
37. In Ethiopian, for example, according to August Dillmann, Grammatik der äthiopischen 
Sprache (Leipzig, 1857), pp. 115ff. Eng. trans, by }. A. Crichton (2d ed 4 London, 1907), 
pp. 140ff. verbs and nouns are distinguished solely by the pronunciation of the vowels. 
Intransitive verbs of a passive character are also distinguished from verbs of pure action by 
the same means. 
38. On the principle of vowel harmony in the Ural-Altaic languages see O. v. B5thlingk, 
Über die Sprache der Jakuten (Petersburg, 1851), pp. xxvi, 103, and H. Winkler, Das Vralal-
taische und seine Gruppen, pp. 77 ff. Grunzel points out that the tendency to vowcl harmony 
is common to all languages, though it has achieved regular development only in the Ural-
Altaic. Here vowcl harmony has in a certain sense resulted also in a "consonant harmony." 
See Josef Grunzel, Entwurf einer vergleichenden Grammatik der altaischen Sprachen (Leipzig, 
1895)> PP· 20 ff., 28 ff. Examples of vowel harmony in other knguages: for the American 
languages Boas, Handbook, Pt. 1, p. 569 (Chinook); for the African knguages C. Meinhof, 
Lehrbuch der Nama-Sprache (BerUn, 1909), pp. 114 ff. 

M I M E T I C AND S Y M B O L I C E X P R E S S I O N 
195 
of vowel harmony, the word or word-sentence gains its true significative 
unity: a rektionship which at first appUes solely to the quality and phys-
iological production of the particular sounds, becomes a means of com-
bining them into a spiritual whole, a unit of "signification." 
This "analogical" correspondence between sound and signification is 
shown even more distincdy in the function of certain widespread and 
typical means of knguage formation, as for example, in the part pkyed 
by reduplication both in morphology and syntax. Reduplication seems at 
first sight to be governed entirely by the principle of imitation: the doubhng 
of the sound or syUable seems to serve the sole purpose of reflecting as 
faithfuUy as possible certain objective characteristics of the thing or event 
designated. The phonetic repetition conforms closely to a repetition given 
in the sensuous reality or impression. Reduplication is most at home where 
a thing presents itsetf repeatedly to the senses with the same character-
istics, or where an event presents a sequence of identical or similar phases. 
But on this elementary foundation a system of astonishing diversity and 
subtlety arises. The sensory impression of "plurality" first breaks down into 
an expression of "collective" and "distributive" plurality. Certain languages, 
which have no designation for the plural in our sense, have instead devel-
oped the idea of distributive plurality to the utmost sharpness and concrete-
ness by meticulously distinguishing whether a specific act presents itself 
as an indivisible whole or falls into several separate acts. If the latter is 
true, and the act is either performed by several subjects or effected by the 
same subject in different segments of time, in separate stages, this distribu-
tive division is expressed by reduplication. In this exposition of the Klamath 
knguage Gatschet has shown how this distinction has actually become the 
basic category of the language, permeating aU its parts and determining 
its whole "form."
 8 9 In other language groups we can also see how the 
duplication of a word, which in the beginnings of hnguistic history was 
a simple means of designating quantity, gradually became an intuitive ex-
pression for quantities that do not exist as a cohesive whole but are di-
vided into separate groups or individuals.
40 But this is far from exhausting 
the uses of reduplication. In addition to expressing plurality and repeti-
39. A. S. Gatschet, Grammar of the Klamath Language, Contributions to North American 
Ethnology, 2 (Washington, Govt. Print. Off., 1890), Pt. 1, pp. 259 ff. On the significance of 
the "ideal of severalty or distribution,".as Gatschet calls it, see below, Chapter 3. 
40. Cf. in particular the examples from the Semitic languages in C. Brockelmann, Grttndrits 
der vergleichenden Grammatik, der semitischen Sprachen (New York, Lemke & Bucchner, 
1908-13), 2,457 ff. 

196 
T H E P H A S E O F S E N S U O U S E X P R E S S I O N 
tion, it can serve to represent many other relations, particularly relations 
of space and size. Scherer calk it an original grammatical form serving 
essentiaUy to express three basic intuitions: those of force, space and 
time.
4 1 By a ready transition the iterative signification develops into a 
purely intensive signification, as in the comparative and superlative of ad-
jectives, and in the case of verbs the intensive forms which often subse-
quendy change to causatives.
42 Extremely subtle modal differences in an 
action or event can also be suggested by the very simple means of reduplica-
tion: in certain American Indian languages, for example, the reduplicated 
form of the verb is used to designate a kind of "unreality" in an action, 
to indicate that it exists only in purpose or "idea" and is not practically 
realized.
48 Тл aU these cases reduplication has clearly passed far beyond 
the phase of mere sensory description or of a pointing to objective reaUty. 
One factor that makes this evident is a peculiar poktrity in its use: it can 
be the expression and vehicle not only of different but of direcdy opposed 
modaUties of signification. Side by side with the intensive signification we 
often find the exact opposite, an attenuative signification, so that it is used 
in constituting diminutive forms of adjectives and limitative forms of 
verbs.
44 In designating temporal stages of an action, it can serve equaUy 
weU to designate present, past or future.
4 8 This is the clearest indication 
that it is not so much a reproduction of a fixed and Umited perceptual 
content as the expression of a specific approach, one might say a certain 
perceptual movement. The purely formal accomphshment of reduplication 
becomes even more evident where it passes from the sphere of quantitative 
expression to that of pure relation. It then determines not so much the 
signification of the word as its general grammatical category, ω languages 
41. Scherer, Zur Geschichte der deutschen Sprache. 
42. For examples, see particularly A. F. Pott, Doppelung (RedupUkfltion, Gemination) aU 
eines der wichtigsten BUdungsmittel der Sprache (1862); see ako the abundant material in 
R. Brandstetter, Die Reduplikation in den indianischen, indonesischen und indogermanischen 
Sprachen (Lucerne, 1917). 
43. "Reduplication is also used to express the diminutive of nouns, the idea of a pkyful per­
formance of an activity, and the endeavor to perform an action. It would seem that in aU these 
forms we have the fundamental idea of an approach to a certain concept without its realization," 
in Boas, "Kwakiutl," Handbook, Pt 1, pp. 444-445; cf. 526ff. 
44. Examples from the South Sea knguages in R. H. Codrington, The Meianesian Languages 
(Oxford, Ckrendon Press, 1885), p. 147; Sidney R. Ray, "The Meknesian Possessive and a 
Study in Method," American Anthropologist, 21 (1919), 356,446; for the American Lndian lan­
guages see Boas, Handbook, 1,526, and elsewhere. 
45. As for example in the tense formation of verbs in TagaIog. Humboldt, Kawi-Werk, 2, 
1a5ff. 

M I M E T I C AND S Y M B O L I C 
E X P R E S S I O N 
197 
which do not make this category recognizable in the mere word form, a 
word is often transferred from one category to another, a noun changed to 
a verb, for example, by the mere redupHcation of a sound or syllable.
46 
AU these phenomena, to which we might easUy add others of Uke nature, 
make it evident that even where language starts as purely imitative or 
"analogical" expression, it constandy strives to extend and finaUy to 
surpass its Umits. It makes a virtue of necessity, that is, of the ambiguity 
inevitable in the linguistic sign. For this very ambiguity will not permit the 
sign to remain a mere individual sign; it compels the spirit to take the de-
cisive step from the concrete function of "designation" to the universal 
and universally valid function of "signification." In this function language 
casts off, as it were, the sensuous covering in which it has hitherto ap-
peared: mimetic or analogical expression gives way to purely symbolic ex-
pression which, precisely in and by virtue of its otherness, becomes the 
vehicle of a new and deeper spiritual content. 
46. Examples from Javanese in Humboldt's Kawi-Werkj 2, 86 ff. 
ж 

Chaper 3 
Language in the Phase of Intuitive Expression 
ι. The Expression of Space and Spatial Relations 
l N LiNGUisTics as in epistemology it is not possible to divide the sensory 
and the intellectual into two distinct spheres, each with its own serf-
sufficient mode of "reality." The critique of knowledge shows that mere 
sensation, i&., a sensory quality without form or order, is not a fact of 
immediate experience but a product of abstraction. The matter of sensation 
is never given purely in itsetf, "prior" to aU formation; the very first per­
ception of it contains a reference to the form of space and time. But in 
the continuous progress of knowledge this indefinite reference becomes 
more specific: the mere "possibility of juxtaposition and succession" un­
folds into the whole of space and time, into an order that is both concrete 
and universal. We may expect that language, as a reflection of the spirit, 
will also reflect this fundamental process in some way. And indeed Kant's 
statement that concepts without intuitions are empty, appUes as much to 
the linguistic designation of concepts as it does to their logical determina­
tion. Even the most abstract terms of language stiU reveal their link with 
the primary intuitive foundation in which they are rooted. Here again, 
"meaning" is not distinct from "sensibility"; the two are closely inter­
woven. Thus the step from the world of sensation to that of "pure intui­
tion," which the critique of knowledge shows to be a necessary factor of 
the I and the pure concept of the object, has its exact counterpart in lan­
guage. It is in the "intuitive forms" that the type and direction of the 
spiritual synthesis effected in language are primarily revealed, and it is 
only through the medium of these forms, through the intuitions of space, 
time and number that language can perform its essentiaUy logical opera­
tion: the forming of impressions into representations. 
It is the intuition of space which most fuUy reveals this interpenetration 
s98 

S P A C E AND S P A T I A L 
R E L A T I O N S 
i99 
of sensuous and spiritual expression in language. The essential role of 
spatial representation is most clearly shown in the universal terms which 
language has devised for the designation of spiritual processes. Even in 
the most highly developed languages we encounter this "metaphorical" 
rendition of intellectual conceptions by spatial representations. In German 
this relationship is manifested in such terms as vorstelUn and verstehen, 
begreifen, begründen, erörtern, etc,
1 and it is found not only in the re-
lated languages of the bido-Germanic group but in linguistic families far 
removed from it. Particularly the languages of primitive peoples are 
distinguished by the precision, the almost mimetic immediacy, with which 
they express all spatial specifications and distinctions of processes and 
activities. The languages of the American Indians, for example, seldom 
have a general term for "going," but instead possess special terms for 
"going up" and "going down" and for countless other shadings of motion; 
and states of rest—position, standing below or above, inside and outside 
a certain limit, standing near something, standing in water, in the woods, 
etc.—are similarly differentiated. 
Whereas these languages attach Uttle 
importance to many distinctions which we make in our use of verbs, often 
failing to express them altogether, aU specifications of place, situation and 
distance arc meticulously designated by particles of original local signifi-
cation. The strictness and precision with which this is done is often re-
garded by specialists as the basic and characteristic principle of these 
languages.
2 Crawford tells us that in the Malayo-Polynesian languages 
the different positions of the body are so sharply distinguished as to pro-
vide an anatomist, painter or sculptor with useful indications—the Java-
nese, for example, renders ten different varieties of standing and twenty 
of sitting, each with its own specific word.
3 Various American Indian lan-
guages can express a thought such as "The man is sick" only by stating at 
1. " 'Brgreifen' like simple 'greifen' goes back originally to touching with hands and fcct, 
fingers and toes." Grimm, Deultches Wörterbuch, Vol. 1, col. 1307. On the spatial origin of 
erörtern (to discuss) cf. Leibniz, "Unvorgreifliche Gedanken betreffend die Ausübung und 
Verbesserung der teutschen Sprache," Deutsche Schriften, ed. G. E. Cuhrauer (Berlin, 1838), 
1, 468, S 54; see also Nouveaux essais, Bk. 3, ch. 1. 
2. E.g., Boas on Kwakiutl: "The rigidity with which location in relation to the speaker is 
expressed, both in nouns and in verbs, is one of the fundamental features of the language." 
Handbook, Pt. I, p. 445. Gatschet expresses the same opinion in his Klamath Language; scc 
especially pp. 396 S., 433 ff., 460. 
3. Crawford, History of the Indian Archipelago, 3, 9; cf. Codrington, The Melanesian Lan-
guages, pp. 164 ff.; "Everything and everybody spoken of are viewed as coming or going, or 
in some relation of place, in a way which to the European is by no means accustomed or 
natural." 

200 
T H E P H A S E OP I N T U I T I V E E X P R E S S I O N 
the same time whether the subject of the statement is at a greater or lesser 
distance from the speaker or the Ustener and whether he is visible or in­
visible to them; and often the place, position and posture of the sick man 
are indicated by the form of the word sentence.
4 AU other specifications are 
thrust into the background by this spatial characterization, or are repre­
sented only indirecdy through it. This is equally true of temporal, quaU-
tative and modal distinctions. In concrete intuition, the purpose of an ac­
tion, for example, is always closely related to its spatial goal and the direc­
tion in which this goal is pursued: accordingly, the "final" or "intentional" 
form of the verb is often formed by the addition of a local particle.
5 
Here we encounter a common characteristic of linguistic thinking which 
is highly significant for the critique of knowledge. For Kant the concepts 
of the pure understanding can be applied to sensory intuitions only 
through the mediation of a third term, in which the two, although totally 
dissimilar,must come together—and he finds this mediation in the "tran­
scendental schema," which is both intellectual and sensory. In this respect 
he distinguishes the schema from the mere image:"The image is a product 
of the empirical faculty of the productive imagination—the schema of 
sensuous conceptions (of figures in space, for example) is a product, and, 
as it were, a monogram of the pure imagination a priori, whereby and 
according to which images first become possible, which, however, can be 
connected with the conception only mediately by means of the schema 
which they indicate, and are in themselves never fully adequate to it."
 β 
Language possesses such a "schema"^o which it must refer all intellectual 
representations before they can be sensuously apprehended and represented 
—in its terms for spatial contents and relations. It would seem as though 
logical and ideal relations became accessible to the Unguistic consciousness 
only when projected into space and there analogically "reproduced." The 
relations of "together," "side by side," "separate" provide it with a means 
of representing the most diverse qualitative relations, dependencies and 
oppositions. 
This relationship can be recognized and clarified by an inquiry into 
the formation of the most elementary spatial terms known to language. 
They are stiU entirely rooted in immediate sensory impression; but, on 
4. Cf. Boas, Handbook, pp. 43 fT., 446. 
5. Examples in Wcstermann, Die Sudansprachen, p. 72; Die CohSprache in Liberia, p. 62, 
and elsewhere. 
6. Kant, Kritik der reinen Vernunft, ad ed., pp. 177 ff.; Everyman ed., p. 119. 

S P A C E AND S P A T I A L R E L A T I O N S 
201 
the other hand, they contain the first germ from which the terms of pure 
relation wiU grow. They are oriented both toward the "sensuous" and 
the "intellectual." For though they are entirely material in their beginnings, 
it is they that open up the characteristic form world of knguage. The 
sensuous factor is evident in their phonetic formation. Aside from mere 
interjections, which "say" nothing, which stiU carry no objective significa-
tion, there is scarcely any ckss of words in which the character of "natural 
sounds" is so pronounced as in those which designate here and there, the 
near and the distant, bi most languages, nearly aU the demonstrative 
particles which serve to designate these distinctions can stUl be recognized 
as echoes of direct "phonetic metaphors." Since in the various types of 
showing and indication, sound serves merely to intensify the gesture, it 
remains here entirely within the sphere of vocal gesture. Thus, we find that 
in the most diverse knguages certain spatial specifications are almost al-
ways designated by the same sounds. Vowels of different quality and 
tone are used to designate degrees of distance, but it is above aU in certain 
consonants and groups of consonants that a specific sensuous tendency is 
manifested. In the very first babblings of children a sharp distinction is 
evident between sound groups of essentially "centripetal" and essentially 
"centrifugal" tendency. The m and n clearly reveal the inward direction, 
while the explosive sounds p and b, t and d reveal the opposite trend. In 
the one case the sound indicates a striving back to the subject; in the other, 
a relation to the "outside world," a pointing or rejection. The one corre-
sponds to the gestures of grasping, of attempting to draw close, the other 
to the gestures of showing or thrusting away. By this original distinction 
we can account for the astonishing simikrity between the first 'Vords" 
of children aU over the world.
7 And the same phonetic groups are found in 
essentially identical or similar functions when we inquire into the origin 
and earUest phonetic form of the demonstrative particles and pronouns 
in different languages. For the beginnings of Indo-Germanic knguage, 
Brugmann distinguishes a threefold form of indication. "Ldeixis" is dis-
tinguished, both in content and Unguistic expression, from "thouKJeixis" 
which in turn merges with the more general form of "thatJeixis." Thou-
deixis is indicated by its direction and by the characteristic sound corre-
sponding to this direction, the ur-Lukv43ermanic demonstrative root *to. 
At first it implies no reference to distance and proximity but merely estab-
7. Cf. Wundt, VolktTprych0U1gie, ad ed., 1, 333 ff., and Cbra and WiUiam Stern, Die 
Kindersprache. ad ed., pp, 300 tf. 

202 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E E X P R E S S I O N 
ttshes opposition to the " I , " the general rektion to the object as object; in it 
for the first time the sphere outside one's own body is distinguished and 
deUmited. Subsequent development leads to a Umitation of subsidiary 
spheres within this general sphere,
8 to a differentiation of this and that, 
here and there, the nearer and the more distant. By the simplest conceivable 
means knguage had achieved an articuktion of spatial intuition which 
was to prove of incalculable importance for man's cultural development. 
A first framework was created, in which aU subsequent differentiations 
could take their place. To understand how aU this could be accomplished 
by a mere group of "natural sounds," we must bear in mind that the in-
dicative act stabiUzed in these sounds possesses a purely spiritual aspect side 
by side with its sensuous aspect, that it bears the imprint of a new inde-
pendent energy of consciousness, extending beyond the mere feeUng of 
which the animal is ako capable* 
The demonstrative pronouns in particular spring then from one of 
those "elementary" Unguistic ideas which are similarly manifested in the 
most diverse languages. Everywhere certain differences in the situation 
or distance of the object referred to are expressed by a mere change of 
vowel or consonant For the most part, the soft vowek express the pkce 
of the person addressed, the "there," while the pkce of the speaker is in-
dicated by a sharper vowel.
1 0 As for the consonantal elements, the role 
of pointingto the distance faUs ahnost exclusively to the groups d and t, 
t\ and g, b and p. ш this respect, the Indc^ermanic, Semitic and Ural-
Altaic knguages show an unmistakable similarity.
1 1 In certain languages 
one demonstrative serves to indicate what Ues within the speaker's sphere 
8. Cf. K. Brugmann, 'TDie Demonstrativpronomina der indogermanischen Sprachen," 
Abhandlungen der Königlieh Sächsischen Gcscüschaft der Wissenschaften, Phüol.-hist. Kksse, 
VoI. 22 (Leipzig, 1904), N0. 6; cf. ako K. Brugmann and B. Delbrück, Grundriss der »er¬
gleichenden Grammatik der indogermanischen Sprachen (ad ed., Strassburg, K. J. Trübner, 
1897-1916), 2, Pt. 2, 302 ff. 
9. See above, pp. 177-178 ff. 
10. As for example in the knguage of Tahiti (see Humboldt, Kam-Werk 2, 153); for 
the African languages see, cg., Meinhof, Lehrbuch der Nama-Sprache, p. 61; also Steinthal, 
Die Mande-Neger-Sprachen, p. 82; for the American Indian knguages cf. Gatschet, Kiamatk 
Language, p. 538. 
χι. Tbis simikrity becomes particularly evident if we compare Brugmann's indications on 
me Indo4krmanic knguages (see note 8 above) with those of Brockdmann and DilImann 
for the Semitic group (see Brockelmann, Grundriss, s, 316ff. and DilImann, Grammatik der 
äthiopischen Sprache, pp. 94ff. [Eng. trans., ad ed., pp. 115ff.]); for the Ural-Aluic kn-
guages see H. Winkler, Das VraUdtaische und seine Gruppen, pp. 26 ff. 

S P A C E AND S P A T I A L R E L A T I O N S 
203 
of perception, another what Ues in the sphere of perception of the person 
addressed; or one form is used for an object close to the speaker, another 
for an object equally distant from the speaker and the person addressed, 
a third for an absent object.
12 
Thus for language as for cognition, the precise difTerentiation of spatial 
situations and distances represents a point of departure from which it 
proceeds to build objective reahty, to define objects. The differentiation of 
places serves as a basis for the differentiation of contents, of the I , Thou 
and He on the one hand, and of physical objects on the other. The general 
critique of knowledge teaches us that the act of spatial position and differ-
entiation is the indispensable condition for the act of objectivization in gen-
eral, for "relating the representation to the object." This is the central idea 
underlying Kant's "Refutation of Idealism" in the sense of an empirical-
psychological idealism. The very form of spatial intuition itseH bears 
within it a necessary reference to an objective existence, a reality "in" space. 
The opposition of "inward" and "outward," on which the representation 
of the empirical I is based, is itself possible only because an empirical object 
is represented at the same time: for the I can become aware of the changes 
in its own states only by referring them to something permanent, to space 
and something enduring in space. 
It is possible to perceive a determination of time only by means of a 
change in external relations (motion) to the permanent in space (for 
example, we become aware of the sun's motion by observing the changes 
in its relation to the objects of this earth). But this is not aU. We find 
that we possess nothing permanent that can correspond and be sub-
mitted to the conception of a substance as intuition, except matter. . . . 
In the representation I , the consciousness of myseU! is not an intuition, 
but a merely intellectual representation produced by the spontaneous 
12. The difference in the designation of a viable and an invisible object is particularly 
pronounced in many American Indian languages (cf. in particular the indications on the 
Kwakiutl, Ponca, and Eskimo knguages in Boas, Handbook, pp. 41 ff., 445 ff. and Gatschet, 
Klamath Language, p. 538). The Bantu languages possess demonstratives in three different 
forms: one indicates that the thing shown is close to the speaker; the second that it is 
already known, that is, has entered into the speaker's sphere of vision and thought; the third 
that it is far removed from the speaker or not visible (C. Meinhof, Grundzüge einer ver-
gleichenden Grammatik der Bantusprachen [BerUn, D. Reimer, x906], pp. 39ff.). For the 
South Sea languages see Humboldt's indications with regard to Tagalog {Werke 6, N0. 1, 
312ff.). 

204
 
T
H
E 
P
H
A
S
E 
O
F 
I N T U I T I V E E X P R E S S I O N 
activity of a thinking subject It follows that this I has no predicate of 
intuition, which in its character of permanence could serve as correlate 
to the determination of time in the internal sense.
1* 
The fundamental principle of Kant's proof lies in his demonstration that 
the specific function of space is a necessary instnunent and vehicle for 
the universal function of substance and for its empirical and objective ap-
plication. Only through the interpenetration of both functions do we gain 
the intuition of a "nature," a setf-sufHcient, comprehensive order of objects. 
It is only when a content is determined in space, when it is distinguished 
by fixed boundaries from the undifferentiated totality of space, that it 
gains its own real form: the act of "setting out" and differentiating, of ex-
sistere first gives it the form of independent "existence." And this logical 
fact is marked out in the construction of language, where the concrete 
designation of situation and space also serves as an instrument for defining 
the category of the "object" This process can be followed in various 
branches of linguistic development. If it is true that the nominative endings 
in the masculine and neuter of the Indo-Germanic languages are derived 
from certain demonstrative particles,
14 this means that an instrument 
for designating place served to express the characteristic function of fhe 
nominative, its position as a "subjective case." It could become the "vehicle" 
of an action only when a specific local characteristic, a spatial determina-
tion was attached to i t But there is another linguistic phenomenon which 
seems to have grown direcdy out of this interpenetration of the two factors, 
this spiritual interaction between the category of space and the category of 
substance. Wherever knguage has produced a definite article, its manifest 
purpose is to constitute a representation of substance, while its origin 
unmistakably pertains to spatial representation. Since the definite article 
is a relatively late product, such a transition in its function can be plainly 
seen on many occasions. In the Indo43ermanic languages, the genesis and 
distribution of the article can be followed historically. The article is lacking 
in Old-Indian, Old-Iranian and Latin, and also in archaic Greek, specifically 
in Homer; it first came into regular use only with Attic prose. Similarly 
in the Germanic group, the use of the article was not established until 
the Middle High German period. The Slavic languages never developed 
13. Kritik der reinen Vernuft, 2d ed., pp. 277 ff.; Everyman ed., p. 172. 
14. bi Brugmann & Delbrück, Grundriss, 2d ed., 2, Pt. 2, 475, expresses the belief that the 
nominative ^ is identical with the demonstrative pronoun *so (ai: sa) and the -m of 
the neuter probably also goes back to a distant-deitic particle. 

SPACE AND S P A T I A L R E L A T I O N S 
205 
the consistent use of an abstract article.
16 The situation is similar in the 
Semitic languages; the article is in general use, but certain languages, like 
the Ethiopic, which in this respect has remained at an earlier stage, make 
no use of i t .
1 6 Wherever the definite article has developed, it can clearly be 
recognized as an offshoot of the demonstrative pronouns. It grows out of 
the form of "that<leixis," designating the object to which it refers as "out-
side" and "there," and distinguishing it spatially from the " I " and the 
"here."
1 T 
This genesis of the article makes it clear that it did not acquire its uni-
versal linguistic function of expressing the idea of substance immediately, 
but through a series of intermediaries. The power of "substantiation" 
peculiar to it developed only gradually. In the languages of primitive peo-
ples there are certain demonstrative pronouns that are used quite in the 
sense of the definite article; but they do not necessarily refer to the class 
of "substantives." In Ewe the article, which here follows the word it 
modifies, is used not only with substantives but also with the absolute 
pronoun, with adverbs and conjunctions.
18 And even where it does refer 
to things, where it remains within the strict sphere of "objective" rep-
resentation, the general expression of "objectivization" which it embodies, 
develops only gradually from the more special meanings. The farther 
back we follow the use of the article, the more "concretely" it seems to 
be used: instead of a universal form of the article, we find diverse types, 
which vary according to the quality of the particular objects or object 
classes. The general junction which it serves both in language and thought, 
is not yet detached from the particularity of the contents to which it is 
applied. In addition to the neuter article, the Indonesian languages have 
a special personal article, which stands before the names of individuals and 
tribes, and also before designations of kinship, not in order to qualify 
them in any way, but merely to identify them as personal names.
19 The 
language of the Ponca Indians draws a sharp distinction between the 
15. Cf. the section
 ,rVom Artikel" in Grimm, Deutsche Grammatik, 1, 366ff.; on the 
Slavic languages see Miklosich, Vergleichende Grammatik der shwischen Sprachen, 2d ed., 
4. « 5 . 
16. See Dillmann, Grammatik der äthiopischen Sprache, pp. 333 ff. (Eng. trans., 2d ed, 
pp. 424 ff.), Brockelmann, Grundriss, 1, 466. 
17. Cf. Brugmann and Delbrück, Grundriss, 2d ed., 2, Pt. 2,315. 
18. Cf. Westermann, Grammatik der Ewe-Sprachc, p. 6x. Eng. trans, by Bickford^>mith, 
pp. 66^67. 
19. See Codrington, The Mehtnesian Languages, pp. 108 ff.; cf Brandstettcr, Der Artikel 
des Indonesischen verglichen mit dem des Indogermanischen (Leipzig, 1913). 

206 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E E X P R E S S I O N 
articles used for animate and inanimate objects: among the latter, such 
classes as horizontal and round objects, scattered objects or collectives each 
have an article of their own; and when an article is used for an animate 
being, a sharp distinction is made as to whether this being is sitting, stand-
ing or moving.
2 0 A noteworthy and highly instructive indication of the 
article's original concrete signiHcation is to be found in the Somali lan-
guage. Somali possesses three forms of the article, which are distinguished 
from one another by the final vowel (-a, -i and •o [or u]). The factor de-
termining the use of one or the other form is the spatial relation of the 
person or thing in question to the speaker. The article ending in -a desig-
nates a person or thing in immediate proximity to the speaker, visible to 
him and actually seen by him; the article ending in •o refers to a person or 
thing more or less removed from the speaker but usually visible to him; 
while the article ending in - i indicates a person or thing known to the 
speaker in some way, but not visibly present
21 Here we can see aknost 
tangibly how the universal form of "substantiation," the forming of a 
"thing," expressed in the article, springs from the function of spatial in-
dication, and at first remains attached to it; how it adheres to the various 
modes of demonstration and their variations until finally, at a relatively late 
stage, the pure category of substance frees itself from the special forms of 
spatial intuition. 
If we attempt to followstill farther the ways by which knguage prog-
resses from its first sharply defined local distinctions to general spatial 
specifications and terms, we seem to find here again that the direction of 
this development is outward from the center. The "differentiation of 
locations in space" starts from the situation of the speaker and spreads in 
concentric circles until the objective whole, the sum and system of local 
specifications has been articulated. At first local distinctions are closely 
linked with specific material distinctions—and it is eminendy the differ-
entiation of the parts of his own body that serves man as a basis for all other 
spatial specifications. Once he has formed a distinct representation of his 
own body, once he has apprehended it as a self^enclosed and intrinsicaUy 
articulated organism, it becomes, as it were, a model according to which 
he constructs the world as a whole. In this perception of his body, he 
possesses an original set of coordinates, to which in the course of develop-
20. Boas and Swanton, "Siouan," Handbook., i, 939 ff. 
21. See Maria von Tiling, "Die Vokale des bestimmten Artikels im Somali," Zeitschrift für 
KoloniaUprachen, g, 132 й. 

S P A C E AND S P A T I A L R E L A T I O N S 
207 
ment he continually returns and refers—and from which accordingly he 
draws the terms which serve to designate this development. 
Indeed, a close connection has been ahnost universaUy observed between 
the expression of spatial relations and certain concrete nouns, among which 
once again words designating parts of man's body are most prominent, 
"mside" and "outside," "before" and «ЪеЬки!," "above" and "below" are 
associated with a specific part of one's own body. Where the more highly 
developed languages tend to use prepositions for the expression of spatial 
relations, the languages of primitive peoples use ahnost exclusively nouns, 
which are themselves either names for parts of the body or clearly derived 
from such names. According to Steinthal, the Mandingan languages ex-
press our prepositional concepts in "a very material way": "behind" is ex-
pressed by an independent substantive meaning "back" or "rear end," "in 
front of" by a word meaning "eye," while "on" is designated by "neck" 
and "in" by 'ЪеИу," etc.
22 In other African languages and in the South 
Sea languages, such words as "face" and "back," "head" and "mouth," 
"loin" and "hip" perform the same function.
28 And if at first sight this 
seems a peculiarly "primitive" mode of designation, we find that it has its 
exact analogy and counterpart in far more advanced stages of knguage 
formation.
24 Yet language does not content itsetf with using the names 
of timbs and organs of the human body as "spatial substantives," but prog-
resses to a more general application of the principle. Instead of "back," 
such a word as "track" may be used to indicate "behind"; while "under" 
may be designated by "ground" or "earth," "over" by such a word as "air."
 2 6 
Now the terms are no longer drawn exclusively from man's own body; 
but the method by which language represents spatial rektions has remained 
the same. The representation of concrete spatial objects dominates the 
22. Steinthal, Die Mande-Neger^prachen, pp. 245 ff. 
23. See Wcstermann, Die Sudansprachen, pp. 53 ff.; Die Gola^prache, pp. 36fi.; L. Rein-
isoh, Die NubaSprache, Vols. 2-3 in Sprachen von NordOst-Afrika (Vienna, 1879), pp. 
123 ff.; for the South Sea languages cf. H. C. v. <L Gabelcntz, Die meumesischen Sprachen, 
pp. 158,230 ff.; Ray, "The Meknesian Possessive, American Anthropologist, 21, 352 ff. 
24. In Egyptian, which has developed true prepositions, their original nominal character is 
shown by their combination with possessive suffixes; an analysis of these "prepositions" oftcn 
kads back to names for parts of the body. Cf. G. A. Erman, Ägyptische Grammatik (3d ed., 
Berlin, 1911), pp. 231, 238ff.; G. Steindorff, Koptische Grammatik (2d ed., BerUn, 1904; 
New York, Lemke & Buechncr, 1904), pp. 173 ff. For the original norninal character of the 
Semitic prepositions see Brockelmann, Grundriss, 1, 494ff. 
25. Ewe, for example, has developed a great number of special and general "kxal sub-
stantives"; cf. Westermann, Grammatik der Ewe-Sprachc, pp. 52 ff.; Eng. trans, by Bickford-
Smith, pp. 51 ff. 

208 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
expression of spatial relations. This appears with remarkable clarity in the 
formation taken by the words of spatial relation in most of the Ural-Altaic 
languages. Here, for example, nominal terms such as "top" or "summit," 
"bottom," "trace," "middle," "circle," are used to designate "over" and 
"under," "before" and "behind," "around," etc.
28 
And even where language has arrived at great freedom and abstract 
clarity in the expression of purely logical relations, the old spatial and 
hence sensuous origin of its terms for these relations is usuaUy evident. 
That "prepositions" were originally independent words in the Indo-
Germanic languages is made evident by the fact that in their combination 
with verbal roots the connection remains extremely loose, so that, for ex-
ample, augment and reduplication are placed between the preposition and 
the verbal form.
2 T And the development of certain Indo-Germanic lan-
guages, such as the Slavic, shows the constant appearance of new "pseudo-
prepositions" whose material signification either remains alive in the hn-
guistic consciousness or can be demonstrated by linguisitic research.
28 
In general we find that the Indo-Germanic case forms served originaUy 
to express spatial, temporal or other outward intuitions, and only later ac-
quired an "abstract" sense. Thus the instrumental was at first the "with" 
case; when the intuition of spatial togetherness passed into that of the 
accompanying and modifying circumstance, the case came to indicate the 
means or basis of an action. From spatial "whence" the causal "whereby" 
develops, from "whither" the general idea of aim and purpose.
29 It is true 
that the localist theory of cases has been attacked not only in terms of the 
history of language but also on the basis of general epistemological con-
siderations, just as it has been defended on similar grounds. Those holding 
the locaHst view have pointed out that, since the whole development of 
language as of thought in general must proceed from the intuitive, from 
the "concrete and vital" to the conceptual, the originaUy spatial origin of 
26. Examples from Yakut in BöthUngk, Über die Sprache der Jakuten, p. 391; from 
Japanese in E. Hoffmann, Japanische Sprachlehre (Leiden, 1877), pp. z88ff., x97ff.; see aUo 
Heinrich Winkler, Der uralaltaische Sprachstamm (Berlin, Dummlers, 1909), pp. 147 ff. 
27. See G. Curtius, Das Verbum der griechischen Sprache, 2d ed., /, 136. 
28. Cf. Miklosich, Vergleichende Grammatik der slawischen Sprachen, ad ed., 4, 196. 
Such new forms are common in other inflected languages, such as the Semitic; cf., for example, 
the list of "new prepositions" which developed in the Semitic out of the names of parts of the 
body, in Brockelmann, Grundriss, ad ed., 2, 421 ff. 
29. Cf. Brugmann and Delbrück, Grundriss, ad ed., 2, Pt. 2, 464 fL, 473, 518, etc.; cf. 
B. Delbrück, Vergleichende Syntax der indogermanischen Sprachen (Strassburg, x893 ff.), 1, 
x88. 

SPACE AND S P A T I A L 
R E L A T I O N S 
209 
aU case determinations was in a sense proved a priori.
3 0 In answer to this 
argument it has been contended that there is no justification for narrowing 
down the concept of intuition to the one specific field of spatial intuition, 
since not only motion in space, but various other dynamic relations, such 
as victory and defeat, cause and effect, are given immediately and intui-
tively and are actually seen.
3 1 This objection however, which was raised 
by B. Delbrück, is untenable, at least in the form he gave it. For since 
Hume's analysis of the concept of causality it is certain that there is no 
sensory impression and no immediate intuition of what we call "causality." 
All that is ever "given" to us in the relation between cause and effect re-
duces to certain spatial and temporal relations, relations of juxtaposition 
and succession. Likewise Wundt, who opposes the localist view on the 
ground that spatial relations are far from exhausting aU the sensuous, intui-
tive characteristics of objects, blunts his own objection by recognizing that 
spatial characteristics have one essential distinction over aU others, namely 
that aU other relations are also spatial, while only spatial relations can by 
themselves form the content of an intuition.
3 2 And this would make it 
probable a priori that knguage can proceed to the expression of purely 
"intelleetual relations only after it has detached and as it were "abstracted" 
them from their involvement with spatial relations. In the finished struc-
ture of our inflected knguages, each of the principal case forms reveals a 
specific logical-grammatical function which it essentially serves. The nom-
inative represents the agent of the action, the accusative or genitive desig-
nates its object, accordingly as it is entirely or partly affected by the action 
—and even the local cases in the more restricted sense can be fitted into 
this schema, since in addition to their specific local sense, they express a gen-
eral relation of the substantive concept to the verbal concept.
83 But al-
though, in this light, the logical-grammatical sense may appear to be the 
vp6repov rfj φυσΐΐ 
rather than the spatial-intuitive sense, epistemological 
and Unguistic considerations lead us to regard the latter as the true πρόπρον 
πμόΐ ήμας. Indeed, the more we consider those knguages which have 
shown the greatest fertUity in the formation of "case forms," the more 
we become convinced of the priority of the spatial over the grammatical-
30. Cf. Whitney, "General Considerations on the European Case-system," Transactions of 
the American Philological Association, 13 (1888), 88ff. 
31. B. Delbrück, Grundfragen der Sprachforschung (Strassburg, 1901), pp. 130 ff. 
32. Wundt, Völkerpsychologie, 2, 79ff. 
33. Cf. the account of the Indo43crmanic case system in Delbrück, Vergleichende Syntax, 1, 
181ff. 

210 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E E X P R E S S I O N 
logical signification. Aside from the American Indian languages,
84 those 
of the Ural-Altaic family show the most elaborate inflection of nouns. Yet 
they have not succeeded in forming the three "stricdy grammatical" cases; 
in them, the relations which are expressed in the Indc^Germanic languages 
by the nominative, genitive and accusative are indicated solely by the 
context. A true norninative or subjective case is lacking, while the genitive 
either has no formal expression or is represented by a pure "adessive" form, 
which designates nothing but local presence. On the other hand, the de-
velopment of terms for purely spatial indications is positively luxuriant. 
We find the greatest diversity and precision in general designations of 
locahty, and in special designations for the situation of a thing and the 
direction of a movement. There are aUative and adessive, inessive and 
iUative, translative, delative and sublative cases, expressing rest within an 
object, being with it, penetration into it, issuing from it, etc.
85 "These lan-
guages," writes Friedrich Müller "do not simply stop outside the object, 
but penetrate, one might say, into the object and create a formal opposi-
tion between its inside and outside, its top and its bottom. The three condi-
tions of rest, motion toward the object and motion away from the object, 
combine with the categories of 'inside,' 'outside' and in some languages 
'above,' to create an abundance of case forms for which our languages 
have no feehng at aU, and which we can therefore not adequately render."
 8 8 
Considering how close this purely intuitive expression of case relations 
remains to mere sensuous expression, it is wormy of note that subdy as 
spatial relations are differentiated, they are stiU rendered throughout by 
concrete substantives. 
The expression of direction and differences of direction, however sensu-
ous its form, impUes a new spiritual factor not to be found in the mere ex-
pression of fixed position. In many knguages spatial verbs as well as 
spatial substantives serve to designate rektions which we render by means 
of prepositions. Humboldt iUustrates this use of spatial verbs by examples 
34. On the case formation of the American knguages see the compilation from the Eskimo 
knguage by Thalbitzer in Boas, Handbook 1, 1017 ff.: here, among other cases, an aUative, 
tacative, ablative, prosecutive are distinguished. Gatschet's Kutmath Language distinguishes 
an "inessive" and "adessive," a "directive" and "prosecutive" as well as an abundance of 
other rektions, each expressed by a local case ending (op. dt 4 pp. 479 ff., 489). 
35- See the copious material in H. Winkler, Das Uralaltaisch<r und seine Cruppen (especially 
pp. 10 ff.), and the section 'Indogermanische und urakltaische Kasus" in Urahdtaische Völker 
und Sprachen (Berlin, 1884), pp. 171 ff.; cf. also Grunzel, Vergleichende Grammatik der 
aUaUchen Sprachen, pp. 49 ff. 
36. Fr. Müller, Grundriss, 2, Pt 2,204. 

SPACE ANO S P A T I A L R E L A T I O N S 
211 
from the Javanese and remarks that it seems to disclose a subder linguistic 
sense than the use of spatial substantives, since the concept of action is 
freer from material mixture when expressed by a verb than when ex-
pressed by a mere concrete noun.
8 7 And indeed spatial rektions do here 
take on a greater fluidity, as it were, than in substantivist expression, which 
is always characterized by a certain rigidity. The expression of a pure ac-
tion, though stiU fully intuitive, prepares the way for the abstract expression 
of pure relations. Here again, the representation is stiU closely linked to 
one's own body, but now it is no longer the parts of the body but its move-
ments, or, one might say, it is no longer its purely material existence but 
its activity, which forms the foundation of language. And historical con-
siderations indicate that in certain knguages where spatial verbs appear side 
by side with spatial substantives the nouns are the earlier forms.
38 Verbs are 
first used to express differences of "sense" in the movement, the difference 
between movement from a place and movement to that same place. These 
verbs then appear in attenuated form in the type of suffixes by which the 
type and direction of motion are characterized. The American Indian lan-
guages use such suffixes to indicate whether the motion occurs within or 
outside of a certain space, particularly inside or outside of the house, 
whether over the sea or over land, whether through the air or through the 
water, whether from inknd toward the coast, or from the coast inknd, 
whether from the fire site toward the house or from house to fire site.
80 
But of aU these many distinctions based on the source and goal of a motion 
and the manner and means of its execution, there is one which assumes 
greater and greater importance for the structure of knguage. The natural, 
in a certain sense "absolute" system of coordinates for aU representation 
of motion in language is evidendy provided by the situation of the speaker 
and the situation of the person addressed. Frequently language distin-
guishes sharply whether a particular movement is effected from the 
speaker to the person addressed, from the person addressed to the speaker, 
or from the speaker to a third person or thing, not addressed.
40 On the 
basis of such concrete distinctions in reference to some material thing or 
37. Humboldt, Kawi-Werk, 2,164ff., 341, etc. 
38. For the Melanesian languages, cf. Codrington, The Melanea'an Languages, p. 158. 
39. See the examples from Athapascan given by Goddard, from Haida given by Swanton, 
and from Tsimshian by Boas, Handbook, J, 112 ff., 244 ff., 300 ff. 
40. For examples, see particularly Humboldt who was first to point out this distinction in 
"Über die Verwandtschaft der Ortsadverbien mit dem Pronomen in einigen Sprachen," 
Werke, 6, N0. ι, 311 ff.); cf. also Fr. Müller, Reise der österreichischen Fregatte Novara, 3,312. 

212 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E E X P R E S S I O N 
to the 4 " or "thou," knguage goes on to develop more general and more 
"abstract" designations. It creates definite groups and schemata of suffixes 
of direction, which classify all possible movements according to certain 
principal spatial division, particularly the cardinal points.
4 1 Different lan-
guages seem to employ very different methods in distinguishing between 
expressions of rest and expressions of motion. The accents may be dis-
tributed between the two in the greatest variety of ways. Languages of the 
purely "objective" or nominal type give priority to local terms over terms 
of direction, to the expression of rest over the expression of motion, while 
in the verbal types the opposite relation generally prevails. A middle posi-
tion is perhaps occupied by those knguages which give priority to the ex-
pression of rest, but lend it a verbal as weU as a nominal form. Thus, for 
example, the languages of the Sudan employ only substantives to designate 
spatial rektions such as above and below, inside and outside, but these 
substantives contain within them a verb which designates fixed position. 
This "local verb" is always used to express an activity occurring in a spe-
cific place.
42 Evidently, the intuition of activity cannot be detached from 
that of purely local presence, but remains in a sense imprisoned in it,
4* 
but on the other hand, this presence, this mere existence in a place appears 
as a kind of activity on the part of its subject. Here again we see how 
tenaciously knguage clings to its original intuition of a "given" space, yct 
is impeUed to surpass the spatial datum as soon as it undertakes to rep-
resent motion and pure activity. As man turns his attention to activity and 
apprehends it as such, he must transform the purely objective, substantial 
unity of space into a dynamic-functional unity; he must, as it were, con-
struct space as a totality of the directions of action. Here a new factor enters 
into the development of the perceptual world, which up to now we have 
foUowed essentially in its objective aspect. This special field of language 
41. See, for example, a Ust of such suffixes in Nlcobarese, in P. W. Schmidt, Die Mon-
Khtner-Volker, ein Bindeglied xunschen Völkern Zcntrahsicns und Austronesiens (Braun-
schweig, 1906), p. 57. 
42. In these languages the use of the "verb of locality and rest," expressing "being in a 
place," gives a sentence such as "He is working in the field" a form such as the following: 
"He works, is the inside of the field"; 'The children are playing on the street" becomes 'The 
children play, are the surface of the street" See Westermann, Die Sudansprachen, pp. 51 ff. 
43. In the Sudan and Bantu languages, as in most of the Hamitic languages, a movement 
which we designate according to its aim and result is designated according to its beginning and 
local starting point. See examples in Meinof, Die Sprachen der Hamiten (Hamburg, 1912), 
p. 20 n. On analogous phenomena in the South Sea languages see Codrington, The Melanesian 
Languages, pp. 159 ff. 

SPACE AND S P A T I A L 
R E L A T I O N S 
213 
formation confirms thc general law that the content and achievement of 
every spiritual form consist, not simply in reproducing something objec-
tively present, but in creating a new relation, a unique correlation be-
tween " I " and "reality," between the "subjective" and thc "objective" sphere. 
In language, as in the other forms, the "road outward" becomes at the 
same time a "road inward." For it is only as its outward intuition becomes 
more determinate, that its inner intuition can truly unfold: the formation 
of spatial terms becomes the medium for designating the I and defining 
it against other subjects. 
Even the oldest stratum of spatial terms discloses this relationship. In 
nearly aU languages, spatial demonstratives provided the foundation for 
the personal pronouns. HistoricaUy, the link between the two classes of 
words is so close that it is hard to decide which to regard as earlier or 
later, original or derived. In his basic treatise "On the relation of local 
adverbs to pronouns in several languages,"
4 4 Humboldt attempted to 
prove that the personal pronouns in general go back to words of local 
signification and origin; many modern linguists, on the other hand, tend 
to reverse the relation, tracing the characteristic trichotomy of the demon-
stratives, found in most languages, to the natural trichotomy of the persons 
" I , " "thou," and "he." However this genetic question may ultimately be 
decided, it is evident that the personal and demonstrative pronouns, the 
original designations of persons and of space, are doseIy related in their 
whole structure and belong as it were to the same stratum of linguistic 
thought. It is the same half-mimetic, half-Unguistic act of indication, the 
same fundamental forms of "deixis," which gave rise to the opposition 
of hier, da and dort
48 
and to that of " I , " "thou" and "he." "Here," remarks 
G. v. d. Gabelentz, "is always where I am, and what is here I call this, 
in contrast to das and jenes, which are da and dort. This accounts for the 
Latin usage: hic, iste, itte — meus, tuus, eius; and, in Chinese, for the 
coincidence of the second person pronouns with conjunctions of local 
and temporal proximity and of similarity."
4 8 In the above-mentioned 
treatise Humboldt demonstrated the same relation for the Malayan lan-
guages, for Japanese, and Armenian. And in the whole development of 
the Indo-Germanic languages the third-person pronoun reveals a close 
44. Humboldt, "Ober die Verwandtschaft der Ortsadverbien mit dem Pronomen," Werke, 
6, N0. I. 
45. The German da occupies a middle position between here and there (Trenr.). 
46. G. T. d. Gabelentz, Die Sprachwissenschaft (Leipzig, T. 0. Weigel, 1891), pp. 230fL 

214 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E E X P R E S S I O N 
formal link with the corresponding demonstrative pronoun—the French 
il goes back to Latin ille, Gothic is (modern German er) corresponds to 
the Latin is. And often the I-thou pronouns also show an unmistakable 
connection with demonstrative pronouns.
47 Exactly corresponding rela-
tions are found in the Semitic and Altaic languages
 4 8 as well as the lan-
guages of the American Indians and the Australian aborigines.
49 In this 
connection the Australian languages reveal a highly distinctive trait. It 
is reported that when certain South Australian languages express an action 
in the third person, they attach a spatial qualifier both to the subject and 
the object of this action. In order, for example, to express the thought that 
a man has struck a dog with a spear, one must say approximately that 
the man "up front" has struck the dog "back there" with this or that 
weapon.
60 bi other words there is no general and abstract term for "he" or 
for "this"; the word used for this signification is stiU fused with a certain 
deictic phonetic gesture, from which it cannot be detached. The same is 
true in those languages which have terms for designating an individual in 
a definite situation, sitting, lying or standing, coming or going, but lack a 
unitary third-person pronoun. The language of the Cherokees, in which 
such distinctions are particularly pronounced, possesses nine third-person 
pronouns instead of one.
6 1 Other languages distinguish in the first as well 
as the second and third person whether the subject is visible or invisible, 
and use a different pronoun accordingly.
52 In addition to spatial distinc-
tions of situation or distance, temporal presence or nonpresence is often 
expressed by a special form of the pronoun; and stiU other characteristics 
may be expressed in the same manner.
63 In all these cases, as we see, the 
terms for the purely "spiritual" differentiation of three persons retain an 
47. Cf. Brugmann, Die Demonstrativpronomina, pp. 30 ff., 71 ff., 129 ff.; and Brugmann 
and Delbrück, Grundriss, 2d ed., 2, Pt. 2, 307 ff., 381 ff. 
48. For the Semitic languages see Brockehnann, Grundriss, t, 296 ff. and his Kurzgefasste 
vergleichende Grammatik der semitischen Sprachen (Berlin, 1908), pp. 142ff.; DiH-
man, Grammatik der äthiopischen Sprache, pp. 98 f. (Eng. trans., 2d ed., pp. 120 f.); for 
the Altaic knguages see Grunzel, Vergleichende Grammatik der altaischen Sprachen, pp. 
55ff. 
49. Cf. Gatschet, Klamath Language, pp. 536 ff.; S. Matthews, "Languages of the Bungand-
ity Tribe in South Australia," /. and Proc. of the Roy. Soc. of N. S. Wales, 37 (1903), 151. 
50. Matthews, 37, 61. 
51. Cf. Humboldt, *^ber den DuaÜs," Werke, 6, N0. 1, 23; Fr. Müller, Grundriss, 2, 
1,224 ff. 
52. Boas, "Kwakiud," in Handbook, 1, 527 ff. 
53. Goddard, "Hupa," in Boas, Handbook, 1, 117; Boas, "Qdnook," in Handbook, *, 
574, 617ff. 

T H E R E P R E S E N T A T I O N O F T I M E 
2i5 
immediately sensuous, above aU a spatial coloration. According to Hoff-
mann, the Japanese has created a word for 'T' from a local adverb whose 
proper meaning is "center" and a wordfor "he" from another word mean-
ing "there."
 5 4 In phenomena of this sort we see how knguage draws as 
it were a sensuous-spiritual circle round the speaker, designating the center 
of the circle as " I , " the periphery as "thou" and "he." The characteristic 
"schematism" of space, which we have previously observed in the building 
of the objective world, here operates in the converse direction^nd the 
representation of space is fuUy constituted only in this twofold function. 
2. The Representation of Time 
The precise distinction and designation of time relations present language 
with a far more difficult and complex problem than the development of 
its spatial conceptions and terms. The simple coordination of spatial form 
and temporal form that has often been attempted in epistemological in-
quiries, finds no confirmation in language. Language shows rather that 
thought in general and linguistic thought in particular must perform an 
operation of a different type and one might say of a higher dimension, in 
building up the representation of time, in differentiating directions and 
intervals of time. For "here" and "there" can be subsumed much more 
simply and immediately in an intuitive unity than is the case with the 
temporal factors "now," "earlier," and "kter." What characterizes these 
factors as temporal is precisely that they are never, like things of objective 
intuition, given to the consciousness simultaneously. The units, the parts, 
which in spatial intuition seem to combine of themselves into a whole, 
here exclude one another: the existence of one specification signifies the 
nonexistence of the others and vice versa. Accordingly, the whole fact of 
the representation of time is never contained in immediate intuition; dif-
ferentiation and combination, analytical and synthetic thought conse-
quendy play a larger part than in spatial representation. Since the elements 
of time exist as such only because consciousness "runs through" them and 
in so doing differentiates them, this act of running through, this "discursus" 
enters into the characteristic form of the concept of time itself. Thus the 
54. Hcu7rnaan, Japanische Sprachlehre, pp. 85 ff. 

2l6 
T H E P H A S E OF I N T U I T I V E E X P R E S S I O N 
form of "being" which we designate as succession, as time, appears to oc-
cupy a far higher level of ideality than mere locally determined existence. 
Language cannot arrive at this level immediately but here too is subject to 
the same inner law that governs its entire formation and progress. It does 
not create new means of expression for every new sphere of signiHcation 
that is opened up to it; on the contrary, its strength consists in giving new 
spiritual form to a specific given material which it employs for new pur-
poses without at first changing its content. 
We have seen that language employed the simplest possible means in 
forming its original spatial terms. The transposition from the sensuous to 
the ideal is so gradual that at first one scarcely perceives the decisive change 
in general spiritual attitude, which it embodies. From a very limited sensu-
ous material, from shadings in vowel coloration and from the phonetic and 
afTective quality peculiar to certain consonants and consonant groups, the 
designations for local distinctions and differences of direction are formed. 
The same process is manifested in a new aspect of linguistic development, 
when we investigate the manner in which it arrives at its original temporal 
particles. We have seen the fluidity of the dividing line between imitative 
or affective sounds and the simplest spatial terms—and we encounter the 
same continuous, imperceptible transition between the linguistic spheres 
embracing local and temporal determinations. Even in our modern civilized 
languages these two often form an inseparable unity; it is common to find 
one and the same word used to express both spatial and temporal relations. 
And still more abundant examples of this relationship are found in the lan-
guages of primitive peoples, which often seem to possess no other means 
of expressing the temporal idea. The simple local adverbs are used in-
differently in a temporal sense, so that, for example, the word for "here" 
merges with the word for "now," thc word for "there" with that for 
"earlier" or "later."
5 5 Attempts have been made to explain this on the 
ground that spatial and temporal proximity or distance condition one 
another objectively; that an event which has occurred in a distant place 
tends to be long past at the moment when it is spoken of. But apparendy 
the relation is not so much a practical one of this sort as a purely ideal one, 
pertaining to a level of consciousness that is stiU relatively undifferentiated 
and not yet sensitive to the specific difference between the forms of space 
55. Cf. the examples from the Klamath language in Gatschet, pp. 582ff. and from the 
Melanesian languages in Codrington, pp. 164 ff. 

T H E R E P R E S E N T A T I O N O F T I M E 
217 
and time. In the knguages of primitive peoples even relatively complex 
temporal relations, for which the highly developed languages have created 
specific expressions, are often designated by the most primitive spatial 
terms.
5 6 
As long as this material bond remains in force, the distinctive character 
of the temporal form cannot be manifested. Involuntarily, knguage trans-
poses the structural rektions of time into relations of space. Spatial "here" 
and "there" stand to one another in a simple relation of distance; two points 
in space are merely differentiated, there is in general no preferred direc-
tion in the passage from one to the other. As spatial factors, the two points 
are "potentially coexistent" and in a sense equivalent; a simple movement 
can transform "there" into "here," and "here," after ceasing to be such, can 
be restored to its previous form by the reverse movement. Time however 
reveals, in addition to thc distinction and distance between its elements, 
a unique and irreversible "sense" in which it proceeds. The directions from 
past to future and from future to past are not interchangeable—^ach is 
peculiar to itseif. But where consciousness is limited to spatial intuition 
and apprehends temporal relations only through spatial analogies—this 
unique character of the direction of time must remain obscure. As in the 
intuition of space, everything is here reduced to the simple distinction of 
near and far. The only essential difference that is grasped and clearly ex-
pressed is that between "now" and "not-now"—between the immediate 
present and that which lies "outside" it. This present should not, to be 
sure, be conceived as a strict mathematical abstraction but as a psychological 
"now," encompassing all those contents which can be intuited as an im-
mediate temporal unity, which can be condensed into an elementary unity 
of experience. It is no mere logical borderline, dividing earlier from later, 
but possesses in itself a certain duration,extending as far as the immediate, 
concrete memory. For this form of primary temporal intuition, the whole 
of consciousness and its contents falls, as it were, into two spheres: a bright 
sphere, illumined by the light of the "present," and another, dark sphere; 
and between these two basic levels, there are as yet no mediation of transi-
tion, no shadings or degrees. 
56. Thc Sudanese languages generally express the thought that a subject is occupied in an 
action by a turn of phrase which means literally that he is inside this action. But since this 
"inside" is usually designated very materially, phrases result such as "I am in the inside of 
going," "I am the belly of going," for "I am in the process of going." See Westermann, Die 
Sudansprachen, p. 65; Die Gola-Sprache, pp. 37, 43, 61. 

2l8 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E E X P R E S S I O N 
The fuUy developed consciousness, perticularly the consciousness of 
scientific cognition, does not content itself with this simple opposition of 
"now" and "not-now" but raises it to its richest logical development. It 
produces abundant gradations of time, aU encompassed in a unitary tem-
poral order in which every moment has its specific position. Epistemological 
analysis shows that this order is not "given" by sensation and cannot be 
derived from immediate intuition. It is rather a work of the understanding 
—particularly of causal inference. It is the category of cause and efTect 
which transforms the mere intuition of succession into the idea of a unitary 
temporal order of events. The simple distinction of separate points in time 
must be transformed into the concept of a mutual dynamic dependence 
between them, time as a form of pure intuition must be permeated with 
the function of causal judgment, before this idea can be developed and 
stabilized, before the immediate feeling of time can be transformed into 
the systematic concept of time as a condition and content of knowledge. 
How long the road is from one to the other and through what difficulties 
and paradoxes it leads has been shown most clearly by the development 
of modern physics. Kant regarded the "analogies of experience," the three 
synthetic principles of substantiality, causality, and reciprocity, as the in-
tellectual condition and foundation for the representation of the three 
possible rektions of time: permanence, succession, and simultaneity. The 
progress of physics to the general theory of relativity and the transforma-
tion which the concept of time has undergone in this theory show that this 
relatively simple schema, which is drawn from the basic form of the New-
tonian mechanics, must be replaced epistemologically by more complex 
determinants.
57 In general, the development from the feeling to the con-
cept of time reveals three different stages, which are also of crucial impor-
tance for the linguistic reflection of the consciousness of time. At the first 
stage the consciousness is dominated by the opposition of "now" and "not-
now," which has undergone no further differentiations; at the second, 
certain temporal "forms"—completed and incompleted, continued and 
momentary action—begin to be distinguished so that a definite distinction 
of temporal modes is developed; the final stage is characterized by the 
pure concept of time as an abstract concept of order, and the various stages 
of time stand out in their contrast and interdetermination. 
For it is even more true of temporal than of spatial relations that they do 
57. For a more detailed discussion of this matter see my book Zur Einstein'schen Relativitäts-
theorie. 

T H E R E P R E S E N T A T I O N O F T I M E 
2i9 
not come to consciousness at once as relations, but that their purely rela­
tional character is always mingled with and concealed by other specifica­
tions, particularly those of things and quaUties. Although local specifica­
tions possess certain traits that distinguish them from othersensuous quaU­
ties by which things are differentiated, they nevertheless stand on one and 
the same plane with them as quaUties. "Hereness" and "thereness" are 
just as much a part of an object as any other "thisness" and "thatness." 
Thus, aU designations of spatial form must take certain material designa­
tions as their starting point. When this relationship is extended from space 
to time, the differences of temporal signification first appear as pure 
qualitative differences. Characteristically, these differences are expressed 
not only in the verb but also in the noun. For the consciousness governing 
our highly developed knguages, the specification of time adheres essentiaUy 
to those parts of speech which express a process or activity. The meaning 
of time and the diversity of the relations it impUes can be apprehended 
and identitied only in the phenomenon of change. The verb, as expression 
of a specific condition, from which change begins or as an expression of the 
act of change itself, seems consequendy to be the only true vehicle of 
temporal specifications: it seems to be the Zeitwort** κατ ίξοχήν. In the 
introduction to the Kawi-Wer\ Humboldt was stiU attempting to show 
that this was a necessary relationship arising from the specific nature of 
man's conception of time and of the verb. In the verb, he held, an energetic 
(not merely qualitative) attributive is comprised with being. The energetic 
attributive contains the stages of action, being encompasses the stages of 
time.
6 0 In the Kau/i-Werk^ itsetf, however, Humboldt himself shows that 
not aU knguages express this rektion with equal distinctness: Although 
we tend to conceive of time rektions only in connection with the verb and 
its conjugation, the Malay languages, for example, have developed a usage 
indicating that they connect them with the noun.
6 0 This phenomenon 
is particularly apparent where language designates time rektions by the 
same means which it has developed for the designation of local relations. 
Somali uses the above-mentioned variations in the vowels of the definite 
article not only to express differences of spatial position and situation, but 
also to represent temporal differences. Here the development and designa­
tion of temporal representations run exactly paraUel to those of local 
58. Verb, hterally "time-word" Trans. 
59. Humboldt, "Einleitung zum Kawi-Werk," Werke, 7, N0. 1, 223. 
60. Kawi-Werk. 2, 286. 

220 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E E X P R E S S I O N 
representations. Pure nouns, which to our way of thinking embody not the 
slightest temporal reference, e.g., words such as "man" or "war," can be 
provided with a certain temporal index by changes of the vowel in their 
article. The vowel -a serves to designate the temporally present, the vowel 
o designates the temporally absent, and no distinction is made between the 
future and the not yet distant past. On the basis of this separation, there 
is only an indirect differentiation in the expression of action as to whether 
it is complete or incomplete, momentary, or of greater or lesser duration.
6 1 
Such a marking out of purely temporal characteristics in the noun might 
easily be interpreted as proof of a particularly acute and subtle sense of 
time, if it were not evident on the other hand that temporal sense and 
local sense were here quite undifferentiated, since the consciousness of the 
specific directions of time is totally undeveloped. A sharp distinction is 
made between the contents of now and not-now, as between those of here 
and there, but the distinction of past and future lags far behind, so that 
the very factor that is decisive for the consciousness of the pure temporal 
form and its distinctive nature is lacking. 
The development of child language shows that adverbs of time are 
formed appreciably later than those of place, and that terms such as "to-
day," "yesterday," "tomorrow" have at first no sharply defined temporal 
sense. "Today" is the expression of the present generally, "tomorrow" and 
"yesterday" for the future and past in general: thus certain specific temporal 
quaUties are distinguished, but a quantitative measure, a measure of time 
intervals, is not attained.
62 We seem to be carried back one more step by 
the study of certain languages in which the qualitative differences of past 
and future are often totally blurred. In Ewe, one and the same adverb 
serves to designate both "yesterday" and "tomorrow."
 6 8 In the Shambala 
knguage, the same word refers both to the earliest time and the distant 
future. "This phenomenon, which for us is so striking"-remarks one of 
the students of this language very apdy, 
61. Cf. M. v. Tiling, "Die Vokale," Zeitschrift für Kolonialsprachen, д, 145ff. Such 
temporal indices in the noun are found frequently in the languages of the American Indians; 
see Boas, Handbook, 1, 39; Goddard, "Athapascan" ibid., s, no, etc. 
62. Cf. Clara and William Stern, Die Kindersprache, pp. 231 ff. 
63. Westermann, Grammatik der Ewe-Sprache, p. 129; Eng. trans, by Bickford-Smith, p. 
185. The same phenomenon occurs in many American languages; cf. Karl von den Steinen, 
Die Bakmri-Sprache (Leipzig, 1892), p. 355. In Tlingit one and the same prefix gu- or ga-
it used to designate future and past (Boas, Handbook, '< 176), just as' the Latin olim (from 
iUe) designates the remote past and the distant future (cf. German: einst). 

T H E R E P R E S E N T A T I O N 
OF 
T I M E 
221 
finds its natural explanation in the fact that the Ntus regard time as 
a thing, so that for them there is only a today and a not-today; whether 
the latter was yesterday or will be tomorrow is all the same to them; 
they do not reflect about it, since this would require not only intuition, 
but thought and a conceptual idea of the nature of time. . . . The 
concept of "time" is alien to the Shambala, they know only the intuition 
of time. How hard it was for us missionaries to emancipate ourselves 
from our concept of time and to understand the temporal intuition of 
the Shambala, can be seen from the fact that for years we searched for 
a form which designated only the future; how often we rejoiced at 
having found this form, only to recognize later, sometimes after a pe­
riod of months, that our joy was premature, since in each instance it 
developed that the form we had found was also used for the past.64 
One indication of this intuition of time as a thing is that time relations 
are expressed by nouns with an original spatial signification.65 Only that 
segment of time as a whole which is present in consciousness at any par­
ticular time is apprehended, in opposition to other nonpresent segments, 
and the same material fragmentation occurs in the representation of action 
and activity. The unity of an action literally breaks into bits. At this stage, 
language can represent an action only by dissecting it into aU its particulars 
and rendering each one separately. And this fragmentation is not a logical 
analysis—for analysis goes hand in hand with and is correlate to synthesis, 
in which the form of the whole is apprehended—here, on the contrary, the 
action is, as it were, broken materially into its components, each of which is 
regarded as an objective substance existing in itself. In many African lan­
guages, for example, every action is spht into its parts, each of which is 
rendered by an independent sentence. The action is described in all its 
particulars, and each of these particular actions is expressed by a special 
verb. An event, for example, which we should express by the single sen­
tence: "he drowned," must here be rendered by the sentences, "he drank 
water, died"· "to cut off" becomes "to cut, to faU"; the action of "bringing" 
becomes "take, go there." 6 6 Steinthal has attempted a psychological ex-
64. K. Roefal, Versuch einer systematischen Grammatik der SchambaUsprache (Hamburg, 
1911), pp. 108 Я. 
65. Cf. Codrington, The Melanesian Languages, pp. 164 ff. 
66. For examples from thc Ewe and other Sudanese Unguages scc Wcstcrmann, Grammatik 
der Ewe-Sprachc, p. 95 (Eng. trans, by Bickford-Smith, p. ia6), and Die Sudansprachen, pp. 
48 ff.; from Nuba, see Reinisch, Die Nu6a-Sprachc, p. 52. 

222 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
planation of this phenomenon, for which he cites examples from thc 
Mandingan, imputing it to a "deficient condensation of representations." * 7 
This "deficient condensation," however, points to a fundamental peculi­
arity of the time representation in these languages. Since they only make 
the simple distinction between now and not-now, only the relatively small 
segment of consciousness that is immediately illumined by the light of the 
now, can truly exist for them. Hence the whole of an action cannot be 
apprehended either in thought or language unless the consciousness liter­
ally "actualizes" it in all its details, thrusting each of its stages, one after 
another, into the light of the now. Thus a great number of designations 
arise; one mosaic tile is set beside another: the product, however, has not 
the unity but only the variegated colors of a picture. For each detail is taken 
for itself and only punctually determined: such a mere aggregate of punc­
tual presents cannot yield the percept of a true temporal continuum. 
Zeno's paradox applies to the form in which these languages express 
motion and action; the flying arrow is fundamentally at rest, because in 
every moment of its motion, it possesses only one fixed position. The de­
veloped consciousness of time frees itself from this difficulty and paradox 
by creating entirely new means of apprehending a temporal "whok." 
Time is a substantial aggregate, pieced together from distinct moments, 
but is apprehended as a functional and dynamic whole: as a unity of rela­
tion and causality. The intuition of the temporal unity of action encom­
passes both the subject of the action and the aim toward which it is 
directed. Thc two factors are situated on entirely different planes; but the 
synthetic force of the concept of time consists precisely in its ability to 
transform their opposition into a reciprocal relation. The process of an 
action can no longer break down into disjoined phases, since from the very 
outset it now has behind it the unitary energy of the active subject and 
before it the unitary aim of the action. It is only when the moments of 
action thus join in a causal and telelogical whole, in the unity of a dynamic 
synthesis and a teleological meaning, that a unified representation of time 
becomes possible. Where the linguistic consciousness is fully developed, 
language, in order to designate the whole of an action, need not represent 
aU the details of its course, but contents itself with fixating the beginning 
and end of the action, the subject from which it emanates and the objective 
goal toward which it is directed. Encompassing the whole scope of this 
opposition in a single glance, language can now mediate it: the tension 
67. Steinthal, Die MandcNeger-Sprachen, p. 222. 

T H E R E P R E S E N T A T I O N OF T I M E 
223 
between thc two extremes has been intensified, but at the same time a 
spiritual spark, as it were, leaps the gap and reconciles them. 
This view of the relatively complex and mediate character of the pure 
concept of time seems at first sight to be contradicted by our information 
concerning the grammar of "primitive" knguages. The grammar of "prim­
itive" peoples is reported to contain an almost inconceivable wealth of 
"tense forms." in the Sotho knguage, Endemann lists 38 affirmative tense 
forms, 22 potential forms, 40 conditional, 4 optative or final forms, a great 
number of participial forms, etc.; Roehl's grammar distinguishes 1,000 
forms in the active indicative alone in Shambala.88 The difficulty which 
these observations seem to raise vanishes however when we consider that 
according to the indications of the grammarians themselves, these forms 
express anything but strictly temporal nuances. We have seen that in 
Shambak the fundamental temporal distinction between past and future 
is in no way developed, and as for thc so-called "tenses" in the Bantu kn­
guages, the grammars expressly state that they cannot be regarded as 
tenses in the strict sense since the only temporal distinction which they 
take into account is that of earlier or later. What aU these verb forms ex­
press is not pure temporal characteristics of action, but certain qualitative 
and modal differences in that action. "A temporal difference," writes Seler 
regarding the verb in the American Indian languages, "is expressed by 
various particles or by combination with other verbs, but is far from play­
ing the role in the knguage which the conjugations drawn up by the 
various clerical grammarians would lead us to suppose. And because dis­
tinctions of tense are unessential and accessory, we find the greatest dif­
ferences in tense formation in otherwise closely related languages." 8 9 But 
even where language begins to express temporal specifications more clearly, 
it does not do so by building up a sharp, logical system of time distinctions. 
Thc first distinctions it makes are not relative, but in a sense absolute. To 
speak in psychological terms, it first apprehends certain temporal "gcstalt 
qualities" in an action. It makes distinctions as to whether an action be-
68. Rochl, Grammatik der Schamb<dasproche, pp. 111 ff., and C Meinhof, Grammatik der 
Baniusprachen, pp. 68,75. 
69. Ed. Seler, Das Konjugationssystem der Maya-Sprachen (Berlin, 1887), Ρ· 30. Similarly 
K. v. d. Steinen says that the Bakairi language (op. cit., pp. 371 ff.) definitely does not 
possess tenses in our sense but uses modal terms for its verb inflexions, whose exact meaning, 
it must be admitted, cannot be determined from the available material and perhaps is alto­
gether inaccessible to a European. A clear picture of the abundance of these modal shadings 
can be gained from Roehl's survey (pp. i n ff.) of the verb forms in Shambala. 

224 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
gins "suddenly" or develops gradually, whether it is abrupt or continuous, 
whether it constitutes a single undivided whole or takes place in similar, 
rhythmicaUy recurrent phases. But for the concrete orientation which lan­
guage still retains, these differences are not so much conceptual as intuitive, 
not so much quantitative as qualitative. Before proceeding to a sharp 
differentiation of "tenses" as true expressions of time relation, language 
represents the diverse "modes of action." Here time is by no means con­
sidered as a universal form of relation and order, embracing all events, 
as a totality of moments each ot which stands to the others in a specific 
and unambiguous relation of "before" and "after," "earlier" and "later." 
On the contrary, every single event expressed by a specific mood has, one 
might say, a "time of its own"^ertain formal characteristics and modes 
of which are stressed. Languages vary appreciably in their relative empha­
sis on time distinctions and on pure modal distinctions. The Semitic lan­
guages start, not with the trichotomy of past, present and future, but with 
the simple dichotomy of completed and incompleted action. The "perfect," 
the tense of completed action can be used equally weU to express the past 
and the present, for example it may designate an action which has begun 
in the past but extends into the present^>n the other hand, the "imperfect," 
which designates an incompleted action stiU in process, can be used for 
a future, as weU as a present or past action.70 But even that linguistic family 
in which the pure relative concept of time and the expressions of pure 
temporal distinctions have achieved their highest development, did not 
attain to this level without numerous intermediary stages. The history of 
the Indo-Germanic languages shows that here too modes of action were 
differentiated before "tenses" proper. In the prehistoric period, writes Streit¬
berg for example, the Indo-Germanic languages had no "tenses" at aU, i.e., 
no formal categories whose original function it was to designate time dis­
tinctions. 
The formal classes which we are accustomed to call tenses have es­
sentially nothing whatever to do with time distinctions. AU classes of 
present, aU aorists, aU perfects in aU their moods are timeless, distin­
guished from one another only by the type of action which they desig-
70. For the use of '4enses" in the Semitic languages see Brockelmann, Grundriss, 2, 144 ff. 
With regard to the Ural-Altaic languages, H. Winkler points out (Das Uralaltaische und seine 
Gruppen, p. 159) that the abundance of determinative and modal qualificatives contained 
in the "verbal noun" so much overshadowed tense formation, the strictly verbal element, that 
the latter seemed secondary and almost incidental. 

T H E R E P R E S E N T A T I O N O F T I M E 
225 
nate. Compared to this abundance of forms which served to differentiate 
modes of action, the means by which the Indo-Germanic designates 
time distinctions, seem modest in the extreme. For the present there 
was no special designation whatsoever, timeless action sufficed. The 
past was expressed by a temporal adverb attached to the verbal form: 
thc augment . . . The future, finally, does not seem to have been ex­
pressed in any uniform way in the prehistoric period of the Indo-
Germanic languages. One of the means of expressing it, perhaps the 
most original, was a modal form of probably voluntative significa­
tion." 
This priority in the designation of modes of action over degrees of time 
is also evident, though in varying degree, in the development of the in-
dividual Indo-Germanic languages.72 Many of these languages have devel­
oped a specific phonetic instrument for differentiating momentary and 
continued action; the momentary forms use the simple root vowel, while 
the continued forms use an intensified vowel.73 Since G. Curtius, "punc­
tual" action has generally been distinguished from "cursive" action in the 
Indr>Germanic languages, and more recent classifications include perfec­
tive, iterative, intensive, terminative action, etc.74 The individual Indo-
Germanic languages vary considerably in the sharpness with which they 
make these distinctions and in the degree to which they have developed 
purely temporal designations;75 but in aU of them it is evident that the 
71. Strcitberg, "Perfektive und imperfektive Aktionsart," Paul-Braune-Beiträge, 15 (1891), 
117ff. 
72. For the Greek language cf. Brugmann, Griechische Grammatik. }d cd., p. 469: "From 
the ur-Grtek period down, every verbal concept had to enter into some relation with the mode 
of action, not with the category of time relation. Since the ur-Indo4>ermanic period there 
had been many tenseless verb forms, but none without mood." A comparison of the Homeric 
with the old Attic knguage shows that it became the rule only very gradually to express 
clear time relations by means of the verb (ibid.). 
73. bi the Greek for example, roots like λα£, » i 0 , Ф"У are used in the first function, while 
Xap0, жаЯ, фагу are used in thc second. Cf. G. Curtius, "Zur Chronologie der indoger­
manischen Sprachforschung," Abhandlungen der Königlich Sächsischen Gesellschaft der 
Wissenschaften, PhiloI-hist. Classe, Vol. 5 (Leipzig, 1B67), N0. 3, 229 ff. 
74. Cf. G. Curtius, "Die Bildung der Tempora und Modi im Griechischen und Latein­
ischen," Sprachvergleichende Beiträge, 1 (1846), 150.ff. 
75. In the Germanic system of inflections, modal disdnctions diminish in importance at 
an early date, although they remain clearly discernible in certain isolated phenomena. Cf. 
H. Paul, "Die Umschreibung des Perfektums im Deutschen mit haben und sein," Abhand-
lungen der Königlich Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Classe I , Vol. я з (Munich, 
1902), Pt. ι, 161 ff. However, they still play a prominent part in the Baltic-Slavic languages, 
which have preserved the distinction between "perfective" and "imperfective" action and 

226 
T H E P H A S E 
O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
precise designation of time distincdons is a relatively late product, while 
the expression of the general "temporal gestak" of a process or action seems 
to belong to an early stratum of thought and speech. 
Farthest removed from the primary level of temporal intuition are 
those hnguistic terms which presuppose a form of time measurement and 
consequendy consider time as a sharply determined quantity. Here, to be 
sure, we face a problem which points beyond the sphere of language and 
which can only find its solution in the "artificial" systems of signs devel­
oped by scientific reflection. And yet knguage provides a decisive ground­
work for this new achievement: for the numerical signs which constitute 
the foundation of aU exact mathematical and astronomical measurement, 
could not have developed without numerical words. In three diverse but 
closely related phases, language develops the three basic intuitions of space, 
time and number and so creates the indispensable condition for aU intel­
lectual mastery of phenomena and for every synthesis of these phenomena 
into the unity of a "world concept." 
3. The Linguistic Development of the Concept of Number 
In progressing from the idea of space to that of time, and from these two 
in turn to the idea of number, we seem to round out the world of intuition 
and at the same time to be referred to something beyond it. The world of 
tangible forms seems to recede, and in its place a new world gradually 
arises: a world of inteUectual principles. In this sense, the "nature" of num­
ber was determined by its true phUosophical and scientific discoverers, the 
Pythagoreans. Proclus says that Pythagoras first raised geometry to the 
level of a free science by arriving at its principles deductively (ανοθεν) 
and representing its theorems in immaterial and purely rational terms 
(άυλως και voep&s).
79 
The universal tendency thus imprinted upon sci­
entific mathematics by its first founder has since then been further in­
tensified and deepened. Through Pkto, Descartes and Leibniz it has been 
imparted to modern mathematics. And in trying to construct geometry 
divide aU verbs into two classes accordingly. Cf. Leskien, Grammati\ der altbulgarischcn 
(altkjrchen-siawitchen) Sprache (Heidelberg, 1909), pp. a15ff. 
76. Proclus ш Euclid, p. 64, ed. G. Friedleia. 

T H E C O N C E P T O F N U M B E R 
227 
and analysis out of one principle, the modern interpretation finds itself 
forced back—even more than was ancient mathematics—upon the concept 
of number as its true center. More and more clearly, the work devoted to 
the conceptual foundation of mathematics turns toward this central point. 
And nineteendvcentury mathematicians strove increasingly to arrive at 
a concept of number as a logicaUy autonomous formation. This aim was 
pursued along different paths by Dedckind and Russell, by Frege and 
Hilbert RusseU attempted to reduce all the basic factors underlying num­
ber to pure "k)gical constants"; Frege saw number as an "attribute," but 
an immaterial attribute attaching to an immaterial content, not so much 
the attribute of a "thing," as of a pure concept. In laying the groundwork 
and derivation of the concept of number, Dedekind just as resolutely 
avoided any Unk with intuitive relations or measurable quantities. The 
realm of number, he held, is not to be built on the intuition of space and 
time; it is just the reverse; the concept of number, an "immediate emana­
tion of the pure laws of thought," can alone enable us to gain precise con­
cepts of space and time. It is only by creating the pure and continuous 
reahn of numbers through a finite system of simple logical operations, free 
from any representation of measurable quantities, that the spirit develops 
a clear representation of continuous space.77 AU these tendencies are rooted 
in the exact sciences; critical togic merely sums them up when it proceeds 
from the assumption that the first prerequisite for the understanding of 
number Ues in the insight that number deals not with any given things 
hut with pure kws of thought. "To derive number from things," writes 
Natorp, "is clearly circular reasoning if by derive we mean explain. For 
the concepts of things are complex concepts, into which number enters as 
one of their indispensable components. . . . For thought there can be 
nothing more fundamental than thought itself, that is: the positing of 
rektions. Whatever ebe might be claimed as the foundation of number 
would include precisely this positing of relations and can only appear to 
be the foundation of number because it contains as a presupposition this 
true foundation, this positing of relations." 7 8 
But, however firmly "pure," scientific thought stands its ground and con-
77. R. Dedekind, Was sind und was woilen die ZahUn (1887); cf. G. Frege, Die Grund-
hgen der Arithmetik. (BresUu, 1884); B. Rutsell, The PrincipUs of Mathematics, 1 (Cam­
bridge, 1903). 
78. P. Natorp, Die logischen Grundlagen der exahjen Wissenschaften (Leipzig and Berlin, 
B. G. Teubner, 1910), pp. 98 ff. 

228 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
sciously rejects aU support and assistance from sensation and intuition, 
it seems nevertheless to retain strong ties with language and its concepts. 
The reciprocal bond between language and thought is once again mani­
fested in the logical and linguistic development of numerical concepts,. 
which are perhaps its clearest and most characteristic expression. Only the 
formation of number as a verbal sign opens the road to an understanding 
of its pure conceptual nature. Thus the numerical signs created by lan­
guage represent the indispensable prerequisite for the "numbers" of pure 
mathematics; and yet, between linguistic and purely intellectual symbols 
there remains an inevitable tension and an opposition that can never be 
fuUy reconciled. Though language prepares the way for these symbols, 
it cannot pursue this road to its end. The form of "relational" thought 
which makes possible the representation of pure numerical concepts, con­
stitutes for language an ultimate goal, which it continuously approaches in 
its development but can never fuUy attain.76 For language cannot take 
the decisive step which mathematical thought demands of numerical 
concepts, namely their characteristic detachment and emancipation from 
the foundations of intuition and the intuitive representation of things. It 
clings to the designation of concrete objects and concrete processes and 
cannot free itself from them even when it seeks mediately to express pure 
relations. But again the dialectical principle of progress is confirmed: the 
more language, in the course of its development, seems to immerse itsetf 
in the expression of sensuous things, the more effectively it contributes 
to the spiritual process of liberation from the sensuous. It is through mate­
rial enumerable things, however sensuous, concrete and limited its first 
representation of these things may be, that language develops the new 
form and the new logical force that are contained in number. 
But this form does not appear aU at once as a self-contained whole, it 
must gradually be built up from its separate factors. It is precisely this 
fact that makes inquiry into the origin and development of the numerical 
concepts in language valuable to logical analysis. The logical content of 
number derives from an interpenetration of quite different methods and 
requirements of thought. In number multiplicity seems to merge with 
unity, analysis with synthesis, thorough differentiation with pure similar­
ity. Before the "exact" concept of number could take form, aU these op­
positions had to be placed in purely intellectual balance with one another. 
This, language cannot do; nevertheless, we can follow plainly how in lan-
79. Cf. Chapter 5, below. 

T H E C O N C E P T O F N U M B E R 
229 
guage those threads which are ultimately woven into the intricate mesh 
of number tie in with one another and form themselves in detail before 
they constitute a logical whole. In different languages this development 
takes different forms. Different factors of number formation are favored 
and emphasized—but the aggregate of all these particular and in a sense 
one-sided insights, whicb language gains into the concept of number, 
constitutes a rektively unitary whole. Although language of itself cannot 
fill out the intellectual circle in which the concept of number lies, it can 
circumscribe it inall its scope and thus mediately prepare the way for a 
definition of its content and limits. 
This process begins in very much the same way as the approach of lan­
guage to simple spatial relations. The differentiation of numbers starts, 
hke that of spatial relations, from the human body and its members, 
thence extending over the whole of the sensuous, intuitive world. Every­
where man's own body provides the model for the first primitive enumera­
tion: the first "counting" consists merely in designating certain differ­
ences found in external objects, by transferring them, as it were, to the 
body of the counter and so making them visible. AU numerical concepts, 
accordingly, are purely mimetic hand concepts or other body concepts be­
fore they become verbal concepts. The counting gesture does not serve 
as a mere accompaniment to an otherwise independent numeral, but fuses 
in a sense with its signification and substance. The Ewe, for example, 
count on their outstretched fingers; beginning with the litde finger of the 
left hand and turning back the counted finger with the pointer of their 
right hand: after the left hand, they do the same with the right hand; then 
they either begin again from the beginning or squat on the ground and 
continue counting on their toes.80 In Nuba the gesture that accompanies 
counting usually consists in pressing first the litde finger, then the ring 
finger, middle finger, index and thumb of the left hand into the fist of the 
right hand and then reversing the hands. At the number twenty, the two 
fists are pressed together horizontally.81 Similarly, v. d. Steinen reports 
that among the Bakairi the simplest attempt at counting was doomed to 
failure unless the object counted, a handful of corn kernels, for example, 
was immediately present to the touch. "The right hand felt . . . the left 
hand reckoned. Even where there were only three kernels, it was ab­
solutely impossible for them to count the grains on the fingers of the left 
80. Wcstermann, Grammatik t** Eu>e-Sprache, p. 80; Eng. trans, by Bickford-Smitb, p. 101. 
81. Reinisch, Die Nuba-Sprache, pp. 36 ff. 

23O 
Т Н Б P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
hand merely by looking at them." 8 8 As we see, it does not suffice at this 
stage for counted objects to be referred to the parts of the body; in order to 
be counted, they must in a sense be immediately transposed into parts of 
the body or bodily sensations. Thus the numerals do not so much designate 
objective attributes or rektions ofobjects, as embody certain directives for 
the bodily gesture of counting. They are terms and indices for positions 
of the hands or fingers, and are often couched in the imperative form of the 
verb. In Sotho, for example, the word for "five" means literaUy "complete 
the hand," that for "six" means "jump," i£., jump to the other hand.83 
This active character of the so<aUed "numerals" is particularly evident in 
those knguages where the form of the numeral indicates the manner 
in which the objects counted are placed or grouped. The Klamath lan­
guage, for example, has a variety of "numerals" formed from verbs of 
setting, laying, placing, each indicating a particular type of arrangement, 
according to the specific character of the objects to be counted. One class 
of objects must be spread out on the ground in order to be counted, an­
other must be piled in layers, one must be divided into heaps, another ar­
ranged in rows—and to each specific arrangement of the objects corre­
sponds a different "numeral classifier." 8 4 By this method, the motions of 
arranging the objects are coordinated with certain bodily motions which 
are conceived as running in a certain order. These motions need not be 
limited to the hands and feet, the fingers and toes, but can extend to other 
parts of the body.In British New Guinea, the sequence in counting runs 
from the fingers of the left hand to the wrist, the elbow, the shoulder, the 
left side of the neck, the left breast, the chest, the right breast, the right side 
of the neck, etc.; in other regions the shoulder, the clavicular hollow, the 
navel, the neck, orthe nose, eye, and ear are used.85 
The intellectual value of primitive counting methods has often been 
disparaged. Steinthal writes for example in his discussion of the counting 
methods of the Mandingos: 
82. K. v. d. Striaen, Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens (2d cd., Berlin, D. Reimer, 
1897), p. 86. 
83. Cf. Meinhof, Grammatik der Bantusprofhen, p. 58; similar examples from thePapuan 
languages in Ray, Torres Straits Expedition, p. 373, etc. In the Eskimo language the number 
20 is expressed by the sentence "a man is completed," i.e., all his fingers and tocs are 
counted. See W. ThaIbitzer in Boas, Handbook, *> P· ™47-
84. J. W. Powell, The Evolution of Language (Smithsonian Institution, Washington), 
Annual Report, N0. 1, p. 21; Gatschet, Klamath Language, pp. 532ff. 
85. See Ray, Torres Straits Expedition, p. 364; cf. in particular the abundant material ia 
Levy-Bruhl, How Natives Think (London, x926), pp. 181 ff. 

T H E C O N C E P T O F N U M B E R 
23i 
Thc intellectual guilt which burdens the spirit of the Negro is that 
once arrived at the toe he did not depart from this material prop and 
multiply the toe by his own free creation, extending the short series 
to a long one; that instead, dinging to the body, he descended from the 
hand, that noble instrument of instruments, the servant of the spirit, 
to the dust-burrowing foot, the slave of the body. Thus number adhered 
to the body and did not become an abstract numerical concept. The 
Negro has no number but only a sum of fingers, fingers of the hand 
and foot; his is not the spirit which, impelled by a striving for the 
infinite, always passes beyond the specific number, adding one from 
out of itself; no, the existing particulars, the things of nature, led him 
from one to one, from the litde finger to the thumb, from the left to the 
right hand, from the hand to the foot, from one man to another; never 
did his spirit intervene, creating freely, but crawled around in na­
ture. . . . That is not the act which our spirit performs when it 
counts.88 
But in the half-poetical, half-theological pathos of his diatribe, Steinthal 
forgets that it is far more fruitful to seek out and recognize the intellectual 
content of this method, however slight, than to measure it by our fully 
developed concept of number. Here, of course, we cannot speak of any 
system or general organization of numeric concepts. But one thing is ac-
compUshed: a very definite order is observed in passing from one mem­
ber of a manifold to another, even though this manifold is determined in 
a purely sensuous way. In the act of counting, one part of the body does not 
follow another arbitrarily, the right hand follows the left, the foot follows 
the hand, the neck, breast, shoulder follow the hands and feet in accordance 
with a schema of succession which is conventional, to be sure, but is in any 
case strktly observed. The instituting of such a schema, though far from 
exhausting the content of what more highly developed thought understands 
by "number," nevertheless provides its indispensable groundwork. For even 
pure mathematical number resolves ultimately into a system of positions, 
into an "order in progression," as Hamilton has called it. True, the crucial 
weakness of the primitive counting method seems to be that it does not 
freely create this order in accordance with a spiritual principle but draws 
it solely from given things, particularly the articulation of the counter's 
own body. But even this method with its undeniable passivity, manifests 
86. Steinthal, Die Mande-Ncger-Sprachen, pp. 75 ff. 

232 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
a characteristic spontaneity, though indeed only in germ. In apprehending 
material objects not only according to what they individuaUy and imme­
diately are, but according to the manner in which they are ordered, the 
spirit begins to advance from the concretion of objects to the concretion 
of acts: and through these acts, the acts of combination and differentiation 
which it performs, it wiU ultimately arrive at the new "inteUectual" prin­
ciple of number. 
For the present, however, the abUity to observe an order in progression 
from one object to another remains merely an isolated factor, which has 
not yet been attuned to the other factors necessary for the formation of the 
pure concept of number. There is indeed a certain coordination between 
the counted objects and the parts of the human body which function as 
expressions of number: but diis coordination remains vague, it remains 
a kind of wholesale coordination, until the series compared can themselves 
be broken down into distinct "units." This can only be done, however, if 
the elements to be counted are regarded as strictly similar—so that each 
element is distinguished from the others through the position it occupies 
in the counting and by no other material attribute. For the present, how­
ever, we are far removed from the abstraction of such a "homogeneity." 
The counted objects must be present in aU their tangible concretion, so that 
they can be immediately touched and felt, and the counting units them­
selves are differentiated only by concrete sensuous characteristics. In place 
of purely abstract, uniform conceptual units, we have only such natural 
things as the articulation of the human body offers. Primitive "arithmetic" 
finds its elements only in such natural groups. One system is distinguished 
from another by the material standard on which it is based. The use of 
one hand as a model gives rise to the quinary system, the use of both 
hands to the decimal system, the use of hands and feet, to the vigesimal 
system.87 And there are other counting methods which are inferior even 
to these simplest attempts at group and system formation. However, such 
Umitations in "counting" should not be interpreted as an inability to recog­
nize and differentiate concrete groups. Even where actual counting has 
not progressed beyond the first meager beginnings, the differentiation of 
such groups can be highly developed—for this requires only that each 
specific group be recognized by some general qualitative characteristic, 
and not that the group itsetf be articulated and quantitatively defined as a 
87. A rich collection of examples is to be found in A. F. Pott, Die quinare und die vige-
timale Zählmetkode bei Völkern aller WeltteiU (Halle, x847). 

T H E C O N C E P T O F N U M B E R 
233 
"sum of units." The Abipones, whose faculty of counting was only partially 
developed, are reported to have been extremely expert at distinguishing 
concrete groups. If a single member of the huge packs of dogs which they 
took with them on hunting expeditions were lacking, it was noticed at 
once, and likewise the owner of a herd of four to five hundred cattle could 
recognize even at a distance whether any were missing and which ones.88 
Here individual groups are recognized and differentiated by some in­
dividual characteristic: in so far as one can speak of "number," it appears 
not in the form of a specific measured magnitude, but as a kind of con­
crete numerical gestalt, an intuitive quality adhering to a totally unartic-
ulated general impression of quantity.89 
This fundamental conception is clearly reflected in language which 
originally had no universal numerals applicable to all enumerable objects, 
but used different numerical designations for different cksses of objects. 
As long as number is seen as a quality of things, there must fundamentally 
be as many diverse numbers and groups of numbers as there are different 
classes of things. If the number of a quantity of objects is regarded only 
as a qualitative attribute, belonging to the things in exacdy the same way 
as a specific spatial formation or sensuous property, language cannot ab­
stract it from other attributes and give it a universal form of expression. 
At primitive levels of knguage formation we do actually find that the 
designation of number is fused with the designation of things and attri­
butes. The same term serves to express the nature of the object and its 
numerical character. There are words which express at the same time a 
particukr class of objects and a particular group character of these objects. 
In the language of the Fiji Isknds, for example, different words are used 
to designate groups of two, ten, a hundred, a thousand coconuts, or a group 
of ten canoes, ten fish, etc.90 And even after the numeral has become inde­
pendent of the designation of things and attributes, it continues to attach 
itself as far as possible to the manifold diversity of things and attributes. 
88. M. DobrizhofTcr, Historia de Ab!ponibut (Vienna, 1784), Eng. trans., An Account of 
theAbipones (London, 1822); cf. PoR, pp. 5,17, etc. 
89. Regarding this qualitative character of the first numbers and of counting, cf. the excel­
lent, richly documented expositions of Wertheimer in "Das Denken der Naturvölker," Zeit-
schrift für Psychologie, 60 (1912), 321 ff. 
90. H. C. v. d. Gabelentz, Die melanesischen Sprachen, p. 23; cf. Codrington, The Melane-
sien Languages, p. 24j. Similar collective terms are found in the Melanesian languages of New 
Guinea, which for example use a separate undivided word to designate 4 bananas or 4 coconuts, 
10 pigs, 10 long objects, etc. Cf. Ray, Torres Straits Expedition, 3,475. 

234 
T
H
E 
P
H
A
S
E 
I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
Not every number applies to every thing: it does not yet express abstract 
multiplicity as such, but expresses the mode, dass and form of a concrete 
multiplicity. In the American Indian languages, for example, different 
groups of numerals are used to designate persons or things, animate or in­
animate objects. Or a different group of numerals may be used to designate 
fishes or pelts, standing, lying or sitting objects. The Moanu Islanders have 
different sets of numbers from one to ten for coconuts or men, spirits and 
animals, trees, canoes and villages, houses, poles and plantations.91 In the 
Tsimshian language of British Columbia there are special series of nu­
merals for counting fiat objects and animals, round objects and time in­
tervals, men, boats, long objects and measurements; 9 2 in other, neighbor­
ing languages the differentiation of the various series of numerals goes 
even further and seems almost unlimited.98 As we see, enumeration is by 
no means oriented toward "homogeneity." The tendency of language is 
rather to subordinate the quandtative difference to the generic difference 
expressed in its classifications and to modify the expression of quantitative 
difference accordingly. This tendency is evident even where language has 
progressed to the point of using universal numerals, but where each nu­
meral is stiU followed by a specific determinative indicating the particular 
class to which the group belongs. Seen intuitively and concretely, there 
is obviously a great difference between the gathering of men into a "group" 
and the gathering of stones into a "heap," between a "row" of resting ob­
jects or a "swarm" of moving objects, etc. Language seeks to retain such 
classifications and shadings in the choice of its collective terms and in the 
regularity with which it combines such words with actual numerals. In 
the Malayo-Polynesian languages, for example, numerals are not directly 
attached to substantives, but instead to certain determinatives which are 
required to ckssify the group. The term for "five horses" is literally "horses, 
five tails," for "four stones" it is "stones, four round bodies" etc.9* In the 
Mexican languages, the expression of number and of the enumerated ob­
ject is likewise followed by a term of group classification, which differs for 
91. Cf. P. Jos. Mcyer in Anthropos, 1, 228 (quoted by Wertheimer, op. cit., p. 342). 
92. Cf. J. W. Powell, Introduction to the Study of Indian Languages (2d ed., Washington, 
1880), p. 25, and the compilation of different classes of numerals (numerals for flat objects, 
round objects, long objects, human beings, measurements) in Boas, "Tsimshian" {Handbook, 
ι. 396ff.). 
93. Cf. the examples collected by Levy-Bruhl from the linguistic and ethonological literature. 
94. Cf. Müller, Novara-Reise, pp. 275, 303; Codrington, The Melanesian Languages, p. 148; 
H. C v. d. Gabelentz, Die melanesischen Sprachen, pp. 23, 255. 

T H E 
C O N C E P T O F N U M B E R 
235 
example for round and cylindrical objects like eggs and beans, or for long 
rows of persons, things, waUs, and furrows, etc.88 The Japanese and Chi­
nese have developed a particidarIy subtle system of "numeratives," differ­
entiated according to the class of objects numbered. These languages, which 
kck the general grammatical distinction between singular and plural, are 
extremely strict in their insistence that a collective grouping be designated 
according to its specific character. While in the process of abstract enumera­
tion the units must be emptied of aU intrinsic content before they can be 
combined with one another, here this content subsists and determines the 
specific type of grouping into collective units, groups and multiplicities.96 
Here both thought and language are far more concerned with identifying 
and differentiating certain groups than with breaking down these groups 
themselves into units and particulars: they characterize a muItipUcity by 
apprehending its general intuitive content and so distinguishing it from 
others, not by building it up logically and mathematicaUy from its con­
stitutive elements. 
In the means by which language carries out the formal and universal 
distinction between singular and plural, we encounter the same basic ap­
proach. H we consider the idea of plural as implying the logical and math­
ematical category of "plurality," i£4 the category of a muItipUcity con­
structed of distinct, similar units, we find that many languages have no 
plural at aU. A great number of knguages lack forms by which to designate 
the antithesis between singular and plural. The substantive in its basic 
form can serve equaUy weU to designate a class embodying an indetermi­
nate number of individuals, or to designate a single member of the class. 
It Ues halfway between a singular and a plural signification and in a man­
ner of speaking has not yet decided between the two. Only in special 
cases, where the distinction seems essential, it is indicated by special lin­
guistic means, and often it is the singular rather than the plural significa­
tion that is so distinguished. Thus, for example, the Malayo-Polynesian 
knguages, according to Fr. MiiUer, "have never risen to the concept of 
number as a category encompassing a multiplicity in a living unity," so 
that their substantives are neither truly concrete nor truly abstract, but are 
something between the two. "To the Malay, 'man* means neither a man 
in concreto nor man — mankind in abstracto, but designates men whom 
95. For details, see Buschmann in his notes on Humboldt's Kam-Werkj 2, 26g ff. 
96. Cf. the system of Japanese and Chinese "numeratives" in Hoffmann, Japanische Sprach-
lehre, pp. 149 ff. 

236 
T H E P H A S E OP I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
one has seen and knows. However, the word (6ran) corresponds more to 
our plural than to our singular, and the singular must be indicated by a 
word meaning 'one.' '* 9 7 Here then we are not dealing with a bare concep­
tual unity which takes on a plural signification through a morphological 
change; instead, we have an undifferentiated multiple to which a plural sig­
nification can be given by the addition of certain nouns witha general collec­
tive sense, and a singular signification by the use of certain individualizing 
particles.98 The same intuition of the singular^>lural relationship is to be 
found in many of the Altaic languages, where one and the same word 
without grammatical differentiation can be used to express both singular 
and plural. This appellative can designate the individual, the whole genus, 
or an indeterminate number of individuals.99 But even in those languages 
which have developed a clear formal distinction between singular and 
plural, there are phenomena which make it apparent that this strict dis­
tinction was preceded by a stage of relative indifference. Often a word 
with theoutward form of a plural is treated grammatically as a singular 
and is conjugated with the singular form of the verb, because its funda­
mental signification is felt to be not so much a discreet plurality as a simple 
collective whole.100 In ur-Indo-Germanic and Greek the neuter plural is 
linked with a singular verb because the ending -a of these nouns originally 
had no plural signification but went back to the feminine singular ending 
-a which was used for collective abstractions. Thus the forms in -a were 
originally neither plural nor singular, but simply collectives, which could 
be construed in either way as the need arose.101 
97. Fr. Mu!lcr, Novara-Reise, pp. 274 ff.; cf. for the Australian languages, pp. 246 ff.; see 
also Fr. Miillcr, Gundriss, 2, Pt 2,114 ff. 
98. Cf. Codrington, The Melanesian Languaget, pp. 148ff.; H. C. v. d. Gabelentz, Die 
melanesischen Sprachen, pp. 23, 255. 
99. Cf. Böthlingk, Über die Sprache der ]akj*ten, pp. 340 ff.; H. Winkler, Der Vralaltaische 
Sprachstamm, p. 137; on the "plural formation" in the Altaic languages see also Grunzel, 
Vergleichende Grammatik der altaischen Sprachen, pp. 47 ff. 
200. In Egyptian, according to Erman (Ägyptische Grammatik, ΡΡ· 108ff.), manycon-
cepts that arc purely plural in meaning are rendered by collective abstract nouns in the singular 
form, and the form of the verbal predicate is transposed accordingly. Similarly in the South 
Semitic languages, according to Brockelmann (Grundriss, t, 437 ff.; cf. 2, 77 ff.), the bound­
aries between singular, collective and plural are stiU in constant flux, so that collectives 
can revert to the singular by a slight phonetic shift and then form a new plural. For the 
Indo-Germanic family see the examples from the Romance Unguages given by Meyer-Lübkc, 
Grammatik der romanischen Sprachen, 2, 69 ff.; 2, 26 ff. 
101. From the ur-Indo-Germanic period on, according to Brugmann, a noun was put in 
the singular if its content was conceived as unitary and no articulation of thc unit was taken 

T H E C O N C E P T O F N U M B E R 
237 
On the other hand, we find that analogously to what has been observed 
in the process of counting, language does not abrupdy juxtapose an ab­
stract category of unity to an abstract of plurality, but finds aU manner 
of gradations and transitions between them. The first pluraUties that it 
distinguishes are not general but specific pluralities, with a disdnctive 
qualitative character. Aside from the use of dual and trial, many languages 
employ a double plural; that is, a narrow form for two or a few objects, 
and another for many objects. This usage, which Dobrizhoffer found in 
the language of the Abipones,102 has its exact counterpart in the Semitic 
languages, for example the Arabic.102* In his account of the plural forms 
in Arabic (which beside the dual has a limited plural for 3 to 9 and a 
multiple plural for 10 and over, or for an indeterminate number of ob­
jects), Humboldt remarks that the underlying conception, which in a 
sense situates the generic concept outside the category of number, so that 
both singular and plural are distinguished from it by inflection, must 
"undeniably be called a very philosophical one." 1 0 3 In truth, however, this 
generic concept does not seem to be conceived in its determinate generic 
character and thus raised above the category of number; on the contrary, the 
category of number does not yet secm to have entered into this form. The 
distinction which language expresses by singular and plural has not been 
taken up into the genus; indeed, it has not yet been sharply drawn; the 
quantitative opposition of unity and multiplicity has not yet been over­
come by a qualitative unity which encompasses them both, because for 
the present this opposition has not yet been clearly determined. The unity 
of the genus signifies a distinct one, opposed to the no less distinct multi­
plicity of its members—but in the indeterminate collective signification, 
from which in many languages both singular and plural significations 
crystallize out, the decisive factor is precisely indistinctness. The multi-
plicityis regarded as a mere heap or mass, hence as a sensuous, not as 
a logical whole. Its universality is that of an impression, which has not 
yet been broken down into its separate elements and components, not that 
into account; the plural on the other hand was used where several members of a class or several 
separate occurrences and actions were distinguished, or a concept was regarded as plural in 
character. Brugmann, Kurze vergleichende Grammatik der indogermanischen Sprachen (Strass-
burg, K. J. Trübner), p. 413; Griechische Grammatik, 3d ed., pp. 369 ff. 
102. Dobrizhoffer, Historia de Abiponibus, 2, 166ff. (quoted in Humboldt, "Über den 
Dualis," Werke,6, N0. I , 10 ff.); Eng. trans., 2, 162ff. 
102a. Cf. Brockelmann, Grundriss, 1, 436ff. 
103. "Über den Dualis," p. 20. 

238 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
of a concept above them aU, encompassing the particular as something 
separated out and distinct. 
But it is precisely through this fundamental factor of separation that 
the strict concept of number can arise from the mere notion of a group and 
multiplicity. So far we have seen two paths by which language approaches 
this concept, which characteristically it can apprehend only in a sensuous 
cloak. On the one hand, linguistic thought, even in those primitive count­
ing methods oriented toward the parts of the human body, fixated the 
factor of "order in progression." If these methods of counting were to 
produce any result at aU, they could not pass arbitrarily from one part of 
the body to another but had to observe some rule of progression. On the 
other hand, it was the impression of multiplicity as such, the consciousness 
of a stiU indeterminate whole which is in some way divided into "parts," 
that guided language in its formation of general collective terms. In both 
cases, the idea of number and its Unguistic expression seem bound up with 
the fundamental forms of intuition, with the intuition of spatial and 
temporal reality. Epistemological analysis shows how the two forms must 
work together in order to produce the essential content of the concept of 
number. In apprehending collective "togetherness," number bases itself 
on the intuition of space, but it requires the intuition of time in order to 
form the characteristic counterpart of this specification, the concept of 
distributive unity and particularity. For the logical problem which number 
must solve consists not only in fulfilling these two requirements separately 
but in apprehending them as one. Every numerically defined multiplicity 
is at the same time conceived and apprehended as a unit, and every unit 
as a multiplicity. Now it is true that this correlative union of opposing 
factors recurs in every fundamental act of consciousness. The elements 
which enter into the synthesis of consciousness are not simply left to stand 
side by side, but are apprehended as the expression and product of one and 
the same fundamental act^ynthesis is made to appear as analysis, analysis 
as synthesis. But necessary as is this interdetermination, one or the other 
of the two factors may assert its preponderance in the general synthesis, 
according to the specific character of the problem involved. In the exact 
mathematical concept of number a pure equilibrium seems to be achieved 
between the function of analysis and synthesis; here the requirements of 
unification into a whole and of absolute discreteness of elements are both 
ideaUy fulfilled. In the consciousness of time and space, however, one of 
these factors predominates. Ία space the favored factor is the coexistence and 

T H E 
C O N C E P T O F N U M B E R 
239 
mutual involvement of elements; in time it is their succession and separate-
ness. We cannot intuit or conceive a particular spatial form unless at the 
same time we represent the space as a whole "in" which it is contained: the 
particularity of the form is possible only as a limitation of al^encompassing 
"unitary" space. On the other hand, although the temporal moment is 
what it is because it appears as a factor in a sequence, this very sequence 
can be constituted only if every single moment excludes aU others, if we 
represent a simple, indivisible "now," a pure punctual present, which is 
absolutely differentiated from the past and the future. The concrete idea 
of number, as expressed in language, makes use of both achievements, that 
of the spatial and that of the temporal consciousness, and through them 
develops two different factors of number. Through the differentiation of 
spatial objects, language arrives at its concept of collective multiplicity— 
through the differentiation of temporal acts, it arrives at its expression of 
particularity and separation. This twofold content of number seems to be 
clearly manifested in plural formation, which may be governed either by 
the intuition of complexes of things or by the rhythmically recurrent phases 
of a specific temporal process; in the one case it is oriented predominantly 
toward objective totalities consisting of multiple parts, in the other to­
ward the repetition of events or actions linked together in an unbroken 
sequence. 
And indeed, those languages which are predominantly verbal in struc­
ture have developed a characteristic, purely "distributive" conception of 
the plural, differing sharply from the collective conception. In these lan­
guages a sharp characterization of verbal acts seems to underlie the whole 
notion of plurahty. The language of the Klamath Indians, for example, has 
developed no specific instrument for distinguishing between the designa­
tion of particular objects and the designation of a multiplicity of objects. 
Instead, it distinguishes accurately and logically between an event consist­
ing only in a single temporal act and an event embracing several phases 
different in time, but similar in content. "To the observing mind of the 
primeval Klamath Indian," Gatschet writes, "the fact that sundry things 
were done repeatedly, at different times, or that the same thing was done 
severally by distinct persons, appeared much more important than the pure 
idea of plurality, as we have it in our language. This category of severalty 
impressed itself on his mind so forcibly that he rendered and symbolized 
it in a very appropriate manner by means of the distributive reduplication 
of the first syllable." In the Klamath, aU expressions of the "plural" in our 

240 
ТНБ P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
sense are demonstrably of recent origin, whereas the idea of breaking down 
an act into a plurality of similar processes is sharply designated by means 
of reduplication which permeates the whole language down to its post­
positions and certain adverbial particles.104 Hupa, a knguage of the Atha­
pascan group, often uses the singular where we would use the plural, 
namely when a plurality of individuals participate in an action but the 
action itself appears as a unit. Even here, however, the distributive rela­
tion is always precisely designated by the use of a special prefix.105 And 
reduplication occurs in the same function in other language groups.108 
Here again an intrinsically abstract concept has found its immediate sensu­
ous expression in language. The simple phonetic repetition is both the 
most primitive and the most effective means of designating the rhythmic 
recurrence and the rhythmic articulation of an act, particularly of a hu­
man activity. Here perhaps, if anywhere, we can gain some insight into 
the earliest motives of language formation and into the relationship be­
tween language and art. Attempts have been made to trace the beginnings 
of poetry back to those first primitive u/ort\ songs in which for the first 
time the rhythm felt by man in his own physical movements was, as it 
were, objectified. Bücher's compendious study of work and rhythm has 
shown how these work songs are still to be met with aU over the world, 
and how similar they are to one another in their basic structure. Every form 
of physical labor, particularly when performed by a group, occasions a 
specific coordination of movements, which leads in turn to a rhythmic 
organization and punctuation of work phases. This rhythm is manifested 
to the consciousness in two ways: in pure motor sensation, in the alterna­
tion of muscular tension and relaxation, and on the other hand objectively, 
in auditory perceptions, in the regularity of the sounds accompanying the 
work. Consciousness of the activity and its nuances is bound up with these 
sensuous differences. Grinding and rubbing, pushing and pulling, pressing 
and trampling: each is distinguished by a rhythm and tone quality of 
its own. In aU the vast variety of work songs, in the songs of spinners and 
weavers, threshers and oarsmen, miUers and bakers, etc., we can stiU hear 
104. Gatschet, Klamath Language, pp. 419, 464, 611. 
105. Goddard, "Athapascan" (Hupa), in Boas, Handboo\, 1, 104; cf. Boas, '%wakiud" 
(op. ciL, /, 444): 'The idea of plurality is not clearly developed. Reduplication of a noun 
expresses rather the occurrence of an object here and there, or of different kinds of a particular 
object, than plurality. It is therefore rather a distributive than a true plural. It seems that this 
form is gradually assuming a purely plural significance." 
106. Cf. the use of reduplication in designating the "distributive" plural in the Hamitc 
knguages. See Meinhof, Die Sprachen der HamUen, pp. 23, 171. 

T H E C O N C E P T O F N U M B E R 
24i 
with a certain immediacy how a specific rhythmic sense, determined by the 
character of the task, can only subsist and enter into the work if it is at the 
same time objectified in sound.107 And perhaps certain forms of reduplica­
tion in the verb, expressive of an act containing a number of rhythmically 
recurrent phases, grew out of an objectivization of this sort, originating in 
man's own activity. In any case, language could acquire consciousness of 
the pure forms of time and number only through association with cer­
tain contents, certain fundamental rhythmic experiences, in which the two 
forms seem to be given in immediate concretion and fusion. Here, it is a 
differentiation of acts rather than of things which gave rise to "distribu­
tion" as one of the basic factors of enumeration. This seems to be confirmed 
by the fact that many languages employ a plural verb not only where 
there is an actual plurality of subjects, but also where a single subject di­
rects one and the same action toward different objects.108 Where the 
intuition of plurality is oriented toward the pure form of the act itself, 
the number of individuals participating in an action is secondary, the 
essential question is whether the action is performed in one or several 
phases. 
So far we have considered the part played by the basic forms of pure 
intuition, the forms of space and time, in the development of numbers 
and plurals. Yet perhaps we have not yet penetrated to the deepest and 
most fundamental root of the enumerative act. For our inquiry cannot 
be restricted to objectivity and to distinctions within the objective world 
107. Cf. Bücher, Arbeit und Rhythmus. 
108. This corresponds exacdy to the reverse phenomenon which we have just (p. 240) 
observed in the Hupa language, where the singular of the verb is used even with a plurality 
of subjects if the action itself (such as the execution of a dance) is regarded as an indivisible 
unit; in most of the American Indian languages a transitive verb occurs in the plural when 
its direct object is plural, that is, when the acdon is directed toward several objects and is 
thus looked upon as split. In other languages as weU, the use of the plural in the verb de­
pends not so much on thc plurality of the subject as of the object, or upon both at once. 
(Examples from the Kivai, a Papuan language, are given b·; Äay, Torres Straits Expedition, 3, 
311 ff.; among the African languages, Nuba, for example, draws a distinction in the verb 
form according to whether the object of the action is singular or plural (Reinisch, Die Nuba-
Sprache, pp. 56ff., 69ff.). Tagalog, which is described in detail by Humboldt in his Kawi-
Werk, often attaches a certain plural prefix to the verb in order to indicate the plurality of 
the subject, but also to indicate that the action consists in different parts or is repeated. In 
this case the concept of plurality refers sometimes to the actors, sometimes to the action or 
its more or less frequent performance. Thus, for example, mag-sulat (from sulat "to write") 
has both thc common plural meaning of "many write" and the frequentative meaning of "hc 
writes much," or it can express an "habitual mood" ("it is his business to write"). Cf. Hum­
boldt, 2, 317, 376. 

242 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
of space and time; it must also return to the fundamental oppositions 
arising from pure subjectivity. There are numerous indicadons that lan­
guage drew its first numerical distinctions from this sphere—that the first 
consciousness of number arose not so much through perception of the 
material togetherness and apartness of objects or events as of the opposidon 
between the " I " and the "thou." This sphere would seem to disclose a 
far subtler differentiation, a far greater sensitivity to the distinction be­
tween "one" and "many," than occurs in the field of mere objective per­
ceptions. Many languages which have not developed a true plural form of 
the noun, disclose a plural form of the personal pronoun; 1 0 9 others 
possess two different plural signs, one of which is used exclusively for pro­
nouns.110 Often the plural of a noun is expressed only in the case of animate 
and rational beings, not in the case of inanimate objects.111 In the Yakut, 
garments and parts of the body usually stand in the singular, even though 
two or several of them are present in one individual, but they are placed 
in the plural if they belong tö several persons;112 thus the distinction of 
number is here developed more sharply for the intuition of individuals 
than for the intuition of mere objects. 
In the enumerations arising from this personal sphere we again encounter 
that same correlation between number and object enumerated, which 
we have discussed above. We have seen that the first numerical terms 
originated in specific, concrete enumerations and seem to retain their color. 
This characteristic coloration is most apparent where the number arises 
109. For the American language cf., for example, Roland B. Dixon's account of Maidu 
(Boas, Handbook, 1, 683 fT.): "Ideas of number are unequally developed in Maidu. In nouns, 
the exact expression öf number seems to have been felt as a minor need; whereas, in the case 
of pronominal forms, number is clearly and accurately expressed" (p. 708). Also in the 
Melanesian, as in the Polynesian and Indonesian languages, number is sharply differentiated 
in the pronoun; cf. Codrington, The Melanesian Languages, p. 110, and H. C. v. d. Gabelentz, 
Die melanesischen Sprachen, p. 37. Bakairi, which knows no difference between singular and 
dual and has no general designation of the plural, shows suggestions of a plural form in the 
first and second persons of the pronoun; cf. v. d. Steinen, Die Bakjuri-Sprache, pp. 324, 349 ff. 
110. This is the case in Tibetan for example; cf. J. J. Schmidt, Grammatik, der tibetanischen 
Sprache (Petersburg, 1839), pp. 63 ff. 
i n . Varied examples of this usage in Fr. Müller, Grundriss, 2, Pt. 1, 261, 314 ff.; 3, Pt. 2, 
50; for thc Melanesian languages see v. d. Gabelentz, op. cit., p. 87. In Hupa only few nouns 
have a plural form: those which indicate a man's age or rank or a relation of kinship 
(Goddard, "Athapascan," in Boas, Handbook, 1,104). In the Aleutian language there are two 
different expressions of plurality, one of which is used for animate beings, the other for inani­
mate objects; cf. Victor Henry, Esquisse d'une grammaire raisonnie de la langue aUoute 
(Paris, 1879), P· 13. 
112. Böthlingk, Ober die Sprache der Jakuten, p. 340. 

T H E C O N C E P T O F N U M B E R 
243 
from a differentiation not of things but of persons. For then number does 
not appear primarily as a universal logical principle or endless process; it 
is restricted from the outset to a specific sphere, whose hmits are defined 
less by objective intuition than by pure subjective feeling. It is this feeHng 
which differentiates " I " from "thou," and "thou" from "he"; but there is 
no immediate need to progress beyond this sharply defined triad, given in 
the differendation of "three persons," to the intuidon of a further multi­
plicity. Where such a multiplicity is conceived and designated in knguage, 
it lacks the "distinctness" of the personal spheres. Beyond "three" the reahn 
of indefinite plurality, of mere undifferentiated collectivity, begins. And 
everywhere we find that the first enumerations are subject to this limita­
tion. The knguages of many primitive peoples show that the activity of 
differentiation growing out of the distinction between " I " and "thou," 
progresses from "one" to "two" and often accompUshes the significant step 
to "three," but that beyond this, the faculty of differentiation, of "discre­
tion," which Ues at the base of enumeration, seems paralyzed. Among the 
Bushmen the numbers, strictly speaking, extend only to two: the term 
for three means only "many" and is used, in conjunction with finger kn­
guage, for aU numbers up to ten. 1 1 3 Similarly, the aborigines of Victoria 
have developed no numerals beyond two. The Binandele knguage of New 
Guinea has only the numerals one, two and three, whUe numbers above 
three must be expressed by circumlocutions.114 AU these examples, to 
which many others might be added,115 make it clear how closely the act 
of counting was originaUy bound up with the intuition of I, thou and he, 
from which it detaches itsetf only gradually. This seems to be the ultimate 
basis of the speckl role played by the number three in the language and 
thinking of aU nations.116 It has been said that among primitive peoples, 
each number has a kind of individual mystical physiognomy. This is par-
113. Cf. Fr. MiiUer, Grundriss, 1, Pt 2, 26 fT. 
114. Cf. Sayce, Introduction to the Science of Language, 1,412. 
115. Such examples, particularly from the Papuan languages, may be found in Ray, Torres 
Straits Expedition, 3,46, 288,331,345,373; see also Fr. MiiUer, *TDie Papuasprachen," Globus, 
72 (1897), 140· In Kivai the same word (potoro) that serves to designate the trial is used also 
for four: its meaning is probably "few," while all numbers over three are rendered by sirio, 
"many" (Ray, p. 306). For the Melanesian languages, see H. C v. d. Gabelentz, p. 258. Ac­
cording to K. v. d. Stcinen, there are dear indications that among the Bakairi two was the 
"limit of the old arithmetic," the term for multiplicity as such; he traces the word used for 
two back to a combination of words meaning htcrally "with thee" (Die Bakatri-Sprache, pp. 
35*ff>. 
x16. Cf. H. K. Usener, "Dreizahl," Rheinisches Museum für Philologie, N. S., Vol. 5i. 

244 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
ticularly true of the numbers two and three. They seem to possess a spe­
cific spiritual tonality, which sets them apart from the uniform and 
homogeneous sequence of numbers. Even in those languages which possess 
a richly developed, "homogeneous" system of numbers, this special posi­
tion of the numbers one and two, sometimes of three and four, is reflected 
in certain formal characteristics. In the Semitic, the words for one and 
two are adjectives, while the other numerals are abstract nouns assuming 
the opposite gender from that of the counted objects which stand in the 
genitive plural. 1 1 7 In ur-Indo-Germanic, as the IndoJranian, Baltk>Slavic 
and Greek languages all indicate, the numbers from one to four were in­
flected, while those from five to nineteen were rendered by uninflected 
adjectives, and those beyond nineteen by substantives commanding the 
genitive of the counted objects.118 Such grammatical forms as the dual, 
persist much longer in personal pronouns than in other parts of speech. 
The dual, which otherwise disappeared from the whole declension, was 
preserved up to a relatively late period in the German first and second 
person pronouns;119 likewise in the Slavic languages, the "objective" dual 
was lost much earlier than the "subjective" dual. 1 2 0 And in many lan­
guages, the etymology of the first numerals suggests a link with the per­
sonal pronouns: in Indo-Germanic, for example, the words for "thou" and 
"two" seem to disclose a common root.121 In speaking of this relationship 
Scherer concludes that we stand here at a common linguistic source of 
psychology, grammar, and mathematics; that the dual root leads us back 
to the original duahsm upon which rests the very possibility of speech 
and thought. 
1 2 2 For according to Humboldt, language was made pos­
sible by address and response, by a tension which arises between I and 
117. Cf. Brockelmann, Grundriss, 1, 484 ff.; 2, 273 ff. 
118. Cf. A. Mciuet,Introduction h Vitude comparative des langues indo*uropSennes (ist 
ed., Paris, Hachette, 1903; 7th ed., 1934, pp. 409 ff.; German trans, by W. Printz from 2d 
French ed., Leipzig and Berlin, 1909, pp. 252fl.); Brugmann, Kurze vergleichende Gram¬
matik, pp. 369 ff. 
119. The Westphalian and Austro-Bavarian dialects stiU retain vestiges of this use of the 
dual; cf. Jacob Grimm, Deutsche Grammatik, 1, 339 ff. 
120. MikIosich, Vergleichende Grammatik der slawischen Sprachen, 4, 40; on thc analogous 
phenomena in the Finno-Ugrian knguages see J$zsef Szinnyei, Finnisch-ugrische Sprach-
wissenschaft (Leipzig, G. J. Göschen, 1910), p. 60. 
121. On this question cf. Benfey, Das indogermanische Thema des Zahlworts "Zwei" ist du 
(Göttingen, 1876); Brugmann and Delbrück, in Grundriss, 2d eAn 2, Pt. 2, 8 ff., also assumet 
tbat the ur-Indo-Germanic *duwo "ultimately goes back to a personal intuition." 
122. Scberer, Zur Geschichte der deutschen Sprache, pp. 308 fl., 355. 

T H E 
C O N C E P T O F N U M B E R 
245 
thou and which is resolved in the act of speech; so that this act appears to 
be the true and authentic "mediation between mind and mind." 
On the basis of this speculative view Humboldt strove, in his treatise 
on the dual, to illuminate this form from within. Whereas most gram­
marians had hitherto regarded it as mere ballast, as a useless linguisdc 
refinement, he traced it to a twofold source, subjective and objective, and 
an original signification which he found to be partly sensuous and pardy 
intellectual. According to Humboldt, wherever the dual is employed 
predominantly as an expression of a purely objective intuition, language 
follows the first direction, i.e., takes duality as a sensuously tangible fact 
given in nature. This usage is found in almost aU linguistic families. To 
the linguistic sense, things existing in pairs represent a special generic group­
ing. In the Bantu languages, for example, such natural pairs as the eyes, 
ears, shoulders, brea0ts, knees, feet, etc., form a special class, characterized 
by a special nominal prefix.123 And there are also artificial pairs; language 
stresses, for example, the duality of certain implements. In most languages, 
however, this use of the dual for pure nominal concepts has steadily de­
clined. In Semitic it belonged to the basic language but dwindled in the 
individual languages.124 In Greek the dual had disappeared from certain 
dialects before the end of the prehistoric period; in Homer it was begin­
ning to disintegrate. It survived relatively late only in the Attic dialect but 
was dying out by the fourth century в.с. 1 2 5 This phenomenon is not 
Umited to any particular region or set of conditions and apparently ex­
presses a general principle of linguistic logic.126 The decline of the dual 
coincides with progress from the individual, concrete number to the ab­
stract numerical series. As the idea of the numerical series, as a whole con­
structed according to a strictly unitary principle, gains ground, the particu­
lar number ceases to represent a specific content and becomes a mere mem­
ber of the series, equivalent to other members. Heterogeneity began to 
123. Mcinhof, Grammatik der Bantusprachen, pp. 8 ff. 
124. Cf. Brockebnann, Kurzgefasste vergleichende Grammatik, p. 222. 
125. Brugmann, Griechische Grammatik, 3d ed., p. 371; Meillct, German ed., p. 6; cf. also 
Friedrich Müller, "Der Dual im indogermanischen und semitischen Sprachgebiete," Sitxungs· 
berichtederKaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philos.-hist. Classe, 35 (Vienna, 1860), 
51ff. 
126. In Old Egyptian the use of the dual is stiU extensive, while in Coptic it has died out 
except for certain vestiges (see Erman, Ägyptische Grammatik, p. 106; Steindorf, Koptische 
Grammatik, ΡΡ· 69, 73· 

246 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
make way for pure homogeneity. But understandably, this new approach 
gained acceptance far more slowly in the personal than in the material 
sphere: for in its whole origin and essence, the personal sphere is oriented 
toward heterogeneity. The "thou" is not similar to the "I," but confronts 
it as an opposite, as a not-I: here the "second" is not a mere repetition of 
the first, but is qualitatively "other." True, the " I " and the "thou" can 
fuse into the community of the "we"-but this form of union is quite differ­
ent from a collectivization of things. As early a writer as Jacob Grimm 
stressed the difference between objective plural concepts and personal plural 
concepts; he pointed out that whereas the objective plural can be defined 
as a sum of similar elements, "men" for example as "man and man," the 
"we" can by no means be represented as a sum of this sort, since it must 
be construed not as "I and I," but rather as "I and thou" or "I and he." 1 2 7 
The purely "distributive" factor in enumeration, the pure differentiation 
of units, is here more prominent than in that form of enumeration which 
starts from the intuition of time and temporal events.128 
The same striving to preserve the specificity of the elements which enter 
into the "we" is revealed in the usage of the trial and of the inclusive and 
exclusive plural. These phenomena are closely related. The use of the 
dual and trial is particularly strict in the Melanesian ktnguages which 
insist on the appropriate term in speaking of two or three persons; and 
in these languages the first person pronoun takes a different form depend­
ing on whether the speaker includes himsetf in the designation "we" or 
excludes himself from it. 1 2 8 The languages of the Australian aborigines 
also tend to interpolate dual and trial forms between the singular and 
plural; both dual and trial possess one form which includes the person 
addressed and another which excludes him. "We two" can mean either 
"thou and I" or "he and I": "we three" can signify either "I and thou and 
127. Cf. Jacob Grimm, Kleinere Schriften, 3, 239 ff. 
z28. Cf. Fr. Müller, Grundrist, 2, Pt t, 76 ff. In Die Sprachwissenschaft, pp. 296 ff., G. v. d. 
Gabelentz remarks: "Grammatically speaking . . . family Ufc embodies aU the personal 
pronouns, singular, dual and plural; the family or clan has a sense of itself as a permanent 
unit, opposed to other families. 'We' stands in opposition to 'you' and 'them.' I believe that 
this is no mere playing with words. Where better could the personal pronoun be rooted than 
in the habits of a continuous famUy life? Sometimes it even seems as though languages con­
tained memories of the relation between the perception of the woman and the perception of 
the 'thou.* Chinese designates both with the same word. . . . Likewise in the Thai languages 
the syUable me combines the significations of 'thou' and 'mother.'" 
129. Cf. Codrington, The MeUmesian Languages, pp. 111 ff.; Ray, Torres StraiU Expedition, 
3,428, and elsewhere. 

T H E 
C O N C E P T O F N U M B E R 
247 
he" or "I and he and he," etc. 1 8 0 In some languages this disdnction is ex­
pressed in the form of the plural—in the Delaware language, for example, 
the inclusive plural consists, according to Humboldt, in a combination 
of the pronouns " I " and "thou," while the exchosive form consists in a 
repetition of the pronoun " I . " 1 3 1 The development of a homogeneous 
number series and a homogeneous intuition of number sets a limit to this 
strictly individualizing tendency. The distinct individual gives way to the 
genus which embraces all individuals alike, the qualifying differentiation 
of elements gives way to the uniformity of method and rule by which they 
are encompassed in a quantitative whole. 
If we look back over the whole process by which language forms its 
numerical concepts and terms, we find that its separate factors can be 
derived per antiphrasin from the exact method of number formation pre­
vailing in pure mathematics. We find that before the logical mathematical 
concept of number can become what it is, it must first be derived from its 
antithesis and opposite. The essential logical attributes of the mathematical 
series of numbers have been designated as its necessity and. universality, 
its uniqueness, its infinity and the absolute equivalence of its members.132 
None of these characteristics applies to that first method of enumeration 
which finds its expression in language. Here there is no necessary and 
universal principle which makes it possible to encompass all numerical 
representations at one glance and to master them by a unitary rule. Here 
there is no unique number series; instead, as we have seen, each new class 
of enumerable objects requires new instruments of enumeration. Nor can 
there be any question of an endless series of numbers: it is neither neces­
sary nor possible to carry the intuitive and perceptual combination of ob­
jects any farther than groups with a very definite intuitive group char­
acter.188 Furthermore, the enumerated object does not enter into the act 
of enumeration as a unit divested of aU quaUtative attributes, but preserves 
130. Cf. Matthews, "Aboriginal Languages of Victoria," /. and Proc. of the Roy. Soc. of 
N. S. Wales, 36 (1902), 72, and "Languages of Some Native Tribes of Queensland," etc., 
ibid., pp. 155 ff., 162. The personal pronouns also have more than one form in the Munda and 
Nicobarese knguages (cf. P. W. Schmidt, Die Mon-Khmer Völker, pp. 50ff.). For the 
American Indian languages see the different examples of "inclusive" and "exclusive" in Boas, 
Handbook, pp. 573 #·» 761, 815; also v. d. Stcinen, Die Bakmri-Sprache, pp. 349 ff. 
131. Humboldt, Kawi-Werk, 2, 39. 
132. Cf. G. F. Lipps, "Untersuchungen über die Grundlagen der Mathematik," in WUhebn 
Wundt, Phüosophische Studien (20 vok. Leipzig, 1883-1903), Vols. 9-11, 14. 
133. Cf. the apt remarks of Wertheimer, op. cit., Zeitschrift für Psychologie, Vol. 60, par-
ticukrly pp. 365 fl. 

248 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
its specific material and qualitative character. An indication of this is 
that forms denoting degrees of qualitative concepts develop very graduaUy. 
If, for example, we consider the comparison of adjectives, the forms of posi­
tive, comparative and superktive developed in our civilized knguages, we 
iind that they all contain a universal concept, a specific generic characteris­
tic, which only varies in size in the process of comparison. But in most of 
these knguages we can stiU discern, side by side with this purely quantita­
tive differentiation, another approach, in which the quantitative difference 
is itsetf perceived as a substantial, generic difference. The suppletives oc­
curring in the comparison of adjectives both in the Semitic and IndcbGer-
manic knguages bear witness to this approach, ω the Indc^Germanic lan­
guages for example, certain quaUtative concepts—such as good and bad, 
large and many, little and few—are formed not from a single basic root 
but from entirely different roots (as for example our "good" and "better," 
Latin bonus, melior, optimus, Greek άγαθός, άμείνων, ариго?, βέΚτίων 
and βέλτΜ~τσς, κράττων and кратигтоъ). The explanation usually ad­
vanced for this phenomenon is that an older "individualizing" trend has 
not been entirely submerged by the later "grouping" trend—that in these 
cases the original "qualitative language formation" has resisted the grow­
ing tendency toward "quantitative formation."184 In place of the abstrac­
tion of a uniformly conceived and uniformly designated attribute, differ­
entiated only in degree, we have here a basic intuition in which each 
"degree" of an attribute retains its own unique character, and which does 
not regard it as a mere "more" or "less"; but as specific and distinct. This 
view appears stiU more clearly in languages that have not developed a 
specific form of adjective comparison, ш the vast majority of knguages the 
forms that we caU "comparative" and "superktive" are totaUy kcking. 
Here degrees can be distinguished only indirecdy: verbal terms such as 
"exceed," "surpass," etc.,188 may be employed, or the two terms of compari­
son may appear side by side in simple parataxis.188 Or eke adverbkl parti­
cles may indicate that a thing is large or beautiful, etc4 in comparison with 
134. Osthoff, Vom Suppletivwesen der indogermanischen Sprachen (Heidelberg, 1899), 
pp. 49 ff. 
135. Examples particularly from the African knguages in Meinhof, Grammatik, der 
Bantusprachen, p. 84; Westermann, Grammatik der Ewc-Sprache, p. x02 (Eng. trans, by 
Bickford-Smith, p. 140), and Die Goh-Sprache, pp. 39, 47; RoebJ, Grammatik der SehambaUt-
sprache, p. 25. 
x36. See examples in Roehl, p. 25; Codrington, The MeUmesian Languages, p. 274; 
Gatschet, Khmath Language, p. 520. 

T H E 
S P H E R E OF " l N N E R 
I N T U I T I O N * ' 
249 
another thing. 1 8 7 Many of these particles have originaUy a spatial sense, so 
that the qualitative gradation seems to be based on local relations of high 
and low, above and below.188 Here again linguistic thought makes use of 
a spatial intuition, where abstract, logical thought seems to call for a 
pure concept of relation. And again the circle of our inquiry closes. Again 
it becomes evident that concepts of space, time and number are the essential 
framework of objective intuition as it develops in language. But they can 
fulfill this function only because their general structure situates them in 
an ideal middle region^>ecause, precisely by holding fast to the form of 
sensuous expression, they progressively imbue the sensuous with intel­
lectual content and mould it into a symbol of spiritual Ufe. 
4. Language and the Sphere of "Inner 
Intuition." 
Phases of the hConcept 
I . FORMATION OF SUBJECTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS IN LINGUISTIC E X -
PRESSION. So far our analysis of language has essentially been directed to­
ward the categories in which it constructs the objective world of intuition. 
But it is already evident that this methodological limit has not been strictly 
observed. In our exposition of the "objective" categories we have at every 
step been led into the subjective sphere; we have found that every new 
specification which knguage gives to the world of objects is also reflected 
in the specification of the subjective world. For we are dealing with 
correlative spheres of intuition, which determine each other's limits. Every 
new configuration of the objective sphere, whether spatial, temporal or 
137. See F. W. H. Migeod, The Mende Language (London, 1908), p. 65, etc. Of the Semitic 
language] only the Arabic has developed a specific form of adjective comparison, a so<alled 
"elative"; according to Brockelmann (Grundriss, 1, 372; 2, 210 fi.) this is a very late, spe­
cifically Arabic development 
138. in the Nuba language (cf. Reinisch, Die Nuba-Sprachc, p. 31) the comparative is sug­
gested by a postposition which literally means "over"; in Fiji the same function is per­
formed by an adverb meaning "upwards" (cf. H. C. v. d. Gabelentz, Die melanesischen 
Sprachen, pp. 6ofT.). The comparative suffixes of the Indo-Germanic -ero, -tero are also 
derived, according to Brugmann (Kurze vergleichende Grammatik., pp. 321 fi.), from adverbs 
of local signification. 

25O 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
numerical, has produced a new picture of subjective reality and disclosed 
new traits in this purely "inner" world. 
But language also has its own independent means of opening up and 
giving form to this other, "subjective" existence: and they are no less firmly 
rooted and no less fundamental than the form in which it apprehends and 
represents the world of things. Even today, it is true, the opinion is often 
expressed that the terms with which language reflects personal reality änd 
its relations are merely derived from those applying to the objective world. 
Attempts at systematic classification of the parts of speech often proceed 
from the assumption that the pronoUn is no independent part of speech 
with a spiritualcontent of its own, but merely a substitute for the noun, the 
substantive, that it does not embody one of the autonomous ideas of kn­
guage formation but merely stands for something else. 1 3 9 But as early a 
writer as Humboldt raised decisive arguments against this "narrowly gram­
matical view." He pointed out that the pronoun cannot possibly be the kt-
est part of speech: for the first element in the act of speech is the personality 
of the speaker himself, who stands in constant contact with nature and in 
speaking must inevitably express the opposition between his I and nature. 
"But in the I, the thou is automaticaUy given, and through a new opposi­
tion the third person arises, which, now that language has gone beyond 
the circle of those who feel and speak, is extended to dead things." 1 4 0 
On the basis of this speculative view, empirical linguists have often at­
tempted to demonstrate that the personal pronoun is, as it were, the 'Ъеа"-
rock" of knguage formation, the most ancient and obscure, but also the 
firmest and most enduring component of languages.141 But although Hum­
boldt stresses in this connection that the original feeling of the I cannot 
be an invented, general, discursive concept, we must bear in mind on the 
other hand that this original feeling cannot be sought exclusively in the 
expHcit designation of the I as the first person pronoun. The philosophy of 
knguage would indeed reduce itsetf to the narrow, logical-grammatical 
view which it combats, if it strove to measure the form and configuration 
139. This conception of the pronoun as a mere idie suppUante is put forward for example 
by Raoul de Ia Grasserie, Du verbe comme ginSrateur det autres parties du discours (Paris, 
x914). The name "pronoun" or irrurvßUx coined by the ancient grammarians goes back to 
this conception; cf. for example Apollonius, De syntaxi, Bk. a, ch. 5. 
140. Humboldt, Einleitung zum Kawi-Werk," Werke, 7, N0. 1, 103 ff.; cf. '^Jber den 
Dualis," Werke, 6,26 ff., and "Über die Verwandtschaft der Qrtsadverbien mit dem Pronomen," 
Werke, 6, N0. ι, 304 ff. 
141. Jacob Grimm, Deutsehe Grammatik, 1, 355 ff.; W. Scherer, Zur Geschickte der deut­
schen Sprache, p. 215. 

T H E S P H E R E O F " l N N E R 
I N T U I T I O N " 
25i 
of the l<onsciousness solely by the development of the pronoun. In thc 
psychological analysis of children's language, the mistake has often been 
made of identifying the earliest phonetic expression of I with the earliest 
stage of the I-feeling. Here it is overlooked that the psychological content 
and its linguistic expression never fully coincide and above all that unity 
of content need not be reflected in simplicity of expression. Language has 
many different means of expressing a specific fundamental intuition, and 
we must consider them as a whole in order to see clearly the direction to 
which thcy point. The formation of the I-concept is not bound up exclu­
sively with the pronoun, but proceeds equally through other linguistic 
spheres, through the medium of the noun, the verb, etc. It is particularly 
in the verb that the finest distinctions and shadings of the I-feeling can be 
expressed, since it is in the verb that the objective representation of a process 
is most characteristically permeated with the subjective representation of 
an action, and since in this sense verbs, as the Chinese grammarians put 
it, are truly "living words" in distinction to nouns which are "dead 
words." 1 4 2 
At first, it is true, the expression of the I and the self seems to require the 
support of the nominal sphere, the sphere of substantial, objective intuition, 
from which it liberates itself only with great difficulty. In the most diverse 
languages, we find terms for I which are derived from objective terms. 
In particular, language shows that at first the concrete feeling of self is 
entirely bound up with the concrete intuition of one's own body and limbs. 
We find here the same orientation toward physical existence and par­
ticularly toward the human body as in the expression of spatial, temporal 
and numerical relations. This system of designating the I is especially ap­
parent in the Altaic languages. AU the branches of this family show a 
tendency to designate whatever we express through personal pronouns, 
by nouns provided with case endings or possessive suffixes. The words for 
" I " or "mc" are replaced by terms signifying "my being," "my essence," 
or by such "drastically material" terms as "my body" or "my bosom." Even 
a purely spatial term, one for example whose basic significance might be 
rendered approximately as "center," can be used in this sense.148 Similarly, 
in Hebrew the reflexive pronoun is rendered not only by words such as 
142. Cf. G. v. d. Gabelentz, Chinesische Grammatik (Leipzig, T. O. Weigel, 1881), pp. 
112ff. 
143. Cf. H. Winkler, Der uraIaItaische Sprachstamm, pp. 59ff., 160fT., Hoffmann, Japa-
nische Sprachlehre, pp. 91 ff., and J. J. Schmidt, Grammatik, der mongolischen Sprache (Petert-
burg,1831),pp.44ff. 

252 
T H E 
P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E E X P R E S S I O N 
"souI" or "person," but also by "faceV "flesh" or "heart" "*-whife simi-
krly the Latin persona originaUy meant the actor's face or mask and was 
long used in German to indicate the outward appearance, figure and stature 
of an individual.148 ω Coptic, "seh?' is rendered by the noun "body," to 
which possessive suffixes are attached.146 Likewise in the bidonesian lan­
guages, the reflexive object is designated by a word which can mean "per­
son," "spirit" or "body." 1 4 7 FinaUy this usage extends even to the fodo-
Germanic knguages; in Vedic and classical Sanskrit, for example, the 
setf and the I are rendered sometimes by the word for soul (ätmän) and 
sometimes by the word for body {tanu).
1*
8 
AU this makes it plain that 
where the intuition of the setf, the soul, the person, first appears in lan­
guage, it cUngs to the body—just as in mythical intuidon man's soul and 
setf are at first conceived as a mere repetition, as a "double" of the body, ш 
many languages, nouns and pronouns long remain formaUy undiffer­
entiated, inflected in the same patterns and assimikted to one another in 
number, case and gender.149 
H, however, we inquire not so much into the form in which language 
clothes the perception of the I, as into the inteUectual content of this per­
ception, we find that it can be sharply defined within the sphere of purely 
144. On the general method by wbich the Semitic knguages express the reflexive pronoun, 
see Brockelmann, Grundriss. 2,228 and 327; in most cases the reflexive must be indicated by 
the word for soul or its synonyms (man, head, being). 
145. Cf. Grimm, Deutsches Wörterbuch, 7. cols. 1561^2. 
146. Steindorff, Koptische Grammatik, p. 88; simikrly in Egyptian, cf. Erman, Ägyptische 
Grammatik, p. 85. 
147. Cf. Brandstetter, Indonesisch und Indogermanisch im Satxbau (Lucerne, 1914), p. 18. 
148. Wm. Dwight Whitney, A Sanskrit Grammar (London, 1879), p. 179; B. Delbrück, 
VergUicheude Syntax, 1, 477. 
149. Cf. Wundt, Die Sprache, Völkerpsychohgie, ad ed^ 2, 47 ff, and the examples here 
cited from Fr. MüUer's Grundriss. Those substantival and adjectival circumlocutions for me 
personal pronouns which have arisen out of considerations of etiquette and ceremonial are 
not to be considered in the same Ught as the phenomena here discussed. According to Humboldt 
(Werke, 6, N0. ι, 307 ff. and Kawi-Werk, 2,335), they belong to a "state of hatf dvifization." 
Terms of exaltation (e.g., commander, magnificence) are used for the second person. The Japa­
nese knguage has gone farthest in this direction. Here the personal pronoun has been entirely 
submerged by such polite circumlocutions, which are precisely graduated according to the 
rank of the speaker and of the person addressed. 'The differentiation of the three grammatical 
persons (I, thou, he)," says Hoffmann (Japanische SpracUehre, pp. 75 ff.), "has remained 
foreign to the Japanese knguage. All persons, that of the speaker as weU as the person to 
whom one speaks, are considered as perceptual content, that is according to our idiom, in the 
third person and it is for etiquette to decide, on the basis of the adjectives employed, which 
person is meant by which word. Etiquette alone distinguishes between I and not-I, abasing 
thc one and exalting the other." 

T H E S P H E R E O F " l N N E R 
I N T U I T I O N ' * 
253 
nominal or verbal expression. In almost aU languages which divide nouns 
into specific classes, a personal class anrJLan object class are clearly distin­
guished. And here we are not dealing with a simple biological distinction 
between the animate and inanimate, which as such would belong to the 
intuition of nature, but with often surprising subdeties and shadings in the 
representation of personal existence. In the Bantu languages a special class, 
identified by a particular prefix, designates man as an independent, active 
personality, while another class embraces animate but not personal beings. 
Man is included in the latter class when he appears as not acting independ-
endy, but as the instrument and representative of another, e.g., as his mes­
senger, emissary, or agent. Here, then, language distinguishes types and 
degrees of personality according to the function it performs and according 
to the dependent or independent form of will manifested in it. 1 5 0 The 
germ of this basic intuition can also be found in those languages which dis­
tinguish the designations of personal beings from those of mere objects by 
preceding them with a special "personal article." In the Melanesian lan­
guages such an article regularly precedes the names of individuals and 
tribes; it is used also with inanimate objects such as trees or boats, ships 
or weapons, if they are considered not as mere representatives of their 
genus but as individuals, and provided with a name of their own. Certain 
languages have developed two different personal articles for different classes 
of animate beings, based evidently on a kind of value gradation within 
the concept of personality.151 A feeling for such purely subjective differ­
ences is also disclosed by certain of the Australian aboriginal languages 
which select one form of the nominative to indicate that a subject merely 
is and another to designate the subject as active in an independent sense.162 
Similar distinctions can be indicated in the verb; a special prefix for ex-
150. Cf. Meinhof, Grammatik der Bantusprachen, pp. 6 ff. 
151. Codrington, The Melanesian Languages, pp. 108 ff., and Brandstetter, Der Artikel des 
Indonesischen, pp. 36, 46. Among the American Indian languages Hupa, for example, pos­
sesses a special third person pronoun used for the adult male members of the tribe, another 
for children, old people, members of other tribes and animals; see Goddard, "Athapascan," in 
Boas, Handbook, 1, 117. 
152. Here the simple nominative serving solely to designate a person or object is distin­
guished from the nominanvus agentis, which is used where a transitive verb is connected with 
the subject. "If, for example, one sees a person in the distance and asks: Who is that?—the 
answer will be k°re (a man); but if one wishes to say, the man has killed the kangaroo, one 
uses another form, the subjective nominative, which must always be employed where the 
noun is represented as acting." See Fr. Müller, Novara-Reise, p. 247; cf. Matthews, "Aboriginal 
Languages of Victoria," /. and Proc. of the Roy. Soc. of N. S. Wales, 36,78, 86, 94. 

254 
T
H
E 
P
H
A
S
E 
O
F 
I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
ample, may indicate whether thc occurrence in question is a simple "natu­
ral" event, whether it represents the intervention of an active subject or is 
performed by several such subjects acting in common.153 These distinctions 
are not outwardly pronominal, yet it is evident that in them the pure con­
cept of personal existence and action is clearly apprehended and developed 
in a variety of gradations. 
The extraordinary wealth of these gradations is particularly evident in 
the abundance of means by which language indicates so-called "generic 
distinctions" in verbs. From the standpoint of sharp logical analysis, only 
a single clear distinction would seem at first glance to be possible: that 
between independent action and mere being acted upon, between active 
and passive. Thus Aristotle strove to raise the grammatical distinction 
which we express by the opposition between "active" and "passive" to thc 
level of a universal logical and metaphysical category. But it is by no means 
correct to maintain that in thus placing central emphasis on the funda­
mental opposition between acting and being acted upon, between noieiv 
and πάσχειν, 
Aristotle followed tendencies which were given and in a 
sense imposed upon him by the Greek language. Language in itself would 
have pointed in a different direction: for precisely in the Greek, the "pas­
sive" is not sharply distinguished from the other voices of the verb either 
in form or meaning. The Greek passive developed only gradually, in part 
from the active and in part from the middle voice.154 When we fuUy con­
sider other linguistic families, it becomes apparent that the simple opposi­
tion of action and being acted upon plays no exclusive role in the develop­
ment of verbal expression, but is constantly crossed by a number of other 
antitheses. Even where languages have clearly developed this opposition, 
where a sharp distinction is made between "active" and "passive" forms, 
this distinction is only one among many: it belongs to a totality of con­
ceptual gradations that are verbally expressed. In other languages this op­
position may be totaUy lacking, so that formaUy at least, there is no spe-
z53. Cf. Codrington, The Melanesian Languages, pp. 183 ff. One Indonesian idiom, the 
Buginesc, has two different "passive prefixes" which it attaches to the verb. One expresses the 
'4inintentional," i.e., an event which occurs "by itself," without thc intervention of an active 
subject Cf. Brandstetter, Sprachvergleichende Charakteristik eines indonesischen ldioms (Lu­
cerne, 1911), pp. 37ff. According to Reinisch (Die Nuba-Sprache, pp. 63 ff.), the Nuba lan­
guage draws a sharp distinction between the passive and the inchoative form of the verb: the 
former is used when a state is induced by the active intervention of a subject, the second 
when it is brought about by mere natural conditions, through a normal course of events. 
154. Cf. Brugmann, Griechische Grammatik, 3d ed., pp. 458 ff. 

T H E S P H E R E O F " l N N E R 
I N T U I T I O N " 
255 
cialized passive use of the verb. Significations which we are accustomed 
to express in passive terms are rendered by active verb forms, particularly 
the third person plural of the active verb.
1 5 S In the Malay languages, ac-
cording to Humboldt, the "passive" is formed by transposition of the verb 
into a nominal form: there is no true passive because the verb itself is not 
conceived as active, but has rather a nominal character. Essentially, the 
designation of an occurrence implies in these languages neither an agent 
nor an object acted upon: the verb merely takes note of the occurrence, 
without explicitly connecting it with the energy of the subject or giving 
any formal indication of its relation to the object affected.
168 
But this deficient development of the abstract opposition of active and 
passive does not arise from any deficiency in the concrete intuition of 
action and its nuances: this intuition is often astonishingly varied in the 
very languages which lack a formal distinction between active and pas-
sive. Not only are the individual "genera" of the verb often sharply defined 
in these knguages, but they can overlap in a great variety of ways and 
combine to produce expressions of astonishing complexity. First of aU we 
have those forms which designate a temporal character in an action, but 
which, as we have seen, are less concerned with the expression of relative 
time than with the type of action. A sharp distinction is made between 
"perfective" and "imperfective," "momentary" and "cursive," unique or 
iterative action: between action completed at the time of speaking and ac-
tion stiU in process of development; between action limited to a specific 
moment or extending over a more protracted time span; between action 
effected aU at once or in several stages. Such distinctions can be expressed 
by specific genera of the verb in addition to the above-mentioned modal 
forms.
1 5 7 A simple state an be designated as such by the use of a "stative," 
155. Examples from the Melanesian languages in Codrington, pp. 191 ff.; from the African 
languages in Westermann, Die Sudansprachen, p. 70; Migeod, The Mcnde Language, p. 82. 
Thc missing passive is often replaced by impersonal locutions or by active forms embodying a 
passive nuance. "He is struck," for example, can be rendered by locutions such as "he receives 
or sufTers striking" or by such a very material formulation as "he eats blows." (Examples in 
Fr. Miiller, Novara-Reise, p. 98.) By means of an auxiliary verb whose basic meaning is 
"obtain, acquire," the Japanese language forms verbs which indicate acquisition of an action 
coming from outside and in this sense can bc designated as passive verbs. (Hoffmann, Japa-
nische Sprachlehre, p. 242.) Similarly in Chinese, the "passive" is frequently formed by means 
of such auxiliary verbs as "see, find, receive" (e.g., "see hate" for "to be hated"). Cf. G. v. d. 
Gabelentz, Chinesische Grammatik., pp. 113, 428. 
156. Humboldt, Kawi-Wer{, 2, 80, 85; cf. the parallels from Australian languages in Fr. 
Müller, Novara-Reise, pp. 254ff. See also Codrington, p. 192. 
157. Cf. abovepp. 224fi. 

256 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E E X P R E S S I O N 
a gradual incepdon by an "inchoative," a concluded action by a"cessative" 
or "conclusive." If the action is to be characterized as protracted and regu­
lar, hence as habitual or customary, the "habitual" form is used. 1 5 8 Other 
languages have developed the differentiation of momentary and frequenta­
tive verbs to a high degree.159 And in addition to these distinctions which 
essentially concern the objective character of the action, the verb form can 
express the inner attitude of the I toward the action. This attitude can be 
either theoretical or practical, it can be a product of pure volition or of 
judgment. The action can be characterized as desired or demanded, or, 
where judgment is implied, as assertoric or problematic. It is in this direc­
tion that the true "modal" distinctions, hke the older "modes of action," 
develop: the subjunctive which has a "volitive," "deliberative" and "pro­
spective" significance; the optative, which is used sometimes in the sense 
of a wish, sometimes to express a prescription or a mere possibility.160 The 
volitive form is capable of expressing further gradations extending from 
wish to command, and these may be reflected, for example, in the distinc­
tion between a "precative" and an "imperative" mood.181 Besides impera­
tive, implorative, desiderative and obligative moods, indicating that an 
action should be performed, many American Indian languages have purely 
theoretical moods which the grammarians call "dubitative" or "quotative," 
indicating that an action is doubtful or reported on the basis of someone 
else's testimony.162 Often a special suffix attached to the verb makes it clear 
whether the subject himsetfhas seen or heard an occurrence or whether 
he knows of it, not through immediate sense perception, but through sup­
position and inference; and sometimes knowledge of an event acquired 
in a dream is distinguished in the same way from knowledge acquired in 
a waking state.168 
158. For this usage of the "stauve," "inchoative" and '%abituaT' see the examples in L. 
Reinisch, Die Nuba-Sprache, pp. 53 ff., 58 ff., and A. Hanoteau, Grammaire kßbyle (Alger, 
1858), pp. 122ff. 
159. Particularly the Finno-Ugrian languages, see Szinnyei, Finnisch-ugrische Sprachwissen-
schaft, pp. 120ff. Hungarian has eight different frequentative suffixes; cf. S. Simonyi, Die 
ungarische Sprache (Strassburg, 1907), pp. 284 ff. 
160. As in Indo-Germanic, cf. Brugmann, Kurze vergleichende Grammatik, pp. 578 ff. 
161. Such a dbtincuon occurs, for example, in Mongolian; cf. J. J. Schmidt, Grammatik 
der mongolischen Sprache, p. 74. On the Sanskrit "prccadve" cf. Albert Thumb, Handbuch 
des Sanskrit (Heidelberg, 1905), pp. 385 ff. 
162. Cf. Powell, The Evolution of Language (Smithsonian Institution, Washington, Annual 
Report, N0. I , p. 12. 
163. Examples in Goddard, "Athapascan," Swanton,
 ,ΉύάΛ," and Boas, "Kwakiud," in 
Boas, Handbook, 1, 105, 124, 247 ff., 443. 

T H E S P H E R E O F " l N N E R 
I N T U I T I O N " 
257 
In these instances the I expresses an attitude of willing or demanding, 
doubting or questioning toward objective reality. But this attitude is most 
sharply manifested when the I acts upon the object. Many languages which 
are relatively indifferent toward the differentiation of active and passive, 
distinguish with the utmost precision between degrees of such action and 
its greater or lesser mediacy. A simple phonetic instrument (such as 
doubling of the middle radical in the Semitic languages) can serve to derive 
from the simple root of a verb a second root which is primarily intensive 
but also causative, and a third having a specific causative function. From 
causatives of the first degree may be formed causatives of the second and 
third degree which give an originaUy intransitive verb a doubly or triply 
transitive signification.164 Such linguistic phenomena clearly reflect the 
increasing complexity of the intuition of personal action: subject and ob­
ject of an action are no longer simply kept apart; instead, more and more 
middle links are interpolated which, even when they are of a personal 
nature, serve as it were to convey the action from its origin in a willing I 
and transpose it into the sphere of objective reality.165 This intuition of 
several subjects collaborating in an action, may be expressed differendy 
depending on whether the mere fact of collaboration is indicated or whether 
attention is given to the form of the collaboration. In the first case, language 
uses the "cooperative form" of the verb, or forms a "social stem," indicat­
ing that one person participates in some way in the action or state of an­
other.166 Certain languages employ special collective infixes to indicate that 
an action is not undertaken by an individual but by a group.167 Where 
there is reflection on the form of collaboration the essential consideration is 
whether the collaboration is directed only outward or whether it is directed 
inward, i.e., whether a plurality of subjects confronts a simple material ob-
164. Cf. Aug. Müller, TürkJschc Grammatik (Berlin and New York, 1889), pp. 71 ff.; for 
the Semitic languages see Brockelmann, Grundriss, 1, 504 ff. According to Dillmann (Gram-
matik der äthiopischen Sprache, pp. n6ff. [Eng. trans., 2d cd., pp. 141 ff.]) Ethiopic con­
tains, in addition to the basic root, an "intensive" and an "influential root"; from all three, 
causadve roots can be derived by the addition of the same morphological element, without 
altering their peculiarities. 
165. Thus for example the Tagalog language makes use of two different prefixes in forming 
causative verbs: one expresses the mere production of a thing, the simple action of the subject, 
while the other indicates that another subject is caused to act, so that we now have two active 
subjects. Cf. Humboldt, Kawi-Werk, 2, 143. 
166. Cf. the examples from the Bedauye language in L. Reinisch, Bedauye, 2, 130 ff. A co­
operative form of the verb occurs also in Yakut; cf. BötbJingk, Über die Sprache der Jakuten, 
pp. 364 ff. 
167. E.g., the language of the Taoripi; see Ray, TortesStraiu Expedition, 3,340. 

258 
ТНБ 
P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
ject, or whether in their action the individuak stand to one another in a 
reciprocalsubject4)bject reladonship. From the latter intuition arises the 
form of expression which language creates for reciprocal action. Even prim­
itive languages sometimes distinguish sharply as to whether subjects di­
rect their action toward an outward object or toward one another.168 And 
here we would seem to be on our way to another significant step. In re­
ciprocal action the agent and the thing acted upon coincide in a certain 
sense: both belong to the personal sphere, and it depends only on the point 
of view whether we consider them as subject or object. The relation be­
comes stiU closer when a plurality of subjects is replaced by a single sub­
ject, so that the starting point and goal of an action are first separated and 
then rejoined into one content. This is the character of reflexive action, in 
which the I acts not upon another thing or person but upon himself—in 
which he directs his action back on himsetf. In many languages this re­
flexive form replaces the missing passive.169 This reference and turning 
back of the action upon the I, and the active subjective consciousness it dis­
closes, are most purely manifested in the Greek use of the middle form. 
This form has with good reason been caUed an essential and distinguishing 
feature of the Greek knguage, the trait which characterizes it as the truly 
"philosophical" language.170 The Sanskrit grammarians have aptly caUed 
the active form of the verb, "a word for another" and the middle form "a 
word for onesejf."171 ActuaUy, the fundamental significance of the mid­
dle is that it situates the process within the sphere of the subject and 
stresses the participation of the subject in it. "In a simple active," says Jacob 
Grimm, 
it remains essentiaUy doubtful whether an intransitive or a transitive 
concept is dominant, e.g. "I see" can signify either
 t cL see with my eyes" 
or "I see something"; κλαίω implies either inward weeping or weeping 
168. E.g., the Bungandity knguage of South Australia, described by Matthews in /. and 
Proe. of the Roy. Soc. of N. S. Wales, 37 (1903), 69. 
169. Cf. for the Semitic knguages, the Ethiopic (DilImann, pp. 115, 123; Eng. trans., 2d 
ed., pp. 140f., 151ff.) and Syrkc (Nöldeke, Kurzgefasste Syrische Grammatik [Leipzig, 
Weigel, 1880], pp. 95ff.; Eng. trans., Compendious Syriac Grammar [London, 1904}, pp. 
j05ff.); according to Aug. Müller, TürkJsche Grammatik» Ρ· 7<>, the reflexive is also often 
used for the passive in Turkish. 
170. Cf. J. Stenzel, "Über den Einfluss der griechischen Sprache auf die philosophische 
Bcgriffsbildung," Neue Jahrbücher für das Klassische Altertum (1921), pp. 152 ff. 
17x. 'The Middle as Atmanepadam," in Pänini, /, Ш, 72^74; the first European gram­
marian to characterize the middle as a special genus verbi was Dionysius Thrax; cf. Benfey, 
Gesehichte der Sprachwissensehaft, pp. 73 and x44. 

T H E S P H E R E O F " l N N E R 
I N T U I T I O N " 
259 
for another. The middle removes this doubt and refers the meaning 
clearly to the subject of the sentence, e.g4 κλαίομαι (I weep for mysetf). 
. . . The true middle is made to designate a hving action in the soul or 
body of the speaker, so that aU languages by a miraculous agreement in­
clude in it concepts such as rejoice, grieve, to be astonished, to fear, hope, 
dweU, rest, speak, dothe, wash, ete. m 
If we now look back over the rich differentiations of verbal genera and 
consider that most of these genera can be combined into new and complex 
forms-^.g., the passive and causative into a causative passive, the causative 
and reflexive into a reflexive causative or a reciprocal causative, etc. 1 7 3— 
we recognize that the power demonstrated by knguage in such formations 
Ues in not regarding the opposition between subjective and objective as 
a rigid, abstract opposition between two mutuaUy exclusive spheres, but 
in conceiving it as dynamically mediated in the most diverse ways. Lan­
guage does not represent the two spheres in themselves but reveals their 
reciprocal determination—it creates as it were a middle reahn in which 
the forms of substance and the forms of action are referred to one another 
and fused into a spiritual unity of expression. 
2. PERSONAL AND p0ssEss1vE E X P R E s s i o N . When we turn from the 
implicit formation of the Lconcept in nominal and verbal expression to its 
explicit Unguistic formation in the gradual development of the true pro­
nouns, it becomes clear, as Humboldt stressed, that, although the feeUng 
of the I must be regarded as an original and irreducible component of aU 
knguage formation, the entrance of the pronoun into actual knguage was 
attended by great difficulties. For, Humboldt pointed out, the essence of 
the I is that it is a subject, while both in thought and speech every concept 
must become an object in relation to the actuaUy thinking subject.174 This 
contradiction can only be resolved if the same rektion which we have ob­
served within the spheres of nominal and verbal expression, is repeated on 
a higher level: Pronominal expression can arrive at a sharp designation 
of the I only by pkcing itsetf in opposition to the objective world and at 
172. Deutsche Grammatik, 1, 598 ff. 
173. Aside from the Semitic languages, examples can bc found in Yakut (Böthlingk, p. 
291), in Turkish (Aug. Müller, pp. 71 ff.), in Nuba (Rcinisch, Bedauye, pp. 62 #.), etc. 
174. Humboldt, Über die Verwandtschaft der Ortsadverbien mit dem Pronomen, Werke, 6, 
N0. ι, 306 ff. 

2бЬ 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
the same time passing through it. Even where language has arrived at a 
determinate idea of the I, it must at first lend it an objective form; it must, 
as it were, find its designation for the I through its designation of objective 
things. 
This presupposition of Humboldt is confirmed by the manner in which 
knguage expresses personal rektions, not at first by using true personal 
pronouns, but by means of possessive pronouns. For the idea of possession 
which these pronouns represent occupies a peculiar middle position between 
objectivity and subjectivity. What is possessed is a thing or object: in be­
coming a content of possession, it is made known as a mere object. And 
yet by being identified as a possession, this thing acquires a new character, 
it moves from the natural to the personal-spiritual sphere. Here we have, 
as it were, a first animation, a transformation of material form into I-form. 
On the other hand, however, the self does not apprehend itself in a free, 
original act of spiritual and volitional spontaneity, but sees itself, one 
might say, in the image of the object which it acquires as "its own." A 
psychological light is thrown on this mediation of purely "personal" ex­
pression through "possessive" expression by the speech of children, in 
which the I seems to be designated much earlier by possessive than- by 
personal pronouns. However, these observations are not entirely reliable 
and are subject to varying interpretations.175 More conclusive are certain 
phenomena in the general history of knguage, which show that the sharp 
formation of the I<oncept in knguage is preceded by a state of indifference, 
in which the expression of " I " and "mine," "thou" and "thine," etc., are 
not yet clearly differentiated. The distinction between the two, Humboldt 
remarks, is felt, but not with the formal sharpness and determinacy which 
are necessary before it can pass into hnguistic expression.178 Most of the 
American Indian languages, as weU as the Ural-Altaic knguages, form the 
conjugations of the verb by adding a possessive affix to the indefinite in­
finitive fornv^so that the term for "I go" Uterally means "my going" and 
the terms for "I build, thou buUdest, he builds" disclose exactly the same 
structure as those for "my house, thy house, his house." 1 7 7 There is no 
175. Cf. Clara and William Stern, Die Kindersprache, zd ed., pp. 41 and 245 ff. 
176. Humboldt, "Einleitung zum Kawi-Werk," Werke, 7, Να χ, 231. Κ. v. d. Stcinen ako 
points out that the "possessive and personal pronoun are stiU identical" in the Bakairi language. 
One and the same word (ura) means not only ' T ' but also "mine," "that is mine," "that be­
longs to me." Another means "thou" and "thine," a third "he" and "his" (Die Bakf8ri-
Sprache, pp. 348 ff., 380). 
177. H. Winkler, Der uralaltaische Sprachstamm, pp. 76ff., x71; examples from other 

T H E S P H E R E OP " l N N E R 
I N T U I T I O N " 
26l 
doubt that a peculiar intuition of the relation between " I " and "reality" 
underlies this peculiarity of expression. Wundt offers a psychological ex­
planation of this persistence of the nominal form in transitive verbal con­
cepts: since the object of the transitive verb is always immediately given to 
the consciousness, it demands to be expressed before anything else; hence, 
he believes, the nominal concept can stand for the whole sentence expressing 
the action.178 But this is not so much an explanation as a roundabout 
description of the process in question. The designation of the pure act and 
the designation of its objective aim and result present two different views 
of action. In the first case the expression of action refers back to subjectiv­
ity as its origin and source; in the second, it concentrates on the product 
of action, which it restores, as it were, to the sphere of the I by means of a 
pronoun indicating possession. The relation between I and objective con­
tent is present in both cases, but it operates in two different directions, in 
one case from center to periphery, in the other form periphery to center. 
This relation between I and not-I, expressed in the possessive pronoun 
and hence mediated by the idea of possession, is especially close when the 
not-I is not a random object in the outside world but belongs to a sphere 
in which the "inward" and the "outward" seem to touch and flow im­
mediately into one another. Even speculative philosophers have designated 
the human body as the reality in which this interchange occurs most 
patently. According to Schopenhauer, the I and the body are not two ob­
jectively recognized different states connected by a bond of causality; they 
do not stand to one another in a relation of cause and effect but are one 
and the same thing given in totally different modalities. The action of 
the body is nothing other than an objectified act of the will-i.e., an act 
that has entered into the world of intuition; the body is nothing other 
than the objectivity of the will itself.
179 From this point of view, it be­
comes understandable that there should he an interpenetration of objective 
and subjective expression in the terms which language creates for the hu­
man body and its parts: that an expression of personal relation should 
often fuse into an inseparable whole with a purely objective term. This 
characteristic is particularly apparent in the languages of primitive peoples. 
In most of the American Indian languages, a part of the body can never 
knguages in Fr. Müller, Grundriss, e.g., 1, Pt. 2, 12, n6ff., 142, 153; 2, Pt. 1, 188; 3, Pt. 2, 
278, etc 
178. Wundt, Die Sprache, Völkerpsychologie, 2d ed., 2,143. 
179. A. Schopenhauer, Die Welt aU WiUe und Vorstellung, cd. Grisebach, 1,151 ff.; 2,289 ff. 

2б2 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
be designated by a general term, but must always be more closely specified 
by means of a possessive pronoun: there is no abstract term for hand or 
arm, but only a term for a hand or arm belonging to a particularman.180 
K. v. d. Steinen tells us that in seeking to ascertain the names for the parts 
of the body in Bakairi, it was necessary to distinguish carefully whether the 
part in question belonged to one's own body, to the body of the person ques­
tioned, or to a third party, since in each case the answer would be different. 
"Tongue," for example can only be rendered in the forms: my tongue, thy 
tongue, his tongue, or the tongues of aU those here present.181 The same 
phenomenon is reported by Humboldt from the Mexican, by Boethlingk 
from the Yakut language.182 In the Melanesian languages, a different term 
is used for parts of the body in general and for parts of the body belonging 
to a specific individual: in the first case, a generaUzing suffix must be added 
to the usual, individualizing term. 1 8 3 This fusion of a nominal term with 
a possessive pronoun is not limited to parts of the human body but extends 
to other contents, in so far as they are conceived as standing in close rela­
tionship with the I and in a sense to form a part of its spiritual-natural sub­
stance. Often terms of blood relationship, "father" and "mother," etc. ap­
pear only in conjunction with the possessive pronoun.184 Here language 
does not look upon objective reality as a single homogeneous mass, simply 
juxtaposed to the world of the I, but sees different strata of this reaUty: 
the relationship between object and subject is not universal and abstract; 
on the contrary, we can distinguish different degrees of objectivity, vary­
ing according to rektive "distance" from the I. 
And from this concretion of the subjectK>bject relationship another con­
sequence follows. The fundamental characteristic of the "pure I," in con­
trast to aU objects, is absolute unity. The I, conceived as a pure form of con­
sciousness, is not susceptible of inner differentiations: for such differentia­
tions belong to the world of objective contents. Consequendy, wherever 
the I is taken as an expression of the nonobjcctive in the strict sense, it 
180. Cf. Buschmann, "Der athapaskische Sprachstamm," Abhandlungen der Berliner 
Akademie der Wissenschaften (1854), pp. 165, 231; Powell, Introduction to the Study of 
Indian Languages, 2d ed., p. 18; Goddard, "Athapascan," in Boas, Handbook, 1, 103. 
181. K. v. d. Steinen, Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens, 2d ed., p. 22. 
182. Cf. Böthlingk, Über die Sprache der Jakuten, p. 357; even in Hungarian, according to 
Simonyi, p. 260, designations of kinship and parts of the body are rektiveIy seldom used 
without possessive personal suffixes. 
183. Codrington,pp. 140ff. 
184. Cf. Reinisch, Die Nuba-Sprache, p. 45; for the American Indian languages see Boas, 
Handbook, e.g., /, 103. 

T H E S P H E R E OF " l N N E R 
I N T U I T I O N " 
must be conceived as "pure identity with itself." In his treatise "On the I 
as a Principle of Philosophy," ScheIling drew this inference with extreme 
sharpness. If the I is not identical with itself, if its original form is not the 
form of pure identity, he points out, the strict limit which divides it from 
aU objective reality and which makes it into something unmistakably in­
dependent and specific, is immediately blurred. Hence we must think of 
the I in this original form of pure identity or not at aU. 1 8 5 But language 
cannot pass directly to this intuition of the pure, "transcendental" I and 
its unity. For since in language the personal sphere only gradually grows 
out of the possessive, since the intuition of the person adheres to the intui­
tion of objective possession, the diversity inherent in the relationship of 
mere possession must react upon the expression of the I. Actually my arm, 
which is organically bound up with the whole of my body, belongs to me 
in quite a different way than my weapon or my implement—my parents, 
my children, are connected with me in a totally different, more natural and 
more immediate way than my horse or dog—and even in the sphere of 
pure objective possessions, there is a discernible difference between mobile 
and immobile possessions. The house in which a man lives "belongs" to 
him in another and firmer sense than the coat he wears. At first, language 
conforms to aU these differences: instead of a unitary and universal ex­
pression of the relationship of possession, it will seek to develop as many 
different expressions as there are distinct classes of concrete possession. 
Here we find the same phenomenon as in the genesis and gradual devel­
opment of numerals. Just as the different objects and groups of objects 
originaUy have different "numbers"—so they have a different "mine" and 
"thine." Consequently, the diverse "numeral" substantives which certain 
languages use in enumerating different objects have a parallel in the di­
verse "possessive substantives." The Melanesian and many Polynesian lan­
guages designate the relationship of possession by augmenting the term 
for the possessed object with a possessive suffix which changes according to 
the class to which it belongs. OriginaUy, aU these diverse expressions of the 
relationship of possession were nouns, as is formally shown by the fact 
that prepositions can precede them. Among these nouns there are grada­
tions distinguishing different kinds of possession or appurtenance. Ont, 
possessive noun of this sort, for example, is added to designations of kin­
ship, to parts of the human body, to parts of a thing, another to things that 
185. F. W. J. v. Schelling, "Vom Ich als Prinzip der Philosophie," Werke, cd. O. Weiss 
(Leipzig, 1907) /, Par. 7, 177. 

264 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
one possesses or to implements one uses^>ne applies to everything one 
eats, another to everything one drinks. 1 8 6 Often a different term is used 
for a possession coming from outside and for an object owing its existence 
to the personal activity of the possessor.187 Most of the American Indian 
languages draw a similar distincdon between the two fundamental types 
of possession: natural, untransferable possession and artificial, transferrable 
possession.188 A diversity in the expression of the possessive relationship 
may also arise from purely numerical considerations, a different possessive 
pronoun being selected according to whether there are two or more pos­
sessors, or whether there are one, two or more possessed objects. In the 
Aleudan language, for example, these factors and their combinadons give 
rise to nine different personal pronouns.189 From aU this we see that the 
homogeneous expression of possession, Uke the homogeneous expression of 
number, was a relatively late product, which had to be detached from the 
intuition of heterogeneity. Just as number achieved its character of "uni­
formity" by transforming itsetf progressively from an expression of objects 
to an expression of pure relation, so gradually the simplicity and uniformity 
of the I-relation gained primacy over the diversity of the contents which 
can enter into this relation. Language appears to be on its way to this purely 
formal designadon of the possessive relation and hence to a mediate intui­
tion of the formal unity of the I, wherever it expresses possession by the 
genitive rather than by possessive pronouns. For although the genitive 
is rooted in concrete intuitions, particularly of a spatial character, it develops 
little by Uttle into a purely "grammatical" case, expressing "possession as 
such" and restricted to no special form of possession. Perhaps we may find 
a transition between these two intuitions in the instances where the genitive 
bears a particular possessive character and a special possessive suffix is re­
quired for the completion of the genitive relation.190 
186. Cf. Ray, 'The Mdanesian Possessive," American Anthropologist, »t, 349 ff. 
187. Cf. Codrington, The Melanesian Languages, pp. 129 ff. 
188. Such different possessive suffixes for transferable and nontransferable possession occur, 
for example, in the Haidan and the Tsimshian languages, where a further distinction is made 
between the transferable possession of animate creatures (my dog) and inanimate things 
(my house), and in the languages of the Sioux Indians; cf. Boas, Handbook, r, 258, 393,946 ff. 
189. Cf. Victor Henry, Langue alioute, p. 22. A similar condition prevaiU in the Eskimo 
language; cf. Thalbitzer, in Boas, Handbook ' ·
1
0
2
1 f7· Szinnyei (p. 115) remarks that in the 
Finno-Ugrian languages there were originally two paradigms with possessive suffixes: one 
for singular, one for plural possession, but that in most of the individual Unguages this dis­
tinction has been obscured, being best preserved in the Vogul. 
x90. As in Turkish, where the phrase "the father's house" is rendered as "the father's his 

T H E S P H E R E O F " l N N E R 
Ι Ν Τ ϋ Ι Τ Ι Ο Ϊ ί " 
2б5 
Language moves towards expression of the purely formal unity of the 
I by another road when, instead of characterizing an activity by its objec-
tive aim and result, it goes back to the origin of the action, the active sub-
ject. This is the direction followed by aU those languages which regard 
the verb as a pure expression of action and designate the person by the per-
sonal pronoun. The I , thou, he, detaches itself far more sharply from the 
objective sphere than the mere mine, thine, his. The subject of the action 
can no longer appear as a mere thing among things, as a content among 
contents, but is the living energetic nucleus from which the action begins 
and from which it takes its direction. Attempts have been made to dis-
tinguish types of language formation according to whether they designate 
verbal occurrences essentially from the standpoint of sensibility or from the 
standpoint of action. In the first case, the expression of action becomes 
a mere "it seems to me'—while conversely, in the second case, mere ap-
pearance is interpreted as action.
1 9 1 But where the expression of activity 
is thus intensified, the expression of the I also takes on a new form. The 
dynamic expression of the I-percept comes far closer than a nominal, ob-
jective expression to apprehending it as a pure formal unity. And now in-
deed, the I is transformed more and more clearly into an expression of pure 
relation. If not only every action but every expression of passivity or even 
of a mere condition is attached to the I by the personal form of verbal ex-
pression, the I itself ultimately becomes this ideal center. It is no content of 
perception or intuition but, as Kant says, it is solely that "in reference to 
which representations have synthetic unity." In this sense, the representa-
tion " I " is "the poorest of aU," because it seems emptied of aU concrete con-
tent, but this absence of content implies an entirely new function and 
signification. For this signification, it is true, language possesses no ade-
quate expression; for, even in its highest degree of spirituality, it must 
refer to the sphere of sensory intuition and hence cannot attain to this "pure 
intellectual representation" of the I , this I of "transcendental apperception." 
But nevertheless it can, mediately at least, prepare the way for the I , by 
developing more and more subtly and sharply the opposition between the 
objective reality of things and subjective, personal reality, and by defining 
the relation between the two in different ways and with diverse instruments. 
house." Cf. Aug. Müller, Türkische Grammatik, p. 64. A similar construction occurs in the 
Finno-Ugrian languages; cf. H. Winklcr, Das VraIaltaische und scinc Gruppen, pp. 7 ff. 
191. Cf. F. N. Finck, Die Hatipttypen ies Sprachbaus, pp. 13 ff. 

T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
3. T H E NOMINAL AND T H E VERBAL TYPB OF L I N G U I S T I C EXPRESSION. 
The science and philosophy of knguage have long concerned themselves 
with the controversy as to whether the original words of knguage were of a 
verbal or nominal nature, whether they designated things or activities. 
The opinions were sharply divided; arguments bearing on the history of 
knguage and considerations of a general speculative nature were adduced 
on both sides. It seemed for a time that the controversy had died down, 
since the concept around which it turned had itsetf become problematic 
Modern Unguists have graduaUy abandoned the attempt to surprise the 
secret of the genesis of language by explorations of primeval times. They 
have ceased to endow the concept of the "Unguistic root" with empirical, 
historical existence, and have come to regard it as a mere product of gram­
matical analysis—as indeed Humboldt with his usual critical circumspec­
tion had done before them. The supposed "original forms" of language 
have paled to mere logical abstractions. As long as linguists believed in an 
actual "root period" of knguage, they could attempt to reduce linguistic 
forms as a whole to a "Umited number of matrices or types"—and com­
bining this view with the belief that aU speech had its origin in the group 
performance of human activities, they proceeded to seek the traces of this 
activity in the fundamental Unguistic form of these types. It was in this 
Ught that Max MüUer, for example, following me lead of Ludwig Noire*, 
undertook to reduce the roots of Sanskrit to a Umited number of original 
Unguistic concepts, to the terms for the simplest human activities, for braid­
ing and weaving, sewing and binding, cutting and dividing, digging and 
thrusting, breaking and beating.188 Attempts of this sort seemed to have 
lost their meaning, however, once the concept of the root had come to be 
taken in a formal rather than a material sense, once it had come to be re­
garded less as the factual element of knguage formation than as a method­
ological element of Unguistic science. And even those who did not go so far 
as this total methodological dissolution of the root concept, who felt justi­
fied in assuming that in the Indo-Germanic, for example, the roots had 
real existence in a time preceding inflection—now seemed enjoined from 
asserting anything with regard to their actual form. 1 9 8 Nevertheless, there 
are signs of a revival of interest in the nature and structure of the original 
192. Cf. Ludwig Noiri, Der Ursprung der Sprache, pp. 311 ff., 341 fL, and Max MüUer, 
Das Denkjtn itn Lichte der Sprache (Leipzig, 1888), pp. 371 fL, 571 ff. 
193. This it the standpoint for cxampk of B. Delbrück in Grundfragen der Sprachforschung. 
pp. 113ff. 

T H E S P H E R E O F " l N N E R 
I N T U I T I O N " 
roots, even among empirical Unguists. The thesis most frequently encoun­
tered is that these roots were verbal in character and structure. In seeking 
to revive this old thesis which was early put forward by Panini, a French 
Hnguist, de la Grasserie, expressly invokes metaphysical considerations as 
weU as observations drawn from the history of language. Language, he 
says, must have started with the designation of verbal concepts and thence 
progressed graduaUy to the expression of objective concepts, because only 
activities and changes are perceived by the senses as phenomena, while the 
thing that Ues at the base of these changes and activities can only be ap­
prehended mediately as their vehicle. Like thought, language must pass 
from the known to the unknown, from what is perceived by the senses 
to what is merely thought, from the "phenomenon" to the "noumenon"; 
the designation of the verb and of verbal attributes must therefore have 
preceded the designations of substance, the linguistic "substantives."194 
But precisely this μετάβασις e« αλλο γένος, this surprising turn to meta­
physics, reveals the methodological weakness in the formulation of the 
problem. The entire demonstration is based on an unmistakable quaternio 
terminorum: the concept of substance which provides the middle term 
of the syUogism is used in two different significations, once in a meta­
physical, once in an empirical sense. The major premise speaks of sub­
stance as the metaphysical subject of changes and attributes, as the "thing 
in itself," which lies "behind" aU quaUties and accidents—the conclusion 
speaks of the nominal concepts of language, which, since they serve to ex­
press objects, can take them only as "phenomenal objects." Substance in the 
first sense is the expression of an absolute essence, whUe in the second sense 
it can only be the expression of a relative, empirical permanence. But if the 
problem is taken in this latter sense, the inference drawn, in so far as it is 
based on epistemological grounds, loses aU cogency. For epistemology does 
not teach us that the idea of the variable attribute or state is necessarily 
"prior" to the idea of the "thing" as a relatively permanent unity: it rather 
shows that the concept of the thing and the concept of the attribute or state 
are equaUy justified and equaUy necessary conditions in the construction of 
the world of experience. They are not distinguished from one another as 
expressions of given realities, according to the order which these realities 
assume, either intrinsically or in reference to our cognition—but as forms 
of thought, as categories which determine one another. In this sense the cri­
terion of permanence, the criterion of the "thing" is given neither before 
194. Cf. Raoul de la Grasserie, Du verbe comme ginerateur det autres parties du dUcvaru 

2б8 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
nor after the criterion of change but only with it as its correlative. And this 
Hne of reasoning operates abo conversely: it disproves not only the aUeged 
primacy of verbs and verbal concepts, but also the psychological arguments 
which have been adduced to demonstrate the primacy of purety objective in­
tuition and mere nominal concepts. "It is impossible to suppose," remarks 
Wundt, for example, "that man ever thought solely in verbal concepts; for 
psychological reasons, we might far more readily believe that he thought 
only in material concepts; and indeed, there are distinct vestiges of such a 
state, not only in the speech of children but also in numerous extant lan­
guages which have preserved a more original level of conceptual develop­
ment." 1 9 5 However, the notion that man once thought solely in nominal 
concepts involves the same fundamental faUacy as the opposite thesis ac­
cording temporal and objective priority to verbal concepts. Here we are 
confronted with one of those problems which cannot be solved by a simple 
eitheror, but only by a basic, critical reformulation of the question itself. 
The dilemma which has long divided students oflanguage into two camps 
is ultimately a dilemma of method. If one accepts the reproduction theory, 
if one assumes that the purpose of language consists solely in the outward 
designation of certain distinctions which are given in the perceptual world 
—then it is meaningful to ask whether it first emphasized things or activi­
ties, states or attributes. EssentiaUy, however, this way of putting the ques­
tion merely embodies the old faUacy of hypostatizing the fundamental cate­
gories of thought and knguage. A distinction which first occurs "in" the 
spirit, i.e, through the totahty of its functions, is looked upon as substan­
tially present and preceding the whole of these functions. The problem 
takes on a new meaning if we reflect that "things" and "states," "attributes" 
and "activities" are not given contents of consciousness, but modaUties and 
directions of its formation. Then it becomes apparent that none of them 
is immediately perceived, and expressed by knguage according to this per­
ception; what takes place is rather that an undifferentiated diversity of 
sensory impressions is defined in accordance with one or another form of 
thought and knguage. It is this fixation into an object or activity, not the 
mere näming of the object or activity, that is expressed in the spiritual 
operation of language as in the logical operation of cognition. The ques­
tion then is not whether the act of designation first seizes upon things or 
activities as self<ontained distinct forms of reaHty, but whether it is situated 
195. Wundt, Die Sprache, Völkerpsychologie, ad ed., /, 594. 

T H E S P H E R E 
OP " l N N E R 
I N T U I T I O N * ' 
in one or another Hnguistic and logical category-v/hcihcr, 
as it were, it 
is performed sub specie nominis or sub specie ver4. 
We may assume that a simple a priori answci to this question wUl not 
be possible. If language is no longer regarded as a disdnct reproducdon of 
a distinct given reality, but as a vehicle of that great process in which the 
I "comes to grips" with the world, in which the limits of the two are dearly 
defined, it is evident that the problem is susceptible of many diverse solu­
tions. For the medium of communication between I and world is not 
finished and determinate from the outset but comes into being and gains 
efficacy only by giving form to itseif. Hence we cannot speak of a system, 
a temporal or logical progression of Hnguistic categories, which aU lin­
guistic development must always follow. As in epistemological inquiry, 
each particular category which we single out and place in relief against the 
others, can only be interpreted and judged as a single factor which may 
develop very different concrete configurations according to the relations 
into which it enters with other factors. It is from the interpenetration of 
these factors and their varying relations with one another that the "form" 
of language arises, which, however, should be regarded as a form not of 
being but of movement, not as static but as dynamic. Accordingly there are 
no absolute oppositions but only relative oppositions^)ppositions of mean­
ing and of direction. The emphasis may fall now on one, now on another 
factor, the dynamic accents may be distributed in any number of ways 
among attributes, states, activities, and only in this oscillating movement 
do we find the special character of aU linguistic form as creative form. The 
more sharply we seek to apprehend this process as it operates in the par­
ticular languages, the more evident it becomes that the parts of speech 
which our grammatical analysis seeks to differentiate, the substantive, 
adjective, pronoun, verb, are not present from the start, acting upon one 
another like rigid substantial units, but that they seem, as it were, to pro­
duce and delimit one another. The designation does not issue from the 
finished object; on the contrary, it is through the development of the sign 
and the consequent definition of the contents of consciousness that our 
world takes on progressively clearer outlines as a totality of "objects" and 
"attributes," of "changes" and "activities," of "persons" and "things," of 
local and temporal rdations. 
If then language represents a process of differentiation, it may be pre­
sumed to have grown out of a relatively undifferentiated state. The history 

270 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
of language confirms this assumption, disclosing a phase when the parts 
of speech which we disdnguish in the highly developed languages, were 
separated from each other neither in form nor content. At this phase, one 
and the same word can fulfill very different grammatical functions, can 
serve as a preposidon or an independent noün, as a verb or as a substantive, 
according to the particular conditions. Especially the indifference of noun 
and verb is the rule which determines the structure of most languages. It 
has sometimes been said that though aU knguage resolves into the cate­
gories of the noun and the verb, very few knguages have a verb in our 
sense. The Indo-Germanic and Semitic knguages seem to be ahnost alone 
in their sharp distinction between the two classes, and even here we stiU 
find fluid boundaries between the nominal and the verbal sentence forms.198 
In the Malay knguages, Humboldt teUs us the boundary between nominal 
and verbal expression is so fluid that the verb seems to be lacking. He also 
points out that the Burmese knguage is totally lacking in formal designa­
tions for the verbal function and that those who speak it seem to have no 
feeling-for the principle of the verb. 1 9 7 Progress in comparative linguistics 
has shown what Humboldt apparendy regarded as an anomaly to be a 
general and widespread phenomenon. In place of sharply distinguished 
nouns and verbs, we encounter a seemingly amorphous form. 1 9 8 The for­
mal distinction between expressions of things and expressions of activities 
emerges only graduaUy. "Conjugation" and "declension" often merge. 
Wherever the type of "possessive conjugation" is observed, we find a com­
plete parallelism between nominal and verbal expression.199 Similar rek­
tions are to be found between the designations of activities and of attributes: 
one and the same system of inflection can apply both to verbs and adjec­
tives.200 Even complex phrases, even whole sentences are sometimes "con-
196. Cf. Nöldcke, Kurzgefasste Syrische Grammatik Ρ· 215 (Eng. trans., p. 245): 'The 
nominal sentence, i.e., a sentence having a substantive, adjective, or adverb as its predicate, is 
not too sharply distinguished from the verbal sentence in the Syriac. The participle, which 
very frequcndy serves as a predicate, which is on its way to becoming a pure verbal form 
but does not conceal its nominal origin . . . suggests a transition from the nominal to the 
verbal sentence. . . . And the nominal and verbal sentence do not reveal a great difference 
of inner structure in Syriac." 
197. Humboldt, "Einleitung zum Kawi-Werk," 7, N0. x, 222, 280 ff., 305; cf. Kawi-Werk 
2,81,129ff.,287 
198. For examples see Fr. Müller, Grundriss: from the Hottentot, /, Pt. 2, 12 ff.; from the 
Mandingan knguages, 1, Pt. 2, 142; from the Samoyed, 2, Pt 2, 174; from the Yenisei-
Ostyak, 2, Pt. ι, 1x5. 
199. See above, p. 26r. 
200. For varied examples of this "adjectival conjugation," see de k Grasserie, op. dt, 32 ff. 

T H E S P H E R E O F " l N N E R 
I N T U I T I O N " 
jugated" in this way. 2 0 1 Such phenomena should not be regarded as indica­
tions of the formlessness of a knguage, but rather as evidence of a char­
acteristic "growth towards form." For this indeterminacy, this deficient 
formation and differentiation of linguistic categories, conceak a factor 
of plasticity and essential formative power. The undifferentiated word 
contains within it aU the potentialities of differentiation and leaves each 
particular language free, as it were, to choose whatever potentiaUties it 
pleases. 
Any attempt to establish a general schema of this development would 
seem futile, for the source of its concrete richness is precisely that each 
knguage follows a different method in building up its system of categories. 
Nevertheless, without doing violence to this concrete abundance of expres­
sive forms, we can group them according to certain basic types. Certain 
knguages and groups of knguages have developed the nominal type in 
full sharpness and purity, their whole structure seems to be dominated by 
the intuition of objects, while in others both grammar and syntax are de­
termined by the verb. The verbal group, moreover, comprises two differ­
ent forms, according to whether the verb is taken as an expression of a 
mere occurrence or of pure activity, according to whether it immerses itself 
in the objective event or whether it gives central emphasis to the active sub­
ject and its energy. The nominal type is most sharply developed in the 
knguages of the Altaic family. Here the entire sentence structure is such 
that one objective term simply follows another and is Unked with it 
attributively: and yet this simple principle of articulation is implemented 
so rigorously and universally that it can provide clear and self<ontained 
expression for the most complex relations. "I do not hesitate," writes H . 
In Malay every word without exception can be transformed into a verb by a suffix; conversely 
one can turn any verb into a noun simply by preceding it with the definite article (Humboldt, 
Kawi-Werk, 2, 81, 348 fT.). In Coptic the infinitive form of the verb even has the gender of 
substantive nouns: the infinitive is a noun and can take a masculine or feminine form, In 
accordance with its nominal character, moreover, it has originaUy no direct object; this 
signification is expressed by a genitive which immediately follows the infinitive as it would 
a substantive (cf. SteindorfT, Koptische Grammatik, pp. 91 ff.). In the YenisebOstyak as in 
the Dravidian languages, verb forms can take case suffixes and are thus "declined"—while in 
some languages the noun can be provided with certain indications of tense and are thus 
"conjugated" (cf. Fr. MüUer, Grundriss, 2, Pt 1, 115,180 ff.; 3, Pt. 1,198). In the language 
of Annatom—according to G. v. d. Gabelentz, Die Sprachwissenschaft, pp. 160ff.—not the 
verb but the personal pronoun is conjugated. The pronoun opens the sentence and indicates 
whether we are dealing with the first, second or third person, singular, dual, trial or plural, 
and whether the action is present, past, future, volitive, etc. 
201. E.g., in Aleutian cf. V. Henry, Langue aUoute, pp. 60 ff. 

272 
T H E P H A S E OP I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
Winkler of this principle, which he illustrates by a discussion of the 
Japanese verb, 
to call it a most wonderful structure. In the most succinct form, it ex­
presses an inexhaustible variety of subtle and minute shadings: what 
we in our language express by numerous circumlocutions, by depend­
ent clauses of aU sorts, relative as well as conjuctional, is clearly rendered 
by a single term or by a single substantive noun governing a verbal 
noun; a verbal noun of this sort can clearly express what in our formula­
tion requires a main clause and two or three subsidiary clauses, and 
moreover each of the three or four links can encompass the sublest and 
most diverse distinctions of tense, of active or passive, causative, con-
tinuative, in short, the most manifold modifications of action. . . . 
And aU this is largely accomplished without recourse to most of the 
formal elements with which we are so familiar and which strike us as 
indispensable. Thus the Japanese is in our sense a formless language 
par excellence; by this I do not mean to disparage this language but 
merely to indicate how vastly its structure diverges from that of our" 
knguages.202 
The essence of this divergence is that while the feeUng for the conceptual 
shadings of action is by no means lacking, it can only be expressed in so 
far as the expression of action is enmeshed, as it were, with the expression 
of the object and enters into it as a specification. The existence of the thing 
forms the center of designation and aU expression of attributes, relations 
and activities remains dependent on it. Thus this knguage manifests a 
"substantial" point of view in the strictest sense. In the Japanese verb wc 
frequently find a pure statement of existence where we would expect to 
find a predicative statement. Instead of expressing a relation between 
subject and predicate, it stresses the presence or nonpresence, existence or 
nonexistence of the subject or predicate. And this first statement of being 
or nonbeing is the point of departure for aU further specifications of 
"whamess," of acting and being acted upon, etc. 2 0 3 This is most strikingly 
shown by the negative locution in which even non-being seems to be taken 
substantiaUy. The negation of an action is expressed by a positive statement 
202. H. WinkIcr, Der uraMtaische Sprachstamm, pp. i66ff. 
203. A sentence such as "it is snowing" is consequently rendered in Japanese as "snow's 
falling (is)." 'The day has ended, it has grown dark" runs "the day's having-grown^ark 
(is)." Cf. Hoffmann, Japanische SprachUhre, pp. 66ff. 

T H E S P H E R E O F " l N N E R 
I N T U I T I O N " 
of its nonbeing: there is no "not coming" in our sense, but rather a non-
being or nonpresence of coming. This nonbeing itself is expressed as "the 
being of the not." And hke the relation of negation, other expressions of 
relation are transformed into substantial expressions. The Yakut expresses 
the relation of possession by asserting the existence or nonexistence of the 
possessed object: a locution such as "my house existing" or "my house 
not existing" states that I possess or do not possess a house.
204 Likewise the 
numerical terms are often so constructed that the property of number seems 
to possess an independent objective content: instead of many men or aU 
men, one says "man of manyness" or "man of allness"; instead of five men, 
"man of fiveness," etc.
2 0 5 The modal and temporal properties of the 
verbal noun are expressed in similar ways. A substantive such as "im-
minence," linked attributively to the verbal noun, indicates that the action 
referred to is regarded as future, hence that the verb is to be taken in a 
future sense
20*—a substantive such as "demanding" serves to form the 
desiderative form of the verb, etc. Other modal shadings such as the 
conditional or the concessive are indicated in accordance with the same 
principle.
2 0 7 Here language expresses an infinite variety of conceptual 
forms and combinations through the simple juxtaposition of independent 
substantive terms. 
We encounter a very different fundamental approach where language, 
stiU preserving this original indifference of noun and verb, accentuates 
the opposite aspect of the indifferent form. In the cases just considered, all 
Unguistic expression takes the object as its point of departure. But there 
are other languages which just as definitely and significandy start from 
the designation of the occurrence. Here the verb, as pure expression of 
occurrence, is manifesdy the true center of language: while in the nominal 
idioms aU relations, even those of occurrence and action, are transposed 
into objective relations, here, conversely even these are transposed into 
204. Cf. Winkler, pp. 199 ff.; Böthlingk, Über iie Sprache der Jakuten, p. 348. 
205. Winkler, pp. 152, 157 fT. 
206. Cf. in Yakut (Böthlingk, pp. 299 ff.): My imminent cutting = the object subjected to 
my future cuting, but also "I will cut," etc. Cf. tense formation in the Japanese verb, where 
the forms which serve to express future or past, completion or duration, are all combinations of 
a dependent verbal noun, designating the content of the action, with a governing verbal noun 
indicating its temporal character. Thus "seeing's striving," "willing," "becoming" (for "will 
see"); "seeing's going away" (for "to have seen"), etc. Cf. Winkler, pp. 176 ff. and Hoffmann, 
Japanische Sprachlehre, pp. 214, 227. 
207. For more details see Winkler, 125 ff., 208 ff., and Urahdtaische Völker und Sprechen, 
pp. 90 ff. 

274 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
relations of occurrence. In the first case one might say that the form of 
dynamic change is drawn into the form of static substance; in the second, 
substance is apprehended only in rektion to change. But this form of 
change is not yet permeated with the pure I-form and hence, despite its 
dynamism, stiU presents a predominantly objective, impersonal aspect. 
In this respect we are stiU in the sphere of things, but its center has shifted. 
The emphasis is no longer on the existence but on the change. We have 
seen that in the nominal languages the substantive, as expression of the 
object, was the dominant structural factor; here we may expect the verb, 
as expression of change, to be the dynamic center. While nominal expres­
sion tended to transpose even the most complex rektions into the sub­
stantival form, here knguage will strive to encompass and, as it were, 
catch aU these rektions in the verbal form. This seems to be the general 
approach of most American Indian languages. There have been attempts 
at a psychological explanation of it based on the structure of the Indian 
mind. 2 0 8 But whatever we may think of this explanation, these knguages 
show a unique method of knguage formation. The general lines of this 
method were clearly delineated by Humboldt in his account of "incorpora­
tion" in the Mexican knguage. The relations which other knguages ex­
press by the analytical articulation of the sentence are here expressed syn­
thetically in a single complex "word-sentence." The core of the word-
sentence is the expression of verbal action, to which however any number 
of modifiers are affixed. The governing and the governed parts of the verb, 
particularly the designations for its more or less immediate object, are in­
corporated into the verbal term and are required to complement it. "The 
sentence," Humboldt remarks, "is conceived as formally completed in the 
verb and is only specified more closely through a kind of apposition. The 
Mexican verb cannot be conceived without these complementary, sub­
sidiary specifications. When there is no specific object, a special indefinite 
pronoun, with diiferent forms for persons and things, is combined with the 
verb: пйкчша, I something eat, ni-te-da-maca, I someone something 
give. . . ." The incorporative method thus forces the entire content of a 
statement into a single verb, or where the statement is too complex and this 
is impossible, it sends out "pointers, as it were," from the verbal center of 
the sentence, "to indicate the directions in which the particular parts are 
to be sought in rektion to the sentence." Even where the verb does not 
encompass the entire content of the statement, it thus contains the gen-
208. Cf. the remarks of G. v. d. Gabelentz, Die Sprachwissenschaft, pp. 402 ff. 

T H E S P H E R E O F " l N N E R 
I N T U I T I O N " 
275 
eral schema of the sentence structure: here a sentence is not constructed, 
not graduaUy built up out of its heterogeneous elements, but is stamped 
into a unit and given aU at once. Language first produces a connected 
whole which is formally complete and seuVsufficient: it expressly designates 
what is not yet individually defined as an undefined something by means 
of a pronoun, and then goes on to fiU in the pardcukrs of this undefined 
residuum.20· 
Later investigations of the American Indian knguages have modified 
HumboMt's general picture of the incorporation process, in certain respects; 
they show that this method can take very different forms in different lan­
guages with regard to the type, degree and scope of the incorporation 2 1 0 
—but his general characterization of the unique way of thinking which 
underlies it, remains essentiaUy valid. To empk>y a mathematical image, 
we might compare this method of language formation to the setting up 
of a formula which designates the universal quantitative relations of magni­
tude but leaves the particular magnitudes unspecified. The formula merely 
renders in a unitary, comprehensive expression the universal forms of 
connection that obtains between certain sets of magnitudes: but before it 
can be appked to a specific case, the unspecified magnitudes, x, y, z must 
be replaced by specific magnitudes. Similarly in the verbal word-sentence, 
the form of the statement is fuUy outUned and anticipated at the outset; to 
complete it, the indefinite pronouns incorporated in the word^entence 
must merely be more closely defined by terms added later. The verb as 
designation of an occurrence strives to concentrate within itsetf the living 
whole of the meaning expressed in the sentence; but the farther it ad­
vances in this direction, the more it is in danger of being submerged in the 
flood of new matter which it is caUed upon to master. Around the verbal 
core of the statement there forms so dense a mesh of modifiers, indicating 
the manner of the action, its local or temporal circumstances, its more or 
less distant object, that it becomes difficult to detach the content of the state­
ment itseU from this involvement and apprehend its independent meaning 
content. The expression of action never seems generic, but is always in-
dividuaUy determined, characterized by special particles with which it is 
209. C i Humboldt, "Emkirung zum Kawi-WerV Werke, y, No. i , 144 ff. 
210. Cf. ш particular the investigations of Lucien Adam on "Po]ysynthesism" in thc Na-
huatl, Quechua, Quiche, and Mayan bnguages, in his ttudcs sur six Ungues amirUaincs (Paris, 
1878). See also Brinton, "On Polysynthesie and urcorporatJon as Characteristics of American 
Languages," Transactions of the American Philosophical Society of PhMadelphia, 33 (1885), 
and Boas, Handbook, 1, 573, 646 fi. (Chinook), 10c2 ff. (Eskimo), etc 

276 
T H E P H A S E O F I N T U I T I V E 
E X P R E S S I O N 
inseparably bound up. 2 1 1 Although an action or occurrence is represented 
as a concrete intuitive whole by means of aU these particles, the unity of 
an occurrence and particularly of the subject of an action is not sharply 
set forth. 2 1 2 The full light of language seems to strike only the content of 
the occurrence itself—not the I which actively participates in it. In most 
of the American Indian languages, for example, the inflection of the verb 
is not governed by the subject but by the object of the action. The transitive 
verb takes its number not from the subject but from its direct object: it 
must stand in the plural when it represents an action directed toward a 
pluraUty of objects. Thus the grammatical object of the sentence becomes 
its logical subject, governing the verb. 2 1 3 The construction of the sentence 
and of the language as a whole takes the verb as its point of departure, but 
the verb remains in the sphere of objective intuition. The essential factor 
in this linguistic approach is the beginning and the course of the event, not 
the energy of the subject, manifested in an action. 
This basic intuition changes only in those languages which have pro­
gressed to a purely personal configuration of verbal action, in which con­
jugation does not basically consist in the combination of the verbal noun 
with possessive suffixes but in a synthetic bond between the verb and the 
personal pronoun. What distinguishes this synthesis from the method of 
the so-called "polysynthetic" knguages is that it is based on a preceding 
analysis. This synthesis is no mere fusion of opposites—on the contrary, it 
presupposes the sharp differentiation of these opposites. With the devel­
opment of personal pronouns the sphere of subjective reality has become 
distinct from the objective sphere—and yet in the inflection of the verb, the 
211. Cf. the characteristic remarks of Κ. τ. d. Steinen on the Bakairi language: Unter den 
Naturvöl\ern Zentral-Brasilient, 2d ed., pp. 78 ff.; Die Bakalri-Sprache, pp. ix ff. 
212. Gatschet (pp. 572 ff.) points out that thc verb in Klamath expresses a verbal act or 
state only in the impersonal and indefinite form—comparable to our infinitive. In a con­
struction such as "thou-to-break-stick," the verbal term only designates breaking as such 
without reference to its subject. Similarly, the Mayan languages possess no transitive active 
verbs in our sense: they have only nouns and absolute verbs designating a state, attribute or 
activity, which are construed as predicates of a personal pronoun or of a third person acting 
as subject, but can take no direct object. The words which serve to represent a transitive 
action are radical or derived nouns which as such are combined with the possessive prefix. 
In Mayan, sentences such as "thou hast killed my father," "thou hast written the book" are 
rendered as "thy killed one is my father," "thy written thing is the book." (Cf. Ed. Sclcr, 
Das Konjugations-system der Maya^prachen pp. 9, 17 ff.) In the verbal expression of the 
Malay such "impersonal" locutions are also frequent, e.g., "my seeing (was) the star" for 
'1 saw the star," etc., cf. Humboldt, Kawi-Werk. ». 80, 350 ff., 397. 
213. Cf. Gatschet, p. 434 and particularly ScIer. 

T H E 
S P H E R E O F " l N N E R 
I N T U I T I O N " 
terms for subjective reaHty join with the terms for objective occurrence 
to form a new unity. Wherever we find the essential and specific nature of 
the verb expressed in this junction, we must infer that for its completion 
the verb must enter into a synthesis with the terms for personal reality. 
"For theactual being which is characterized in the grammatical representa­
tion of the verb," says Humboldt, "cannot easily be expressed by itsetf, 
but can only be manifested as a being with a certain modaHty, a specific 
time and person; the expression of this character is inextricably woven into 
the root, so demonstrating that the root can only be conceived with these 
attributes and must in a sense be permuted into them. Its (the verb's) na­
ture Hes precisely in this mobility, this inability to be fixated except in the 
specific case." 2 1 4 But neither the temporal nor personal specification of the 
verb, neither its temporal nor its personal fixation is part of its original 
substance; both represent a goal that is attained only relatively late in the 
development of knguage. We have ah*eady foUowed the process of tem­
poral specification;218 as to the rektion of the verb to the I, we can gain 
an idea of the gradual changes that took pkce by considering the way in 
which certain knguages distinguish between "transitive" and "intransi­
tive" verbal expression. In various Semitic languages, for example, the in­
transitive or semi-passive verb, which expresses not a pure action but a 
state or a being-acted-upon, is distinguished by a specific vowel pronuncia­
tion. In Ethiopic, according to DilImann, this differentiation of intransi­
tive verbs by pronunciation has remained in fuU force: all verbs designat­
ing attributes, physical or spiritual qualities, passions or unfree activities, 
are pronounced differendy from those designating a free and independent 
activity.218 This phonetic symbolism is indicative of that fundamental 
spiritual process which becomes more and more evident as language devel­
ops. The I grasps itself through its counterpart in verbal action, and only 
as this ktter becomes more elaborated and sharply defined, does the I truly 
find itself and understand its unique position. 
214. Humboldt, Kawi-Werk, 2, 79 fT. 
215. Cf. above, pp. 218-219. 
216. Dillmann, Grammatik der äthiopischen Sprache, pp. 116 ff. 

Chapter 4 
Language as Expression of Conceptual Thought, 
Concept and Class Formation in Language 
x. The Formation of Qualifying Concepts 
Тнн PROBLEM of concept formation marks the point of closest contact be­
tween logic and the philosophy of language; at this point they seem to fuse 
into an inseparable unit. For all logical analysis of concepts seems eventually 
to lead to the study of words and names. The resulting nominalism con­
centrates the two problems into one: the content of the concept merges 
with the content and function of the word. Truth itsetf then becomes a 
Hnguistic rather than a logical term: veritas in dicto, non in re consistit. It 
is an agreement which is to be found neither in things nor in ideas, but has 
reference solely to combinations of signs and particularly of phonetic signs. 
An absolutely "pure," speechless thought would not know the opposition 
between true and false, which arises only in and through speech. Thus the 
question of the significance and origin of the concept inevitably leads back 
to the question of the origin of the word: inquiry into the genesis of word 
significations and word classes becomes the only means of elucidating the 
immanent meaning of the concept and its function in the development of 
knowledge.1 
Closer investigation, to be sure, shows this nominalistic solution to the 
problem of the concept to be a pseudo-solution, since it forms a vicious 
circle. For on the one hand language is expected to supply the ultimate, 
in a sense, the only "explanation" of concept formation, while on the other 
hand, it requires the support of this function at every step in its own de­
velopment. And this vicious circle confronts us in every part of the theory. 
Traditional logic tells us that the concept arises "through abstraction": it 
instructs us to form a concept by comparing similar things or percepts and 
z. Cf. above, p. 137 ff. 
278 

T H E 
F O R M A T I O N 
O F Q U A L I F Y I N G 
C O N C E P T S 
a79 
abstracting tbeir "common characteristics." That the contents of compari­
son have specific "characteristics," that they possess qualitative properties 
according to which we can divide them into classes, genera, species, is 
usually taken as a sehSevident premise, requiring no special mention. And 
yet this seemingly seh>evident premise embodies one of the most difficult 
problems of concept formation. First of all, the old question arises as to 
whether the "characteristics" according to which we divide things into 
classes, are given us prior to language formation or whether they are sup­
plied only by language formation, "bi the theory of abstraction," Sigwart 
righdy remarks, 
it is forgotten that before a represented object can be resolved into its 
particular characteristics, judgments are required whose predicates 
must be general ideas (as concepts are ordinarily caUed); and that 
these concepts must ultimately be gained by some means other than ab­
straction, since it is they which make this process of abstraction pos­
sible. The advocates of this theory also forget that abstraction presup­
poses some definition of the sphere of objects to be compared, and they 
tacidy posit a motive for selecting this particular grouping and for 
seeking its common characteristics. Ultimately this motive, if it is not 
absolutely arbitrary, can only be that these objects have been recognized 
as similar a priori, because they aU have a specific content in common, 
i.e, that there is already present a general idea by means of which these 
objects are distinguished from the totality of objects. The whole theory 
that concepts are formed by comparison and abstraction has meaning 
only if, as it often the case, the problem is to indicate thc common factor 
in things which general Unguistic usage actually designates by the same 
word, and thus to elucidate the true signification of the word. If one 
is asked to describe the concept of the animal, of gas, of theft, one 
might be tempted to seek the common characteristics of aU the things 
which are caUed animals, of aU the bodies which are caUed gases, of aU 
the actions which are called thefts. Whether this is successful; whether 
this means of concept formation is practicable, is another question; it 
might be plausible, if we could assume that there is no doubt as to 
what should be caUed animal, gas, theft—ΪΛ., if we already have the 
concept we are seeking. Thus any attempt to form a concept by ab­
straction is tantamount to looking for the spectacles which arc on your 
nose, with the help of these same spectacles.* 

28ο 
E X P R E S S I O N O F C O N C E P T U A L 
T H O U G H T 
Indeed, the theory of abstraction solves the question of conceptual form 
only by referring it, consciously or tacitly, to the form of language. And 
with this the problem is not so much solved as relegated to another field. 
The process of abstraction can be carried out only with respect to such con­
tents as have already been in some way defined and designated, which 
have been classified in language and thought. But how, we must now ask, 
do we arrive at this classification itself? What are the conditions of that 
first primary formation which is effected in language and which provides 
the foundation for all the subsequent and more complex syntheses of logical 
thought? How does language succeed in escaping from that Heraclitean 
river of change, in which no content recurs truly identical—how does lan­
guage place itself, as it were, in opposition to this flux, and abstract determi­
nate forms from it? Here lies the true secret of "predication" as a problem 
both of logic and of language. The beginning of thought and speech is 
not this: we do not simply seize on and name certain distinctions that are 
somewhere present in feeling or intuition; on the contrary, on our own 
initiative we draw certain dividing lines, effect certain separations and 
connections, by virtue of which distinct individual configurations emerge 
from the uniform flux of consciousness. In the usual logical view, the con­
cept is born only when the signification of the word is sharply deUneated 
and unambiguously fixed through certain inteUectual operations, particu­
larly through "definition" according to genus proximum and differentia 
specifia. But to penetrate to the ultimate source of the concept, our thinking 
must go back to a deeper stratum, must seek those factors of synthesis and 
analysis, which are at work in the process of word formation itself, and 
which are decisive for the ordering of aU our representations according to 
specific linguistic classifications. 
For the primary function of concept formation is not, as most logicians 
have assumed under the pressure of a centuries4>ld tradition, to raise our 
representations to ever greater universaUty; on the contrary, it is to make 
them increasingly determinate. Li so far as "universaUty" is expected of 
the concept, it is not an end in itsetf but only a means of attaining to the 
true purpose of the concept, which is precision. Before any contents can 
be compared with one another and ordered into cksses according to the 
degree of their simUarity, they themselves must be defined as contents. But 
for this a k>gicaI act of postulation and differentiation is required, which wiU 
provide certain intervak in the continuous flow of consciousness, which 
in a sense wiU halt the resdess corning and going of sense impressions and 

T H E F O R M A T I O N O F Q U A L I F Y I N G 
C O N C E P T S 
28l 
create certain stopping places. Hence the original and decisive achievement 
of the concept is not to compare representations and group them accord-
ing to genera and species, but rather to form impressions into representa-
tions. Among modern logicians Lotze has expressed this relationship most 
clearly, although in his interpretation of it he has not entirely freed himseif 
from the fetters of the logical tradition. His theory of the concept starts 
from the idea that the most basic operation of thought cannot consist in 
the combination of two given representations, but that we must take a 
further step backward. In order that representations may be combined into 
the form of thought, they themselves must undergo a process of forma-
tion which makes them into logical elements. We tend to pass over this 
first operation of thought, because it has already been performed in the 
formation of our traditional language and consequently seems to be a setf-
evident premise, and no longer to be the achievement of one's own think-
ing. But in truth, says Lotze, the creation of words, if we disregard mere 
formless interjections and expressions of excitement, implies the funda-
mental form of thought, the form of objectivization. Language cannot 
yet aim to institute connections of the manifold, which come under a uni-
versal rule, but it must first perform the preliminary task of giving to 
each particular impression an intrinsic signification. This type of objectiviza-
tion has as yet nothing to do with attributing an entirely independent 
reality to the content—it is concerned solely with fixing the content for 
knowledge and characterizing it for consciousness as something identical 
with itself and recurrent amid the flux of impressions. "Thus through 
the logical objectivization effected in the creation of the names, the named 
content is not moved into an outward reality; the common world in which 
others are expected to find the content to which we refer, is in general only 
the world of the thinkable; here the first suggestion of an existence of its 
own, and an inner necessity identical for all thinking beings and independ-
ent of them, is imputed to this world." 
And now this first fixation of whatever qualities can be apprehended in 
thought and speech is augmented by further specifications, through which 
they enter into certain relations with one another, through which they are 
articulated into orders and series. The particular quality not only possesses 
in itself an identical "whatness," an enduring character of its own, but 
through it it is related to others—and this relation is not arbitrary, but dis-
closes a characteristic objective form. Yet, although we recognize this form 
as such, we cannot juxtapose it to the particular contents as something in-

282 
E X P R E S S I O N OP C O N C E P T U A L 
T H O U G H T 
dependent and separable; we can only find it in them and through them. 
If, after having fixed and named several contents as such, we group them 
into the form ofaseries, we seem, in so doing, to have postulated a common 
characteristic which is specified in the particular members of the series, 
which is manifested in aU of them, yet in each one with a specific difference. 
This first universal is however, as Lotze stresses, essentiaUy different from 
the current generic concepts of logic. 
We communicate the general concept of an animal or of a geometric 
figure to others by prescribing a precise series of logical operations of 
synthesis, analysis or relation to be performed upon a number of par­
ticular representations assumed to be known; at the end of this logical 
operation the content which we wished to communicate wiU be present 
in his consciousness. But we cannot in this way explain wherein consists 
the generic blue which included our representation of light blue or dark 
blue, or the generic color which formed part of our representation of 
red and yellow. . . . The common factor in red and yellow, by virtue 
of which they are both colors, cannot be detached from what makes red 
red and yeUow yellow; that is to say, this common factor cannot be de­
tached and made into the content of a third representation of the same 
kind and order as the other two. Our sensation communicates only a 
particular color shade, a particular pitch, volume and quality of tone. 
. . . Anyone who wishes to apprehend the universal in color or tone 
wUl inevitably come up against the fact that what he has in mind is the 
intuition of a specific color or sound accompanied by the reflection that 
every other tone or color has an equal right to serve as an intuitive ex­
ample of the universal which is itsetf not subject to intuition; or else, 
his memory must present many colors and tones successively, while 
again he reflects that what he is seeking is not these particulars but that 
which is common to them and which cannot be intuited in itsetf. . . . 
In truth, words such as "color" and "tone" are only indications of 
logical problems which cannot be solved in the form of a seh>contained 
representation. Through them we instruct our consciousness to represent 
and compare the particular, perceptible tones and colors, and in this 
comparison to apprehend the common factor which, as our sensation 
teUs us, is contained in them but which no effort of thought can truly 
detach from that wherein they are different to make them into the 
content of an equaUy intuitive new representation.* 
3. H. Lotze, Logik, (ad ed., Leipzig, 1880), pp. 14ff., 29ff. Eng. tranb, by B. Bosanquet 
(Oxford, Chrendon Prew, t884), pp. 22^4. 

T H E F O R M A T I O N O F Q U A L I F Y I N G C O N C E P T S 
283 
Wc havc here reported Lotze's theory of the "first universal" at length, 
because, correctly understood and interpreted, it may provide the key to 
an understanding of the original form of Unguistic concept formation. 
As Lotze's remarks clearly show, the logical tradition finds itself in a 
strange dUemma in regard to this problem. Traditional logicians are con­
vinced that the concept must be oriented purely towards universaUty and 
that its ultimate achievement must be to provide universal representations; 
but then it develops that this essentiaUy uniform striving for universality 
cannot everywhere be fuUiUed in the same way. Consequently, we must 
distinguish two forms of universal: in one, the universal is given only 
implicitly, as it were, in the form of a relation disclosed by the particular 
contents, whUe in the other it emerges also expUcidy after the manner of 
an independent intuitive representation. But from here only one step is 
required to reverse our viewpoint: to look upon the enduring relation as 
the true content and logical foundation of the concept, and to regard the 
"universal representation" as a psychological accident which is not always 
desirable or attainable. Lotze did not take this step; instead of drawing a 
sharp distinction in principle between definition by stipulation, in which 
the concept makes the claim, and the postulate to universality, he trans­
formed the primary definitions to which the concept leads back into pri­
mary universals, so that instead of the two characteristic works of the con­
cept there are only two forms of the universal, a "first" and a "second" 
universal. But from his own presentation it follows that these two types 
have litde more than the name in common and are very distinct in their 
logical structure. For the relation of subsumption, which traditional logic 
regards as the constitutive relation through which the universal is con­
nected with the particular, the genus with the species and individuals, is 
not applicable to the concepts which Lotze designates as the "first uni­
versal." Blue and yeUow are not particulars subordinated to the genus 
"color in general"; on the contrary, color "as such" is contained nowhere 
else but in them and in the totaUty of other possible color gradations, and 
is thinkable only as this aggregate in its graduated order. Thus universal 
logic points to a distinction which also runs through the whole formation 
of linguistic concepts. Before language can proceed to the generaUzing and 
subsuming form of the concept, it requires another, purely qualifying 
type of concept formation. Here a thing is not named from the standpoint 
of the genus to which it belongs, but on the basis of some particular prop-
erty which is apprehended in a total intuitive content. The work of the 
spirit does not consist in subordinating the content to another content. 

284 
E X P R E S S I O N 
O F C O N C E P T U A L 
T H O U G H T 
but in distinguishing it as a concrete, undifferentiated whole by stressing 
a specific, characterisdc factor in it and focusing attention on this factor. 
The possibility of "giving a name" rests on this concentration of the mind's 
eye: the new imprint of thinking upon the content is the necessary condi­
tion for its designation in language. 
For the aggregate of these questions the philosophy of language has 
created a special concept, which however is so ambiguous and discordant 
in its usage that instead of offering a definite solution it seems to present 
one of its most difficult and controversial problems. Since Humboldt, the 
term "inner form" has been used to designate the specific law according to 
which each language, as set off from others, effects its concept formation. 
By inner form Humboldt meant the enduring, uniform factor in the en­
deavor of the spirit to raise the articulated sound to the level of an expres­
sion of ideas; he set out to apprehend this factor as fully as possible in its 
context and to expound it systematically. But even in Humboldt this defini­
tion is not unequivocal: for sometimes this form is said to express itself in the 
laws of linguistic combination, and sometimes in the formation of roots. 
Thus, as has sometimes justifiably been argued against Humboldt, it is 
taken now in a morphological, now in a semiotic sense; on the one hand 
it applies to the interrelation of certain grammatical categories, e.g., the 
noun and the verb; on the other hand it goes back to the origin of word 
significations.4 If, however, we survey Humboldt's definition of concepts 
as a whole, it is unmistakable that for him the latter standpoint was pre­
dominant. That each particular language has a specific inner form meant 
for him primarily that in the choice of its designations it never simply ex­
pressed the objects perceived in themselves, but that this choice was emi-
nendy determined by a whole spiritual attitude, by the orientation of man's 
subjective view of objects. For the word is not a copy of the object as such, 
but reflects the soul's image of the object.5 In this sense, the words of dif­
ferent languages can never be synonyms—their meaning, strictly speaking, 
can never be encompassed in a simple definition which merely lists the 
objective characteristics of the object designated. There is always a specific 
mode of signification which expresses itself in the syntheses and coordina­
tions underlying the formation of linguistic concepts. If the moon in Greek 
4. Humboldt, 'Einleitung zum Kawi-Werk," Wer\e, 7, N0. 1, 47 ff.; cf. the remarks of 
B. Delbrück, Vergleichende Syntax, 1, 42. 
5. Cf. "Einleitung zum Kawi-Werk," Wer\e, 7, N0. 1, 59 ff., 89 ff., 190 ff., etc.; see pp. 
158 ff., above. 

T H E F O R M A T I O N 
O F Q U A L I F Y I N G 
C O N C E P T S 
285 
is caUed the "measurer" (μην), in Latin the "gUttering" {luna, luc-na), 
we have here one and the same sensory intuition assigned to very differ­
ent notions of meaning and made determinate by them. It no longer seems 
possible to give a general account of the way in which this specifying of in­
tuition is effected in the different languages, precisely because we have to do 
with a highly complex cultural process, which varies with each special 
case. The only road that seems to Ue open for us is to place ourselves in the 
midst of the immediate intuition of the particular languages, striving not 
to describe their method in an abstract formula, but to feel it immediately 
in the particular phenomena.6 Yet, although phUosophical analysis can 
never claim to grasp completely the special subjectivity that expresses it-
seff in the different languages, still the universal subjectivity of language 
remains within the scope of its problems. For whUe languages differ in 
their perspectives of the world, there is a perspective of knguage itself, 
which distinguishes it from the other cultural forms. This perspective offers 
certain points of contact with those of scientific cognition, art and myth, 
but it also defines itself over against them. 
What primarily distinguishes linguistic concept formation from stricdy 
logical concept formation is that it never rests solely on the static representa­
tion and comparison of contents but that in it the sheer form of reflection 
is always infused with specific dynamic factors; that its essential impulsions 
are not taken solely from the world of being but are always drawn at the 
same time from the world of action. AU linguistic concepts remain in the 
zone between action and reflection. Here there is no mere classification and 
ordering of intuitions according to specific objective characteristics; even 
where there is such classification, an active interest in the world and its 
constitution expresses itsetf. Herder said that originaUy knguage, Uke 
nature, was for man a pantheon of animated, active beings. And indeed, 
it is the reflection not of an objective environment, but of man's own life 
and action that essentially determines the Unguistic view of the world, as 
it does the primitive mythical image of nature. Man's wiU and action are 
directed toward one point, his consciousness strains and concentrates on 
it, and so he becomes ripe, as it were, for the process of linguistic designa­
tion. In the stream of consciousness which seemed to flow along uniformly, 
waves arise with their crests and troughs: particular, dynamically stressed 
6. A highly interesting and instructive attempt to carry out this task was performed by 
James Byrne on the basis of an extraordinary wealth of empirical material. See General 
Principles of the Structure of Language (2 vols. London, 1885). 

286 
E X P R E S S I O N O F C O N C E P T U A L 
T H O U G H T 
coments take form and others group around them. And now the ground 
is prepared for those coordinations which make it possible to single out 
linguistic-logical "characteristics" and to collect these into distinct, char­
acteristic groups; the foundation is provided upon which language can 
build 'its edifice of qualifying concepts. 
This general trend of language formation has been disclosed in the 
transition from mere sensuous sounds of excitement to the cry. The cry, 
e.g., of tear or pain, may remain entirely within the sphere of the mere 
interjection; and yet it already means more than that, in so far as it is not 
the mere reflex following instantly upon a sense impression, but is rather 
the expression of a definite and conscious intent. For now consciousness 
no longer stands in the sign of mere reproduction, but enters the sphere of 
anticipation: it no longer clings to what is given and present, but reaches out 
to represent futurity. Accordingly, the sound no longer merely accompanies 
a present state of feeling and excitement, but itsetf acts as a factor inter­
vening in a process. The changes in this process are not merely designated, 
but in the strictest sense "provoked." When the sound thus acts as an 
organ of the will, it has once and for aU gone beyond the stage of mere 
"imitation." Among children, we can observe how, in the period preced­
ing actual language formation, the infantile outburst graduaUy becomes 
a cry. When the cry becomes differentiated, when particular sounds, 
though not yet articulated, come to be used for different emotions and dif­
ferent kinds of desire, the sound is guided as it were towards specific con­
tents and thus the way is paved for its first "objectivization." The language 
of mankind developed in essentiaUy the same way if we accredit the theory 
advanced by Lazarus Geiger and Ludwig Noire that the original sounds 
originated not in the objective intuition of substance but in the subjective 
intuition of action. According to this theory it became possible for the pho­
netic sign to represent the objective world only as this world itself graduaUy 
took form from man's work and activity. For Noire it was above aU the 
social form of action which made possible the social function of knguage 
as a means of mutual understanding. If the phonetic sign had merely ex­
pressed an individual representation produced in the individual conscious­
ness, it would have remained imprisoned in the individual consciousness, 
without power to pass beyond it. There would have been no bridge be­
tween the perceptual and phonetic worlds of one man and another. But 
since knguage arises not in isolated but in communal action, it possesses 
from the very start a truly common, "universal" sense. Language as a 
sensorum commune could only grow out of the sympathy of activity. 

ТНБ 
F O R M A T I O N O F Q U A L I F Y I N G 
C O N C E P T S 
287 
It was from communal activity directed toward a common purpose, 
it was from the primeval labor of our ancestors that language and ra­
tional life sprang forth. . . . In its beginnings, the linguistic sound ac­
companied communal activity as an expression of an enhanced feeling 
of community. . . . A common representation and designation of other 
things, of sun and moon, tree and animal, man and child, pain and 
joy, food and drink, was absolutely impossible; this alone—common 
activity, not individual activity—was the solid, unchanging ground 
upon which common understanding could rise. . . . Things enter into 
the scope of human vision, i.e., they become things only in so far as they 
undergo human activity, and it is then that they obtain their designa­
tions, their names.7 
The empirical demonstration by which Noire strove to justify this spec­
ulative thesis has to be sure been discredited: what he says coneerning the 
original form of linguistic roots and words remains as hypothetical and 
doubtful as the whole notion of an original "root period" in language. But 
even if we give up hope of penetrating to the ultimate metaphysical secret 
of Unguistic origins from this standpoint, a study of the empirical form 
of the different languages shows how deeply rooted they are in the sphere 
of action and activity. This relationship is particularly evident in the lan­
guages of primitive peoples 8—and the advanced languages reveal it more 
and more clearly as we pass beyond the sphere of general concepts and 
consider the development of "occupational languages" in the various fields 
of human activity. Usener pointed out that these languages contain a com­
mon structural factor which is characteristic for the trend of linguistic as 
weU as mythico-religious concept formation. "Special names" like "special 
gods" are gradually superseded only as man progresses from special to more 
general activities, as his action becomes more universal and with it his 
consciousness of that action: only the extension of his activity, as Usener 
writes, enables man to rise to truly universal linguistic and religious con­
cepts.9 
The content of these concepts and the principle which determines their 
7. Cf. Lazarus Geiger, Ursprung und Entwickjung der menschlichen Sprache und Vernunft 
(2 vols. Frankfurt a. M.), pp. 1868 ff.; Ludwig Noire, Der Ursprung der Sprache especially 
pp. 323 ff.; idem, Logos-Ursprung und Wesen der Begriffe, especially pp. 296 ff. 
8. Cf. C. Meinhof's essay, "Über die Einwirkung der Beschäftigung auf die Sprache bei 
den Bantustämmen Afrikas," Globus, 75 (1899), 361 ff. 
9. H. Usener, Götternamen: Versuch einer Lehre von der religiösen Begriffsbildung (Bonn, 
1896), especially pp. 317 ff. 

288 
E X P R E S S I O N O F C O N C E P T U A L 
T H O U G H T 
structure become fuUy intelligible only if beside their abstract logical mean­
ing we consider their teleological meaning. The words of language are not 
reflections of stable concretions in nature and in the perceptual world, 
they rather indicate directions which the processof determination may 
foUow. Here consciousness does not passively confront the aggregate of 
sensory impressions, it permeates them and fills them with its own inner 
life. Only what in some way touches on man's inner activity, what seems 
"significant" for it, obtains the linguistic stamp of signification. It has been 
said of concepts in general that the principle of their formation is a prin­
ciple of selection rather than "abstraction"—and this eminently applies to 
the formation of linguistic concepts. What happens here is not that existing 
distinctions, given to consciousness by sensation or perception, are simply 
stabilized and provided with a certain phonetic sign as a kind of trade­
mark, but rather that dividing lines are drawn within the consciousness 
as a whole. The determinants and dominants of linguistic expression arise 
through the determination which the action itself undergoes. The light 
does not simply pass from objects into the sphere of the spirit, but spreads 
progressively from the center of the action itself,10 and thus makes the 
world of immediate sensation into a world illumined from within, formed 
both in intuition and language. In this process, language formation shows 
its kinship with mythical thought and representation, and yet distinguishes 
itsetf by a characteristic, independent tendency of its own. Like myth, lan­
guage starts from the basic experience and basic form of personal activity; 
however, it does not, like mythology, weave the world in infinite varia­
tions around this one central point, but gives it a new form in which it 
confronts the mere subjectivity of sensation and feeling. In language, the 
process of animation and the process of definition constantly merge to 
form a spiritual unity.11 And it is through this twofold movement, from 
io. We cite an example of this process from H. K. Brugsch, Religion und Mythologie der 
alten Ägypter (Leipzig, J. C. Hinrichs, i888), p. 53: "In ancient Egyptian the word hpd 
designates successively the most diverse concepts: to make pots, to be a potter, to form, create, 
build, work, draw, navigate, travel, sleep; and substantively: likeness, image, metaphor, 
similarity, circle, ring. The original representation, "to turn around, to turn in a circle," under­
lies all these and similar derivatives. The turning of the potter's wheel evoked the representa­
tion of the potter's formative activity, out of which grew the significations "form, create, build, 
work." 
it. This twofold process is perhaps best followed by an examination of the form which 
the linguistic expression of activity, the verb, assumes in the inflected languages. Here two 
entirely different functions unite and permeate one another, for the verb is the clearest ex­
pression of the power of objectivization on the one hand and of the power of personification 

T H E F O R M A T I O N O F Q U A L I F Y I N G 
C O N C E P T S 
289 
thc inside out and back again, through this ebb and flow of the spirit, that 
inner and outer reaUty take form and definition. 
So far, to be sure, we have only set up an abstract schema of Unguistic 
concept formation; we have oudined its framework, as it were, without 
entering into the details of the picture. To gain closer understanding of 
the process, we must foUow the manner in which knguage progresses 
from a purely "qualificative" to a "generalizing" view, from the sensuous 
and concrete to the generic and universal. If we compare the concepts of 
our advanced languages with those of primitive knguages, the contrast 
in basic approach is immediately evident. The languages of primitive peo­
ples designate every thing, every process and activity, with the most intui­
tive concretion; they strive to express as plainly as possible aU the dis­
tinguishing attributes of a thing, aU the concrete details of an occurrence, 
every modification and shading of an action. In this respect they possess 
a richness which our advanced languages cannot even begin to approach. 
As we have seen, spatial specifications and rektions are expressed with the 
most meticulous care.12 Yet this verbal expression particularizes not only 
spatiaUy, but from coundess other points of view. Every modifying cir­
cumstance of an action, whether applying to its subject or object, its aim 
or the instrument with which it is performed, immediately affects the 
choice of term. In certain North American knguages, the activity of wash­
ing is designated by thirteen different verbs, according to whether it applies 
to the washing of the hands or face, of bowk, garments, meat, etc.18 Ac­
cording to TrumbuU, no American Indian language has an equivalent for 
our general term "to eat"; instead, they have any number of verbs, one 
of which for example is used in connection with animal, another with 
vegetable nutriment, one indicating the meal of an individual, another a 
on the. other. The first factor was aiready noted by Humboldt, who regarded the verb as the 
immediate ungu>stic expression of the spiritual "act of synthetic postulationn "By one and 
the same synthetic act, it joins the predicate with the subject in being, but in this fashion: being, 
which with an energetic predicate passes into an activity, is attributed to the subject, so that 
what was thought of as merely linkable in thought becomes an existing thing or an occurrence 
in reality. It is not merely that we think of the striking lightning, it is the lightning itself that 
strikes. . . . The thought, if one may express oneself in such sensuous terms, leaves its inner 
dwdling pkce with the help of the verb and passes into reality." ("Einleitung zum Kawi-
Werk," Werke, 7, N0. I, 214.) On the other hand Hermann Paul, for example, points out 
that the Unguistic form of the verb as such embodies an element of animation of nature, akin 
to the mythical animation of the universe: that "a certain degree of personification of the 
subject" is impk'at in the very use of the verb (Prinzipien der Sprachgeschichte, 3d ed, p. 89). 
12. See above, p. 198 ff. 
13. Sayce, Introduction to the Science of Language. 1,120. 

2Q0 
E X P R E S S I O N O F C O N C E P T U A L 
T H O U G H T 
mcal eaten in common, etc. In the case of strikJng, a different verb is used 
for striking with the fist or the flat of the hand, with a rod or with a whip; 
breakJng is variously designated according to the type of breaking and the 
instrument used.14 And the same ahnost unlimited differentiation appUes 
to things as weU as activities. Here again, before language can create spe­
cific class designations and "generic concepts," it concentrates on the 
designation of "varieties." The aborigines of Tasmania had no word to 
express the concept tree, but a special name for every variety of the acacia, 
the blue rubber tree, etc.15 K. v. d. Steinen reports that the Bakairi had 
different names for every variety of parrot and palm tree, but no equivalent 
for the general concepts of parrot and pahn.16 The same phenomenon oc­
curs in otherwise highly developed languages. The Arabic knguage, for 
example, is so rich in terms for animal and plant varieties that it has been 
cited as an example of how language study can advance our knowledge of 
natural history and physiology. In a monograph on the subject, Hammer 
Usted no less than 5,744 names for camel in Arabic, varying according to sex, 
age, and individual characteristics. There are special terms for the male 
and female, for the foal and the adult, and for the subdest gradations 
within these classes. The foal that has not yet grown its side teeth, the foal 
that is beginning to walk, a camel between the age of one and ten, each 
has itS own special name. Other distinctions have to do with mating, 
pregnancy, foaUng, and stiU others with physical peculiarities: for ex­
ample, there are special names for a camel with big or with litde ears, 
with a cut ear or a hanging ear lobe, with a large jawbone or a sagging chin, 
etc." 
Here, apparendy, we are not dealing with an accidental luxuriation of 
some isolated Unguistic impube, but rather with an original tendency of 
Unguistic concept formation, which often leaves discernible vestiges in 
languages that have in general passed beyond it. Those phenomena which 
since the time of Hermann Osthoff have been caUed suppletives are usuaUy 
14. J. Hammond Trumbull, "On the Best Method of Studying the North American Lan­
guages," Transactions of the American Philological Association, 186970 (Hartford, 1871), 
PP· 55~79; cf. Powell, Introduction to the Study of Indian Languages, ad ed., p. 6x. For details, 
see the examples from the Algonquin and Sioux languages in Boas, Handbook, 1, 807fL, 
90a fT., etc. 
15. Cf. Sayce, a, 5. 
16. K. v. d. Steinen, Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-BrasiUens, 2d ed., p. 84. 
17. Cf. Hammer-Purgstall, "Das Kamel," Denkschriften der Kaiserlichen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften xu Wien, PhuWhist. Classe, Vob. 6 and 7 (1855 ff.). 

T H E 
F O R M A T I O N O F Q U A L I F Y I N G 
C O N C E P T S 
2СД 
interpreted in this Hght. Often, particularly in the Indc^Germanic lan­
guages, words which combine into a system of inflection, e.g, the cases of 
a substantive, the tenses of a verb, the degrees of adjectives, are not formed 
from one, but from two or more stems. Side by side with the "regular" con­
jugation of verbs and comparison of adjectives, we find cases such as fero, 
tuH, latum, φέρω, οϊσω, ήντ/κον, which at first sight seem to be mere arbi­
trary "exceptions" to the principle of designating the different forms of the 
same concept by words built from the same root. Osthoff discovered the 
kw governing these exceptions, by tracing them back to an older stratum 
of language formation, in which an "individualizing" trend stiU out­
weighed the "grouping" tendency. He beUeved that the closer the con­
cepts and significations stabilized in the language ky to men's natural 
range of perceptions, to their immediate activities and interests, the longer 
the "individualizing" view would predorninate. "Just as man's physical 
eye differentiates most sharply what is closest to him in space, his spiritual 
eye, whose mirror is knguage, wiU most sharply differentiate and in-
dividuaUze those things of the perceptual world which stand closest to his 
feeUng and thoughts, which most intensely grip his soul and excite his 
psychic interest, whether as an individual or a people." And indeed, from 
this point of view it seems significant that precisely those concepts for 
which the languages of primitive peoples have the most diverse designa­
tions, are ako those for which, in the mdc^Germanic languages, suppletives 
are most richly developed and endure the longest. Among verbs, it is 
first those of motion, "to go," "to come," "to run" and then those of eat­
ing, striking, seeing, speaking, etc. in which we find the most varied par-
ticularization. Curtius has shown that ur-Indc^Germanic, for example, 
differentiated the varieties of "going" before it arrived at the general con­
cept of going. He demonstrated that such varieties as peering, spying, 
looking, watching, etc? must have been designated earUer than seeing as 
such, and the same for the other sensory activities, hearing, feeling, etc. 
And such verbs as the post-Homeric aur0avea0a^ sentire, designating 
sense perception in general, developed last of all. 1 8 Since other famiUes of 
knguages, such as the Semitic, disclose phenomena quite analogous to the 
Lido-Germanic suppletives, we must conclude that word formation here 
reflects a general trend in the development of Unguistic concepts. True, 
18. Curtius, Grundsäge der grieehisehen Etymologie, 5th ed., pp. 98 S.; on the whole sub­
ject see Osthoff, Vom Suppletivwesen der indogermaniscken Sprachen, Akademische Redc 
(Hckktocrg, 1899). 

292 
E X P R E S S I O N O F C O N C E P T U A L 
T H O U G H T 
we cannot speak of an original "individualizing" tendency in language: 
for every appellation of a particular intuition, however concretely formu­
lated, goes beyond the purely individual view of that intuition and stands, 
as it were, in opposition to it. Nevertheless, different degrees of universality 
can be expressed in linguistic concepts. If we conceive of the whole intui­
tive world as a uniform plane, from which certain individual figures are 
singled out and differentiated from their surroundings by the act of appella­
tion, this process of specification at first affects only a particular, narrowly 
limited portion of the plane. Nevertheless, since aU these individual areas 
are adjacent to one another, the whole plane can gradually be apprehended 
in this way and covered by an even denser network of appellations. Yet fine 
as the meshes of this net may be, it stiU presents gaps. For each word has 
only its own relatively limited radius of action, beyond which its force 
does not extend. Language stiU lacks the means of combining several dif­
ferent spheres of signification into a new Unguistic whole designated by a 
unitary form. The power of configuration and differentiation inherent in 
each single word begins to operate, but soon exhausts itseff, and then a new 
sphere of intuition must be opened up by a new and independent impulsion. 
The summation of aU these different impulses, each of which operates 
alone and independently, can form collective, but not truly generic unities. 
The totality of Unguistic expression here attained is only an aggregate but 
not an articulated system; the power of articulation has exhausted itseU in 
the individual appellation and is not adequate to the formation of com­
prehensive units. 
But language takes a further step towards generic universaUty when, in­
stead of contenting itself with creating specific designations for specific 
intuitions, it proceeds to combine these designations, in such a way as to 
imprint the objective fynship of contents on their Unguistic form. This 
endeavor to create a stricter rektion between sound and signification by 
coordinating specific series of conceptual signification with specific pho­
netic series, characterizes the progress from purely qualifying concepts to 
classifying concept formation. This occurs in its simplest form where kn­
guage characterizes groups of different words as a unit by marking them 
with a common suffix or prefix. It complements the special signification of 
each word as such by adding a new determining element, which discloses 
its relation to other words. Such a group, held together by a classificatory 
suffix is to be found, for example, in the indo-Germanic tides of fantily 
relationship: in the names for father and mother, brother, sister, and 

T H E F O R M A T I O N O F Q U A L I F Y I N G 
C O N C E P T S 
293 
daughter. The common ending -tar (ter) which appears in them (pitar, 
mätär, bhratar, svasar, duhitar,vaTqp, μήτηρ, φράτωρ, θνγάτηρ, etc.) joins 
these names into a self-contained series and thus marks them as expressions 
of one and the same "concept"—which however does not exist as an in­
dependent, detachable unit outside of the series, but whose signification lies 
precisely in this function of encompassing the individual links of the series. 
It would be a mistake, however, if for this reason we were not to accept the 
operation here performed by language as a logical operation in the strict 
sense. For the logical theory of concepts clearly demonstrates that the-
"serial concept" is not posterior to the "generic concept" in force and 
significance, but is an integral part of the generic concept.10 If we bear 
this in mind, the principle which operates in these hnguistic phenomena 
stands out in aU its significance and fruitfuhiess. And we shall not do full 
justice to the spiritual content of this principle if we suppose that the 
psychological law of association by similarity provides an explanation for 
those forms. The accidental course of associations, different from case to 
case and individual to individual, can no more explain the foundation and 
origin of linguistic than of purely logical concepts. "From the psycho­
logical point of view," Wundt remarks, 
the only possible way of conceiving the process by which the terms of 
kinship were formed in the Indo-Germanic languages is to presume that 
from one term to another there extended an associadon of the two ideas 
and of the feelings accompanying them, and that this association 
brought about an assimilation of those phonetic elements of the word, 
which did not serve to express the special content of the idea. Thus such 
a determining phonetic sign, common to a whole class of ideas, can 
have arisen only through successive associative assimUation and not 
through the simultaneous formation of inclusive conceptual signs. 
And consequently the concept of an affinity of objects did not precede 
the formation of these Unguistic determinants but developed simulta­
neously with them. For it is evidently the expression of affinity im­
mediately presenting itseU in the transition from one object to another 
that constitutes the concept of affinity, so that this concept rests rather 
upon certain similarly colored attendant feeUngs than on actual com­
parison.20 
19. Cf. my book, Substance and Function, espcciaUy cbs. 1 and 4. 
?o. Wundt, Völkerpsychologie, ad ed., a, 15 ff. 

294 
E X P R E S S I O N 
O F C O N C E P T U A L 
T H O U G H T 
Contrary to this it must be said, however, that whatever may have been 
the original psychological motive in forming a specific group of names, the 
grouping itsetf constitutes an independent logical act with a specific logical 
form. A determination which remained exclusively in the sphere of feel­
ing, could not by itsetf create a new objective specification. For some sort 
of associations of feeling can exist between any, even the most heterogene­
ous contents of consciousness; so that, consequendy, such associations can­
not lead to that kind of "homogeneity" which is established or at least 
postulated in the logical and linguistic concept. Feeling can join anything 
with anything; hence it provides no adequate explanation for the group­
ing of specific contents into specific unities. For this we rather require a 
logical basis of comparison, and such a basis is discernible in linguistic 
series even where it is expressed only in the form of a classifying suffix and 
not as an independent substantive.81 When language expresses the existence 
of a generic relationship between contents, it serves as a vehicle of intel­
lectual progress, regardless of whether or not it states wherein this relation­
ship consists. Here again it anticipates a function which can be truly ful­
filled only by scientific cognition: in a sense it foreshadows the logical con­
cept. The logical concept not only asserts a coordination and affinity of 
contents, but inquires into the "why" of this coordination, striving to 
apprehend its law and "foundation." Here analysis of the relations between 
concepts ultimately leads back to their "genetic definition": to the state­
ment of a principle out of which they can grow, from which they can be 
derived as its varieties. Language can rise to this task neither in its qualify­
ing, nor its "classifying," nor its stricdy "generic" concepts. But it prepares 
the way by creating a first schema of coordination. This schema may en­
compass Utde of the objective kinship of the contents, yet it seems to 
stabilize the subjective aspect of the concept, to embody the significance 
of the concept as question. And indeed, historically speaking, the problem 
of the concept was discovered when men learned not to accept the lin-
guistic expression of concepts as definitive, but to interpret them as logical 
questions. This was the origin of the Socratic expression of the concept, the 
Tt « r r i : the Socratic induction consisted in starting from the provisional and 
presumptive unity of the word form and thence "leading" to the specific 
2i. There is no doubt that many of these "dassifying suffixes," like other suffixes, go back 
to concrete substantives (cf. Chapter 5), though in the Indo43crmanic languages etymological 
proof of this relationship seems krgely impossible; cf. Brugmann and Delbrück, Grundriss, 
2de&,2,PL2^84582fL,etc 

B A S I C TRENDS I N L I N G U I S T I C CLASS F O R M A T I O N 
2Cfi 
and definitive form of the logical concept.22 In this sense, we may say that 
precisely in the subjectivity which inevitably adheres to them, the co­
ordinations and classifications of language contain a certain ideality, a 
tendency towards the objective unity of the "idea." 
2. Basic Trends in Linguistic Class Formation 
The task of describing the various types of concept and class formation 
which operate in the particular languages, and of disclosing their ultimate 
spiritual factors, lies beyond the scope and methodological means of the 
philosophy of language. It can be undertaken only by general linguistics 
and the special linguistic sciences. The processes at work are so interwoven 
and obscure that they can be elucidated only by the closest and most sensi­
tive immersion in the details of the particular languages. For the type of 
class formation is an essential factor in that "inner form" which makes one 
language different from another. Yet, although this rich and varied spir­
itual formation cannot be captured once and for aU in any finished, abstract 
schema, a comparison of the particular phenomena nevertheless points 
to certain general considerations on the basis of which language arrives at 
its classifications and coordinations. We may attempt to arrange these by 
taking as our guiding principle the constant progress from the "concrete" 
to the "abstract" which determines the general development of language: 
yet we must bear in mind that we have to do not with a temporal, but 
with a methodological stratification and that in a given historical con­
figuration the strata which we shall attempt to differentiate may exist 
side by side or may be intermingled in a variety of ways. 
We seem to find ourselves at the lowest step of the cultural scale where 
the comparison and coordination of objects are based solely on some 
similarity in the sensory impression which they evoke. The languages of 
primitive peoples offer a variety of examples of this type of grouping. The 
most diverse contents may be grouped into a "class," provided they reveal 
some analogy in their sensuous form. The Melanesian and American 
mdian knguages reveal a tendency to employ special prefixes for round 
or long objects. In accordance with this tendency, the terms for sun and 
22. See above, pp. 123 ff. 

2o5 
E X P R E S S I O N 
O F C O N C E P T U A L 
T H O U G H T 
moon, for example, are grouped with those for human ear, for fishes of a 
particular shape, for canoes, etc.; while another group is composed of long 
objects such as nose and tongue.
28 
To an entirely different level would seem to belong those class distinc-
tions which are based not on a mere similarity in the content of things per-
ceived, but on some relation between them; here objects are differentiated 
according to their size, number, and position. The Bantu languages, for 
example, use a special prefix to designate particularly large objects, while 
other prefixes serve as diminutives; objects which regularly occur as ele-
ments in a collective multiplicity, as "one of many," are distinguished from 
such "things doubly present" as the eyes, ears, and hands.
24 As for position 
and situation, many American Indian languages determine the class of 
a word according to whether the object it designates is thought of as stand-
ing, sitting, or lying.
2 5 Side by side with this classification of objects ac-
cording to direct, intuitively grasped characteristics, we find a noteworthy 
intermediary principle: here things as a whole are coordinated with parts 
of the human body and, through this relationship with one part or another, 
assigned to different linguistic groups. Here we discern a theme already en-
countered in the linguistic building of spatial intuition and the formation 
of certain primary spatial terms, namely that the human body and the 
differentiation of its parts serves as one of the first and necessary pillars of 
Hnguistic orientation.
20 In certain languages the differentiation of the parts 
of the body serves as a general schema for the articulation of the world as 
a whole: each particular thing designated by language is first linked with 
a part of the body, the mouth, the legs, the head, the heart, etc., and accord-
ing to this basic relation assigned to a specific class or "genus."
2 7 Such 
23. Codrington, The Melanesian Languages, pp. 146 ff. Among the American Indian lan­
guages, Haida, for example, divides all nouns into groups distinguished by sensuous char­
acters; e.g., long, thin, round, flat, angular, thread-shaped objects, each form a separate 
group. Cf. Swanton, "Haida," in Boas, Handbook, '> 216, 227fT. 
24. See the account of the class prefixes in Meinhof, Grammatik der Bantusprachen, pp. 
8ff., 
16ff. 
25. Cf. Powell, Introduction to the Study of Indian Languages, 2d ed., p. 48. In the Ponca 
language, which distinguishes between animate and inanimate objects, special prefixes serve 
to indicate a resting member of the first class, a moving member, a single animate being that 
is standing, one that is sitting, etc. Cf. Boas and Swanton, "Siouan," in Boas, Handbook, *, 94°· 
26. See above, pp. 206 ff. 
27. Particularly characteristic of this process is the highly remarkable classification system of 
the South Andaman languages, described in detail by E. H. Man, On the Aboriginal In-
habitants of the Andaman Islands, with Report of Researches into the Language of the South 
Andaman Islands by A. /. Ellis (London, 1883). A supplement to this has been given by M. J. 

B A S I C TRENDS I N L I N G U I S T I C CLASS 
F O R M A T I O N 
297 
classifications make it very clear that the first conceptual differentiations 
of language are still thoroughly bound up with a material substrate, that the 
relation between the members of a class can only be thought if it is em-
bodied in an image. Yet the most richly and subdy developed systems of 
classification, such as that of the Bantu languages, seem to have acquired 
a general view extending far beyond this first sphere of mere sensuous 
differentiation. Here language already reveals the power to apprehend the 
entirety of being—in so far as it is a spadal entity—as a complex of relations 
and to let it grow, as it were, out of those relations. When in the precisely 
graduated system of "locative" prefixes employed in the Bantu languages 
there is a sharp definition of the varying distance of objects from the 
speaker and also the diverse spatial relations prevaiUng among objects, their 
"interpenetration," "juxtaposition," "separation," then the immediate form 
of spatial intuition begins, as it were, to assume a systematic structure. Lan-
guage seems to construct space as a manifold determined in different ways, 
to form it, by various distinctions of situation and direction, into a self-
enclosed, yet differentiated unity.
2 8 Such classifications seem already to 
disclose a drive and an energy for organization which, even where the ob-
ject itsetf remains entirely within the sphere of sensuous intuition, sur-
passes it in principle and points to new and characteristic "syntheses of 
the manifold." 
True, it lies in the very nature of language that each of these syntheses 
is not governed exclusively by theoretical but by imaginative factors as 
weU, and that consequently much of Unguistic "concept formation" seems 
to be the product less of logical comparison and combination than of the 
Unguistic fantasy. The form of grouping is never determined solely by the 
objective "similarity" of the particular contents, but also by the subjective 
imagination. In so far as we can gain insight into them, the factors which 
guide language in its classifications seem closely related to primitive myth-
ical concepts and classifications.
20 Here again language, as a general cul-
Portman, Notes on the Languages of the South Andaman Group of Tribes (Calcutta, 1898). 
In this system human beings form a special dass which is distinguished from other nouns; 
next, the particular parts of the body and terms of kinship are divided into groups which are 
sharply differentiated. Each group, for example, has its own set of possessive pronouns, its 
own special terms for mine, thine, his, etc The pans of the body and the kinship groups are 
related by various coordinations and "identities." (Cf. Man, pp. 51 ff., and Portman, pp. 37 ff.) 
28. Cf. the account of thc system of "locative prefixes" in Meinhof, Grammatik der 
Bantusprachen, pp. 19ff. 
29. Cf. my essay Die Begriffsform in mythischen Denken, Studien der Bibliothek Warburg, 
Vol.r. 

208 
E X P R E S S I O N O F C O N C E P T U A L 
T H O U G H T 
tural form, stands on the borderline between myth and logos and also 
represents an intermediary between the theoretical and aesthedc approach 
to the world. That most familiar form of Unguistic classification, the di-
vision of nouns into three genders, masculine, feminine, and neuter, must 
have originated largely in such half-mythical, half-aesthetic factors, as cer-
tain of its manifestations stiU indicate. Students of language who combined 
profound artistic intuition with rigorous grammatical analysis have 
believed that the system of genders offered an opportunity to study the 
principle of linguistic concept formation at its very source. Jacob Grimm 
derived the difference of gender in the Germanic languages from a trans-
ference of natural gender in the earliest period of language. He imputed a 
"natural origin" not only to the masculine and feminine but to the neuter 
as weU, whose source he sought in the "concept of the foetus or proles of 
Uving creatures." He attempted to show that the masculine designates the 
earlier, larger, more solid, more resistant, the active, mobile, generative, 
while the feminine designates the later, smaller, softer, quieter, the suffer-
ing and receptive, and the neuter indicates whatever is engendered, what 
is worked upon, the material, general, collective, undeveloped. Here, to be 
sure, modern linguistics has followed him only in small part. In the case 
of the Indo-Germanic languages, Grimm's aesthetic theory was countered 
by Brugmann who attributed the extending of the sexual distinctions to 
aU nouns not to any general trends of the linguistic imagination but to 
certain formal and in a sense accidental analogies. In his more sober theory, 
language, in developing and fixing this distinction, was not guided by an 
animistic intuition, but rather by essentially meaningless similarities of pho-
netic form: thus, for example, from the circumstance that certain "natural 
feminines"-i.e., designations for female beings^nded in -a (^>7), aU nouns 
having this ending came gradually to be assigned to the feminine gender 
by a process of pure association.
30 Compromise theories have attributed 
the development of grammatical gender partly to intuitive and partly to 
formal factors and attempted to draw dividing lines between the two.
8 1 
But the basic problem here involved could be grasped in its fuU meaning 
and scope only when linguistic studies were extended beyond the Indo-
Germanic and Semitic families and it became evident that the distinction 
of gender in these languages is merely a special case, a vestige perhaps of 
30. Brugmann, "Das grammatische Geschlecht in den indogermanischen Sprachen," in 
Techmer's Zeitschrift für Allgemeine Sprachwissenschaft, 4,100 ff.; cf. ako Kurze vergleichende 
Grammatik, pp. 361 ff. 
31. Cf. for example, WUmans, Deutsche Grammatik, 3, 725 fl. 

B A S I C TRENDS I N L I N G U I S T I C CLASS 
F O R M A T I O N 
299 
far richer and far more sharply elaborated classifications. When we con-
sider those which we find most particularly in the Bantu languages, we 
cannot but conclude that the distinction of "sex" occupies only a relatively 
smaU place among aU those means which language employs to express 
"generic" classifications and that consequendy it represents only a par-
ticular trend in linguistic imagination and not a universal principle. In-
deed, a large number of languages do not classify nouns according to 
natural gender or any analogy based on it. In these languages the masculine 
and feminine gender are not distinguished at aU in inanimate beings and 
in the case of animals they are expressed either by special words or by the 
addition of a word designating sex to the general name of the species. 
Similarly in the human sphere, an addition of this sort wiU transform a 
general term such as child or servant into son or daughter, manservant or 
maidservant, etc.
82 
Humboldt, who like Jacob Grimm finds the source of linguistic classifi-
cations in a basic function of the Unguistic "imaginative faculty," conse-
quendy interprets this faculty in a broader sense by starting not from the 
distinction of natural gender but from the general distinction between the 
animate and inanimate. Here he bases his argument essentially on his 
observations in the American Indian languages, most of which designate 
the difference in natural gender either not at aU, or only occasionally and 
incompletely, but reveal the keenest sense of the contrast between animate 
and inanimate objects. The whole structure of the Algonquin language is 
governed by this contrast. A special suffix (·*) designates an object com-
bining the attributes of life and independent motion; another (-/) desig-
nates objects lacking in these attributes. Every verb or noun must fall into 
one or the other of these classes: but the classification is not determined 
solely by empirical observation; mythical imagination and the mythical 
animation of nature also play a crucial part in it. In these languages, for 
example, a great number of plants, among them such all-important vari-
eties as corn and tobacco, are assigned to the class of animate objects.
38 
32. This method is most typical of the Finno-Ugrian and Altaic languages, none of which 
has designations of gender in the Indo-Germanic sense, but it is ako widespread in other 
groups. For thc Altaic languages, see Böthlingk, Über die Sprache der Jakuten, ρ. 343, and 
J. J. Schmidt, Grammatik der mongoUschen Sprache, pp. 22 ff.; for other languages see H. C. 
v. d. Gabelentz, Die Melanesischen Sprachen, p. 88; Wcstermann, Die Sudansprachen, pp. 39 ff.; 
Matthews, "Languages of Some Native Tribes of Queensland," /. and Proc. of the Roy. Soc. of 
N. S. Wales, 36 (1902), 148,168. 
33. On the classification of the Algonquin Unguages, see W. Jones, "Algonquin" (Foz), 
in Boas, Handbook, 1, 760 ff. 

300 
E X P R E S S I O N O F C O N C E P T U A L 
T H O U G H T 
In another context, the heavenly bodies are pkced in the same class with 
men and animals, and Humboldt regards this as the clearest verification 
of his theory that these peoples think of them as beings which move with 
an energy of their own, which are endowed with personality and probably 
guide human destinies from above.
84 If this reasoning is sound, it means 
that in devising such classifications language is still intimately bound up 
with mythical thinking, but is ahready beginning to rise above the first 
primitive stratum of this thinking. For this stratum is sdll dominated by 
a form of "pan-animism" which embraces and permeates the whole world 
and everything in it. But in the linguisdc disdnction between persons and 
things there gradually emerges from the general sphere of the "animate" 
a distinctly personal existence endowed with a peculiar significance and 
value of its own. In the Dravidian languages, for example, aU nouns faU 
into two classes, one of which comprises the "reasoning," the other the "un-
reasoning"—to the first belong men, gods and demigods, to the second 
inanimate objects and animals.
36 The dividing line that is here drawn 
through the world as a whole follows a principle essentiaUy different from 
the simple, almost undifferentiated mythical animadon of the universe. 
The Bantu languages also distinguish sharply between man as an inde-
pendently acting personality and every sort 6t animated but not personal 
being. They use a special prefix for ghosts, which they regard not as 
independent personaUties but as what animates or as something that 
"befalls" a man, and accordingly the same prefix is used for such natural 
forces as diseases, smoke, fire, streams, the moon.
8 6 Thus the conception of 
a personal, spiritual existence and activity in the restricted sense has created 
a linguisdc expression of its own, by which it distinguishes itsetf from 
the merely animisdc view of life and the soul, which regards the soul as a 
universal but utterly undifferentiated mythical power 
Here again the distinction of special classes of persons and things as 
weU as the subsumption of particular objects under them does not follow 
"objecdve" criteria; the conceptual structure of reality represented in lan-
guage is stiU permeated with purely subjective distincdons which can only 
be apprehended by immediate feeling. This classification is never de-
termined by mere acts of perception or judgment but always at the same 
time by acts of the emotion and wiU, by inner attitudes. Therefore a 
34. Humboldt, "Einleitung zum Kawi-Werk," Wer\e, 7, N0.1,172 ff. 
35. Fr. Müller, Grundriss, 3, Pt 1, 173; Novara-Reise, p. 83. 
36. For examples, see Memhof, Grammatik, der BantUsprechen, pp. 6 3. 

B A S I C TRENDS I N L I N G U I S T I C CLASS 
F O R M A T I O N 
3OI 
speaker may frequently place a thing which normally belongs to the 
object class in the personal class, in order to stress its value and im-
portance.
87 Even in the languages which, in the form known to us, have 
divided nouns according to natural gender, sometimes reveal, by the 
manner in which they employ this distinction, that it goes back to an 
older differentiation of persons and things, which was also felt to be a 
value judgment.
38 Strange as such phenomena may seem at first glance, 
they merely disclose the basic principle of aU linguistic concept formation. 
Language never simply follows the lead of impressions and perceptions, 
but confronts them with an independent action: it distinguishes, chooses 
and directs, and through this action creates certain centers of objective 
intuition. And because the world of sensory impressions is thus permeated 
with the inner measures of judgment, the theoredcal nuances of significa-
tion and the affective nuances of value tend at first to shade off continu-
ously into each other. However, language reveals its inner logic in that 
the distinctions which it creates do not immediately vanish but reveal a 
certain tendency to endure; in that they possess a peculiar logical consist-
ency and necessity, by virtue of which they not only maintain themselves, 
but spread from particular spheres of language formation over the whole. 
Through the rules of congruence which govern the grammatical structure 
of language and which are most clearly developed in the prefix and class 
languages, the conceptual distinctions applied to the noun spread to the 
other parts of speech. In Bantu every numeral, adjective, or pronoun which 
37. ln thc Gola language of Liberia (according to Wcstermann, Die Gola-Sprache, p. 27) 
a noun which ordinarily takes another prefix, takes the 0- prefix of the human and animal 
class if it is to be stressed as particularly large, outstanding, valuable. These qualities place it 
in the class of living creatures: "Side by side with kesie, oil palm, they say osie, thus char­
acterizing this palm as one of the most important trees; %ekjtl, tree, but okul, a particularly 
large, beautiful tree; ebu, field, but obuo, the beautiful, luxuriandy growing field. Trees or 
other objects which speak in fairytales are also put into this o-cIass." In the Algonquin lan­
guages, small animals are often assigned to the class of "inanimate" objects, while particularly 
important plants are assigned to the "animate" class. See above, p. 29g, and Boas, Handbook 1, 
p. 36. 
38. Characteristic examples of this are cited by Meinhof and Reinisch from the Bedauye 
language, where for example, la', the cow, as main support of the whole economy, is masculine, 
while ia', the meat, is feminine, because it is less important (see Meinhof, Die Sprachen der 
Hamiten, p. 139). Likewise in the Semitic languages, according to Brockelmann, Grundriss, 1, 
404 ff., the division of nouns between the masculine and feminine genders probably had 
originally nothing to do with natural sex, but was rather bascd on a differentiation of rank 
and value, vestiges of which are stiU discernible in the use of the feminine as a pejorative 
and diminutive. Cf. Brockelmann, Grundriss, 2, 418 ff. and Kurzge)asste vergleichende Gram-
matik^, pp. 198 ff. 

302 
E X P R E S S I O N O F C O N C E P T U A L 
T H O U G H T 
enters into an attributive or predicative relation with a substantive must 
assume the characteristic class prefix of that word. Similarly, the verb is 
allied with its subject and object by a special prefix.
89 Thus, the principle 
of ckssification, once arrived at, not only governs the formation of nouns, 
but thence spreads to the whole syntactical structure of the language, be-
coming the actual expression of its organization, its spiritual "articulation." 
Here the work of the Unguistic imagination seems throughout to be closely 
bound up with a specific methodology of Unguistic thinking. Once again 
language, with aU its involvement in the sensuous, imaginative world, 
reveals a tendency towards the logical and universal, through which it 
progressively liberates itsetf and attains to a purer and more independent 
spirituality of form. 
39. Cf. the account of the syntax of the Bantu languages in Meinhof, op. cit., pp. 83 ff. 
A simUar phenomenon prevails in most of the American Indian languages; cf. Powell, Intro-
duction to thc Study of Indian Languages, 2d ed., pp. 48 ff. 

Chapter j 
Language and the Expression of the Forms of 
Pure Relation. The Sphere of Judgment and 
the Concepts of Relation 
FoR EPisTEMOLOGiCAL inquiry an unbroken path leads from sensation to 
intuition, from intuition to conceptual thought, and thence to logical judg-
ment. Yet in following this path, the epistemologist is aware that sharply 
asits phases must be distinguished in reflection, they must never be re-
garded as independent data of consciousness, existing separately from one 
another. On the contrary, every more complex factor here includes the 
simpler ones, and every "later" one the "earlier," while conversely the 
Utter contains within it the seeds of the former. AU those components 
which constitute the concept of knowledge are related to one another and 
to the unitary aim of knowledge, the "object": consequently a rigorous 
analysis can discover in each one of them a reference to aU the others. The 
function of simple sensation and perception is not merely "connected" with 
the basic functions of inteUection, judgment and inference; it is itsetf 
such a basic function, containing implicidy what in these functions achieves 
a conscious and independent form. And in language we may expect to 
find the same indissoluble correlation of the spiritual instruments with 
which it constructs its world; we may expect each of its factors to contain 
the universality and specific totality of language as a whole. This expecta-
tion is confirmed when we note that the true and original element of aU 
language formation is not the simple word but the sentence. This is an-
other of the fundamental insights which Humboldt contributed to the 
philosophy of language. "We cannot possibly conceive of language," he 
wrote, "as beginning with the designation of objects by words and thence 
proceeding to their organization. In reality, discourse is not composed from 
words which preceded it, on the contrary, words issued from the whole 
303 

304 
F O R M S O F P U R E 
R E L A T I O N 
o£ discourse."
1 This conclusion, which Humboldt drew from the specula-
tive concept underlying his whole philosophy of language—from the con-
cept of "synthesis" as the source of aU thought and speech
 a—has been fully 
confirmed by empirical, psychological analysis, which also regards the 
"primacy of the sentence over the word" as one of its first and most secure 
findings.
8 The same conclusion follows from the history of language, which 
at every point seems to teach that the separating out of particular words 
from the sentence as a whole and the delimitation of the parts of speech 
from one another were only graduaUy accomplished and were almost 
totaUy lacking in early and primitive languages.
4 Here again language 
shows itself to be an organism in which, as the old Aristotelian definition 
put it, the whole is prior to its parts. Language begins with a complex total 
expression which only gradually breaks down into its elements, into rela-
tively independent subsidiary units. As far back as we can trace it, language 
confronts us as a formed whole. None of its utterances can be understood 
as a mere juxtaposition of separate words; in each and every one, we find 
provisions which serve purely to express the relation between the particular 
elements, and which articulate and graduate this rektion in a variety of 
ways. 
This principle seems indeed to be belied when we consider the structure 
of the so<alled "isolating languages," which have often been cited as proof 
of the possibility and actual existence of absolutely "formless" knguages. 
For here the above<lescribed relation between sentence and word does 
not seem to be confirmed. On the contrary, the word seems to possess that 
independence, that genuine "substantiality" by virtue of which it "is" in 
itself and must be so conceived. The separate words simply stand side by 
side in the sentence as material vehicles of signification, and their gram-
1. 'TinIcitung zum Kawi-Wcrk," Werke, 7, N0. 1, 72 ff.; cf. especially p. 143. 
2. Cf. above, p. 161. 
3. This primacy is asserted by Wundt and particularly by Ottmar Dittrich, Grundzüge der 
Sprachpsychologie, Vol. / (1903), and Die Probleme der Sprachpsychologie (1913). 
4. Cf. the remarks of Sayce in Introduction to the Science of Language, 1,111 ff. and B. Del­
brück, Vergleichende Syntax, 3, 5. In the so<allcd "polysynthctic" languages no sharp dis­
tinction can be drawn between the individual word and thc whole of the sentence; cf. particu-
hrly the accounts of the American Indian languages in Boas, Handbook, t. 27 ff., 762 fL, 
1002 ff., etc. H. Winkler tells us that the Altaic languages have likewise been deficient in the 
development of word units, that in general the word becomes a word in these languages only 
in itt membership in the sentence. (Das Vralaltaische und seine Gruppen, pp. 9, 43, etc.) 
And even in inflected languages we often find vestigcs of an archaic state in which the 
boundaries between sentence and word were quite fluid; cf. for the Semitic knguages the 
remarks in Brockelmann, Grundriss, 2, 1 fL 

F O R M S O F P U R E R E L A T I O N 
ДО 
matical relation is not made expUcit in any wav. ln Chinese, which is the 
principal example of this type of isoIating language, one and the same word 
may serve as a substantive, adjective, adverb or verb, without incurring 
any change indicative of its grammatical category. There is nothing in the 
form of a word to indicate whether a substantive is used in this or that 
number or case, or a verb in this or that genus, tense, or mood. Philosophen 
of language long behcved that this characteristic of the Chinese language 
offered an insight into that original period of language formation in which 
aU human speech consisted in series of simple, monosyUabic "roots": but 
this belief was increasingly discredited by historical research which showed 
mat the strict isoktion prevaiUng in modern Chinese was by no means 
an original state, but a derivative result. The assumption that the words 
in Chinese had never undergone a transformation and that this language 
had never possessed any kind of morphology becomes untenable, as G. v. d. 
Gabelentz pointed out, as soon as Chinese is compared to those languages 
which are most closely related to it, Then it becomes apparent that Chi-
nese stiU contains numerous vestiges of an older agglutinative and even 
inflectional form, ш this respect the development of Chinese has often been 
compared to that of modern EngUsh, where a transformation from an in-
flected to a relatively uninflected state seems to have gone on before our very 
eyes.
5 Even more significant than such historical changes is the circum-
stance that where pure isolation has been achieved, this by no means sig-
nifies a triumph of "formlessness"; it means rather that form has imprinted 
itsetf here with great force and clarity on a seemingly resistant material. 
For the isolation of words from one another is far from negating the con-
tent and ideal meaning of the sentence form, since the logical and gram-
matical relations between the particular words are clearly expressed in the 
word order, without recourse to phonetic changes in the words themselves. 
This instrument of word order, which the Chinese language has developed 
to the highest consistency and sharpness, might indeed, from a purely 
logical point of view, be regarded as the only truly adequate means of ex-
pressing grammatical rektions. For it would seem possible to designate 
them more clearly and specificaUy as rektions pure and simple, possessing 
no perceptual base of their own, through the pure relation of words ex-
pressed in their order, than by special words and affixes, bi this sense Hum-
boldt, who in general regarded the inflected languages as the expression 
5. G. v. d. Gabelentz, Die Sprachwissenschaft, pp. 252ff.; Chinesische Grammatik, pp. 
90 ff.; cL tko B. DeUirück, Grundfragen der Sprachforschung, pp. 118II. 

F O R M S O F P U R E 
R E L A T I O N 
of the perfect, "absolutely lawful" form of language, said that the essen­
tial advantage of Chinese lay in the consistency with which it carried out 
the principle of inflectionlessness. Precisely the seeming absence of aU 
grammar, he declared, hadsharpened the people's sense of the formal ele­
ment in discourse—the less outward grammar the Chinese language pos­
sesses, the more inner grammar inheres in it.
6 So strict indeed is this inner 
structure that Chinese syntax has been said to consist essentially in the 
logical development of a few basic laws, from which aU special applications 
can be derived by pure logical deduction.
7 If we compare this finely articu­
lated language with isolating languages of a primitive type—such as the 
Ewe language of Africa
8—it becomes discernible that the most diverse 
formal gradations and constrasts are possible within a single "Unguistic 
type." One of the flaws in Schleicher's attempt to characterize different lan­
guages on the basis of the connection between signification and relation 
within them, and accordingly to construct a progressive dialectical series 
in which the isolating, agglutinative and inflected languages stand to one 
another as thesis, antithesis, and synthesis,
9 was that it distorted its prin­
ciple of classification by failing to consider the very different forms which 
this connection between "relation" and"signification" can assume within 
one and the same type. Moreover, the rigid demarcation between inflected 
and agglutinative language has graduaUy broken down in the light of 
empirical research.
10 Here again that relation between "essence" and 
"form," which is expressed in the old Scholastic dictum forma dat esse rei, 
is confirmed also for language. Epistemology cannot analyze the substance 
and form of knowledge into independent contents which are only out­
wardly connected with one another; the two factors can only be thought 
and defined in relation to one another; and likewise in language, pure, 
naked substance is a mere abstraction—a methodological concept to which 
no immediate "reality," no empirical fact corresponds. 
Even in the inflected languages, in which the antithesis between expres­
sion of substantial signification and expression of formal relation is most 
clearly marked, we find that the balance between the two is rather unstable. 
6. Humboldt, "Einleitung zum Kawi-Werk," Werke, 7, N0. 1, pp. 271 ff., 304 ff. 
7. G. v. d. Gabclcntz, Chinesische Grammatik, Ρ· ΐ9· 
8. Cf. Westermann, Grammatik der Ewe-Sprachc, pp. 4 ff., 30 ff. (Eng. trans., by Bickford-
Smith, pp. 4 ff.) 
9. Schleicher, Sprachvergleichende Untersuchungen, t, 6 fT.; 2, pp. 5 ff.; cf. above, pp. 164 ff. 
10. See as early a writer as Böthlingk, Ober die Sprache der Jakuten (1851), p. xxiv, cf. 
below, p. 309, n. 15. 

F O R M S O F P U R E 
R E L A T I O N 
For clearly as the categorial concepts are in most cases distinguished from 
the substandve concepts, there is nevertheless a constant flux between the 
two spheres, since substandve concepts serve as a basis for the expression 
of reladons. This becomes most evident when we consider the etymological 
origins of the suffixes used in the inflected languages to express quaUty, 
attribute, type, character, etc. The history of language shows that a great 
number of these suflixes originated in words of material significadon, which 
gradually cast off this initial character and became transformed into terms 
of general relation.
1 1 And it was this use of sufSxes which prepared the 
way for the designation of pure concepts of rektion. What first served as 
a special thing-indicadon developed into the expression of categorial de­
termination, e.g., of an attributive concept as such.
12 But though this 
transition bears so to speak a negative sign from a psychological standpoint, 
a positive act of knguage formation is inherent in this very negation. At 
first sight, to be sure, suffix formation might seem to be essentially char­
acterized by the fact that the original substantial signification of the word 
from which the suflixes derive, is progressively thrust into the background 
and ultimately forgotten altogether. This forgetfumess sometimes goes 
χι. In German, for example, this is borne out by the development of the suifixes -heit, 
-ichaft, -tum, •4ar, -lich, •sam, -haft. The sufEx 4ich, which is one of the principal instruments 
of adjective formation, goes back direcüy to the substantive Ükfl ( = body): "The type of a 
word such as weibUck," writes H. Paul in Principien der Spraehgeschiehte, 3d ed., p. 322, 
"goes back to an old bahuvrihi composite, ur<rermanic *wtboUhJs, Uterauy Voman's form,' 
then metaphorically, 'having woman's form.' Between a composite of this sort and the simplex 
Middle High German lich, New High German Ltiche, there is so great a discrepancy, first 
of signification, then of phonetic form, that all connection is annulled. From the material 
signification of the simplex 'form,' 'outward appearance,' the more abstract 'quality* had 
developed." In the case of the suffix -heit, the substantive from which it originated was stiU 
in use as an independent word in the Gothic, Old High German, Old Saxon and Old Norse 
knguages. Its basic signification scems to have been of person or rank and dignity, but the 
general signification of quality or manner (Gothic hmdus) seems to have developed at an 
early date; transformed into a suffix it served to designate any abstract attribute (cf. Grimm, 
Deutschet Wörterbuch, 4, N0. 2, col. 919 ff.). The Romance languages formed their adverbs 
of manner on the basis of a different basic intuition but in accordance with the same tendency 
and principle. They did not, to be sure, employ a concept of bodUy substance or form, but 
thc term for spirit, which gradually assumed the character of a suffix of rektion, was originally 
taken in a concrete sense (fierement = fera mente, etc). 
12. In Sanskrit, for example, the suffix -maya originaUy goes back to a substantive {maya — 
substance, material) and was first used, accordingly, to form adjectives designating the sub­
stance of a thing—only kter, as the noun became transformed into a suffix, the general 
signification of attribute and "quality" developed from the special concept of material property 
(mrn-maya, made of day, but maha-maya "buUt on delusion," etc Cf. Brugmann and Del­
brück, Grundriss, 2d ed., 2, Рь a, 13, and Thumb, Handbueh des Sanskrit, p. 441. 

308 
F O R M S O F P U R E 
R E L A T I O N 
so far that new suffixes may arise, which owe their origin to no concrete 
intuition but to what one might caU a misguided impulsion of linguisdc 
analogy formation. In German, for example, the suffix -\cit, goes back to 
a linguistic "misunderstanding" of this sort: in words such as ewic-heit, 
the final e of the stem blended with the initial h of the suffix, so as to form 
a new suffix which was propagated by analogy.
18 From a purely formal and 
grammatical point of view, such processes are regarded as "aberrations" 
of the linguistic sense; actually they are far more, they represent progress 
to a new formal view, a development from substantial expression to the 
expression of pure relation. The psychological obscuring of the former be-
comes a logical instrument and vehicle for the progressive development 
of the latter. 
Of course, in exploring this progress we must not stop at the level of 
mere word formation. The law and basic tendency of the advance are rather 
to be apprehended in the relations of sentence formation, for if the sen-
tence is the true vehicle of linguistic "meaning," it is only through an in-
vestigation of the sentence that the logical shadings of this meaning can 
be made clear. By its very form every sentence, even the so<alled simple 
sentence, embodies the possibility of such an inner articulation. But the 
articulation itsetf can be effected in very different degrees and phases. 
Synthesis may outweigh analysis^>r conversely, analytical power may 
attain a relatively high development while synthetic power lags behind. 
The dynamic interaction and tension between the two forces yields what 
we caU the "form" of each particular language. In the so<alIed "polysyn-
thetic" languages the combinatory impulse seems very much predomi-
nant, expressing itsetf above all in the striving to represent the functional 
unity of linguistic meaning materially and outwardly in a highly complex 
but self<ontained phonetic configuration. The whole of the meaning is 
pressed into a single word-sentence where it appears, as it were, encased 
in a rigid sheU. But this unity of Unguistic expression is not yet a true 
unity of thought, since it can only be achieved at the expense of the logical 
universality of this expression. The more modifiers the word-sentence ac-
quires by incorporation of whole words and particles, the better it serves 
for the designation of a particular concrete situation, which it seeks ex-
haustively to detaU but which it cannot connect with other similar situa-
13. The documentation U compiled in Grimm, Deutsches Wörterbuch, Vol. 5. colt. 500 ff. 
(*~ v. "keit"). SimUar processes of suffix formation by Misunderstanding" are found in other 
Unguistic famihcs; for example, cf. Simonyi, Die ungarische Sprache, pp. a76& 

F O R M S OF P U R E R E L A T I O N 
3OQ 
tions to form a comprehensive general context.
14 In the inflected languages, 
on the other hand, we findan entirely different relation between the two 
fundamental powers of analysis and synthesis. Here the word itsctf con-
tains a kind of inner tension which it also resolves and overcomes. The 
word is built up of two distinct, yet inseparably linked and related factors. 
One component which serves solely for the objective designation of the 
concept confronts another whose sole function it is to place the word in 
a specific category of thought, to characterize it as a "substantive," "ad-
jective," "verb," as a "subject" or direct or indirect object. Here the index 
of relation, by means of which the particular word is linked with the sen-
tence as a whole, is no longer attached to the word from without, but fuses 
with it and becomes one of its constitutive elements.
16 The differentiation 
of the word and its integration with the sentence form correlative methods 
which join in a stricdy unitary operation. Humboldt and the older phi-
losophers of language looked upon this circumstance as a proof that the true 
inflected languages represent the summit of aU language formation and 
that in them, and only in them, the "absolutely lawful form" of language 
expressed itself in ideal perfection. But even if we show a certain skepticism 
and reserve toward such absolute evaluations, there is no doubt that the 
inflected languages provide a highly important and effective organ for 
the development of purely relational thought. The more this relational 
thinking progresses, the more distincdy it must mould the articulation 
of language to ks purpose—while on the other hand this very articula-
tion reacts decisively on the form of thought. 
And the same progress towards sharper articulation, the same develop-
ment from the unity of a mere aggregate to the unity of a systematic "form" 
is evident when we advance from the relation of word to sentence to the 
14. Cf. above, pp. 289 ff., on "concept formation" in the American Indian languages, and 
pp. 273 ff. 
15. In his account of the Yakut language (1851), BothIingk ah*eady stressed that this 
process itself admits of very different degrees and levels, and that in this respect there is no 
sharp and absolute dividing line between the inflected knguages and the so<alled agglutina­
tive knguages. He points out that although the Indc-Germanic languages in general create a 
far more intimate bond between "substance" and "form" than the so<alled agglutinative lan­
guages, certain of the Ural-Altaic knguages, particularly Finnish and Yakut, are far from 
attaching the two as superficklly as is often assumed. Here too, on the contrary, we find a 
constant development toward "formation," and entirely different phases of this development 
are manifested in different knguages, e.g., Mongolian, Turkish-Tatar and Finnish. (Böthlingk, 
Über die Sprache der Jakuten, Intro., p. xxiv; cf. especklly H. Winkler, Dat UraUdtaische und 
seine Gruppen, pp. 44 ff., on the 'Morphokgy" of thc Ural-Altaic knguages.) 

310 
F O R M S O F P U R E 
R E L A T I O N 
relation between sentences. In the earliest stages of language formation 
which we can examine from a psychological point of view, simple para-
taxis is the basic rule of sentence structure. The language of children is 
everywhere governed by this principle.
16 One word follows another in 
mere coordination, and where several sentences occur, they disclose a loose 
connection, for the most part without coordinating conjunctions. The 
clausesmay be strung together, but they are not yet inwardly linked and 
"interlocked," since there is as yet no linguistic instrument by which to 
designate and sharply differentiate their subordination and superordina-
tion. The Greek grammarians and rhetoricians saw the touchstone of style 
in the development of the period, in which clauses do not run along in an 
indeterminate sequence, but support one another like the stones of an 
arch.
1 7 And indeed, this style is the uldmate and highest product of kn-
guage. It is lacking in the languages of primitive peoples,
18 and seems to 
have been acquired only gradually in the highly developed knguages. At 
this early stage a complex logical rektion of causal or teleological type— 
arektion of cause and effect, of condition and conditioned, end and means, 
etc, must be expressed by simple coordination. Often an absolute construc-
tion comparable to the Latin ablative absolute or the Greek genitive ab-
solute serves to indicate highly complex rektions of "since" and "after," of 
"because" and "therefore," of "although" and "consequently." The separate 
ideas that constitute discourse here lie as it were on a single linguistic plane: 
there is still no differentiation of perspective between foreground and back-
ground in speech itsetf.
19 Language reveals its power of differentiation and 
16. Cf. Clara and William Stern, Die Kinderspracke, pp. i8aff. 
17. Demetrius, De elocutionc, pars. 11-13 
(quoted in Humboldt, Werkje. 7, a23). 
18. Examples of the prevalence of parataxis in the languages of primitive peoples can be 
drawn from the accounts of most African bnguages and American Indian languages. For 
the former see Steinthal, Die Mande-Neger-Sprachen, pp. iao fI., 247 ff.; and Roehl, Gram-
matik der Schambalasprache, p. 27; for the latter see Gatschet, Klamath Language, pp. 656 fT. 
In Ewc, according to Westermann, Grammatik der Ewe-Sprache, p. 106 (Eng. trans., by 
Bickford-Smith, p. 147), aU dependent clauses are concluded with the article U. if they precede 
the main clause; they are thus regarded as nouns and not really as clauses. In the Nuba 
language, subordinate clauses are treated as nouns and take the same case endings (Reinisch, 
Die Nuba-Sprache, p. 142). 
19. Thc most characteristic examples of this seem to occur in the Finno-Ugrian and Altaic 
knguages. H. Winkler tells us that thc basic sentence structure of these languages leaves no 
room for subordinate clauses of any sort: the whole sentence is an adnominal, self*ndosed 
wordlike complex, or merely represents the gapless Unking of a subject-like part with a 
predicate-like part. In both cases, everything that we consider secondary, such as iemporal, 
spatial, causative or conditional specifications, is placed between the two essential parts · * thc 

F O R M S O F P U R E 
R E L A T I O N 
3 " 
articulation in the coordination of the parts of the sentence; but it does 
not yet succeed in raising this purely static relation to a dynamic relation 
of reciprocal logical dependency, and expressing it explicitly as such. In 
place of precisely graduated subordinate clauses, a simple gerundial con­
struction may serve, without departing from the law of coordination, to 
express the most diverse specifications and modifications of action, encom­
passing them in a stable, but characteristically rigid construction.
20 
This form of thought and speech finds a negative but no less character­
istic expression in the absence of those classes of words which, as the gram­
marians' term for them suggests, must be regarded as one of the basic 
instruments of reladonal thought and its linguisdc expression. The relative 
pronoun appears to be a late development and, if we consider language 
as a whole, rather rare. Before language arrives at this formation, the 
relations which we express by relative clauses must be rendered by more 
or less complex circumlocutions, various types of which Humboldt illus­
trated by examples from the American Indian knguages, particularly the 
Peruvian and Mexican.
21 The Melanesian languages also use a simple co­
ordination of statements in place of subordination by relative sentences and 
sentence or word-sentence. 'This is no fiction but is almost unmistakably the true nature of 
the sentence in most of the Ural-Altaic languages, for example, in Mongolian, Tungusic, 
Turkish and Japanese . . . this strangely developed idiom [Tungusic] seems to have no place 
for anything that suggests relative connection. In the Votyak language our Indo-Germanic 
dependent conjunctional clause regularly takes the form of an interpolated phrase after the 
manner of the hukvGermanic genitive, ablative or accusative absolute." (Winkler, Dcr nraI-
altaische Sprachstamm, pp. 85 ff., 107 ff.). Similarly in Chinese, according to G. v. d. Gabe­
lentz (Chinesische Grammatik. ΡΡ· *68 &)· whole sentences are often simply strung together 
in such a way that one can gather only from the context whether the relation between them 
is temporal, causal, relative, or concessive. 
ao. Striking examples of such sentence structure are cited, for example, in J. J. Schmidt, 
Grammatik der mongolischen Sprache (especially pp. 62 ff. and 124 ff.). A sentence such as 
"Aftcr I had obtained the horse from my elder brother and given it to my younger brother, 
the latter took it, mounted it while I went into the house to get a rope, and rode away with­
out saying a word to anyone," runs in Mongolian, literally translated: "I obtaining the horse 
from my elder brother, having given it to my younger brother, the latter taking it from me, 
(while) I went into the house to get a ropc, the younger brother, without saying a word to 
anyone, mounting it, rode away." (Here, as Winkler points out, p. 112, the word "while" in 
the translation has woven a conjunctional relation into the sentence, whereas the text itself 
contains no conjunction.) Other characteristic examples of sentence construction by means of 
gerunds, supines and participle-like forms are cited from the Tibetan by J. J. Schmidt, 
Tibetanische Grammatik, Ρ· *97· 
2i. See "Einleitung zum Kawi-Werk," Werke, 7, N0. 1, 253 ff. The Klamath language 
ako uses a participial or verbal expression where we use interpokted rcktive ckuses. See 
Gatschet, Klamath Language, p. 657. 

312 
F O R M S O F P U R E 
R E L A T I O N 
relative pronouns.
23 H . Winkler points out that fundamentaUy the Ural-
Altaic family has no room for independent subordinate units and that ac-
cordingly none of its members originally had reladve conjunctions, or at 
most had feeble suggestions of them. Where such conjunctions were kter 
used, they were usuaUy if not always derived from pure interrogatives. 
Particukrly the Western, Firmr>Ugrian group of the Ural-Altaic kn-
guages have developed such relative pronouns derived from interrogatives, 
but here Indo-Germanic influence may have pkyed a part.
2 8 m other 
languages independent relative ckuses are formed by special particles, but 
are felt to be substantive nouns and consequcndy preceded by the definite 
article, or used as the subject or object of a sentence, as a genitive, after 
a preposition etc
8 4 AU these phenomena seem to show how knguage takes 
up the pure category of rektion hesitandy, as it were, and learns to ap-
prehend it only deviously, through other categories, particukrly those of 
substance and attribute.
25 And this is true even of those languages which 
in their general structure have subsequendy developed the true "style'* 
of discourse, the art of hypotactic articuktion, to its highest refinement. 
Even the Indo4jcrmanic languages, which thanks to their astonishing 
faculty of differentiating the expression of rektion have been caUed the 
true languages of phUosophical ideaUsm, developed this faculty only gradu-
aUy.
28 A comparison, for example, between Greek and Sanskrit shows 
that the different members of this group represent entirely different stages 
with regard to the power and freedom of rektional thought and expression, 
ш the "ur-period" the independent ckuse seems to have predominated 
33. Examples in H. C v. d. Gabckntz, Die melanesischen Spraehen, i, зоз fL, 232 tf.; 2, 28; 
Ccdrington, The MeUmesian Languages, p: 136. 
23. Winkler, Der UraLdtaische Spraehstamm, pp. 86fL, 98fL, xxofL; cf. ako Simonyi, 
Die ungarische Sprache, pp. 357,423. 
34. Cf. Stcindorff, Koptische Grammatik, pp. 337 ff.; simikrly in the Semitic knguages the 
Miubsuntivization of asyndetic rekave sentences" is frequent; see Brockelmann, Grundriss, 2, 
561ff. 
35. Thus, for example, Japanese (according to Hoffmann, Japanische Sprachiehre, p. 99) 
possesses no relative ckuses but must transform tbem into adjectival ckuses; simikrly in 
Mongohan, cf. J. J. Schmidt, Grammatik der mongoUschen Sprache, pp. 47 fL, 137 if. 
26. 'Xes kngues de cette famiUe sembknt cr&cs pour i'abstraction et k metaphysiquc. Elks 
ont une soupIesse merveiUeuse pour exprimer les rektions les plus intimes dcs choses par lea 
flexions de leurs noms, par les temps et ks modes ά varies de kurs verbes, par leurs mots 
composes, par la düicatesse de leurs particules. Posseoant seules radmirablc secret de k peV 
riodc, eUes savent reuer dans un tout ks membres divers de la phrase. . . . Tout devient pour 
eUes abftraction et categories. EUes aont ks kngues de l'idcaUtme." E. Renan, De Forigine 
du Ungage, 8th ed., p. x94. 

F O R M S O F P U R E R E L A T I O N 
over the subordinate clause, the paratactic over the hypotacdc connection. 
Although this ur-knguage possessed rektive clauses, it tacked, according 
to the evidence of comparative linguistics, a sharply deUmited set of con-
junctions by which to express cause, consequence, coordination, opposi-
tion, etc.
27 In Sanskrit, conjunctions are ahnost totaUy lacking as a distinct 
class of words: what other knguages, particukrly Latin and Greek, ex-
press by subordinating conjunctions is here rendered by the ahnost un-
Umited use of nominal composition and the amplification of the main 
clause by participles and gerunds.
28 But in Greek itsetf, the progress from 
the paratactic structure of the Homeric knguage to the hypotactic struc-
ture of Attic prose occurred only graduaUy.
29 AU this indicates that what 
Humboldt caUed the act of autonomous, synthetic postuktion in knguage, 
and found embodied (apart from the verb) chiefly in the use of conjunc-
tions and rektive pronouns, was one of the latest accompUshments of k n -
guage formation, to which it attained through a variety of intermediary 
phases. 
This is particukrly true of that Ungmstic form which is fundamentally 
set apart from aU substantial expression, serving solely as an expression of 
synthesis as such, of pure combination. Only in the use of the copula does 
the logical synthesis effected in judgment achieve its adequate Unguistic 
designation. In its analysis of the pure function of judgment, the Critique 
of Pure Reason pointed to this rektionship. For Kant, judgment meant the 
"unity of action," by which the predicate is referred to the subject and 
Unked with it to form a whole meaning, to form the unity of an objectively 
subsisting and objectively constituted rektionship. And it is this inteUectual 
unity of action which finds its Unguistic representation and counterpart 
in the use of the copula. "But if I investigate more closely the relation of 
given cognitions in every judgment"-be writes in the section onthe 
transcendental deduction of the concepts of the pure understanding—"and 
27. 'TRelative скшеь" 
writes A. MeiUet ia bis Introduction ä l'itude comparative des 
htngues indo*uropcenncs (German trans., p. 231; French 7th ed., p. 377), "arc the only 
subordinate ckuses which may properly be regarded as mdo4Sermanic The other types, 
particukrly conditional ckuses, have a different form in every mdc~Germank dialect." This 
rektion is interpreted somewhat differenrJy by Brugmann, who expkins the kck of agree-
ment by the theory that although conjunctional particles existed in the "ur-period," they 
were not yet extensively used and had not yet been fixed as expressions for particukr individual 
rektions (Kurxe vergleichende Grammatik, p. 653). 
28. Examples in Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar, p. 369, and Thumb, Handbuch des Sanskrit, 
PP-434.475*T. 
29. Cf. Brugmann, Griechische Grammatik, 3d cd., pp. 535 fL 

3i4 
F O R M S O F P U R E 
R E L A T I O N 
cUstinguish it, as belonging to the understanding, from the rektion which 
is produced according to the kws of the reproductive imagination (which 
has only subjective vaUdity), I find that a judgment is nothing other than 
the' mode of bringing given cognitions under the objective unity of apper-
ception. This is plain from our use of the term of rektion is in judgments, 
in order to distinguish the objective unity of given representations from the 
subjective unity. For this term indicates the rektion of these representa-
tions to the original apperception, and ako their necessary unity." Jf I say 
"bodies are heavy," this means that corporeity and heaviness are joined in 
the object and not merely that they always coexist in subjective percep-
tion.
80 
Thus even for Kant, the pure logician, the objective meaning of 
judgment was intimately rekted to the hnguistic form of predicative state-
ment. It is clear, however, that language could only graduaUy attain to the 
abstraction of that pure being which is expressed in the copula. For k n -
guage, which in its beginnings is entirely bound up with the intuition of 
substantial objective existence, the expression of "being" as a pure tran-
scendental form of relation can only be a kte product arrived at through 
a variety of medktions. A great many languages are utterly kcking in a 
copula in our bgical-grammatical sense and have no need of one. A unitary 
and universal expression of what is designated in our "term of relation is" 
is not only kcking in the languages of primitive peoples—as in most of the 
African knguages, the languages of the American mdians, etc.—but is not 
to be found in other, highly developed knguages. Even where the predica-
tive rektion is differentiated from the purely attributive relation, the for-
mer does not necessarUy have a special Unguistic designation. Ja the Ural-
Altaic languages, for example, the subject is ahnost always Unked with the 
predicate by simple juxtaposition, so that "the city big" means "the city is 
big," " I man" means " I am a man," etc.
8 1 In other knguages we often en-
counter locutions which at first sight seem to correspond to our use of 
the copuk, but which in truth are far from possessing its universaUty of 
function. Here, as closer analysis reveak, the "is" of the copuk is not a 
universal term, serving to express relation as such, but possesses a special 
and concrete, usuaUy local or tcmpond, secondary signification. Instead 
of a purely rektional ^ i n g " we have a term which designates existence 
in this or that pkce, a being-here or being4here, or eke an existence in this 
30. Kritik ier reinen Vernunft, ad erL, pp. 141 ff. (Етегутап ed., p. 99). 
31. Cf. H . Winkler, Der urmmtaUche Spraehstamm, pp. 68 ff.; for tbe Firino-Ugrian bu> 
guages see, &g 4 Simonyi, Dit ungarische Sprache, 

F O R M S O F P U R E 
R E L A T I O N 
or that moment, Thus the apparent copula is differentiated according to 
the diverse spatial situation of the subject or other intuitive modifications 
in its existence, so that one "copula" is used when the subject in question 
is standing, another when he is sittmg or lying, one when he is awake 
and another when he is asleep, etc
8 2 Formal "being" and the formal mean-
ing of relation are repkced by more or less materiaUy conceived terms 
which stiU bear the coloration of a particukr sensuously given reaUty.
88 
And even where knguage has progressed to the point of encompassing 
aU these specifications of existence in a universal expression of "being," 
there remains an appreciable difference between even the most compre-
hensive expression of mere existence and "to be" as an expression of purely 
predicative "synthesis." Here the development of language reflects a prob-
lem which extends far beyond its sphere and which has played a crucial 
part in the history of logical and phUosophical thought, ш this point more 
clearly than in any other we see how this thought has developed with kn-
guage but at the same time in opposition to i t From the FJeatic phUoso-
phcrs down, we can fbUow the great struggle carried on by phUosophical 
ideaUsm with language and with the ambivalence of its concept of being. 
The precise task that Parmenides set himseff was to resolve the controversy 
32. Examples of mis occur particukrly in the American sndian knguages: the AJgonquin 
knguages for exampk lack a universal verb of 'temg,'' but possess a great number of words 
designating being in this or that place, at this or that time, or in this or that special condition, 
ш the Kkmath knguage the verb (gi) which is used to expreu copuktive "being" is actuaUy 
a demonstrative partide signifying being here or being there. (Cf. Gatschet, KUxmath Lan-
guage, pp. 430 ff., 674 ff., and TrumbuU, Transactions of tie American Philological Associa-
tion, 186970.) The udian knguages of the Maya family ako use certain demonstrative 
particles for predicative statement; when combined with tense signs, these particles very much 
resemble true substantive verbs. Yet none of them is equivalent to the universal and purely 
rektional term "to be": some express the nominal concept "given, postukted, present," whik 
others indicate situation in a certain pkce or happening at a certain time. (Cf. Seler, Das 
Konjugaa'onssystem der hiaya-Sprachen, pp. 8 and 14.) A simikr differentiation occurs in the 
Mcknesian knguages and many of the African knguages. "A true substantive verb," writes 
H. C. v. d. Gabekntz for example, "is kcking in Fiji; sometimes it 'u rendered by yaco, 'to 
happen,' 4o become,' tu, 'to be there' or 'present,' ti\o Ίο be thcrc,' or to endure,' etc, and 
there always remains a secondary signification corresponding to the true concept of these 
verbs." (Die meumesischen Sprachen, p. 40; cf. p. 106.) For the African languages cf. the 
various terms for the substantive verb cited by Migeod (Thc Mende Language, pp. 75 ff.) 
from the Mandingan and by Westermann (Grammatik der Eu>e-Sprache, p. 75; Eng. trans, by 
Bickford^mith, pp. 921) from the Ewe. 
33· fa Nicobarese, for example, being as a mere copuk is not expressed: the "substantive 
verb" always has thc sense of 'to exist," "to be present," particukrly 'to exist in a particukr 
pkce." See Roepstorff A Dictionary of the Nancowry Dideet of the Nicobarese Language 
(Cakuna, 1884), p. xvu, xxiv ff. 

3l6 
FORMS O F P U R E R E L A T I O N 
over true being by means of pure reason. But is this true being of the 
FJeatic philosophers grounded purely in logical judgment, does it corre­
spond solely to the Ιστι of the copula as the basic form of every valid state* 
ment—or does it retain some vestige of another, more concrete, original 
signification, which makes it comparable to the intuition of a "well-rounded 
sphere." Parmenides undertook to free himsetf from the fetters both of 
knguage and of the common, sensuous world view. " . . . all things that 
mortals have estahUshed, believing in their truth," he declared, "are just 
a name: Becoming and Perishing, Being and Not-Being, and Change of 
position, and alteration of bright colour."
 8 4 And yet, in the expression of 
his supreme principle, he too succumbed to the power of speech and the 
diversity of its concept of being. In the basic Eleatic formula, in the sen­
tence ecrrt то elvcu the verbal and substantival, the predicative and abso-
lute signification of "being" merge with one another. Even Pkto arrived at 
a sharper distinction only after long intellectual struggles which are most 
clearly reflected in his Parmenides. In the Sophists, which concludes this 
struggle, the logical nature of the pure concepts of rektion is clearly devel-
oped and their specific "being" defined for the first time in the history of 
philosophy. On the strength of this newly acquired insight, Pkto was able 
to argue that though aU earUer philosophers had sought the principle of 
being, what they had discovered and had taken as their foundation was not 
the true and radical source of being but only certain of its varieties, specific 
forms of what is. Yet even this pregnant formulation did not resolve the 
opposition concealed in the concept of being, but only defined it precisely 
for the first time. This opposition runs through the entire history of medieval 
thought. The question of how to delimit "essence" and "existence," the 
two basic modaUties of being, and of how to unite them despite this de-
Umitation, became the central problem of medieval philosophy. It became 
most acute in connection with the ontological proof of the existence of 
God, which lay at the very heart of medieval theology and metaphysics. 
But even the modern, critical form of ideaUsm, which renounced the "proud 
name of ontology" and more modesdy caUed itsetf an "analytic of the pure 
understanding," found itsetf involved again and again in the ambivalence 
of the concept of being. Even after Kant's critique of the ontological proof, 
fichte found it necessary to point explicitly to the difference between 
predicative and absolute being, ш his Foundations of General Scientific 
34. Parmenides, Fragments 7, 8, in Dicls, Die Fragmente der Vorsohranher. Eng. trans, 
by K. Freeman, in AnciUa to the Pre^oeratk Philosophers, p. 44. 

F O R M S O F P U R E 
R E L A T I O N 
Theory he postulated the proposidon A is A as the first, absolute principle 
of aU philosophy, and added that this proposidon, in which the
 Mis" has the 
sole signification of a logical copula, says nothing whatsoever regarcUng the 
existence or nonexistence of A. "Being" postukted without a predicate, 
he went on, expresses something entirely different from 4being* with a 
predicate: the proposition "A is A " asserts only that if A is, then A is; but 
it does not so much as raise the question of whether A truly is or not.
3 5 
Ti even phUosophical thought engaged in a constant struggle to distin­
guish the two concepts of being—it is understandable that in Unguistic 
thinking the two should have been intimately Unked from the outset and 
that the pure meaning of the copula could only very graduaUy be disen­
gaged from this involvement. The use of one and the same word to desig­
nate existence and the predicative rektion is a widespread phenomenon, 
not Umited to any particular knguages. To consider only the InckbGer-
manic languages, we find that the various terms by which they designate 
predicative ^ i n g " aU go back to an original signification of "existence": 
either in a very general sense as mere presence, or in a special and concrete 
sense as living and breathing, growing and becorning, enduring and dweU-
ing. "The copuk," says Brugmann, 
was originaUy a verb of intuitive signification (the original signification 
of es*mi Ί am' is unknown, but the oldest demonstrable one is Ί exist') 
and the substantive or adjective stood in apposition to the subject which 
was closely connected with the predicative verb (the earth is a baU — 
the earth exists as a baU). The so<alled degeneration of the verb into 
a copula occurred when the emphasis shifted to the predicate noun, so 
that the perceptual content of the verb lost its importance and vanished. 
The verb thus became a mere form . . . In the ur-IndcbGermanic pe­
riod es- "to be" assuredly functioned as a copuk, and probably forms 
of bheur "to grow, to become," which at that time entered into a sup­
pletive rektion with 
The use of the two roots seems to have developed as foUows: es (as) ap­
pears to have been taken as an expression of continued, unchanging exist­
ence, and accordingly used for the durative forms of the present stem, whUe 
the root bheu, as expression of becoming, was eminendy used for such tenses 
as the aorist and the perfect, designating an incipient or completed action 
35- Cf. J. G. Fkhte, "Grundlage der gesamten Wissenschaftdehrr*" Werke, 1, 92 ff. 
36. Brugmann, Kurse vergLeichende Qrammau% p. 627. 

jl8 
F O R M S O F P U R E 
R E L A T I O N 
(cf. ί-φ
ν-ν, πέφ&κα, fui).*
T The underlying sensuous signification of the 
ktter root is stiU apparent in words such as φύω I engender, φύομαι I grow. 
Ja Germanic, the root bheu entered into the formation of the present stem 
(ich bin, du bist, etc.), and the auxiUary root ues (Gothic wisan, I was, etc.) 
with the original signification of "dwelling" and "enduring" (OHG 
weren) also came into use. StiU different was the development in the 
Romance knguages, where the copula is linked with the intuitive significa­
tion of standing.
38 And just as the expression of being is here based on the 
percept of local stabiUty and rest, the expression of becoming is based on 
the perception of motion: the intuition of becoming is developed from that 
of turning.
8 8 And the general signification of becoming can also develop 
from the concrete signification of coming and going.
4 0 AU this shows that 
even those languages in which the sense for the logical singularity of the 
copuk is sharply developed, designate it not very differendy from others 
which are totally kcking in that sense, or which at least have not developed 
a comprehensive and universal expression of the substantive verb. Here 
again, the spiritual form of rektional expression can be represented only 
in a certain material cloak, which however comes ultimately to be so 
permeated with the relational meaning that it no longer appears as a mere 
barrier, but as the sensuous vehicle of a purely ideal signification. 
ш the universal term of rektion, the copuk, we thus find confirmed the 
same fundamental tendency of language that we have foUowed in the 
Unguistic configuration of the special terms of relation. Here again we find 
the same reciprocal determination of the sensuous by the spiritual and the 
spiritual by the sensuous as in the linguistic representation of the rektions 
of space, time, number, and the I . One is tempted to interpret the involve-
ment of the two factors in language in a sensationalist sense, and Locke, on 
the basis of such an interpretation, claimed knguage as one of the main 
supports for his basic empiricist view of knowledge.
41 But even in refer-
37. Curtius, Grundsuge der grieehitchen Etymologie, 5th ed., p. 304, 375. 
38. Cf. ItaUan stato, French Ш (from Lat. stare) as participles of essere and ctre. According 
to Osthoff, Vom Suppleüvwesen der indogermanischen Sprachen, p. 15, this auxiliary use of 
sta "to stand" was also known to Old Celtic 
39. Thus Gothic tuairpan (werden, to become) is etymologicaUy Unked with Latin vertere, 
and likewise the Greek *rA« goes back to a root which in Sanskrit means "to move, wander 
around, travel." Cf. Brugmann, Kurxe vergleichende Gramtnatattk^, p. 628 and Delbrück, 
VergUichende Syntax, 3,12.ff. 
40. Cf. in the modern languages diventare, divenire, devenir, English, to become; cf. also 
Humboldt, "Einleitung zum Kawi-Werk," Werkje, 7, 218 St. 
41. See above, pp. 133 ff. 

FORMS OF P U R E R E L A T I O N 
ence to Unguistic thinking, we must counter such interpretations by point­
ing to the sharp distinction which Kant, in his critique of "empirical knowl­
edge," made between "beginning with" and "arising from." Even though 
sensuous and spiritual elements seem to have been inextricably inter­
twined in the origin of language, this correlation, precisely because it is 
a correktion, does not argue a reladon of onesided dependency between 
the two. For intellectual expression could not have developed through and 
out of sensuous expression if it had not originaUy been contained in it; if, 
as Herder said, sensuous designadon did not already embrace a basic act 
of "reflecdon." The maxim πάντα θύα καΙ άνθρώπινα πάντα is perhaps 
nowhere so clearly confirmed as by the study of signification and form in 
the highly developed languages: the characteristic meaning of knguage is 
not contained in the opposition between the two extremes of the sensuous 
and the inteUectual, because in aU its achievements and in every particular 
phase of its progress, language shows itsetf to be at once a sensuous and an 
inteUectual form of expression. 
* 


General Index 
Adjectives, 244, 248, 249 n., 269, 291, 30x, 
306n., 309; comparison of, 248 
Adverbial particles, 248, 249, 275, 276, 309 
Adverbs, 205, 211, 216, 305, 307 tu\ of time, 
216, 220, 225 
Animal sounds, 189 and n. 
Apodeixis, 182 
Aristotelian definition of knguage, 304 
Articles, 204-205, 206,219,312; neuter, 205, 
233; personal, 205 
Being, 77, 97, 106,107, 111-112, 117, 314, 
315n., 316. 317 
Cambridge school, 142, 144 
Cases, grammatical (general), ao8, a09, 210 
and n.; cases (specific), ablative, 310; ac­
cusative, a09, 210; adessive, 210; allative, 
210; deIative, 210; genitive, 209, 210, 244, 
310; illative, 210; inessive, 210; nomina­
tive, 209, 210, 253; subktive, 210 
Child language, 150, 220, 251, 260, 3x0; see 
aUo Stern, Clara and William 
Cistercian monks, 178 
Clauses, 312, 313; rdative clauses, 3x1 n* 
312 and n., 313n. 
Collectives, 236 and n. 
Colors, generic. See Lotze 
Concept formation, 278-297, 309n. 
Conjunctions, 313; rdative conjunctions, 3x2 
'42opernican revolution," 6, 79 
Copuk, 313-318, 315 nn. 
Copy theory of knowledge, 75, 77, 78, xoo, 
105, 107, x41, x88 
Counting, primitive methods, 229-233, 237¬
238; systems of, decimal, quinary, vigesi­
mal, 232 
"Cry." See Sensuous sounds 
Darwinian Theory and Linguistic Science, 
166; see aUo Schkicher 
Deictic function. See Deixis 
Deixis, 182, 183, 201, 203, 213, 2x4 
Dialects. See Languages 
Dual, 237, 244, 245, 246 
Dutch school of philologists, x49 n. 
Dynamic form of knguage, 269 
Eleatic philosophers, 74, 98, 99, 3x5, 316 
Empiricism (general discussion of), 133, 
140-142, 163 
English, the, 99, x44, t53; English Neopk-
tonists, x43; EngUsh Pktonists, 142, 143 
"Enlightenment," 30, 132, 139-x47 
'Tirst universal." See Lotze 
Gender, 204, 298, 299 and n., 30t n. 
Generic concept, 234, 290, 292-295, 299 
Gerund, 313 
"Gestalt" psychology, 102; "Gestalt" quali­
ties, 223, 226, 233 
Gesture. See Sign knguage 
"He," 203, 213-215, 243, 246-247 
Hypotactic structure, 312-313 
Ί , " 9C-oi, 93,101-102, x57,178,180,181¬
182, 193, x98, 20x-204, 212-213, 215, 
242-243, 246-252, a56^265, 269, 274, 
a76-277, 3x8 
Languages, general classification: agglutina­
tive, 164-165, 194, 305-306; inflected, 
164-165,209,288 n., 305-306,309; isolat­
ing (monosyllabic), 164-165, 305-306; 
pc4ysynthetic, 276, 304n., 308 
Languages (of the world) 
Abipones, 233 and n 4 237 and n. 
African, x94n., 202n., 207, 221, 241n* 
248n., 255n., 310n., 3x4, 3x5n. 
Aleutian, 242 n 4 27x n. 
Ahjonquin, 299 and n* 301n* 315n. 

322 
G E N E R A L 
I N D E X 
Languages (continued) 
AItak, 314 *nd α* 336 and tk, 271,399 α, 
30404 310n. 
Annatom, 370 η. 
Arabic, 337,349 
зоо 
Armenian, 313 
Athapascan, 256 η. 
AustraUan (aborigines), 214,336 tL-, (Aus-
traUan, South), 314 
Austro-Bavarian (dialect), 244n. 
Bakairi, 223O4 339, 24x n , 362, 27604 
390 
Bamc-Skvic, 335 n , 344 
Bantu, 203 tu, 3i3 n , 245, 253, 396, 297, 
300,301, 3020, 
Bedauye, 357 n* 401 0. 
Binandele, 343 
Buginese, 354 n. 
Bungandity, 258 n. 
Burmese, 370 
Cherokee, 214 
Chinese, 213, 235 and n 4 246 n 4 25t, 
253n.,305,306,310rk 
Chinook, 194n* 214n. 
Coptic, 352, 27x o. 
Dravidian, 271 n 4 300 
Egyptian, 207n., 2360* 288n.; Egyptian 
(old), 345 n. 
EngUsh, 145, 305, 3180. 
Eskimo, 203 n., 310 n* 330 
Ethiopian, 194n. 
Ethiopic, 205, a57n^ 258 n., 377 
Ewe, 190, 305 and n , 307 n., 220,22x tu, 
339 and Пч 306,3io Пч 315 η. 
Fiji, 333, 249n*3i5tk 
Finnish, 309 α. 
French, 214,318n. 
Finno-Ugrian, 244tL, 256rb, 36400« 
399 04 3x0 tk, зхз 
German, i49» i50, i99> » 5
 n ^ 252,307 n , 
308 
Germanic 398,318 
Gok, 301 n. 
Gothic, 314,307n4 318 and no. 
Greek, 140, 225 nn 4 336, 245, 348, 354, 
358, 384, 310, 312, 313, 318n^ Attic 
aod OM Homeric, 325 П4 345,313 
Haidan, 211 n , 2560, 264O4 2960, 
Hamitic, 212m, 3400> 
Hebrew, x40, x91 n., 351 
Hottentot, 370 n. 
Hupa, 314tk, 240 and n 4 241 яи, 24304 
253»ь 
fadian (Nortb American), 196, x99,203 o* 
3xo, 21x, 314, 333, 334 and n., 34x Оч 
353 Оч 336, 260, a6i, збз гь, 264, 274, 
376,389,295,296 and ппч 399,303 ъ, 
304П4 309n·» 3»Пч 3 4 · 3150· 
bKfo4fcrmank, 165, x82,191 arid пч 192, 
199, ao4. ao8,209 n* 2x0,213,224,225 
and Оч 236 and шх, 244, 348, 352, 
256 Шч збб, 370,291,294,298,299 Оч 
309n4 310П4 3 " , 313n., 317 
bdo-banian, 244 
mdonesian, 205, 242rb, 252 
ItaUan, 318 n. 
Japanese, 208n., 2x3, 215, 235 and Оч 
252 Пч 272 and Пч 273 n., 310 пч 3 " n. 
Javanese, i97&4 21x 
Kavi, 156 
Kivai, 243 n. 
Kkmath, 195n., 199n., 202п ч 2 ю п ч 
2x6n4 230 and Пч 239, 240n4 276n4 
310n.,311n.,3150. 
Kwakiud, 203 Пч 214 n., 256 n. 
Latin, 140, 204, 213, 314, 248, 252, 285, 
310,313 
Maida, 242 о. 
Maky, 2x3, 219, 255» 270 and o. 
Makyo-Polynesian, 199, 200, 234^35 
Mandingan, 207, 222, 230, 270n4 3*5». 
Mayan, 275 хи, 276 пч 3*5 0. 
Mckncsian, x96n4 199n., 205n4 207n4 
ЗПОч 213Пч 21бПч 22Шч 236n4 
242n., 343n4 346 and η , 353, 355, 
262-263,395, 315 «· 
Mende, 349 n. 
Mexkan, 234, 262, 274 
Mongouan, 256n4 309O4 3<0Пч J i i n , 
3120. 
New Guinea, 230 
Nicobarese, зхз л, 247 xk, 3>5 n· 
NtU, 32X 
Nuba, 221 Оч 339 °-> 241 оч 249 Пч 254 ш, 
310n. 
Old Celtic, 318 n. 
Old-Indian, a04 
Old-banian, 204 

G E N E R A L 
I N D E X 
323 
Old Norse, 307 n. 
OM Saxon, 307 n. 
Papuan, 230 n , 241 n., 243 n. 
Ponca, 203 n., 205 
Polynesian, 242 n., 263 
Quechua, 275 n. 
Quiche, 275 n. 
Romance, 236 n., 307 n., 318 
Sanskrit, x91n., 252, 256 η., 258, гбб, 
307 n., 3i*r3*3» 318 η. 
Samoyed, 270 η. 
Semitic, 195n., 202, 205, 208n., 214n., 
224 and n., 236 n., 244-245, 252 n., 257, 
258 n., 270,277,291,298,301 n., 304 n., 
312n. 
Shambala, 220-221, 223 and n. 
Siamese, 194 
Sioux, 264 n. 
Somali, 206 
Sotho, 223, 230 
South Andaman, 296n. 
South Sea, 196 n., 203 n., 207 and n. 
Sudanese, 194, 212 and nn., 217 n. 
Syriac, 258 n., 270 n. 
Tagalog, 237.П4 257 n. 
Tahitian, 202 n. 
Taoripi, 257n. 
Tasmanian, 290 
Thai, 246n. 
Tibetan, 242n., 311 n. 
Tlingit, 220 n. 
Tungusic, 310n. 
Tsimshian, 211 n., 234 and n., 264 n. 
Turkish, 258 n., 264 n. 
Turkish-Tatar, 309 n., 310 n. 
Ural-Altaic, 193 n., 194 and n., 202 and n., 
210, 260,309 n., 310 n., 312, 314 
Vedic, 252 
Votyak, 310 n. 
Westphalian (dialect), 244 n. 
Yakut, 208n., 242, 257n., 259n., 262, 
273 and n., 309 n. 
Yenisei4Dstyak, 270nn. 
Zuni, 184 n. 
Localist theory of cases, 208-209 
Magic: name-magic, 118; word-magic, 118-
« 9 
Manual concepts, z84; see aUo Sign knguage 
Mathematics, 128, 226-228, 247 
Mimetic function, 178-179, 183-184, 186¬
199> 213.229 
Modal distinctions, 225 n., 224-226,254-255, 
259. 273 
Modes of action. See Modal distinctions 
Monads, 131 
Myth, rektion to language, 178, 288,300 
Nominal expression, 200,212,253,259,261¬
262, 266, 268, 270-271, 278 
Nouns, 207, 210-2z1, 219-220 and n., 234¬
235, 242, 251-253 and n., 263, 268, 270, 
273,296 n., 298-299,301 and n., 302,312; 
genders of, 204, 298, 299 and n. 
Number, concept of, 129-130, 226-245, 249, 
263-264, 301, 318; numbers, mystical, 
243-244 
'Object," 178, 181,198, 204-205 
Objectivization, 281, 286 
Onomatopoek, 149, 190-x91 
Opposites, explanation by, 187 
Parataxis, 310 and n.; see also Paratactic, 313 
Participles, 313 
Particles, 201, 216, 249, 308; adverbial, 240; 
demonstrative, 201, 204; temporal, 216 
Phonetic laws, 167-176 
Plural, 235-237, 239-243, 246, 257, 292 
Poetry. See Work songs 
Possessive rektions, 259-264 
Prepositions, 207 and n., 208, 263, 270 
Pronouns, 250 and n., 259, 269, 271 n., 301; 
see aUo " I , " "Thou," etc.; demonstrative, 
201-202 and n., 203 n., 204,213-214; per­
sonal, x93 n., 213, 242-243, 244, 246, 252 
and n., 260; 264, 276; possessive, 260-264, 
297n., 299; relative, 3x1-313; reflexive, 
251, 252 n. 
Reduplication, 195-196, 197 and n., 239 
Relativity, theory of, 218-219 
Root concept, 266-267, 287; roots, verbal, 
257 and n., 305, 317-3x8 
Sensationalism, 135-137, 179 
"Signs," 85^6, 89^90, 107-109f t12, 125, 
138-139; "concept signs," "thing signs,' 
see Sign knguage 

324 
G E N E R A L 
I N D E X 
Sensuoui expression, 177-197, aoo-a01, 210, 
297.303.316-319 
Sentence, io8,161,303,304,308-311,310 n 4 
311 n.; see aUo Word^entence 
Sign language, 75,180-185, 201 
Singular, 235-237, 240 
Sophists, The, 74 n., 81, 94, 122-123, 186¬
187 
Sound groups, of children, 201 
Spatial relations, 94, 96, 100-101, 198-223, 
229, 238-242, 249, 289, 296-297, 318; 
spatial substantives, 211; spatial verbs, 210— 
211 
"Spccialgods," 118, 287 
"Special names," 287 
Stoics, 186-187, 192 
Subjunctive, 256 
Substantive, 235,263,269,300,305,307,309 
Suppletives, 290-291 
Tense forms in primitive languages, 223-224 
"Thing," 94> 120, 182, 185, 215, 225, 233, 
267,268, 272, 296,307 
"Thou," 157, 193, 201, 203, 212-214, 34a-
343,245-250,260,265 
Time, 94^6, 99, 136 n., 215^26, 238-239, 
241-242,246,249,255,318 
Tonal>gradatk>ns, i93-E95 
Trial, 246 
Universal language, 128-x33 
Vedic religion, 118 
Verbal expression, 253, 266, 268, 270, 371, 
275. 277 
Verbal knguage, 270 n., 271 
Verbs, 182, 190, 194, i96-i97» X99-2oo, 
210-212, 219, 223-225, 230, 241 and n., 
251» 253, a55, 256-257, 265, 267-273, 
a76-277,284-291,302,305,313.317.318; 
generic distinctions in, 254-256, 258-259· 
299 
Voice: active, 254-255,272; middle, 254,258 
and n., 259; passive, 254-255 and n., 258¬
259» 272 
VoweU, 194-195, 201, 216, 220, 225 
"We," 246 
Word formation, 308 
Word order, 305 
Word-sentence, 195, 200, 274^x75, 308, 311 
and в. 
Work songs, 240 

Index of Proper Names 
Adam, 275 α. 
d'Alembcrt, )., 135 η. 
Ammonius, 183 η. 
Aristodc, 46, 126, 127, 183 and n., 189, 254 
Bacon, 136, 140 and η. 
Batteauz, 
151 
Berkeley, G., 100, 136, 137 and n., 138, t39 
BcrtaIanffy, 29 
Bidney, D., 55 »• 
Boas, F., 72, 190n., 1940·· 196 η-, i99n., 
ΐοο n., 203 n., 206 n., 210 n., 211 n., 214 
and n., 220 n., 230 n., 234 η-, 240 
242 
and n., 253n., 264n., 27sn., 296nn., 
301 n., 304 η. 
Boehme, I-, 132n. 
B6chUngk, Ο. оп, 194n., 208n., 236n., 
242n., 257n, 262 and n., 273 η·· ί99°·ι 
3o6n. 
Bopp, F., 162, 163n., 169 
Brandstetter, 2520., ϊ53
η·>
 
354 0· 
Brinton, 275 
Brockelmann, C., 195 η·ι 
3
0
1 »•·
 2 0 5 n., 207 
n., 208 n., 214 η , 224 »·· 
азб n., 237
 
η · . 
244n.. a45n., 249"·. 352n, »57^, 301 
η., 304n., 3ian-
Brugmann, Κ-, 170, 2oi, 202n., 204n., 205 
η , 2o8 n., 214 η., З25 η , 236 and n., 244 
η , 24;n., 249n., 254n, 3s6n., 294n., 
298 and η , 307 n., 313· 3*7 and n., 318 η. 
Brugscb, Η. K., 288 η. 
Bücher, Κ, 185 n., 240, 241 η. 
Buffon, 24 and η., 25, a6 
ВшсЬапп, 235n., 262 η 
Byrne, Jame>. 285 η, 
Cauirer, b , τϋ, vrU, ix, x, жъ JÖiii i-3> 5» 8, 
хо, 14-16, 19^36. 3 « 7 . 5S^05. 75^i 
91 n., 96 n., 127 n., 130 α, 139 »-» '4* »·> 
155 η , 2i8n,, 293 η.· 297 
Codrington, R. H., 196 n., t97 n., 205 n., 
211 n 4 2 i i n , 2i6n., 221n., 233n-> 234 
n., 236 n., 242 n., 246 n., 248 η., 253 °ч 
254n., 25Jn., 262n., 264 η., 296n. 
Cohcn, H., 179 η. 
CondiUac, £. Β. de, 146 and n., 153 
Copernicu<, 41 
Couturat, L. Sce WUkint and Delgarno 
Cratylus, 123 
Crawford, 199 and η. 
Croce, Benedetto, 71, i7S 
Cudworth, 143 
Curtius. G., ]87n., 191, 
i g 3 n . , 208n., 225 
n., 291 and n., 318 η. 
Cushing, 184n. 
Darwin, C., 63, 164, 180 
Dedekind, R , 327 and η. 
Delbrück, B., 169n, 173°-, a02n., 204 η., 
205 °·>
 a ° 8 n., 209 and шч 214 n., 252 n., 
266 n., 294 n.,304 n., 305 n., 307 η , 3i8 η. 
Ddgarno, 129 and η. 
De MeUac, 188 η. 
Democritus, 73, 74 
Dcmotthcnet, 150, 
151 
DcmpwoIfl, Ο., 73 
Deaarte, ix, 79i 99·
 
Ι 04, « 7 · *з8 and n., 
129, 130, 135 η., 326 
Diderot, 24-26, 141> 143 
Dieb, 187 η. 
Dillmarm, Α., 174n., 202n, 205n., 214n, 
a58, 277 and η. 
Diogenes, Laertius, 
148n. 
Dittricb, Ottmar, з ° 4 П . 
Dixon, R. B., 242 η. 
Dobrizhofier, M., 233 η , 237 η-
Du BoU-Reymond, 169 
ElU1,A.J.,296n. 
Endemann, 223 
Engel, I. U l3l> 1790. 

326 
Epicurus, 148, 
187 
Erman, G. Λ* 207 n., 236 n., 252 η. 
Fichte, J. G., 150, 
317n. 
Finck, F. N., 265 η. 
Frege, G., 227 and a. 
Gabelentz, G 4 vd., 213 and n., 246n., 25t 
n., 235 n^ 270 n,, 274 n., 305 and n., 306 
n., 311 n. 
Gabelentz, H. C., v.d., 207 n., 233 n., 234 n., 
236 n., 242 nn., 243 n , 249 n., 299 n., 3z2 
n., 315n. 
GaUleo, ix, 3, 7» i7. 85 
Gatschet, A. S 4 195 and n 4 199 n 4 202 n., 
210n., 214n., 216n., 230n., 239n., 240 
n., 276nn., 310 η., 3x1n., 315tu 
Gawronsky, D., xiii, 47, 49, 55 n. 
Geiger, L., 286, 287n. 
Goddard, 211 n., 214n., 220n., 240n., 242 
n., 253 n., 256 n., 262 n. 
Goethe, ix, 22, 25, 30-ЗЗ» 4°. 
64, 87, 
154, 169,186 
Gorgias, 187, 188 
Gottsched, 147 
'Grasserie, &, de la, 250 n., 267, 269 ru, 270 
n. 
Grimm, J., 145 and n., 185 and ш, 192 and 
n., 199 n., 205 n., 244 n., 246 and n., 250 
n., 252n., 258n., 298n., 299, 308n» 
Grotius, 37 
Grunzel, J., 194n., 210n., 214n., 236n. 
Gutmann, J., xii 
Haeckel, E., 166, 167 
Hamann, J. G., x50, 15x and nn., x52 
Hamburg, C. H., xiii, 54 n,, 55 n. 
Hamilton, 23x 
Hammer, P 4 290 and n. 
Hanoteau, A., 256 n. 
Harris, J., 14x, x44 tUL 
Hartman, & S., xiii, 35 n. 
Haym, R., 152n. 
Hegel, 3*-34> 42-43» 61^3, 
83, 84, 164, 
165, 
167 
Hchnholtz, 75, x68, x69 n. 
Hendel, C. W., xiii, 24 n., 38 n., 39 n. 
Henry, V., 242 n., 264 n., 27x n. 
I N D E X O F PROPER N A M E S 
Heraditus, 119 and n., 12x and nn., 122, 
x23, 125, 
15x 
Herbart, 70, 99 
Herder, J. G. v., 25, 36, 39-43, 46, 64, x45 
and nn., 147, 151, 
152 and n., x33 and 
o., 155. 159. 285, 319 
Hertz,H.,53,75,76n.,85 
Hcsiod, 82 
Hilbert, 227 
Hildebrand, R* x45 
Hobbes, T., 37,134 and n., 136,138 and nn. 
Hoffman, E , 72, 125 n., 208 n., 213 and n., 
2.5 n., 272 n., 273 n., 312 n. 
Homer, 82, 142, 245 
Howald, E., 124 n. 
Humboldt, WUhelm von, 45, 64, 70, 71, 91, 
92 and n., 140, 146,155 and n., 156, 
157 
and n., 158 and nn., 159 and n., 160 nn* 
x61, 162 and nn., 171, 174, x92 and n., 
193. 194n., 202n., 203n., 210, 211n., 
213 and n., 214 η., 2i9 and η·» 235
 η·»
 
237 
and n., 24x n., 244, 245, 247 and ш, 250 
and n., 252 n., 255 and n., 257, 239 and 
n., 260 and n., 266, 270 and nn., 274,275 
and n., 277, 278 n., 284 and n., 299r 300 
and n., 303, 304-305, 306n., 309, 
313, 
318n. 
Hume, 2 and n., 3, 11, 17, 24, 37, 38, 94, 
10x, 209 
Jones, W., 299n. 
Jorio, A. de, x82 and n. 
Junker, H., 72 
Kant, viii, ix, x-14, 16,17-18,20^2,25-34, 
39-41, 46, 50^2, 56-57, 59^0, 62, 78¬
79. 97. 104-105, xx2-113, 154. x57-i59. 
x6i and nn., 168, x98, 200 and n* 203¬
204, 218, 265, 3i3-3i4> 316, 
319 
Kaufmann, Felix, 35n., 55n. 
Kaufmann, Fritz, xiii, 35 n., 55 n. 
KepIer, ix 
Kirchhoff, x70 and ш 
Kluge, Fr* x82 n. 
Kohlcr,B.W., 189tk 
Koeln, F. C. A., xiii 
KristeUer, xii 
Kuhn, 35n., 53n4 5an. 

I N D E X O F PROPER N A M E S 
Langer, Susanne K., xü, xiii, 55 n. 
Leander, F., xüi, 55 n. 
Leeuwenhoek, 23 
Leibniz, ix, 23-24, 30, 40, 85-86, 100, 109, 
112 and n., 129-130 and n., 131 and n., 
132 and n., 133, 135, 136n., 152, 
155, 
159» 192 2nd n., 199n., 226 
Lersh, 117n., 191 n. 
Lcskien, 170 n., 225 n. 
Lessing, 31, 42, 141, 145, 
147 
Levy-Bruhl, L., 184n., 230 η., 234n. 
Linnaeus, 28 
Lipps, G. F., 247 n. 
Locke, J., 37, 133 and n., 134 and nn., 136 
and n., 137, 140-141 nn., 318 
Lotze, H., 281, 282 and n., 283 
Lucretius, 148 and n. 
Machiavelli, 37, 38 
Mallery, G., 183 n. 
Man, E. H., 296n. 
Marty, 70 
Matthews, S., 214 n., 247 n., 253 n., 299 n. 
Maupertius, P. L. de, 24-26, 146, 147 n., 153 
Mauthner, Fr., 189n. 
MeiIlet, A., 244n., 245n., 3x1η. 
Meinecke, F., 36 
Meinhof, C., 72, 194 n., 202 n., 203 n., 212 
n., 230n., 240n., 245n., 248n., 253n., 
287 n., 296 n., 297 n., 300 n., 301 n., 302 
n. 
Merscnne, 128 and n. 
Meyer, J., 234 n. 
Meyer-Lübke, W., 191n., 236n. 
Migeod, F. W. H., 258 n., 315 n. 
Miklosich, 208 n., 244 n. 
Monboddo, 145 
Montagu, M. F. A., xiii, 35 n., 51 n., 55 n. 
Montesquieu, 37-381 38n., 39, 42 
Müller, Aug., 257 n., 258 n., 259 n., 265 n. 
Müller, Fr., 173 n., 193 nn., 210 and n., 211 
n., 214 n., 234 n., 235, 236 n., 242 n., 243 
n., 246n., 252n., 253n., 255n., 260n., 
270 n., 271 n., 300 n. 
Natorp, 227 and n. 
Newton, 2, 17, 24, 96, 109, 218 
Nöldekc, 270n. 
Noire, L , 266 and n., 286-287 and n. 
Osthoff, H., 170 and n., 171 and n., 248n., 
290-291 and n., 318n. 
Pänini, 258n., 267 
Parmenides, 74, 315-316 and n. 
Paul, H., 171 and n., 172 and n., 191 n., 225 
n., 288n., 307n. 
Pettegrove, J. P., xüi 
Plato, I , 2, 18, 44, 64,73, 74. « 2 , 1 2 3 . 1 2 5 ¬
127, 181 and n., 226,316 
Plotinus, 31 n. 
Polybius, 37, 58 
Portman, M. J., 296n. 
Pott, A. F., 196 n., 232 n., 233 n. 
Powell, J. W., 230 n., 234 n., 256 n., 262 n., 
296n., 302n. 
Proclas, 226 and n. 
Prometheus, 143 
Pythagoras, 226 
Ramus, P., 27 
Randall, J. H., Jr., xii, 55 n. 
Ray, 230 n., 233 n., 241 n., 264 n. 
Reichart, K., 55n. 
Reinisch, L., 207 n., 221 n., 229 n., 241 n., 
249 n., 254 n., 256 n., 257 n., 259 n., 262 
n., 301 n., 310 n. 
Renan, E., 312n. 
Roehl, K., 221 n., 223 and nn., 248 n., 310 n. 
Roepstorff, 315 n. 
Rousseau, J. J., ix, 26, 37, 150 and n. 
Roux, 28 
Russell, B., 227 and n. 
Sayce, A. H., 190 n., 289 n., 290 n., 304 n. 
Scheler, 61 
Schelling, F. W. von, 33, 44, 154 and n., 
i57> 263 and n. 
Scherer, W., 191 n., x96 and n., 244 and n. 
Schiller, ix 
Schlegel, F., 153, 
154 
Schleicher, A., x64-169 and n., 173, 
306 
and n. 
Schmidt, J. J., 242 n., 25x n., 256 n., 299 n., 
31x n., 312n. 
Schmidt, P. W., 212n., 247n. 
Schopenhauer, A., 26x and n. 
Scotus, ). D., 127n. 
Seler, E., 72, 223 and n., 276n. 

328 
I N D E X O F PROPER 
N A M E S 
Shaftesbury, ix, 25, 30-31, 14a-145 
Shakespeare, 14a 
Sigwart, C V* 279 *nd 0· 
Simonyi, 308n. 
Slochower, H., 35 n 4 55 n. 
Socrates, 64,123 
Solomitz, 35n. 
Spencer, 63 
Spengler, 63 
Spinoza, ix, 31, 93 
Suhl, 3 
Steindorff, 207n., 252 η., 270 η* 3ian. 
Steinen, K- von den, 220 η* 223n., 229, 
230n., 242n., 243n., 262 and n., 276n., 
290 and & 
Steinthal, C , 117 η , 122 η* х8бпч 202n., 
207 and ти, 22z, 222 n« 230-231 and пч 
310n. 
Stenzel, J., 124 n., 258 ο. 
Stern, Clara and WiUiam, 184n., 201 n., 220 
n., 260n., 310xu 
Stevens, I. K., xiii 
Streitberg, 224, 223n. 
Swabey, WiUiam and Mary, vii 
Swammerdam, 23 
Swanton, 206n* 2ix n 4 296nn. 
Szinnyei, 256n., 264n. 
Täuber, 191 η. 
Taine, 63 
Thalbitzer, 2x0n., 230n., 264n. 
Thucydides, 37~з8 
Thumb, Α., 256 n., 309 η. 
Thrax, D., 258 η. 
Tüing, Maria von, 206n., 220Ш 
TorricelU, 3, 7 
Trendeknburg, F. Α., 127 tu 
Trumbull, J. H., 289, 290 n., 315 tu 
Oberweg, Friedrich, 1x7ru 
Ungerer, E., 28 
Urban, xiii, 35 n* 51 n., 35 n. 
Usener, H. K., 243 n* 287 and n. 
VaUa, L., 127 
Vico, G., 149 and n., x50 
Vives, L·, 127 
Vossler, K~, 70, x74-x75 and atu 
Werkmeister, W. 
35 tu 
Wertheimer, 233, 247 
Westermann, D., 190 and n., x94tUL, 200 
n., 205n., 207n., 2x2n., 217n., 220n., 
22x n., 229 n., 248 n., 255 n., 301 n., 306 
n., 310n., 315n. 
Whitney, W. D , 209n., 252&, 313n. 
Wilkins, x29 and n. 
Willamowitz, 124n. 
Winkler, H., 193 η., 194n., 210n., 224П4 
251 n., 260 n., 265 n., 272 and n., 273 atL·, 
304n., 309n., 310n., 31x n* 312 and n« 
314n. 
Woglom, W. Нч xiii 
Wotf (letter from von Humboldt), 155 
Woül, E., 72 
Wood, R., xi 
Wundt, W., 90 n., 172 and n., 173 and n* 
x79n., x80, x8xn., x82n., 184, 193n^ 
201 n., 209 and n., 247 n., 252 tu, 261 and 
n., 268 n., 293 and n., 304 & 
Xenophanes, 82 
Xenophon, 122 and tu 
Zeno, 222 

