Further Knowledge on Featured Topics
The use of artificial intelligence
(AI) to enhance academic
communication, education and
research: a balanced approach
Abstract
Much has been written about the concerns surrounding artificial intelligence (AI). This article looks pos-
itively at how AI can enhance communication and academic skills, including teaching and research. The
article explains what AI, Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT), and chat-GPT are and highlights a few
AI-based tools that are currently in use to improve communication and academic skills. It also mentions
potential AI problems, such as a lack of personalization, societal biases, and privacy concerns. The future
lies in the training of hand surgeons to master the skill of precise communication and academia using AI
tools.
Keywords
Artificial intelligence (AI), AI-related tools, Large language model (LLM) academics, research, risks
Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a booming field with the
power to revolutionize communication and research.
As hand surgeons, we can reap immense benefits
from the use of AI tools in our academic practice if
we can harness its potential. In this article, we
explore the ways in which AI can enhance our written
and oral communication and research work, and also
balance these with caution that we must take in its
widespread use.
We first provide a brief overview of what AI, GPT
and ChatGPT are:
(1) AI is the use of computer systems to simulate
human mental processes, such as interpreting
and generating language.
(2) GPT
stands
for
Generative
Pre-trained
Transformer
and
was
developed
by
OpenAI
(https://platform.openai.com). It is a neural net-
work machine learning model trained to generate
any logical text in natural language, completing
an input text. Neural networks are computer sys-
tems based on the biological brain, with large
numbers of nodes or ‘neurones’ designed to pro-
cess information in a similar way to the human
brain. GPT requires a small amount of input text
‘prompt’ to generate large volumes of relevant
and sophisticated machine-generated text.
GPT-3 is a large language model (LLM), a deep
learning neural network model taught with over
175 billion machine learning parameters. It is capa-
ble of producing high-quality outputs answering an
input prompt. GPT-3 was the first algorithm of its
kind and paved the way for the subsequent models
of GPT-3.5 and GPT-4.
GPT-3 and GPT-3.5 are the largest neural net-
works ever produced and the two most advanced
algorithms for text generation. As a result, they out-
perform any prior model for producing text so
convincing that it could be mistaken for human auth-
ored content. They have also been used for text-to-
voice application development.
GPT-4 is the latest in the series. It is connected to
the Internet, enabling it to generate more natural-
sounding language and understanding of context.
GPT is the core of all the AI-based tools that are
on the market. We can access GPT through these
different
tools
or
directly
with
our
Application
Personal Interface (API) in the OpenAI platform
(https://platform.openai.com).
(3)
Chat
GPT
is
a
natural
language
chatbot
launched as a prototype on 30 November
2022. Its original release was based on GPT-
3.5. A version based on GPT-4, the newest
OpenAI model, was released on March 14th,
Journal of Hand Surgery
(European Volume)
2023, Vol. 48(8) 819–822
! The Author(s) 2023
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/17531934231185746
journals.sagepub.com/home/jhs

2023, and is available for paid subscribers
on a limited basis. It generates meaningful
responses
to
conversations
across
many
domains of knowledge. It is designed to imi-
tate human-like conversations, although its
limited ability to generate factually correct
responses has been identified as a significant
drawback. Its advent has increased competi-
tion within the space, motivating the creation
of Google’s Bard (https://bard.google.com/?
hl=en)
and
Meta’s
LLaMA
(https://ai.face
book.com/blog/large-language-model-llama-
meta-ai).
How can AI enhance our written
communication skills?
AI can potentially save time and effort by eliminating
the need for tedious manual processes that slow
down the writing process in the following ways:
(1) Error detection and correction: AI can quickly
and
accurately
identify
and
correct
errors,
typos and inconsistencies as well as suggest
improvements to the writing.
(2) Grammar and style suggestions: AI can analyse
texts and provide feedback and suggestions on
grammar, sentence structure, spelling, punctu-
ation and word choice.
(3) Citation assistance: Although AI can find and
summarize specific citations, it still appears
unable to search for real citations rather than
fabricate them.
(4) Proofreading and improving flow: AI can help
streamline
the
proofreading
process
and
improve the flow, clarity and readability of writ-
ten information.
(5) Formatting assistance: AI can quickly and accu-
rately format documents according to the pub-
lisher’s requirements, ensuring that it is ready
for publication quickly and with minimal effort.
(6) Plagiarism detection: AI can detect instances of
plagiarism in written work.
Grammarly
(Grammarly
Inc.,
USA)
and
ProWritingAid (ProWritingAid, UK) are two AI-driven
tools specifically designed to improve written com-
munication. It is worth noting, however, that these
tools may have difficulty understanding specific
hand surgery language and terminology, which can
potentially
reduce
the
accuracy
of
automated
corrections.
How can AI enhance our oral
communication skills?
AI can also help with the preparation of oral presen-
tations to be used in congresses or courses, simpli-
fying the process to allow for quick content creation
and editing in the following ways:
(1) Creating visually appealing presentations: AI can
improve the visual aspects of presentations,
helping to communicate more effectively with
our audience. It can help us with a wide selection
of templates, fonts and images to choose from,
and provides features such as theme customiza-
tion, easy text editing and animation options to
make the presenter’s work stand out.
(2) Improving
audience
engagement:
Future
AI-based tools may use motion detection and
facial recognition to track audience engagement
during our oral presentations. This could allow
customization
of
the
presentation
according
to the level of engagement of the audience,
making sure that the most important points are
not missed.
(3) Automatic transcription: AI-based speech recog-
nition tools can automatically and precisely tran-
scribe our live or remote speeches, providing a
more accurate record of the presentation and
make it easier for the speaker to review and
improve their work.
Prezi (https://prezi.com) and Canva (https://www.
canva.com) are AI-based tools that allow hand sur-
geons
to
craft
unique
and
eye-catching
presentations.
How can AI enhance our research work?
The potential for AI and AI-based tools to enhance
research in the field of hand surgery is potentially
immense. If used carefully, these may ultimately
improve the quality and effectiveness of care for
our patients:
(1) Data management and analysis: AI-based tools
can sift through massive amounts of research
data more effectively than humans. It can ana-
lyse large volumes of data more easily with
greater speed and accuracy.
(2) Statistics: AI can be used to write the code
required for statistical analyses using specialist
statistics and graphics software, saving signifi-
cant amounts of time for users.
(3) Simulation and testing: AI can also be used to
simulate and test complex procedures far more
820
Journal of Hand Surgery (Eur) 48(8)

efficiently and accurately than has ever been
possible before.
AI-based tools are powerful in our PDF, Excel or
document research work. Here are a few examples:
(1) Humata (https://app.humata.ai) is a software that
offers a Q&A platform for PDF files. It helps
accelerate
scientific
discovery
by
allowing
AI-powered queries about one or multiple PDFs to
get instant answers. It summarizes long papers,
provides instant Q&A and creates new writing
based on a PDF file. In summarizing the information
from multiple PDF files, it allows us to save time by
learning faster and working smarter.
(2) ChatGPT in Google SheetsTM and DocsTM (https://
workspace.google.com/marketplace/app/gpt_
for_sheets_and_docs/677318054654)
is
an
AI
writer that enables us to use a ChatGPT model
directly in Google SheetsTM and DocsTM. It is built
on top of OpenAI, so we need our OpenAI API to
use it. In both platforms, the use of ChatGPT can
potentially improve productivity and the genera-
tion of high-quality content.
Risks of the use of AI
The advent of AI has caused concerns among several
research institutions and publishers (Leopold et al,
2023; The Lancet Digital Health, 2023). As we embark
on its increasing use in research and education, we
should be aware of the risks involved:
(1) AI-powered tools in general collect vast amounts
of personal data, which might pose a potential
threat to our privacy and security when installing
AI-related tools in our computers.
(2) The cost of implementation of this type of tech-
nology may unfairly advantage the more privi-
leged in society.
(3) There is a risk from the use of AI by researchers
who do not understand its limitations and capac-
ity for incorrect responses, thus generating false
information in scholarly publications. In particu-
lar, references generated by ChatGPT may not
exist and ultimately it is the responsibility of
researchers to check these.
(4) There are potential ethical issues for inputting
patient data to a LLM, which is designed to
learn from inputted text.
(5) AI lacks human emotions that are necessary for
effective teaching and learning. The connection
between a teacher and student at a human level
provides several important points of connection.
Notably, the ‘hidden’ curriculum, which is a set of
unspoken values or rules, can often only be
learned by human interaction within a social
environment.
(6) Because ChatGPT is trained on the Internet, a
mainly Western initiative, there are societal
biases, prejudices and stereotypes that may
occur in these systems.
(7) There is a risk that we may become too depen-
dent on technology, hindering our ability to think
critically or solve problems.
Conclusion
AI and AI-related tools can provide significant bene-
fits
to
the
academic
hand
surgery
community,
enhancing communication and collaboration and
research in innovative ways. Their use, however,
also raises ethical concerns regarding privacy, equi-
tability, bias, trust and authorship.
Whether we embrace it or not, AI and AI-related
tools are already a part of our academic life and are
here to stay. We therefore have a responsibility to
learn what they are and how to harness their poten-
tial in the right ways. It is important to note that AI is
a neutral tool and is never wrong and simply
responds to what is inputted into it; therefore, the
onus is on us to write the right prompts to obtain
the right answers.
Concerns about AI are valid but may be slightly
misplaced. Ultimately, we do not compete with any
AI; we compete with any human who is already using
AI and knows how to use it properly. We should not
be afraid to experiment with it, but we should be
careful not to believe everything we learn from it,
and we should never forget our real values or what
makes us human.
Declaration of conflicting interests The author
declares no potential conflicts of interest with respect to
the authorship and/or publication of this article. However,
I would like to acknowledge the use of GPT version 3.5
February 2023 (OpenAI, San Francisco, CA, USA) in editing
this article, specifically in discussing IA and IA-based tools
utilities. The use of this large language model (LLM) has
also assisted me in rephrasing and ensuring the clarity and
effectiveness of my language and highlights the potential of
language models in aiding researchers and hand surgery
professionals to save valuable time by effectively and effi-
ciently communicating in written words the concepts that
they wish to express.
Esplugas
821

Funding The author received no financial support for the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
ORCID iD Mireia Esplugas
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-
6931-1339
References
The Lancet Digital Health. ChatGPT: friend or foe? Lancet Digit
Health. 2023, 5: e102.
Leopold SS, Haddad FS, Sandell LJ, Swiontkowski M. Artificial
intelligence applications and scholarly publication in orthope-
dic surgery. J Orthop Res. 2023, 41: 1137–8.
Mireia Esplugas
Kaplan Hand Institute Barcelona, Avinguda Reina Elisenda
17, Barcelona, 08034, Spain
Corresponding author: Mireia Esplugas, Clinica
Activamutua Tarragona, c/ Pin i Soler, 12-14, Tarragona,
43002, Spain.
Email: mireiaesplugas@institut-kaplan.com
822
Journal of Hand Surgery (Eur) 48(8)

