Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

1-1 Replacing Tissues and Organs, 6
1-2 Visualizing the Interior of the Body, 18
2-1 Blood Gases, 30
2-2 Nitric Oxide, 31
2-3 Lipids in the Blood, 36
2-4 A Protein Mystery: Prions, 39
3-1 Terminology of Solutions, 53
3-2 Genetic Disease – Sickle-Cell Anemia, 59
3-3 Abnormal Cellular Functioning – Cancer, 61
4-1 Cystic Fibrosis, 74
4-2 Vitamin C and Collagen, 78
4-3 Cosmetic Collagen, 78
5-1 Burns, 92–93
5-2 Preventing Skin Cancer: Common Sense and Sunscreens, 94
5-3 Common Skin Disorders, 97
5-4 Administering Medications, 100
6-1 Fractures and Their Repair, 111
6-2 Osteoporosis, 113
6-3 Herniated Disc, 121
6-4 Abnormalities of the Curves of the Spine, 122
6-5 Arthritis, 130
7-1 Anabolic Steroids, 141
7-2 Tetanus and Botulism, 146
7-3 Muscular Dystrophy, 148
7-4 Myasthenia Gravis, 148
7-5 Common Injection Sites, 149
8-1 Multiple Sclerosis, 168
8-2 Shingles, 174
8-3 Spinal Cord Injuries, 176
8-4 Cerebrovascular Accidents, 181
8-5 Aphasia, 182
8-6 Alzheimer’s Disease, 183
8-7 Parkinson’s Disease, 184
8-8 Lumbar Puncture, 187
9-1 Cataracts, 205
9-2 Glaucoma, 207
9-3 Errors of Refraction, 208
9-4 Night Blindness and Color Blindness, 209
9-5 Deafness, 214
9-6 Motion Sickness, 216
10-1 Disorders of Growth Hormone, 230
10-2 Disorders of Thyroxine, 235
10-3 Diabetes Mellitus, 238
10-4 Disorders of the Adrenal Cortex, 242
11-1 Anemia, 257
11-2 Jaundice, 259
11-3 Rh Disease of the Newborn, 261
11-4 Leukemia, 263
11-5 White Blood Cell Types: HLA, 264
11-6 Hemophilia, 266
11-7 Dissolving Clots, 268
12-1 Coronary Artery Disease, 280
Clinical applications of the book’s anatomical and physiological information are set
apart from the text in boxed inserts and often deal with aspects of pathophysiology. A
list of these boxes is presented here for your convenience.
List of Boxes
(List of boxes continued on inside back cover)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Valerie C. Scanlon, PhD
College of Mount Saint Vincent
Riverdale, New York
Tina Sanders
Medical Illustrator
Castle Creek, New York
Formerly
Head Graphic Artist
Tompkins Cortland Community College
Dryden, New York
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

F. A. Davis Company
1915 Arch Street
Philadelphia, PA 19103
www.fadavis.com
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis Company
Copyright © 1991, 1995, 1999, and 2003 by F. A. Davis Company. All rights reserved.
This product is protected by copyright. No part of it may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, pho-
tocopying, recording, or otherwise, without written permission from the publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
Last digit indicates print number: 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Nursing Editor: Lisa B. Deitch
Developmental Editor: Alan Sorkowitz
Project Editor: Ilysa H. Richman
Cover Designer: Carolyn O’Brien
As new scientiﬁc information becomes available through basic and clinical research, rec-
ommended treatments and drug therapies undergo changes. The author(s) and publisher
have done everything possible to make this book accurate, up to date, and in accord with
accepted standards at the time of publication. The author(s), editors, and publisher are not
responsible for errors or omissions or for consequences from application of the book, and
make no warranty, expressed or implied, in regard to the contents of the book. Any prac-
tice described in this book should be applied by the reader in accordance with professional
standards of care used in regard to the unique circumstances that may apply in each situ-
ation. The reader is advised always to check product information (package inserts) for
changes and new information regarding dose and contraindications before administering
any drug. Caution is especially urged when using new or infrequently ordered drugs.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Scanlon, Valerie C.,
Essentials of anatomy and physiology/Valerie C. Scanlon, Tina
Sanders. — 5th ed.
p.
;
cm.
Includes index.
ISBN–13: 978-0-8036-1546-5
ISBN–10: 0-8036-1546-9
1. Human anatomy.
2. Human physiology.
I. Sanders, Tina,
1943-.
II. Title.
III. Title: Anatomy and physiology.
[DNLM: 1. Anatomy.
2. Physiology.
QS 4 S283e 2006]
QP34.5.S288 2006
612—dc22
2006015120
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal
use of speciﬁc clients, is granted by F. A. Davis Company for users registered with the
Copyright Clearance Center (CCC) Transactional Reporting Service, provided that the
fee of $.10 per copy is paid directly to CCC, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923.
For those organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by CCC, a separate
system of payment has been arranged. The fee code for users of the Transactional
Reporting Service is: 8036-1546/07  0  $.10.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

v
Preface
A ﬁfth edition of Essentials of Anatomy and Physiology is very gratifying, and again we
have the pleasure of thanking all of our colleagues in teaching who continue to use our
textbook and of welcoming new teachers and students.
Changes have been made in the content of the book to keep the material as current
as possible. Most of these are small changes, such as a new cell organelle, the protea-
some, in Chapter 3; a clariﬁcation of blood cell production in Chapters 4, 11, and 14;
and the addition of concentric and eccentric contractions to Chapter 7. The most
extensive revision is in Chapter 14: The section on immunity has been rewritten using
the categories of innate and adaptive immunity.
New illustrations in this edition include positive and negative feedback mecha-
nisms in Chapter 1, cellular transport mechanisms in Chapter 3, hormones that affect
blood pressure in Chapter 13, innate immunity in Chapter 14, and synthesis uses of
foods in Chapter 17. Illustrations that have been revised include protein structure,
active site theory, and DNA and RNA structure in Chapter 2, blood cells in Chapter
11, and adaptive immunity in Chapter 14.
Also new to this edition are illustration questions. Each ﬁgure legend is followed
by a question for the student; the answers are in Appendix G.
As always, your comments and suggestions will be most welcome, and they may be
sent to us in care of the publisher: F. A. Davis Company, 1915 Arch Street,
Philadelphia, PA 19103.
Valerie C. Scanlon
Dobbs Ferry, New York
Tina Sanders
Castle Creek, New York
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

vi
To the Instructor
A s the science and arts of medicine and health care become increasingly complex,
so too does the education of those who pursue careers in nursing and other health-
related ﬁelds. Human anatomy and physiology is often a ﬁrst course in many educa-
tion programs, and is the basis for so many of the more specialized courses. Teachers
of introductory anatomy and physiology thus take on a special challenge: We must
distill and express the complexities of human structure and function in a simple way,
without losing the essence and meaning of the material. That is the goal of this text-
book: to make this material readily accessible to students with diverse backgrounds
and varying levels of educational preparation.
No prior knowledge of biology or chemistry is assumed, and even the most funda-
mental terms are deﬁned thoroughly. Essential aspects of anatomy are presented
clearly and reinforced with excellent illustrations. Essential aspects of physiology are
discussed simply, yet with accuracy and precision. Again, the illustrations complement
the text material and foster comprehension on the part of the student. These illustra-
tions were prepared especially for students for whom this is a ﬁrst course in anatomy
and physiology. As you will see, these are images in which detail is readily apparent.
All important parts have been labeled, but the student is not overwhelmed with
unnecessary labels. Illustrations of physiology lead the student step-by-step.
Wherever appropriate, the legends refer students to the text for further description or
explanation. Each illustration also has a question for the student; the illustration ques-
tions in a chapter form an ongoing self-test. (The answers are given in Appendix G.)
The text has three unifying themes: the relationship between physiology and
anatomy, the interrelations among the organ systems, and the relationship of each
organ system to homeostasis. Although each type of cell, tissue, organ, or organ sys-
tem is discussed simply and thoroughly in itself, applicable connections are made to
other aspects of the body or to the functioning of the body as a whole. Our goal is to
provide your students with the essentials of anatomy and physiology, and in doing so,
to help give them a solid foundation for their future work, and an appreciation for the
incredible living organism that is the human body.
The sequence of chapters is a very traditional one. Cross-references are used to
remind students of what they have learned from previous chapters. Nevertheless, the
textbook is very ﬂexible, and, following the introductory four chapters, the organ sys-
tems may be covered in almost any order, depending on the needs of your course.
Each chapter is organized from the simple to the more complex, with the anatomy
followed by the physiology. The Instructor’s Guide presents modiﬁcations of the topic
sequences that may be used, again depending on the needs of your course. Certain
more advanced topics may be omitted from each chapter without losing the meaning
or ﬂow of the rest of the material, and these are indicated, for each chapter, in the
Instructor’s Guide.
Clinical applications are set apart from the text in boxed inserts. These are often
aspects of pathophysiology that are related to the normal anatomy or physiology in the
text discussion. Each box presents one particular topic and is referenced at the appro-
priate point in the text. This material is intended to be an integral part of the chapter
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

but is set apart for ease of reference and to enable you to include or omit as many of
these topics as you wish. The use of these boxes also enables students to read the text
material without interruption and then to focus on speciﬁc aspects of pathophysiology.
A comprehensive list of the boxes appears inside the book’s front and back covers, and
another list at the beginning of each chapter cites the boxes within that chapter.
Tables are utilized as summaries of structure and function, to present a sequence of
events, or additional material that you may choose to include. Each table is referenced
in the text and is intended to facilitate your teaching and to help your students learn.
New terms appear in bold type within the text, and all such terms are fully deﬁned
in an extensive glossary, with phonetic pronunciations. Bold type may also be used for
emphasis whenever one of these terms is used again in a later chapter.
Each chapter begins with a chapter outline and student objectives to prepare the
student for the chapter itself. New terminology and related clinical terms are also
listed, with phonetic pronunciations. Each of these terms is fully deﬁned in the glos-
sary, with cross-references back to the chapter in which the term is introduced.
At the end of each chapter are a study outline and review questions. The study out-
line includes all of the essentials of the chapter in a concise outline form. The review
questions may be assigned as homework, or used by the students as a review or self-
test. Following each question is a page reference in parentheses. This reference cites
the page(s) in the chapter on which the content needed to answer the question cor-
rectly can be found. The answers themselves are included in the Instructor’s Guide.
The questions in the sections titled For Further Thought may be used in a variety of
ways, and the answers are in the Instructor’s Guide.
An important supplementary learning tool for your students is available in the form
of a Student Workbook that accompanies this text. For each chapter in the textbook, the
workbook offers ﬁll-in and matching-column questions, ﬁgure-labeling and ﬁgure-
coloring exercises, and crossword puzzles based on the chapter’s vocabulary list. Also
included are two comprehensive, multiple-choice chapter tests to provide a thorough
review. All answers are provided at the end of the workbook.
Ancillary materials for the teacher using this text are all on a CD-ROM: a complete
Instructor’s Guide, two computerized test banks, and an Image Ancillary presentation
of the text illustrations. The Instructor’s Guide contains notes on each chapter’s
organization and content (useful for modifying the book to your speciﬁc teaching
needs), topics for class discussion, answers to the chapter review questions from the
textbook, and detailed answers to the For Further Thought questions. The multiple-
choice test bank contains more than 2600 questions that have been organized in
relation to the chapter review questions, and further explanation may be found in the
Instructor’s Guide. The ﬁll-in test bank contains more than 2100 questions organized
by textbook chapter. The Image Ancillary presentation contains many of the illustra-
tions from the textbook, with suggested points for use in classroom lectures.
Suggestions and comments from colleagues are always valuable, and yours would
be greatly appreciated. When we took on the task of writing and illustrating this text-
book, we wanted to make it the most useful book possible for you and your students.
Any suggestions that you can provide to help us achieve that goal are most welcome,
and they may be sent to us in care of F. A. Davis Company, 1915 Arch Street,
Philadelphia, PA 19103.
Valerie C. Scanlon
Dobbs Ferry, New York
Tina Sanders
Castle Creek, New York
To the Instructor
vii
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

viii
To the Student
This is your textbook for your ﬁrst course in human anatomy and physiology, a sub-
ject that is both fascinating and rewarding. That you are taking such a course says
something about you. You may simply be curious as to how the human body functions
or you may have a personal goal of making a contribution in one of the healthcare
professions. Whatever your reason, this textbook will help you to be successful in your
anatomy and physiology course.
The material is presented simply and concisely, yet with accuracy and precision.
The writing style is informal yet clear and speciﬁc; it is intended to promote your
comprehension and understanding.
ORGANIZATION OF THE TEXTBOOK
To use this textbook effectively, you should know the purpose of its various parts. Each
chapter is organized in the following way:
Chapter Outline—This presents the main topics in the chapter, which corre-
spond to the major headings in the text.
Student Objectives—These summarize what you should know after reading
and studying the chapter. These are not questions to be answered, but are
rather, with the chapter outline, a preview of the chapter contents.
New Terminology and Related Clinical Terminology—These are some of
the new terms you will come across in the chapter. Read through these terms
before you read the chapter, but do not attempt to memorize them just yet.
When you have ﬁnished the chapter, return to the list and see how many
terms you can deﬁne. Note those you may not be sure of and look them up.
All of these terms are fully deﬁned in the glossary.
Study Outline—This is found at the end of the chapter. It is a concise summary
of the essentials in the chapter. You may ﬁnd this outline very useful as a quick
review before an exam.
Review Questions—These are also at the end of the chapter. Your instructor
may assign some or all of them as homework. If not, the questions may be
used as a self-test to evaluate your comprehension of the chapter’s content.
The page number(s) in parentheses following each question refers you to the
page(s) in the chapter on which the content needed to answer the question
correctly can be found.
For Further Thought—The heading tells you what these are for: thinking.
Your instructor may use these for class discussion, and, if so, please do not
ever be afraid to be wrong. Being wrong in the classroom is one of the ways
each and every one of us learns. Contribute, raise your hand and speak up
with your best thoughts, and listen to those of others. Together you will ﬁnd
the answers.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

OTHER FEATURES WITHIN EACH CHAPTER
Illustrations—These are an essential part of this textbook. Use them. Study
them carefully, and they will be of great help to you as you learn. They are
intended to help you develop your own mental picture of the body and its
parts and processes. You may not have thought of mental pictures as being
important, but they are, and each new one you create is a major step in learn-
ing. Each illustration is referenced in the text, so you will know when to con-
sult it. With a little concentration, you will have it in your mind for whenever
you need it. You will see that each illustration also has a question after the leg-
end. These questions provide an ongoing quiz; try to answer each one as you
come to it. (Will it matter if you’re wrong? No, but answering the questions
will help you to learn.) The answers are given in Appendix G, just before the
glossary.
Boxes—Discussions of clinical applications are in separate boxes in the text so
that you may ﬁnd and refer to them easily. Your instructor may include all or
some of these as required reading. If you are planning a career in the health
professions, these boxes are an introduction to pathophysiology, and you will
ﬁnd them interesting and helpful.
Bold Type—This is used whenever a new term is introduced, or when an old
term is especially important. The terms in bold type are fully deﬁned in the
glossary, which includes phonetic pronunciations.
Tables—This format is used to present material in a very concise form. Some
tables are summaries of text material and are very useful for a quick review.
Other tables present additional material that complements the text material.
Glossary—Not within the chapters but at the end, the glossary is the diction-
ary of the book. All of the terms in bold type, as well as others, are deﬁned
here. Make use of it, rather than wonder what a word means. The sooner you
have a deﬁnition ﬁrmly in your mind, the sooner it is truly part of your
knowledge.
To make the best use of your study time, a Student Workbook is available that will
help you to focus your attention on the essentials in each chapter. Also included are
comprehensive chapter tests to help you determine which topics you have learned
thoroughly and which you may have to review. If your instructor has not made the
workbook a required text, you may wish to ask that it be ordered and made available
in your bookstore. You will ﬁnd it very helpful.
SOME FINAL WORDS OF ENCOURAGEMENT
Your success in this course depends to a great extent on you. Try to set aside study
time for yourself every day; a little time each day is usually much more productive
than trying to cram at the last minute.
Ask questions of yourself as you are studying. What kinds of questions? The sim-
plest ones. If you are studying a part of the body such as an organ, ask yourself: What
is its name? Where is it? What is it made of? What does it do? That is: name, loca-
tion, structure, and function. These are the essentials. If you are studying a process,
ask yourself: What is happening here? What is its purpose? That is: What is going on?
And what good is it? Again, these are the essentials.
To the Student
ix
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

We hope this textbook will contribute to your success. If you have any suggestions
or comments, we would very much like to hear them. After all, this book was written
for you, to help you achieve your goals in this course and in your education. Please
send your suggestions and comments to us in care of F. A. Davis Company, 1915 Arch
Street, Philadelphia, PA 19103.
Valerie C. Scanlon
Tina Sanders
Dobbs Ferry, New York
Castle Creek, New York
x
To the Student
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

xi
Acknowledgments
Writing and illustrating are part of a book, yet never the whole, and we thank the
editors and production staff of the F. A. Davis Company, especially:
• Lisa Deitch, Nursing Editor
• Alan Sorkowitz, of Alan Sorkowitz Editorial Services, Developmental Editor
• Bob Butler, Production Editor
• Michael Bailey, Director of Production
• Patti Cleary, Editor in Chief, Nursing
• Ilysa Richman, Project Editor, Nursing
• Lisa Thompson, Project Editor, Production
• Lorretta Palagi, Copy Editor
• Carolyn O’Brien, for designing the layout and the cover
• Neil Kelly, director of sales, and all of the F. A. Davis sales representatives
VCS
TS
To my students, past and present
VCS
To Brooks, for his encouragement
TS
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

xii
Contents
CHAPTER 1
Organization and General Plan of the Body  . . . . . . . . .1
Levels of Organization, 4
Metabolism and Homeostasis, 7
Terminology and General Plan of the Body, 12
CHAPTER 2
Some Basic Chemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .21
Elements, 24
Atoms, 24
Chemical Bonds, 25
Chemical Reactions, 28
Inorganic Compounds of Importance, 28
Organic Compounds of Importance, 33
CHAPTER 3
Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .46
Cell Structure, 48
Cellular Transport Mechanisms, 52
The Genetic Code and Protein Synthesis, 56
Cell Division, 60
Aging and Cells, 63
CHAPTER 4
Tissues and Membranes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .67
Epithelial Tissue, 70
Connective Tissue, 74
Muscle Tissue, 79
Nerve Tissue, 81
Membranes, 82
Aging and Tissues, 84
CHAPTER 5
The Integumentary System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .88
The Skin, 90
Subcutaneous Tissue, 99
Aging and the Integumentary System, 101
CHAPTER 6
The Skeletal System  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .104
Functions of the Skeleton, 106
Types of Bone Tissue, 106
Classiﬁcation of Bones, 106
Embryonic Growth of Bone, 108
Factors That Affect Bone Growth and Maintenance, 108
The Skeleton, 112
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Joints—Articulations, 128
Aging and the Skeletal System, 128
CHAPTER 7
The Muscular System  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .135
Muscle Structure, 138
Muscle Tone, 140
Muscle Sense, 141
Energy Sources for Muscle Contraction, 141
Muscle Fiber—Microscopic Structure, 142
Contraction—The Sliding Filament Mechanism, 146
Responses to Exercise—Maintaining Homeostasis, 147
Aging and the Muscular System, 149
Major Muscles of the Body, 149
CHAPTER 8
The Nervous System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .163
Nervous System Divisions, 166
Nerve Tissue, 166
Types of Neurons, 170
Nerves and Nerve Tracts, 171
The Nerve Impulse, 171
The Spinal Cord, 171
The Brain, 176
Meninges and Cerebrospinal Fluid, 184
Cranial Nerves, 186
The Autonomic Nervous System, 187
Aging and the Nervous System, 191
CHAPTER 9
The Senses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .196
Sensory Pathway, 198
Characteristics of Sensations, 198
Cutaneous Senses, 199
Muscle Sense, 200
Sense of Taste, 200
Sense of Smell, 202
Hunger and Thirst, 202
The Eye, 202
The Ear, 210
Arterial Receptors, 216
Aging and the Senses, 216
CHAPTER 10
The Endocrine System  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .221
Chemistry of Hormones, 225
Regulation of Hormone Secretion, 225
The Pituitary Gland, 225
Thyroid Gland, 231
Parathyroid Glands, 233
Pancreas, 233
Adrenal Glands, 236
Ovaries, 242
Contents
xiii
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Testes, 243
Other Hormones, 243
Mechanisms of Hormone Action, 244
Aging and the Endocrine System, 245
CHAPTER 11
Blood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .250
Characteristics of Blood, 252
Plasma, 252
Blood Cells, 254
CHAPTER 12
The Heart  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .272
Location and Pericardial Membranes, 274
Chambers—Vessels and Valves, 274
Coronary Vessels, 277
Cardiac Cycle and Heart Sounds, 278
Cardiac Conduction Pathway, 279
Heart Rate, 283
Cardiac Output, 283
Regulation of Heart Rate, 284
Aging and the Heart, 286
CHAPTER 13
The Vascular System  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .290
Arteries, 292
Veins, 292
Capillaries, 293
Pathways of Circulation, 296
Velocity of Blood Flow, 306
Blood Pressure, 307
Regulation of Blood Pressure, 310
Aging and the Vascular System, 314
CHAPTER 14
The Lymphatic System and Immunity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .319
Lymph, 322
Lymph Vessels, 322
Lymphatic Tissue, 322
Immunity, 327
Aging and the Lymphatic System, 337
CHAPTER 15
The Respiratory System  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .342
Divisions of the Respiratory System, 344
Mechanism of Breathing, 347
Pulmonary Volumes, 351
Exchange of Gases, 354
Transport of Gases in the Blood, 355
Regulation of Respiration, 358
Respiration and Acid–Base Balance, 360
Aging and the Respiratory System, 361
xiv
Contents
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CHAPTER 16
The Digestive System  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .367
Divisions of the Digestive System, 370
Types of Digestion, 370
Oral Cavity, 370
Pharynx, 373
Esophagus, 373
Structural Layers of the Alimentary Tube, 373
Stomach, 376
Small Intestine, 378
Liver, 379
Gallbladder, 379
Pancreas, 379
Completion of Digestion and Absorption, 381
Large Intestine, 385
Other Functions of the Liver, 386
Aging and the Digestive System, 389
CHAPTER 17
Body Temperature and Metabolism  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .394
Body Temperature, 396
Metabolism, 400
Aging and Metabolism, 413
CHAPTER 18
The Urinary System  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .417
Kidneys, 421
Formation of Urine, 424
The Kidneys and Acid–Base Balance, 428
Other Functions of the Kidneys, 429
Elimination of Urine, 431
Characteristics of Urine, 432
Aging and the Urinary System, 433
CHAPTER 19
Fluid–Electrolyte and Acid–Base Balance  . . . . . . . . . . .439
Water Compartments, 442
Water Intake and Output, 443
Electrolytes, 445
Acid–Base Balance, 446
Aging and Fluid and pH Regulation, 450
CHAPTER 20
The Reproductive Systems  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .454
Meiosis, 456
Male Reproductive System, 457
Female Reproductive System, 462
Aging and the Reproductive Systems, 470
CHAPTER 21
Human Development and Genetics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .474
Human Development, 476
Genetics, 486
Contents
xv
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CHAPTER 22
An Introduction to Microbiology
and Human Disease  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .496
Classiﬁcation of Microorganisms, 498
Normal Flora, 500
Infectious Disease, 500
Epidemiology, 503
Methods of Control of Microbes, 504
The Pathogens, 507
Appendixes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .528
A
Units of Measure, 528
B
Abbreviations, 530
C
Normal Values for Some Commonly Used Blood Tests, 532
D
Normal Values for Some Commonly Used Urine Tests, 533
E
Eponymous Terms, 534
F
Preﬁxes, Combining Word Roots, and
Suffixes Used in Medical Terminology, 535
G
Answers to the Illustration Questions, 539
Glossary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .547
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .589
xvi
Contents
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CHAPTER 1
Organization and General
Plan of the Body
1
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CHAPTER 1
Chapter Outline
Levels of Organization
Chemicals
Cells
Tissues
Organs
Organ Systems
Metabolism and Homeostasis
Terminology and General Plan of the Body
Body Parts and Areas
Terms of Location and Position
Body Cavities and Their Membranes
Dorsal cavity
Ventral cavity
Planes and Sections
Areas of the Abdomen
BOX 1–1
REPLACING TISSUES AND ORGANS
BOX 1–2
VISUALIZING THE INTERIOR OF THE BODY
Student Objectives
• Deﬁne the terms anatomy, physiology, and patho-
physiology. Use an example to explain how they are
related.
• Name the levels of organization of the body from
simplest to most complex, and explain each.
• Deﬁne the terms metabolism, metabolic rate, and
homeostasis, and use examples to explain.
• Explain how a negative feedback mechanism
works, and how a positive feedback mechanism
differs.
• Describe the anatomic position.
• State the anatomic terms for the parts of the body.
• Use proper terminology to describe the location
of body parts with respect to one another.
• Name the body cavities, their membranes, and
some organs within each cavity.
• Describe the possible sections through the body or
an organ.
• Explain how and why the abdomen is divided into
smaller areas. Be able to name organs in these
areas.
2
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Organization and General
Plan of the Body
3
New Terminology
Anatomy (uh-NAT-uh-mee)
Body cavity (BAH-dee KAV-i-tee)
Cell (SELL)
Homeostasis (HOH-me-oh-STAY-sis)
Inorganic chemicals (IN-or-GAN-ik KEM-i-kuls)
Meninges (me-NIN-jeez)
Metabolism (muh-TAB-uh-lizm)
Negative feedback (NEG-ah-tiv FEED-bak)
Organ (OR-gan)
Organ system (OR-gan SIS-tem)
Organic chemicals (or-GAN-ik KEM-i-kuls)
Pathophysiology (PATH-oh-FIZZ-ee-AH-luh-jee)
Pericardial membranes (PER-ee-KAR-dee-uhl
MEM-brayns)
Peritoneum/Mesentery (PER-i-toh-NEE-um/MEZ-
en-TER-ee)
Physiology (FIZZ-ee-AH-luh-jee)
Plane (PLAYN)
Pleural membranes (PLOOR-uhl MEM-brayns)
Positive feedback (PAHS-ah-tiv FEED-bak)
Section (SEK-shun)
Tissue (TISH-yoo)
Related Clinical Terminology
Computed tomography (CT) scan
(kom-PEW-ted toh-MAH-grah-fee SKAN)
Diagnosis (DYE-ag-NO-sis)
Disease (di-ZEEZ)
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
(mag-NET-ik REZ-ah-nanse IM-ah-jing)
Positron emission tomography (PET)
(PAHZ-i-tron e-MISH-un toh-MAH-grah-fee)
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The human body is a precisely structured container
of chemical reactions. Have you ever thought of your-
self in this way? Probably not, and yet, in the strictly
physical sense, that is what each of us is. The body
consists of trillions of atoms in speciﬁc arrangements
and thousands of chemical reactions proceeding in
a very orderly manner. That literally describes
us, and yet it is clearly not the whole story. The keys
to understanding human consciousness and self-
awareness are still beyond our grasp. We do not yet
know what enables us to study ourselves—no other
animals do, as far as we know—but we have accumu-
lated a great deal of knowledge about what we are
made of and how it all works. Some of this knowledge
makes up the course you are about to take, a course in
basic human anatomy and physiology.
Anatomy is the study of body structure, which
includes size, shape, composition, and perhaps even
coloration. Physiology is the study of how the body
functions. The physiology of red blood cells, for exam-
ple, includes what these cells do, how they do it, and
how this is related to the functioning of the rest of the
body. Physiology is directly related to anatomy. For
example, red blood cells contain the mineral iron in
molecules of the protein called hemoglobin; this is an
aspect of their anatomy. The presence of iron enables
red blood cells to carry oxygen, which is their function.
All cells in the body must receive oxygen in order to
function properly, so the physiology of red blood cells
is essential to the physiology of the body as a whole.
Pathophysiology is the study of disorders of func-
tioning, and a knowledge of normal physiology makes
such disorders easier to understand. For example, you
are probably familiar with the anemia called iron-
deﬁciency anemia. With insufficient iron in the diet,
there will not be enough iron in the hemoglobin of
red blood cells, and hence less oxygen will be trans-
ported throughout the body, resulting in the symp-
toms of the iron-deﬁciency disorder. This example
shows the relationship between anatomy, physiology,
and pathophysiology.
The purpose of this text is to enable you to gain
an understanding of anatomy and physiology with
the emphasis on normal structure and function. Many
examples of pathophysiology have been included,
however, to illustrate the relationship of disease to
normal physiology and to describe some of the proce-
dures used in the diagnosis of disease. Many of the
examples are clinical applications that will help you
begin to apply what you have learned and demonstrate
that your knowledge of anatomy and physiology will
become the basis for your further study in the health
professions.
LEVELS OF ORGANIZATION
The human body is organized into structural and
functional levels of increasing complexity. Each higher
level incorporates the structures and functions of the
previous level, as you will see. We will begin with the
simplest level, which is the chemical level, and pro-
ceed to cells, tissues, organs, and organ systems. All of
the levels of organization are depicted in Fig. 1–1.
CHEMICALS
The chemicals that make up the body may be divided
into two major categories: inorganic and organic.
Inorganic chemicals are usually simple molecules
made of one or two elements other than carbon (with
a few exceptions). Examples of inorganic chemicals are
water (H2O); oxygen (O2); one of the exceptions, car-
bon dioxide (CO2); and minerals such as iron (Fe), cal-
cium (Ca), and sodium (Na). Organic chemicals are
often very complex and always contain the elements
carbon and hydrogen. In this category of organic
chemicals are carbohydrates, fats, proteins, and
nucleic acids. The chemical organization of the body
is the subject of Chapter 2.
CELLS
The smallest living units of structure and function are
cells. There are many different types of human cells,
though they all have certain similarities. Each type of
cell is made of chemicals and carries out speciﬁc
chemical reactions. Cell structure and function are
discussed in Chapter 3.
TISSUES
A tissue is a group of cells with similar structure and
function. There are four groups of tissues:
Epithelial tissues—cover or line body surfaces; some
are capable of producing secretions with speciﬁc
functions. The outer layer of the skin and sweat
glands are examples of epithelial tissues. Internal
epithelial tissues include the walls of capillaries
(squamous epithelium) and the kidney tubules
(cuboidal epithelium), as shown in Fig. 1–1.
4
Organization and General Plan of the Body
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

1. Chemical Level
2. Cellular Level
3. Tissue Level
4. Organ Level
5. Organ System
Level
6. Organism Level
Cuboidal epithelium
Squamous epithelium
Smooth muscle
Kidney
Urinary
bladder
Urinary
system
Figure 1–1.
Levels of structural organization of the human body, depicted from the
simplest (chemical) to the most complex (organism). The organ system shown here is the
urinary system.
QUESTION: What other organ system seems to work directly with the urinary system?
5
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Connective tissues—connect and support parts of
the body; some transport or store materials. Blood,
bone, cartilage, and adipose tissue are examples of
this group.
Muscle tissues—specialized for contraction, which
brings about movement. Our skeletal muscles and
the heart are examples of muscle tissue. In Fig. 1–1,
you see smooth muscle tissue, which is found in
organs such as the urinary bladder and stomach.
Nerve tissue—specialized to generate and transmit
electrochemical impulses that regulate body func-
tions. The brain and optic nerves are examples of
nerve tissue.
The types of tissues in these four groups, as well as
their speciﬁc functions, are the subject of Chapter 4.
ORGANS
An organ is a group of tissues precisely arranged so as
to accomplish speciﬁc functions. Examples of organs
are the kidneys, individual bones, the liver, lungs,
and stomach. The kidneys contain several kinds of
epithelial, or surface tissues, for their work of absorp-
tion. The stomach is lined with epithelial tissue that
secretes gastric juice for digestion. Smooth muscle
tissue in the wall of the stomach contracts to mix
food with gastric juice and propel it to the small intes-
tine. Nerve tissue carries impulses that increase or
decrease the contractions of the stomach (see Box 1–1:
Replacing Tissues and Organs).
ORGAN SYSTEMS
An organ system is a group of organs that all con-
tribute to a particular function. Examples are the uri-
nary system, digestive system, and respiratory system.
In Fig. 1–1 you see the urinary system, which consists
of the kidneys, ureters, urinary bladder, and urethra.
These organs all contribute to the formation and
elimination of urine.
As a starting point, Table 1–1 lists the organ sys-
tems of the human body with their general functions,
and some representative organs, and Fig. 1–2 depicts
6
Organization and General Plan of the Body
BOX 1–1
REPLACING TISSUES AND ORGANS
eventually be used to cover a large surface. Other
cells grown in culture include cartilage, bone, pan-
creas, and liver. Much research is being done on
liver implants (not transplants), clusters of func-
tional liver cells grown in a lab. Such implants
would reduce or eliminate the need for human
donors. Tissue engineering is also being used to cre-
ate arteries and urinary bladders.
Many artiﬁcial replacement parts have also been
developed. These are made of plastic or metal and
are not rejected as foreign by the recipient’s
immune system. Damaged heart valves, for exam-
ple, may be replaced by artiﬁcial ones, and sections
of arteries may be replaced by tubular grafts made
of synthetic materials. Artiﬁcial joints are available
for every joint in the body, as is artiﬁcial bone for
reconstructive surgery. Cochlear implants are tiny
instruments that convert sound waves to electrical
impulses the brain can learn to interpret, and have
provided some sense of hearing for people with cer-
tain types of deafness. Work is also progressing on
the use of a featherweight computer chip as an arti-
ﬁcial retina, on devices that help damaged hearts
pump blood more efficiently, and on small, self-
contained artiﬁcial hearts.
Blood transfusions are probably the most familiar
and frequent form of “replacement parts” for peo-
ple. Blood is a tissue, and when properly typed and
cross-matched (blood types will be discussed in
Chapter 11) may safely be given to someone with
the same or a compatible blood type.
Organs, however, are much more complex struc-
tures. When a patient receives an organ transplant,
there is always the possibility of rejection (destruc-
tion) of the organ by the recipient’s immune sys-
tem (Chapter 14). With the discovery and use of
more effective immune-suppressing medications,
however, the success rate for many types of organ
transplants has increased. Organs that may be trans-
planted include corneas, kidneys, the heart, the
liver, and the lungs.
The skin is also an organ, but skin transplanted
from another person will not survive very long.
Several kinds of artiﬁcial skin are now available to
temporarily cover large areas of damaged skin.
Patients with severe burns, for example, will even-
tually need skin grafts from their own unburned
skin to form permanent new skin over the burn
sites. It is possible to “grow” a patient’s skin in lab-
oratory culture, so that a small patch of skin may
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

all of the organ systems. Some organs are part of two
organ systems; the pancreas, for example, is both a
digestive and an endocrine organ, and the diaphragm
is part of both the muscular and respiratory systems.
All of the organ systems make up an individual person.
The balance of this text discusses each system in more
detail.
METABOLISM AND HOMEOSTASIS
Metabolism is a collective noun; it is all of the chem-
ical reactions and physical processes that take place
within the body. Metabolism includes growing, repair-
ing, reacting, and reproducing—all the characteristics
of life. The pumping of the heart, the digestion of
food in the stomach, the diffusion of gases in the lungs
and tissues, and the production of energy in each cell
of the body are just a few of the thousands of aspects
of metabolism. Metabolism comes from a Greek word
meaning “change,” and the body is always changing in
visible ways (walking down the street), microscopic
ways (cells dividing in the skin to produce new epider-
mis), and submicroscopic or molecular ways (RNA
and enzymes constructing new proteins). A related
concept, metabolic rate, is most often used to mean
the speed at which the body produces energy and heat,
or, put another way, energy production per unit of
time, such as 24 hours. Metabolic rate, therefore, is
one aspect of metabolism.
Organization and General Plan of the Body
7
Table 1–1
THE ORGAN SYSTEMS
System
Functions
Organs*
Integumentary
Skeletal
Muscular
Nervous
Endocrine
Circulatory
Lymphatic
Respiratory
Digestive
Urinary
Reproductive
*These are simply representative organs, not an all-inclusive list.
• Is a barrier to pathogens and chemicals
• Prevents excessive water loss
• Supports the body
• Protects internal organs and red bone marrow
• Provides a framework to be moved by muscles
• Moves the skeleton
• Produces heat
• Interprets sensory information
• Regulates body functions such as movement by means
of electrochemical impulses
• Regulates body functions such as growth and reproduc-
tion by means of hormones
• Regulates day-to-day metabolism by means of hormones
• Transports oxygen and nutrients to tissues and removes
waste products
• Returns tissue ﬂuid to the blood
• Destroys pathogens that enter the body and provides
immunity
• Exchanges oxygen and carbon dioxide between the air
and blood
• Changes food to simple chemicals that can be absorbed
and used by the body
• Removes waste products from the blood
• Regulates volume and pH of blood and tissue ﬂuid
• Produces eggs or sperm
• In women, provides a site for the developing
embryo-fetus
skin, subcutaneous tissue
bones, ligaments
muscles, tendons
brain, nerves, eyes, ears
thyroid gland, pituitary
gland, pancreas
heart, blood, arteries
spleen, lymph nodes
lungs, trachea, larynx,
diaphragm
stomach, colon, liver,
pancreas
kidneys, urinary bladder,
urethra
Female: ovaries, uterus
Male: testes, prostate gland
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Circulatory system
Skeletal
system
Integumentary
system
Muscular
system
Nervous
system
Figure 1–2.
Organ systems. Compare the depiction of each system to its description in
Table 1–1.
QUESTION: Name at least one organ shown in each system.
8
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Respiratory
system
Urinary system
Endocrine system
Digestive
system
Lymphatic system
Reproductive system
Figure 1–2.
(Continued)
9
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

A person who is in good health may be said to be in
a state of homeostasis. Homeostasis reﬂects the abil-
ity of the body to maintain a relatively stable metabo-
lism and to function normally despite many constant
changes. The changes that are part of normal metab-
olism may be internal or external, and the body must
respond appropriately.
Eating breakfast, for example, brings about an
internal change. Suddenly there is food in the stom-
ach, and something must be done with it. What hap-
pens? The food is digested or broken down into
simple chemicals that the body can use. The protein in
a hard-boiled egg is digested into amino acids, its basic
chemical building blocks; these amino acids can then
be used by the cells of the body to produce their own
specialized proteins.
An example of an external change is a rise in envi-
ronmental temperature. On a hot day, the body tem-
perature would also tend to rise. However, body
temperature must be kept within its normal range of
about 97 to 99F (36 to 38C) in order to support
normal functioning. What happens? One of the body’s
responses to the external temperature rise is to
increase sweating so that excess body heat can be lost
by the evaporation of sweat on the surface of the skin.
This response, however, may bring about an undesir-
able internal change, dehydration. What happens? As
body water decreases, we feel the sensation of thirst
and drink ﬂuids to replace the water lost in sweating.
Notice that when certain body responses occur, they
reverse the event that triggered them. In the preced-
ing example a rising body temperature stimulates
increased sweating, which lowers body temperature,
which in turn decreases sweating. Unnecessary sweat-
ing that would be wasteful of water is prevented. This
is an example of a negative feedback mechanism, in
which the body’s response reverses the stimulus (in
effect, turning it off for a while) and keeps some aspect
of the body metabolism within its normal range.
Look at Fig. 1–3 for another negative feedback
mechanism, one in which the hormone thyroxine reg-
ulates the metabolic rate of the body. As metabolic
rate decreases, the hypothalamus (part of the brain)
and pituitary gland detect this decrease and secrete
hormones to stimulate the thyroid gland (on the front
of the neck just below the larynx) to secrete the hor-
mone thyroxine. Thyroxine stimulates the cellular
enzyme systems that produce energy from food, which
increases the metabolic rate. The rise in energy and
heat production is detected by the brain and pituitary
gland. They then decrease secretion of their hor-
mones, which in turn inhibits any further secretion of
thyroxine until the metabolic rate decreases again.
Metabolic rate does rise and fall, but is kept within
normal limits.
You may be wondering if there is such a thing as a
positive feedback mechanism. There is, but they are
rare in the body and quite different from a negative
feedback mechanism. In a positive feedback mecha-
nism, the response to the stimulus does not stop or
reverse the stimulus, but instead keeps the sequence of
events going. A good example is childbirth, in which
the sequence of events, simply stated, is as follows:
Stretching of the uterine cervix stimulates secretion of
the hormone oxytocin by the posterior pituitary gland.
Oxytocin stimulates contraction of the uterine muscle,
which causes more stretching, which stimulates more
oxytocin and, hence, more contractions. The mecha-
nism stops with the delivery of the baby and the pla-
centa. This is the “brake,” the interrupting event.
Any positive feedback mechanism requires an
external “brake,” something to interrupt it. Blood
clotting is such a mechanism, and without external
controls, clotting may become a vicious cycle of clot-
ting and more clotting, doing far more harm than
good (discussed in Chapter 11). Inﬂammation follow-
ing an injury is beneﬁcial and necessary for repair to
begin, but the process may evolve into a cycle of dam-
age and more damage. The rise of a fever may also
trigger a positive feedback mechanism. Notice in Fig.
1–3 that bacteria have affected the body’s thermostat
in the hypothalamus and caused a fever. The rising
body temperature increases the metabolic rate, which
increases body temperature even more, becoming a
cycle. Where is the inhibition, the brake? For this
infection, the brake is white blood cells destroying the
bacteria that caused the fever. An interruption from
outside the cycle is necessary. It is for this reason,
because positive feedback mechanisms have the poten-
tial to be self-perpetuating and cause harm, that they
are rare in the body.
Negative feedback mechanisms, however, contain
their own brakes in that inhibition is a natural part of
the cycle, and the body has many of them. The secre-
tion of most hormones (Chapter 10) is regulated by
negative feedback mechanisms. The regulation of
heart rate (Chapter 12) and blood pressure (Chapter
13) involves several negative feedback mechanisms.
10
Organization and General Plan of the Body
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The result of all of these mechanisms working to-
gether is that all aspects of body functioning, that is, of
metabolism, are kept within normal limits, a steady
state or equilibrium. This is homeostasis.
In the chapters to come, you will ﬁnd many more
examples of homeostasis. As you continue your study
of the human body, keep in mind that the proper func-
tioning of each organ and organ system contributes to
homeostasis. Keep in mind as well that what we call
the normal values of metabolism are often ranges, not
single numbers. Recall that normal body temperature
is a range: 97 to 99F (36 to 38C). Normal pulse
Organization and General Plan of the Body
11
Cells decrease
energy
production
Metabolic
rate
decreases
Bacteria
White blood cells
Hypothalamus
Heat gain
mechanisms
Key:
Stimulates
Inhibits
Leads to
Cells increase
heat
production
Fever
Metabolic
rate
increases
Cells increase
energy
production
Thyroid gland
Thyroxine
increases
Stimulates
thyroid
gland
Thyroxine
decreases
Thyroid gland
No longer
stimulates
thyroid gland
Metabolic
rate
increases
Hypothalamus
and pituitary gland
A
B
Hypothalamus
and pituitary gland
Figure 1–3.
Feedback mechanisms. (A) The negative feedback mechanism of regulation
of metabolic rate by thyroxine. (B) The positive feedback mechanism triggered by a fever.
See text for description.
QUESTION: For each mechanism, where is the source of the “brake” or inhibition?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

rate, another example, is 60 to 80 beats per minute; a
normal respiratory rate is 12 to 20 breaths per minute.
Variations within the normal range are part of normal
metabolism.
TERMINOLOGY AND GENERAL
PLAN OF THE BODY
As part of your course in anatomy and physiology,
you will learn many new words or terms. At times you
may feel that you are learning a second language, and
indeed you are. Each term has a precise meaning,
which is understood by everyone else who has learned
the language. Mastering the terminology of your pro-
fession is essential to enable you to communicate effec-
tively with your coworkers and your future patients.
Although the number of new terms may seem a bit
overwhelming at ﬁrst, you will ﬁnd that their use soon
becomes second nature to you.
The terminology presented in this chapter will be
used throughout the text in the discussion of the organ
systems. This will help to reinforce the meanings of
these terms and will transform these new words into
knowledge.
BODY PARTS AND AREAS
Each of the terms listed in Table 1–2 and shown in
Fig. 1–4 refers to a speciﬁc part or area of the body.
For example, the term femoral always refers to the
thigh. The femoral artery is a blood vessel that passes
through the thigh, and the quadriceps femoris is a
large muscle group of the thigh.
Another example is pulmonary, which always refers
to the lungs, as in pulmonary artery, pulmonary edema,
and pulmonary embolism. Although you may not
know the exact meaning of each of these terms now,
you do know that each has something to do with the
lungs.
TERMS OF LOCATION AND POSITION
When describing relative locations, the body is always
assumed to be in anatomic position: standing upright
facing forward, arms at the sides with palms forward,
and the feet slightly apart. The terms of location are
listed in Table 1–3, with a deﬁnition and example for
each. As you read each term, ﬁnd the body parts used
as examples in Figs. 1–4 and 1–5. Notice also that
these are pairs of terms and that each pair is a set of
opposites. This will help you recall the terms and their
meanings.
BODY CAVITIES AND
THEIR MEMBRANES
The body has two major cavities: the dorsal cavity
(posterior) and the ventral cavity (anterior). Each of
these cavities has further subdivisions, which are
shown in Fig. 1–5.
12
Organization and General Plan of the Body
Table 1–2
DESCRIPTIVE TERMS FOR
BODY PARTS AND AREAS
Term
Deﬁnition (Refers to)
Antebrachial
forearm
Antecubital
front of elbow
Axillary
armpit
Brachial
upper arm
Buccal (oral)
mouth
Cardiac
heart
Cervical
neck
Cranial
head
Cutaneous
skin
Deltoid
shoulder
Femoral
thigh
Frontal
forehead
Gastric
stomach
Gluteal
buttocks
Hepatic
liver
Iliac
hip
Inguinal
groin
Lumbar
small of back
Mammary
breast
Nasal
nose
Occipital
back of head
Orbital
eye
Parietal
crown of head
Patellar
kneecap
Pectoral
chest
Pedal
foot
Perineal
pelvic ﬂoor
Plantar
sole of foot
Popliteal
back of knee
Pulmonary
lungs
Renal
kidney
Sacral
base of spine
Scapular
shoulder blade
Sternal
breastbone
Temporal
side of head
Umbilical
navel
Volar (palmar)
palm
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Dorsal Cavity
The dorsal cavity contains the central nervous system,
and consists of the cranial cavity and the vertebral or
spinal cavity. The dorsal cavity is a continuous one;
that is, no wall or boundary separates its subdivisions.
The cranial cavity is formed by the skull and contains
the brain. The spinal cavity is formed by the backbone
(spine) and contains the spinal cord. The membranes
that line these cavities and cover the brain and spinal
cord are called the meninges.
Ventral Cavity
The ventral cavity consists of two compartments, the
thoracic cavity and the abdominal cavity, which are
separated by the diaphragm. The diaphragm is a large,
dome-shaped respiratory muscle. It has openings for
the esophagus and for large blood vessels, but other-
wise is a wall between the thoracic and abdominal cav-
ities. The pelvic cavity may be considered a
subdivision of the abdominal cavity (there is no wall
between them) or as a separate cavity.
Organization and General Plan of the Body
13
Body Parts and Areas
Anatomic position
Cranial
Orbital
Nasal
Buccal
Axillary
Umbilical
Volar
Patellar
Plantar
Popliteal
Femoral
Inguinal
Iliac
Brachial
Mammary
Pectoral
Deltoid
Cervical
Parietal
Occipital
Lumbar
Sacral
Gluteal
Perineal
B
A
Frontal
Temporal
Sternal
Antecubital
Antebrachial
Pedal
Scapular
Figure 1–4.
Body parts and areas. The body is shown in anatomic position. (A) Anterior
view. (B) Posterior view. (Compare with Table 1–2.)
QUESTION: Name a body area that contains a bone with a similar name. Can you name
two more?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Cranial cavity
Foramen magnum
Spinal cavity
Dorsal
cavity
Sacral promontory
Symphysis pubis
Pelvic cavity
Abdominal cavity
Diaphragm
Thoracic cavity
Ventral
cavity
Figure 1–5.
Body cavities (lateral view
from the left side).
QUESTION: Which of these cavities are
surrounded by bone?
Table 1–3
TERMS OF LOCATION AND POSITION
Term
Deﬁnition
Example
Superior
Inferior
Anterior
Posterior
Ventral
Dorsal
Medial
Lateral
Internal
External
Superﬁcial
Deep
Central
Peripheral
Proximal
Distal
Parietal
Visceral
above, or higher
below, or lower
toward the front
toward the back
toward the front
toward the back
toward the midline
away from the midline
within, or interior to
outside, or exterior to
toward the surface
within, or interior to
the main part
extending from the main part
closer to the origin
farther from the origin
pertaining to the wall of a cavity
pertaining to the organs within a cavity
The heart is superior to the liver.
The liver is inferior to the lungs.
The chest is on the anterior side of the body.
The lumbar area is posterior to the umbilical area.
The mammary area is on the ventral side of the body.
The buttocks are on the dorsal side of the body.
The heart is medial to the lungs.
The shoulders are lateral to the neck.
The brain is internal to the skull.
The ribs are external to the lungs.
The skin is the most superﬁcial organ.
The deep veins of the legs are surrounded by muscles.
The brain is part of the central nervous system.
Nerves in the arm are part of the peripheral nervous system.
The knee is proximal to the foot.
The palm is distal to the elbow.
The parietal pleura lines the chest cavity.
The visceral pleura covers the lungs.
14
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Organization and General Plan of the Body
15
Organs in the thoracic cavity include the heart and
lungs. The membranes of the thoracic cavity are
serous membranes called the pleural membranes.
The parietal pleura lines the chest wall, and the vis-
ceral pleura covers the lungs. The heart has its own set
of serous membranes called the pericardial mem-
branes. The parietal pericardium lines the ﬁbrous
pericardial sac, and the visceral pericardium covers the
heart muscle.
Organs in the abdominal cavity include the liver,
stomach, and intestines. The membranes of the
abdominal cavity are also serous membranes called the
peritoneum and mesentery. The peritoneum is the
membrane that lines the entire abdominal wall, and
the mesentery is the continuation of this membrane,
folded around and covering the outer surfaces of the
abdominal organs.
The pelvic cavity is inferior to the abdominal cav-
ity. Although the peritoneum does not line the pelvic
cavity, it covers the free surfaces of several pelvic
organs. Within the pelvic cavity are the urinary blad-
der and reproductive organs such as the uterus in
women and the prostate gland in men.
PLANES AND SECTIONS
When internal anatomy is described, the body or an
organ is often cut or sectioned in a speciﬁc way so as
to make particular structures easily visible. A plane is
an imaginary ﬂat surface that separates two portions of
-
A
B
Figure 1–6.
(A) Planes and sections of the body. (B) Cross-section and longitudinal sec-
tion of the small intestine.
QUESTION: What other organs would have sections that look like those of the small intes-
tine?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

16
Organization and General Plan of the Body
Stomach
Pancreas
Colon
Spleen
Aorta
Left kidney
Vertebra
Spinal cord
Liver
Gallbladder
Duodenum
Ribs
Inferior vena cava
Right kidney
Muscle
Back
Front
C
Figure 1–6.
(Continued) (C) Transverse section through the upper abdomen.
the body or an organ. These planes and sections are
shown in Fig. 1–6 (see Box 1–2: Visualizing the
Interior of the Body).
Frontal (coronal) section—a plane from side to side
separates the body into front and back portions.
Sagittal section—a plane from front to back separates
the body into right and left portions. A midsagittal
section creates equal right and left halves.
Transverse section—a horizontal plane separates the
body into upper and lower portions.
Cross-section—a plane perpendicular to the long
axis of an organ. A cross-section of the small intes-
tine (which is a tube) would look like a circle with
the cavity of the intestine in the center.
Longitudinal section—a plane along the long axis of
an organ. A longitudinal section of the intestine is
shown in Fig. 1–6, and a frontal section of the
femur (thigh bone) would also be a longitudinal
section (see Fig. 6–1 in Chapter 6).
AREAS OF THE ABDOMEN
The abdomen is a large area of the lower trunk of the
body. If a patient reported abdominal pain, the physi-
cian or nurse would want to know more precisely
where the pain was. To determine this, the abdomen
may be divided into smaller regions or areas, which
are shown in Fig. 1–7.
Quadrants—a transverse plane and a midsagittal
plane that cross at the umbilicus will divide the
abdomen into four quadrants. Clinically, this is
probably the division used more frequently. The
pain of gallstones might then be described as in the
right upper quadrant.
Nine areas—two transverse planes and two sagittal
planes divide the abdomen into nine areas:
Upper areas—above the level of the rib cartilages are
the left hypochondriac, epigastric, and right
hypochondriac.
Middle areas—the left lumbar, umbilical, and right
lumbar.
Lower areas—below the level of the top of the pelvic
bone are the left iliac, hypogastric, and right
iliac.
These divisions are often used in anatomic studies
to describe the location of organs. The liver, for exam-
ple, is located in the epigastric and right hypochon-
driac areas.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Organization and General Plan of the Body
17
SUMMARY
As you will see, the terminology presented in this
chapter is used throughout the text to describe the
anatomy of organs and the names of their parts. All
organs of the body contribute to homeostasis, the
healthy state of the body that is maintained by con-
stant and appropriate responses to internal and exter-
nal changes. In the chapters that follow, you will ﬁnd
detailed descriptions of the physiology of each organ
and organ system, and how the metabolism of each is
necessary to homeostasis. We will now return to a
consideration of the structural organization of the
body and to more extensive descriptions of its levels of
organization. The ﬁrst of these, the chemical level, is
the subject of the next chapter.
A
B
Figure 1–7.
Areas of the abdomen. (A) Four quadrants. (B) Nine regions.
QUESTION: Are there any organs found in all four abdominal quadrants?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Introduction
1. Anatomy—the study of structure.
2. Physiology—the study of function.
3. Pathophysiology—the study of disorders of func-
tioning.
Levels of Organization
1. Chemical—inorganic and organic chemicals make
up all matter, both living and non-living.
2. Cells—the smallest living units of the body.
18
Organization and General Plan of the Body
STUDY OUTLINE
BOX 1–2
VISUALIZING THE INTERIOR OF THE BODY
A
B
C
Box Figure 1–A
Imaging techniques. (A) CT scan of eye in lateral view showing a tumor (arrow)
below the optic nerve. (B) MRI of midsagittal section of head (compare with Figs. 8–6 and 15–1).
(C) PET scan of brain in transverse section (frontal lobes at top) showing glucose metabolism. (From
Mazziotta, JC, and Gilman, S: Clinical Brain Imaging: Principles and Applications. FA Davis,
Philadelphia, 1992, pp 27 and 298, with permission.)
In the past, the need for exploratory surgery
brought with it hospitalization, risk of infection, and
discomfort and pain for the patient. Today, how-
ever, several technologies and the extensive use of
computers permit us to see the interior of the body
without surgery.
Computed tomography (CT) scanning uses a
narrowly focused x-ray beam that circles rapidly
around the body. A detector then measures how
much radiation passes through different tissues,
and a computer constructs an image of a thin
slice through the body. Several images may be
made at different levels—each takes only a few
seconds—to provide a more complete picture of
an organ or part of the body. The images are
much more detailed than are those produced by
conventional x-rays.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is another
diagnostic tool that is especially useful for visual-
izing soft tissues, including the brain and spinal
cord. Recent reﬁnements have produced images
of individual nerve bundles, which had not been
possible using any other technique. The patient
is placed inside a strong magnetic ﬁeld, and the
tissues are pulsed with radio waves. Because
each tissue has different proportions of various
atoms, which resonate or respond differently,
each tissue emits a characteristic signal. A com-
puter then translates these signals into an image;
the entire procedure takes 30 to 45 minutes.
Positron emission tomography (PET) scanning
creates images that depict the rates of physio-
logical processes such as blood ﬂow, oxygen
usage, or glucose metabolism. The comparative
rates are depicted by colors: Red represents the
highest rate, followed by yellow, then green, and
ﬁnally blue representing the lowest rate.
One drawback of these technologies is their cost;
they are expensive. However, the beneﬁts to
patients are great: Highly detailed images of the
body are obtained without the risks of surgery and
with virtually no discomfort in the procedures them-
selves.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

3. Tissues—groups of cells with similar structure and
function.
4. Organs—groups of tissues that contribute to spe-
ciﬁc functions.
5. Organ systems—groups of organs that work
together to perform speciﬁc functions (see Table
1–1 and Fig. 1–2).
6. Person—all the organ systems functioning prop-
erly.
Metabolism and Homeostasis
1. Metabolism is the sum of all of the chemical and
physical changes that take place in the body.
Metabolic rate is the amount of energy and heat
production per unit of time.
2. Homeostasis is a state of good health maintained
by the normal metabolism (functioning) of the
organ systems.
3. The body constantly responds to internal and
external changes, yet remains stable; its many
aspects of metabolism are kept within normal lim-
its (usually a range of values, not a single value).
4. Negative feedback mechanism—a control system
in which a stimulus initiates a response that
reverses or reduces the stimulus, thereby stopping
the response until the stimulus occurs again and
there is a need for the response (see Fig. 1–3).
5. Positive feedback mechanism—a control system
that requires an external interruption or brake. Has
the potential to become a self-perpetuating and
harmful cycle, therefore is rare in the body (see Fig.
1–3).
Terminology and General Plan of the Body
1. Body parts and areas—see Table 1–2 and Fig. 1–4.
2. Terms of location and position—used to describe
relationships of position (see Table 1–3 and Figs.
1–4 and 1–5).
3. Body cavities and their membranes (see Fig. 1–5).
• Dorsal cavity—lined with membranes called
meninges; consists of the cranial and vertebral
cavities.
• Cranial cavity contains the brain.
• Vertebral cavity contains the spinal cord.
• Ventral cavity—the diaphragm separates the tho-
racic and abdominal cavities; the pelvic cavity is
inferior to the abdominal cavity.
• Thoracic cavity—contains the lungs and heart.
— Pleural membranes line the chest wall and
cover the lungs.
— Pericardial membranes surround the
heart.
• Abdominal cavity—contains many organs
including the stomach, liver, and intestines.
— The peritoneum lines the abdominal cav-
ity; the mesentery covers the abdominal
organs.
• Pelvic cavity—contains the urinary bladder
and reproductive organs.
4. Planes and sections—cutting the body or an organ
in a speciﬁc way (see Fig. 1–6).
• Frontal or coronal—separates front and back
parts.
• Sagittal—separates right and left parts.
• Transverse—separates upper and lower parts.
• Cross—a section perpendicular to the long axis.
• Longitudinal—a section along the long axis.
5. Areas of the abdomen—permits easier description
of locations:
• Quadrants—see Fig. 1–7.
• Nine areas—see Fig. 1–7.
Organization and General Plan of the Body
19
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Explain how the physiology of a bone is related to
its anatomy. Explain how the physiology of the
hand is related to its anatomy. (p. 4)
2. Describe anatomic position. Why is this knowl-
edge important? (p. 12)
3. Name the organ system with each of the following
functions: (p. 7)
a. Moves the skeleton
b. Regulates body functions by means of hormones
c. Covers the body and prevents entry of
pathogens
d. Destroys pathogens that enter the body
e. Exchanges oxygen and carbon dioxide between
the air and blood
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

1. The human foot is similar to the human hand, but
does have anatomic differences. Describe two of
these differences, and explain how they are related
to the physiology of the hand and the foot.
2. Complete each statement using the everyday term
for the body part.
a. The distal femoral area is immediately superior
to the ____.
b. The proximal brachial area is immediately infe-
rior to the ____.
c. The patellar area is directly proximal to the
____.
d. The volar area is directly distal to the ____.
3. Name a structure or organ that is both superior and
inferior to the brain. Name one that is both ante-
rior and posterior.
4. If a person has appendicitis (inﬂammation of the
appendix caused by bacteria), pain is felt in which
abdominal quadrant? (If you’re not sure, take a
look at Fig. 16–1 in Chapter 16.) Surgery is usually
necessary to remove an inﬂamed appendix before it
ruptures and causes peritonitis. Using your knowl-
edge of the location of the peritoneum, explain why
peritonitis is a very serious condition.
5. Keep in mind your answer to Question 4, and
explain why bacterial meningitis can be a very seri-
ous infection.
6. Use a mental picture to cut the following sections.
Then describe in simple words what each section
looks like, and give each a proper anatomic name.
First: a tree trunk cut top to bottom, then cut side
to side.
Second: a grapefruit cut top to bottom (straight
down from where the stem was attached), then
sliced through its equator.
20
Organization and General Plan of the Body
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
4. Name the two major body cavities and their subdi-
visions. Name the cavity lined by the peritoneum,
meninges, and parietal pleura. (pp. 13, 15)
5. Name the four quadrants of the abdomen. Name at
least one organ in each quadrant. (p. 17)
6. Name the section through the body that would
result in each of the following: equal right and left
halves, anterior and posterior parts, superior and
inferior parts. (pp. 15–16)
7. Review Table 1–2, and try to ﬁnd each external area
on your own body. (pp. 12–13)
8. Deﬁne cell. When similar cells work together, what
name are they given? (p. 4)
9. Deﬁne organ. When a group of organs works
together, what name is it given? (p. 6)
10. Define metabolism, metabolic rate, and ho-
meostasis. (pp. 7, 10)
a. Give an example of an external change and
explain how the body responds to maintain
homeostasis
b. Give an example of an internal change and
explain how the body responds to maintain
homeostasis
c. Brieﬂy explain how a negative feedback mech-
anism works, and how a positive feedback
mechanism differs
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CHAPTER 2
Some Basic Chemistry
21
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CHAPTER 2
Chapter Outline
Elements
Atoms
Chemical Bonds
Ionic Bonds
Covalent Bonds
Disulﬁde Bonds and Hydrogen Bonds
Chemical Reactions
Inorganic Compounds of Importance
Water
Water Compartments
Oxygen
Carbon Dioxide
Cell Respiration
Trace Elements
Acids, Bases, and pH
Buffer systems
Organic Compounds of Importance
Carbohydrates
Lipids
Proteins
Enzymes
Nucleic Acids
DNA and RNA
ATP
BOX 2–1
BLOOD GASES
BOX 2–2
NITRIC OXIDE
BOX 2–3
LIPIDS IN THE BLOOD
BOX 2–4
A PROTEIN MYSTERY: PRIONS
Student Objectives
• Deﬁne the terms element, atom, proton, neutron, and
electron.
• Describe the formation and purpose of ionic
bonds, covalent bonds, disulﬁde bonds, and hydro-
gen bonds.
• Describe what happens in synthesis and decompo-
sition reactions.
• Explain the importance of water to the function-
ing of the human body.
• Name and describe the water compartments.
• Explain the roles of oxygen and carbon dioxide in
cell respiration.
• State what trace elements are, and name some,
with their functions.
• Explain the pH scale. State the normal pH ranges
of body ﬂuids.
• Explain how a buffer system limits great changes
in pH.
• Describe the functions of monosaccharides, disac-
charides, oligosaccharides, and polysaccharides.
• Describe the functions of true fats, phospholipids,
and steroids.
• Describe the functions of proteins, and explain
how enzymes function as catalysts.
• Describe the functions of DNA, RNA, and ATP.
22
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Some Basic Chemistry
23
New Terminology
Acid (ASS-sid)
Amino acid (ah-MEE-noh ASS-sid)
Atom (A-tum)
Base (BAYSE)
Buffer system (BUFF-er SIS-tem)
Carbohydrates (KAR-boh-HIGH-drayts)
Catalyst (KAT-ah-list)
Cell respiration (SELL RES-pi-RAY-shun)
Covalent bond (ko-VAY-lent)
Dissociation/ionization (dih-SEW-see-AY-
shun/EYE-uh-nih-ZAY-shun)
Element (EL-uh-ment)
Enzyme (EN-zime)
Extracellular ﬂuid (EKS-trah-SELL-yoo-ler)
Intracellular ﬂuid (IN-trah-SELL-yoo-ler)
Ion (EYE-on)
Ionic bond (eye-ON-ik)
Lipids (LIP-ids)
Matter (MAT-ter)
Molecule (MAHL-e-kuhl)
Nucleic acids (new-KLEE-ik ASS-sids)
pH and pH scale (pee-h SKALE)
Protein (PROH-teen)
Salt (SAWLT)
Solvent/solution (SAHL-vent/suh-LOO-shun)
Steroid (STEER-oyd)
Trace elements (TRAYSE EL-uh-ments)
Related Clinical Terminology
Acidosis (ASS-i-DOH-sis)
Atherosclerosis (ATH-er-oh-skle-ROH-sis)
Hypoxia (high-POK-see-ah)
Saturated fats (SAT-uhr-ay-ted)
Unsaturated (un-SAT-uhr-ay-ted) fats
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

When you hear or see the word chemistry, you may
think of test tubes and Bunsen burners in a laboratory
experiment. However, literally everything in our phys-
ical world is made of chemicals. The paper used for
this book, which was once the wood of a tree, is made
of chemicals. The air we breathe is a mixture of chem-
icals in the form of gases. Water, gasoline, and diet
soda are chemicals in liquid form. Our foods are
chemicals, and our bodies are complex arrangements
of thousands of chemicals. Recall from Chapter 1 that
the simplest level of organization of the body is the
chemical level.
This chapter covers some very basic aspects of
chemistry as they are related to living organisms, and
most especially as they are related to our understand-
ing of the human body. So try to think of chemistry
not as a complicated science, but as the air, water, and
food we need, and every substance that is part of us.
ELEMENTS
All matter, both living and not living, is made of ele-
ments, the simplest chemicals. An element is a sub-
stance made of only one type of atom (therefore, an
atom is the smallest part of an element). There are 92
naturally occurring elements in the world around us.
Examples are hydrogen (H), iron (Fe), oxygen (O),
calcium (Ca), nitrogen (N), and carbon (C). In nature,
an element does not usually exist by itself but rather
combines with the atoms of other elements to form
compounds. Examples of some compounds important
to our study of the human body are water (H2O), in
which two atoms of hydrogen combine with one atom
of oxygen; carbon dioxide (CO2), in which an atom of
carbon combines with two atoms of oxygen; and glu-
cose (C6H12O6), in which six carbon atoms and six
oxygen atoms combine with 12 hydrogen atoms.
The elements carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen,
phosphorus, and sulfur are found in all living things. If
calcium is included, these seven elements make up
approximately 99% of the human body (weight).
More than 20 different elements are found, in vary-
ing amounts, in the human body. Some of these are
listed in Table 2–1. As you can see, each element has a
standard chemical symbol. This is simply the ﬁrst (and
sometimes the second) letter of the element’s English
or Latin name. You should know the symbols of the
elements in this table, because they are used in text-
24
Some Basic Chemistry
Table 2–1 ELEMENTS IN THE
HUMAN BODY
Percent of
Atomic
the Body
Elements
Symbol
Number*
by Weight
Hydrogen
H
1
9.5
Carbon
C
6
18.5
Nitrogen
N
7
3.3
Oxygen
O
8
65.0
Fluorine
F
9
Trace
Sodium
Na
11
0.2
Magnesium
Mg
12
0.1
Phosphorus
P
15
1.0
Sulfur
S
16
0.3
Chlorine
Cl
17
0.2
Potassium
K
19
0.4
Calcium
Ca
20
1.5
Manganese
Mn
25
Trace
Iron
Fe
26
Trace
Cobalt
Co
27
Trace
Copper
Cu
29
Trace
Zinc
Zn
30
Trace
Iodine
I
53
Trace
*Atomic number is the number of protons in the nucleus of
the atom. It also represents the number of electrons that
orbit the nucleus.
books, articles, hospital lab reports, and so on. Notice
that if a two-letter symbol is used for an element, the
second letter is always lowercase, not a capital. For
example, the symbol for calcium is Ca, not CA. CA is
an abbreviation often used for cancer.
ATOMS
Atoms are the smallest parts of an element that have
the characteristics of that element. An atom consists of
three major subunits or particles: protons, neutrons,
and electrons (Fig. 2–1). A proton has a positive elec-
trical charge and is found in the nucleus (or center) of
the atom. A neutron is electrically neutral (has no
charge) and is also found in the nucleus. An electron
has a negative electrical charge and is found outside
the nucleus orbiting in what may be called an electron
cloud or shell around the nucleus.
The number of protons in an atom gives it its
atomic number. Protons and neutrons have mass and
weight; they give an atom its atomic weight. In an
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

atom, the number of protons () equals the number of
electrons (); therefore, an atom is electrically neu-
tral. The electrons, however, are important in that
they may enable an atom to connect, or bond, to other
atoms to form molecules. A molecule is a combina-
tion of atoms (usually of more than one element) that
are so tightly bound together that the molecule
behaves as a single unit.
Each atom is capable of bonding in only very spe-
ciﬁc ways. This capability depends on the number and
the arrangement of the electrons of the atom.
Electrons orbit the nucleus of an atom in shells or
energy levels. The ﬁrst, or innermost, energy level
can contain a maximum of two electrons and is then
considered stable. The second energy level is stable
when it contains its maximum of eight electrons. The
remaining energy levels, more distant from the
nucleus, are also most stable when they contain eight
electrons, or a multiple of eight.
A few atoms (elements) are naturally stable, or
uninterested in reacting, because their outermost
energy level already contains the maximum number of
electrons. The gases helium and neon are examples of
these stable atoms, which do not usually react with
other atoms. Most atoms are not stable, however, and
tend to gain, lose, or share electrons in order to ﬁll
their outermost shell. By doing so, an atom is capable
of forming one or more chemical bonds with other
atoms. In this way, the atom becomes stable, because
its outermost shell of electrons has been ﬁlled. It is
these reactive atoms that are of interest in our study of
anatomy and physiology.
CHEMICAL BONDS
A chemical bond is not a structure, but rather a force
or attraction between positive and negative electrical
charges that keeps two or more atoms closely associ-
ated with each other to form a molecule. By way of
comparison, think of gravity. We know that gravity is
not a “thing,” but rather the force that keeps our feet
on the ﬂoor and allows us to pour coffee with consis-
tent success. Molecules formed by chemical bonding
often have physical characteristics different from those
of the atoms of the original elements. For example,
the elements hydrogen and oxygen are gases, but
atoms of each may chemically bond to form molecules
of water, which is a liquid.
The type of chemical bonding depends upon the
tendencies of the electrons of atoms involved, as you
will see. Four kinds of bonds are very important to the
chemistry of the body: ionic bonds, covalent bonds,
disulﬁde bonds, and hydrogen bonds.
IONIC BONDS
An ionic bond involves the loss of one or more elec-
trons by one atom and the gain of the electron(s) by
another atom or atoms. Refer to Fig. 2–2 as you read
the following.
An atom of sodium (Na) has one electron in its out-
ermost shell, and in order to become stable, it tends to
lose that electron. When it does so, the sodium atom
has one more proton than it has electrons. Therefore,
it now has an electrical charge (or valence) of 1 and
is called a sodium ion (Na). An atom of chlorine has
seven electrons in its outermost shell, and in order to
become stable tends to gain one electron. When it
does so, the chlorine atom has one more electron than
it has protons, and now has a charge (valence) of 1.
It is called a chloride ion (Cl).
When an atom of sodium loses an electron to an
atom of chlorine, their ions have unlike charges (pos-
itive and negative) and are thus attracted to one
another. The result is the formation of a molecule of
sodium chloride: NaCl, or common table salt. The
bond that holds these ions together is called an ionic
bond.
Some Basic Chemistry
25
Second energy level
First energy level
Proton [+]
Neutron
Nucleus
Electrons [--]
Figure 2–1.
An atom of carbon. The nucleus contains
six protons and six neutrons (not all are visible here). Six
electrons orbit the nucleus, two in the ﬁrst energy level
and four in the second energy level.
QUESTION: What is the electrical charge of this atom as
a whole?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Another example is the bonding of chlorine to cal-
cium. An atom of calcium has two electrons in its out-
ermost shell and tends to lose those electrons in order
to become stable. If two atoms of chlorine each gain
one of those electrons, they become chloride ions.
The positive and negative ions are then attracted to
one another, forming a molecule of calcium chloride,
CaCl2, which is also a salt. A salt is a molecule made
of ions other than hydrogen (H) ions or hydroxyl
(OH) ions.
Ions with positive charges are called cations. These
include Na, Ca2, K, Fe2, and Mg2. Ions with
negative charges are called anions, which include Cl,
SO4
2 (sulfate), and HCO3
 (bicarbonate). The types
of compounds formed by ionic bonding are salts,
acids, and bases. (Acids and bases are discussed later in
this chapter.)
In the solid state, ionic bonds are relatively strong.
Our bones, for example, contain the salt calcium car-
bonate (CaCO3), which helps give bone its strength.
However, in an aqueous (water) solution, many ionic
bonds are weakened. The bonds may become so weak
that the bound ions of a molecule separate, creating a
solution of free positive and negative ions. For exam-
ple, if sodium chloride is put in water, it dissolves, then
ionizes. The water now contains Na ions and Cl
ions. Ionization, also called dissociation, is important
to living organisms because once dissociated, the ions
are free to take part in other chemical reactions within
the body. Cells in the stomach lining produce
hydrochloric acid (HCl) and must have Cl ions to do
so. The chloride in NaCl would not be free to take
part in another reaction since it is tightly bound to the
sodium atom. However, the Cl ions available from
ionized NaCl in the cellular water can be used for the
synthesis, or chemical manufacture, of HCl in the
stomach.
COVALENT BONDS
Covalent bonds involve the sharing of electrons
between atoms. As shown in Fig. 2–3, an atom of oxy-
gen needs two electrons to become stable. It may
share two of its electrons with another atom of oxy-
gen, also sharing two electrons. Together they form a
molecule of oxygen gas (O2), which is the form in
which oxygen exists in the atmosphere.
An atom of oxygen may also share two of its elec-
trons with two atoms of hydrogen, each sharing its
single electron (see Fig. 2–3). Together they form a
molecule of water (H2O). When writing structural
formulas for chemical molecules, a pair of shared elec-
trons is indicated by a single line, as shown in the for-
mula for water; this is a single covalent bond. A double
covalent bond is indicated by two lines, as in the for-
mula for oxygen; this represents two pairs of shared
electrons.
The element carbon always forms covalent bonds;
an atom of carbon has four electrons to share with
other atoms. If these four electrons are shared with
four atoms of hydrogen, each sharing its one electron,
a molecule of methane gas (CH4) is formed. Carbon
may form covalent bonds with other carbons, hydro-
gen, oxygen, nitrogen, or other elements. Organic
26
Some Basic Chemistry
Na                      +                       Cl                      =                NaCl
                                                                                                     +
             –
                                                                                                                            
Figure 2–2.
Formation of an ionic bond. An atom of sodium loses an electron to an
atom of chlorine. The two ions formed have unlike charges, are attracted to one another,
and form a molecule of sodium chloride.
QUESTION: Why is the charge of a sodium ion 1?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

compounds such as proteins and carbohydrates are
complex and precise arrangements of these atoms
covalently bonded to one another. Covalent bonds are
relatively strong and are not weakened in an aqueous
solution. This is important because the proteins pro-
duced by the body, for example, must remain intact in
order to function properly in the water of our cells and
blood. The functions of organic compounds will be
considered later in this chapter.
DISULFIDE BONDS AND
HYDROGEN BONDS
Two other types of bonds that are important to
the chemistry of the body are disulﬁde bonds and
hydrogen bonds. Disulﬁde bonds are found in some
proteins. Hydrogen bonds are part of many different
molecules.
A disulﬁde bond (also called a disulﬁde bridge) is a
covalent bond formed between two atoms of sulfur,
usually within the same large protein molecule. The
hormone insulin, for example, is a protein that must
have a very speciﬁc three-dimensional shape in order
to function properly to regulate the blood glucose
level. Each molecule of insulin has two disulﬁde bonds
that help maintain its proper shape and function (see
Box Fig. 10–A). Other proteins with shapes that
depend upon disulﬁde bonds are antibodies of the
immune system (see Fig. 14–8) and keratin of the skin
and hair.
Some Basic Chemistry
27
Figure 2–3.
Formation of covalent bonds. (A) Two atoms of oxygen share two electrons
each, forming a molecule of oxygen gas. (B) An atom of oxygen shares one electron with
each of two hydrogen atoms, each sharing its electron. A molecule of water is formed.
QUESTION: Which of the bonds shown here is a double covalent bond?
O                 +                 O                   =                  O2
O=O
8+                +                 8+                 =                   8+                             8+
A
O              +              H+H          =           H2O                               O
                                                                                               H   H
8+               +                         =
1+
1+
1+
1+
8+
B
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

A strand of hair maintains its shape (a genetic char-
acteristic) because of disulﬁde bonds. When naturally
curly hair is straightened, the disulﬁde bonds in the
keratin molecules are broken. When naturally straight
hair is “permed” or curled, the disulﬁde bonds in the
keratin are ﬁrst broken, then re-formed in the curled
hair. Neither process affects the living part of the hair,
the hair root, so the hair will grow out in its original
shape. We would not want such a process affecting our
insulin or antibody molecules, for that would destroy
their functioning.
A hydrogen bond does not involve the sharing or
exchange of electrons, but rather results because of a
property of hydrogen atoms. When a hydrogen atom
shares its one electron in a covalent bond with another
atom, its proton has a slight positive charge and may
then be attracted to a nearby oxygen or nitrogen atom,
which has a slight negative charge.
Although they are weak bonds, hydrogen bonds are
important in several ways. Large organic molecules
such as proteins and DNA have very speciﬁc functions
that depend upon their three-dimensional shapes. The
shapes of these molecules, so crucial to their proper
functioning, are often maintained by hydrogen bonds.
Hydrogen bonds also make water cohesive; that is,
each water molecule is attracted to nearby water mol-
ecules. Such cohesiveness can be seen if water is
dropped onto clean glass; the surface tension created
by the hydrogen bonds makes the water form three-
dimensional beads. Within the body, the cohesiveness
of water helps keep blood a continuous stream as it
ﬂows within the blood vessels, and keeps tissue ﬂuid
continuous around cells. These hydrogen bonds are
also responsible for the other important characteris-
tics of water, which are discussed in a later section.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS
A chemical reaction is a change brought about by the
formation or breaking of chemical bonds. Two general
types of reactions are synthesis reactions and decom-
position reactions.
In a synthesis reaction, bonds are formed to join
two or more atoms or molecules to make a new com-
pound. The production of the protein hemoglobin in
potential red blood cells is an example of a synthesis
reaction. Proteins are synthesized by the bonding of
many amino acids, their smaller subunits. Synthesis
reactions require energy for the formation of bonds.
In a decomposition reaction, bonds are broken,
and a large molecule is changed to two or more
smaller ones. One example is the digestion of large
molecules of starch into many smaller glucose mole-
cules. Some decomposition reactions release energy;
this is described in a later section on cell respiration.
In this and future chapters, keep in mind that the
term reaction refers to the making or breaking of
chemical bonds and thus to changes in the physical
and chemical characteristics of the molecules
involved.
INORGANIC COMPOUNDS
OF IMPORTANCE
Inorganic compounds are usually simple molecules
that often consist of only one or two different ele-
ments. Despite their simplicity, however, some inor-
ganic compounds are essential to normal structure and
functioning of the body.
WATER
Water makes up 60% to 75% of the human body, and
is essential to life for several reasons:
1. Water is a solvent; that is, many substances (called
solutes) can dissolve in water. Nutrients such as
glucose are dissolved in blood plasma (which is
largely water) to be transported to cells throughout
the body. The sense of taste depends upon the sol-
vent ability of saliva; dissolved food stimulates the
receptors in taste buds. The excretion of waste
products is possible because they are dissolved in
the water of urine.
2. Water is a lubricant, which prevents friction where
surfaces meet and move. In the digestive tract,
swallowing depends upon the presence of saliva,
and mucus is a slippery ﬂuid that permits the
smooth passage of food through the intestines.
Synovial ﬂuid within joint cavities prevents friction
as bones move.
3. Water changes temperature slowly. Water has a high
heat capacity, which means that it will absorb a
great deal of heat before its temperature rises sig-
niﬁcantly, or it must lose a great deal of heat before
its temperature drops signiﬁcantly. This is one of
the factors that helps the body maintain a constant
temperature. Water also has a high heat of vapor-
ization, which is important for the process of
28
Some Basic Chemistry
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

sweating. Excess body heat evaporates sweat on the
skin surfaces, rather than overheating the body’s
cells, and because of water’s high heat of vaporiza-
tion, a great deal of heat can be given off with the
loss of a relatively small amount of water.
WATER COMPARTMENTS
All water within the body is continually moving, but
water is given different names when it is in speciﬁc
body locations, which are called compartments (Fig.
2–4).
Intracellular ﬂuid (ICF)—the water within cells;
about 65% of the total body water
Extracellular ﬂuid (ECF)—all the rest of the water
in the body; about 35% of the total. More speciﬁc
compartments of extracellular ﬂuid include:
Plasma—water found in blood vessels
Lymph—water found in lymphatic vessels
Tissue ﬂuid or interstitial ﬂuid—water found in
the small spaces between cells
Specialized ﬂuids—synovial ﬂuid, cerebrospinal
ﬂuid, aqueous humor in the eye, and others
The movement of water between compartments in
the body and the functions of the specialized ﬂuids
will be discussed in later chapters.
OXYGEN
Oxygen in the form of a gas (O2) is approximately
21% of the atmosphere, which we inhale. We all know
that without oxygen we wouldn’t survive very long,
but exactly what does it do? Oxygen is important to us
because it is essential for a process called cell respira-
tion, in which cells break down simple nutrients such
as glucose in order to release energy. The reason we
breathe is to obtain oxygen for cell respiration and to
exhale the carbon dioxide produced in cell respiration
(this will be discussed in the next section). Biologically
useful energy that is released by the reactions of cell
respiration is trapped in a molecule called ATP
(adenosine triphosphate). ATP can then be used for
cellular processes that require energy.
CARBON DIOXIDE
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is produced by cells as a waste
product of cell respiration. You may ask why a waste
product is considered important. Keep in mind that
“important” does not always mean “beneﬁcial,” but it
Some Basic Chemistry
29
Figure 2–4.
Water compartments, showing the names water is given in its different loca-
tions and the ways in which water moves between compartments.
QUESTION: Which of the ﬂuids shown are extracellular ﬂuids?
Fluid
movement
Intracellular fluid
Cell
Capillary
Lymph
capillary
Lymph
Interstitial
(tissue) fluid
Plasma
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

does mean “signiﬁcant.” If the amount of carbon di-
oxide in the body ﬂuids increases, it causes these ﬂuids
to become too acidic. Therefore, carbon dioxide must
be exhaled as rapidly as it is formed to keep the
amount in the body within normal limits. Normally
this is just what happens, but severe pulmonary dis-
eases such as pneumonia or emphysema decrease gas
exchange in the lungs and permit carbon dioxide to
accumulate in the blood. When this happens, a person
is said to be in a state of acidosis, which may seriously
disrupt body functioning (see the sections on pH and
enzymes later in this chapter; see also Box 2–1: Blood
Gases).
CELL RESPIRATION
Cell respiration is the name for energy production
within cells and involves both respiratory gases, oxy-
gen and carbon dioxide. Many chemical reactions are
involved, but in its simplest form, cell respiration may
be summarized by the following equation:
Glucose (C6H12O6)  6O2 →6CO2  6H2O  ATP  heat
This reaction shows us that glucose and oxygen
combine to yield carbon dioxide, water, ATP, and heat.
Food, represented here by glucose, in the presence of
oxygen is broken down into the simpler molecules
carbon dioxide and water. The potential energy in the
glucose molecule is released in two forms: ATP and
heat. Each of the four products of this process has a
purpose or signiﬁcance in the body. The carbon diox-
ide is a waste product that moves from the cells into
the blood to be carried to the lungs and eventually
exhaled. The water formed is useful and becomes part
of the intracellular ﬂuid. The heat produced con-
tributes to normal body temperature. ATP is used for
cell processes such as mitosis, protein synthesis, and
muscle contraction, all of which require energy and
will be discussed a bit further on in the text.
We will also return to cell respiration in later chap-
ters. For now, the brief description just given will suf-
ﬁce to show that eating and breathing are interrelated;
both are essential for energy production.
TRACE ELEMENTS
Trace elements are those that are needed by the body
in very small amounts. When they are present in food
or nutritional supplements, we often call them miner-
als, and examples are iron, cobalt, and zinc. Although
they may not be as abundant in the body as are carbon,
hydrogen, or oxygen, they are nonetheless essential.
Table 2–2 lists some of these trace elements and their
functions (see also Box 2–2: Nitric Oxide).
30
Some Basic Chemistry
BOX 2–1
BLOOD GASES
oxygen falls below the normal range, oxygen will
be administered; if blood carbon dioxide rises
above the normal range, blood pH will be corrected
to prevent serious acidosis.
Damage to the heart may also bring about a
change in blood gases, especially oxygen. Oxygen
is picked up by red blood cells as they circulate
through lung capillaries; as red blood cells circulate
through the body, they release oxygen to tissues.
What keeps the blood circulating or moving? The
pumping of the heart.
A mild heart attack, when heart failure is unlikely,
is often characterized by a blood oxygen level that
is low but still within normal limits. A more severe
heart attack that seriously impairs the pumping of
the heart will decrease the blood oxygen level to
less than normal. This condition is called hypoxia,
which means that too little oxygen is reaching tis-
sues. When this is determined by measurement of
blood gases, appropriate oxygen therapy can be
started to correct the hypoxia.
A patient is admitted to the emergency room with
a possible heart attack, and the doctor in charge
orders “blood gases.” Another patient hospitalized
with pneumonia has “blood gases” monitored at
frequent intervals. What are blood gases, and what
does measurement of them tell us? The blood gases
are oxygen and carbon dioxide, and their levels
in arterial blood provide information about the
functioning of the respiratory and circulatory
systems. Arterial blood normally has a high con-
centration of oxygen and a low concentration of
carbon dioxide. These levels are maintained by
gas exchange in the lungs and by the proper circu-
lation of blood.
A pulmonary disease such as pneumonia inter-
feres with efficient gas exchange in the lungs. As a
result, blood oxygen concentration may decrease,
and blood carbon dioxide concentration may
increase. Either of these changes in blood gases
may become life threatening for the patient, so
monitoring of blood gases is important. If blood
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

ACIDS, BASES, AND pH
An acid may be deﬁned as a substance that increases
the concentration of hydrogen ions (H) in a water
solution. A base is a substance that decreases the con-
centration of H ions, which, in the case of water, has
the same effect as increasing the concentration of
hydroxyl ions (OH).
The acidity or alkalinity (basicity) of a solution is
measured on a scale of values called pH (parts hydro-
gen). The values on the pH scale range from 0 to 14,
with 0 indicating the most acidic level and 14 the most
alkaline. A solution with a pH of 7 is neutral because
it contains the same number of H ions and OH
ions. Pure water has a pH of 7. A solution with a
higher concentration of H ions than OH ions is an
acidic solution with a pH below 7. An alkaline solu-
tion, therefore, has a higher concentration of OH
ions than H ions and has a pH above 7.
The pH scale, with the relative concentrations
of H ions and OH ions, is shown in Fig. 2–5. A
change of one pH unit is a 10-fold change in H ion
concentration. This means that a solution with a pH
of 4 has 10 times as many H ions as a solution with a
pH of 5, and 100 times as many H ions as a solution
with a pH of 6. Figure 2–5 also shows the pH of some
body ﬂuids and other familiar solutions. Notice that
gastric juice has a pH of 1 and coffee has a pH of 5.
This means that gastric juice has 10,000 times as many
H ions as does coffee. Although coffee is acidic, it is
a weak acid and does not have the corrosive effect of
gastric juice, a strong acid.
The cells and internal ﬂuids of the human body
have a pH close to neutral. The pH of intracellular
ﬂuid is around 6.8, and the normal pH range of blood
is 7.35 to 7.45. Fluids such as gastric juice and urine
are technically external ﬂuids, because they are in
body tracts that open to the environment. The pH of
these ﬂuids may be more strongly acidic or alkaline
without harm to the body.
The pH of blood, however, must be maintained
within its very narrow, slightly alkaline range. A
decrease of only one pH unit, which is 10 times as
many H ions, would disrupt the chemical reactions
of the blood and cause the death of the individual.
Normal metabolism tends to make body ﬂuids more
Some Basic Chemistry
31
Table 2–2
TRACE ELEMENTS
Element
Function
Calcium
Phosphorus
Iron
Copper
Sodium and
potassium
Sulfur
Cobalt
Iodine
• Provides strength in bones and teeth
• Necessary for blood clotting
• Necessary for muscle contraction
• Provides strength in bones and teeth
• Part of DNA, RNA, and ATP
• Part of cell membranes
• Part of hemoglobin in red blood
cells; transports oxygen
• Part of myoglobin in muscles; stores
oxygen
• Necessary for cell respiration
• Necessary for cell respiration
• Necessary for hemoglobin synthesis
• Necessary for muscle contraction
• Necessary for nerve impulse trans-
mission
• Part of some proteins such as insulin
and keratin
• Part of vitamin B12
• Part of thyroid hormones—thyroxine
BOX 2–2
NITRIC OXIDE
Nitric oxide is a gas with the molecular formula
NO. You have probably heard of it as a compo-
nent of air pollution and cigarette smoke, but it
is synthesized by several human tissues, and
this deceptively simple molecule has important
functions.
Nitric oxide is produced by the endothelium
(lining) of blood vessels and promotes vasodila-
tion of arterioles, permitting greater blood ﬂow
and oxygen delivery to tissues. It is involved in
nerve impulse transmission in the brain, and may
contribute to memory storage. Some immune
system cells produce nitric oxide as a cytotoxic
(cell-poisoning) agent to help destroy foreign
cells such as bacteria.
Nitric oxide is also being used therapeutically
in clinical trials. It has been found useful in the
treatment of pulmonary hypertension to relax
abnormally constricted arteries in the lungs to
permit normal gas exchange. Other studies
show that nitric oxide helps some premature
babies breathe more easily and efficiently.
Much more research is needed, including a
determination of possible harmful side effects of
greater than normal amounts of nitric oxide, but
the results of some clinical trials thus far are
promising.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

acidic, and this tendency to acidosis must be continu-
ally corrected. Normal pH of internal ﬂuids is main-
tained by the kidneys, respiratory system, and buffer
systems. Although acid–base balance will be a major
topic of Chapter 19, we will brieﬂy mention buffer
systems here.
Buffer Systems
A buffer system is a chemical or pair of chemicals
that minimizes changes in pH by reacting with strong
acids or strong bases to transform them into sub-
stances that will not drastically change pH. Expressed
in another way, a buffer may bond to H ions when a
body ﬂuid is becoming too acidic, or release H ions
when a ﬂuid is becoming too alkaline.
As a speciﬁc example, we will use the bicarbonate
buffer system, which consists of carbonic acid
(H2CO3), a weak acid, and sodium bicarbonate
(NaHCO3), a weak base. This pair of chemicals is
present in all body ﬂuids but is especially important to
buffer blood and tissue ﬂuid.
Carbonic acid ionizes as follows (but remember,
because it is a weak acid it does not contribute many
H ions to a solution):
H2CO3 →H  HCO3

Sodium bicarbonate ionizes as follows:
NaHCO3 →Na  HCO3

If a strong acid, such as HCl, is added to extracel-
lular ﬂuid, this reaction will occur:
32
Some Basic Chemistry
Figure 2–5.
The pH scale. The pH values of several body ﬂuids are indicated above the
scale. The pH values of some familiar solutions are indicated below the scale.
QUESTION: Describe the pH range of blood compared to the pH range of urine.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

HCl  NaHCO3 →NaCl  H2CO3
What has happened here? Hydrochloric acid, a
strong acid that would greatly lower pH, has reacted
with sodium bicarbonate. The products of this reac-
tion are NaCl, a salt that has no effect on pH, and
H2CO3, a weak acid that lowers pH only slightly. This
prevents a drastic change in the pH of the extracellu-
lar ﬂuid.
If a strong base, such as sodium hydroxide, is added
to the extracellular ﬂuid, this reaction will occur:
NaOH  H2CO3 →H2O  NaHCO3
Sodium hydroxide, a strong base that would greatly
raise pH, has reacted with carbonic acid. The products
of this reaction are water, which has no effect on pH,
and sodium bicarbonate, a weak base that raises pH
only slightly. Again, this prevents a drastic change in
the pH of the extracellular ﬂuid.
In the body, such reactions take place in less than a
second whenever acids or bases are formed that would
greatly change pH. Because of the body’s tendency to
become more acidic, the need to correct acidosis is
more frequent. With respect to the bicarbonate buffer
system, this means that more NaHCO3 than H2CO3 is
needed. For this reason, the usual ratio of these
buffers is 20:1 (NaHCO3:H2CO3).
ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
OF IMPORTANCE
Organic compounds all contain covalently bonded
carbon and hydrogen atoms and perhaps other ele-
ments as well. In the human body there are four major
groups of organic compounds: carbohydrates, lipids,
proteins, and nucleic acids.
CARBOHYDRATES
A primary function of carbohydrates is to serve as
sources of energy in cell respiration. All carbohydrates
contain carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen and are classi-
ﬁed as monosaccharides, disaccharides, oligosaccha-
rides, and polysaccharides. Saccharide means sugar, and
the preﬁx indicates how many are present.
Monosaccharides, or single-sugar compounds,
are the simplest sugars. Glucose is a hexose, or six-
carbon, sugar with the formula C6H12O6 (Fig. 2–6).
Fructose and galactose also have the same formula,
Some Basic Chemistry
33
Figure 2–6.
Carbohydrates. (A) Glucose, depicting its structural formula. (B) A disac-
charide such as sucrose. (C) Cellulose, a polysaccharide. (D) Starch, a polysaccharide.
(E) Glycogen, a polysaccharide. Each hexagon represents a hexose sugar such as glucose.
QUESTION: What is the chemical formula of glucose?
H
C
OH
CH2OH
C
H
OH
C
H
H
C
OH
H
C
OH
A   Glucose
E   Glycogen
B   Disaccharide
C   Cellulose
D   Starch
o
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

but the physical arrangement of the carbon, hydrogen,
and oxygen atoms in each differs from that of glu-
cose. This gives each hexose sugar a different three-
dimensional shape. The liver is able to change fructose
and galactose to glucose, which is then used by cells in
the process of cell respiration to produce ATP.
Another type of monosaccharide is the pentose, or
ﬁve-carbon, sugar. These are not involved in energy
production but rather are structural components of
the nucleic acids. Deoxyribose (C5H10O4) is part of
DNA, which is the genetic material of chromosomes.
Ribose (C5H10O5) is part of RNA, which is essential
for protein synthesis. We will return to the nucleic
acids later in this chapter.
Disaccharides are double sugars, made of two
monosaccharides linked by a covalent bond. Sucrose,
or cane sugar, for example, is made of one glucose and
one fructose. Others are lactose (glucose and galac-
tose) and maltose (two glucose), which are also present
in food. Disaccharides are digested into monosaccha-
rides and then used for energy production.
The preﬁx oligo means “few”; oligosaccharides
consist of from 3 to 20 monosaccharides. In human
cells, oligosaccharides are found on the outer surface
of cell membranes. Here they serve as antigens,
which are chemical markers (or “signposts”) that iden-
tify cells. The A, B, and AB blood types, for example,
are the result of oligosaccharide antigens on the outer
surface of red blood cell membranes. All of our cells
have “self” antigens, which identify the cells that
belong in an individual. The presence of “self” anti-
gens on our own cells enables the immune system to
recognize antigens that are “non-self.” Such foreign
antigens include bacteria and viruses, and immunity
will be a major topic of Chapter 14.
Polysaccharides are made of thousands of glucose
molecules, bonded in different ways, resulting in dif-
ferent shapes (see Fig. 2–6). Starches are branched
chains of glucose and are produced by plant cells to
store energy. We have digestive enzymes that split the
bonds of starch molecules, releasing glucose. The glu-
cose is then absorbed and used by cells to produce
ATP.
Glycogen, a highly branched chain of glucose mol-
ecules, is our own storage form for glucose. After a
meal high in carbohydrates, the blood glucose level
rises. Excess glucose is then changed to glycogen and
stored in the liver and skeletal muscles. When the
blood glucose level decreases between meals, the
glycogen is converted back to glucose, which is
released into the blood (these reactions are regulated
by insulin and other hormones). The blood glucose
level is kept within normal limits, and cells can take in
this glucose to produce energy.
Cellulose is a nearly straight chain of glucose mol-
ecules produced by plant cells as part of their cell
walls. We have no enzyme to digest the cellulose we
consume as part of vegetables and grains, and it passes
through the digestive tract unchanged. Another name
for dietary cellulose is “ﬁber,” and although we cannot
use its glucose for energy, it does have a function.
Fiber provides bulk within the cavity of the large
intestine. This promotes efficient peristalsis, the
waves of contraction that propel undigested material
through the colon. A diet low in ﬁber does not give
the colon much exercise, and the muscle tissue of the
colon will contract weakly, just as our skeletal muscles
will become ﬂabby without exercise. A diet high in
ﬁber provides exercise for the colon muscle and may
help prevent chronic constipation.
The structure and functions of the carbohydrates
are summarized in Table 2–3.
LIPIDS
Lipids contain the elements carbon, hydrogen, and
oxygen; some also contain phosphorus. In this group
of organic compounds are different types of sub-
stances with very different functions. We will con-
sider three types: true fats, phospholipids, and steroids
(Fig. 2–7).
True fats (also called neutral fats) are made of one
molecule of glycerol and one, two, or three fatty acid
molecules. If three fatty acid molecules are bonded to
a single glycerol, a triglyceride is formed. Two fatty
acids and a glycerol form a diglyceride, and one fatty
acid and a glycerol form a monoglyceride.
The fatty acids in a true fat may be saturated or
unsaturated. Refer to Fig. 2–7 and notice that one of
the fatty acids has single covalent bonds between all its
carbon atoms. Each of these carbons is then bonded to
the maximum number of hydrogens; this is a saturated
fatty acid, meaning saturated with hydrogen. The
other fatty acids shown have one or more (poly) dou-
ble covalent bonds between their carbons and less
than the maximum number of hydrogens; these are
unsaturated fatty acids. Many triglycerides contain
both saturated and unsaturated fatty acids, and though
34
Some Basic Chemistry
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

it is not as precise, it is often easier to speak of satu-
rated and unsaturated fats, indicating the predomi-
nance of one or the other type of fatty acid.
At room temperature, saturated fats are often in
solid form, while unsaturated fats are often (not
always) in liquid form. Saturated fats tend to be found
in animal foods such as beef, pork, eggs, and cheese,
but palm oil and coconut oil are also saturated.
Unsaturated fats are found in other plant oils such as
corn oil, sunﬂower oil, and safflower oil, but certain
ﬁsh oils are also unsaturated, and even pork contains
unsaturated fatty acids.
Unsaturated fats may be changed to saturated fats
in order to give packaged foods a more pleasing tex-
ture or taste, or to allow them to be stored longer
without refrigeration (a longer shelf life). These are
hydrogenated fats (meaning that hydrogens have been
added), also called trans fats. Trans fats contribute sig-
niﬁcantly to atherosclerosis of arteries, that is,
abnormal cholesterol deposits in the lining that may
clog arteries, especially the coronary arteries of the
heart. (See also Box 2–3: Lipids in the Blood.)
The triglyceride forms of true fats are a storage
form for excess food, that is, they are stored energy
(potential energy). Any type of food consumed in
excess of the body’s caloric needs will be converted to
fat and stored in adipose tissue. Most adipose tissue is
subcutaneous, between the skin and muscles. Some
organs, however, such as the eyes and kidneys, are
enclosed in a layer of fat that acts as a cushion to
absorb shock.
Phospholipids are diglycerides with a phosphate
group (PO4) in the third bonding site of glycerol.
Although similar in structure to the true fats, phos-
pholipids are not stored energy but rather structural
components of cells. Lecithin is a phospholipid that is
part of our cell membranes (see Fig. 3–1; each phos-
pholipid molecule looks like a sphere with two tails;
the sphere is the glycerol and phosphate, the tails are
the two fatty acids). Another phospholipid is myelin,
Some Basic Chemistry
35
Table 2–3
CARBOHYDRATES
Name
Structure
Function
Monosaccharides—“Single” Sugars
Glucose
Fructose and
galactose
Deoxyribose
Ribose
Disaccharides—“Double” Sugars
Sucrose, lactose,
and maltose
Oligosaccharides—“Few” Sugars (3–20)
Polysaccharides—“Many” Sugars (Thousands)
Starches
Glycogen
Cellulose
Hexose sugar
Hexose sugar
Pentose sugar
Pentose sugar
• Most important energy source for cells
• Converted to glucose by the liver, then used for energy
production
• Part of DNA, the genetic code in the chromosomes of cells
• Part of RNA, needed for protein synthesis within cells
Two hexose sugars
• Present in food; digested to monosaccharides, which are
then used for energy production
• Form “self” antigens on cell membranes; important to
permit the immune system to distinguish “self” from
foreign antigens (pathogens)
Branched chains of
glucose molecules
Highly branched chains
of glucose molecules
Straight chains of
glucose molecules
• Found in plant foods; digested to monosaccharides and
used for energy production
• Storage form for excess glucose in the liver and skeletal
muscles
• Part of plant cell walls; provides ﬁber to promote peristalsis,
especially by the colon
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

BOX 2–3
LIPIDS IN THE BLOOD
cause in this form cholesterol is more easily
removed from the blood by the liver and excreted
in bile.
A diet low in total fat, with most of it unsaturated
fat, tends to raise HDL levels and lower LDL levels.
The beneﬁt is the delaying of atherosclerosis and
coronary artery disease. A simple blood test called a
lipid proﬁle (or lipid panel) can determine levels of
total cholesterol, triglycerides, HDLs, and LDLs. A
high HDL level, above 50 mg/dL, is considered
good, but some researchers now believe that the
LDL level is more important and should be as low as
possible, below 100 mg/dL.
Other factors contribute to coronary artery dis-
ease, such as heredity, smoking, being overweight,
and lack of exercise. Diet alone cannot prevent ath-
erosclerosis. However, a diet low in total fat and
high in polyunsaturated fats is a good start.
Triglycerides and cholesterol are transported in the
blood in combination with proteins. Such mole-
cules made by the small intestine are called chy-
lomicrons. Those made by the liver are called
lipoproteins and are categorized by their density,
which reﬂects the proportion of protein to choles-
terol.
Low-density lipoproteins (LDLs, which are low in
protein and high in cholesterol) transport choles-
terol to the tissues, where it is used to synthesize
cell membranes or secretions. LDLs are also called
“bad cholesterol,” because in this form the choles-
terol is more likely to be deposited in the walls of
blood vessels, leading to atherosclerosis.
High-density lipoproteins (HDLs, which are
higher in protein and lower in cholesterol than
LDLs) transport cholesterol from the tissues to the
liver. HDLs are also called “good cholesterol,” be-
B
A
Glycerol
Triglyceride
3 Fatty acids
Cholesterol
Figure 2–7.
Lipids. (A) A triglyceride made of one glycerol and three fatty acids. (B) The
steroid cholesterol. The hexagons and pentagon represent rings of carbon and hydrogen.
QUESTION: What would a diglyceride look like?
36
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

which forms the myelin sheath around nerve cells and
provides electrical insulation for nerve impulse trans-
mission.
The structure of steroids is very different from
that of the other lipids. Cholesterol is an important
steroid; it is made of four rings of carbon and hydro-
gen (not fatty acids and glycerol) and is shown in Fig.
2–7. The liver synthesizes cholesterol, in addition to
the cholesterol we eat in food as part of our diet.
Cholesterol is another component of cell membranes
and is the precursor (raw material) for the synthesis of
other steroids. In the ovaries or testes, cholesterol is
used to synthesize the steroid hormones estrogen or
testosterone, respectively. A form of cholesterol in the
skin is changed to vitamin D on exposure to sunlight.
Liver cells use cholesterol for the synthesis of bile
salts, which emulsify fats in digestion. Despite its link
to coronary artery disease and heart attacks, choles-
terol is an essential substance for human beings.
The structure and functions of lipids are summa-
rized in Table 2–4.
PROTEINS
Proteins are made of smaller subunits or building
blocks called amino acids, which all contain the ele-
ments carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen. Some
amino acids contain sulfur, which permits the forma-
tion of disulﬁde bonds. There are about 20 amino
acids that make up human proteins. The structure of
amino acids is shown in Fig. 2–8. Each amino acid has
a central carbon atom covalently bonded to an atom of
hydrogen, an amino group (NH2), and a carboxyl
group (COOH). At the fourth bond of the central car-
bon is the variable portion of the amino acid, repre-
sented by R. The R group may be a single hydrogen
atom, or a CH3 group, or a more complex conﬁgura-
tion of carbon and hydrogen. This gives each of the 20
amino acids a slightly different physical shape. A bond
between two amino acids is called a peptide bond,
and a short chain of amino acids linked by peptide
bonds is a polypeptide.
A protein may consist of from 50 to thousands of
amino acids. The sequence of the amino acids is
speciﬁc and unique for each protein, and is called
its primary structure. This unique sequence, and the
hydrogen bonds and disulﬁde bonds formed within
the amino acid chain, determines how the protein will
be folded to complete its synthesis. The folding may
be simple, a helix (coil) or pleated sheet, called the sec-
ondary structure, or a more complex folding may
occur to form a globular protein, called the tertiary
structure. Myoglobin, found in muscles, is a globular
protein (Fig. 2–8). When complete, each protein has a
characteristic three-dimensional shape, which in turn
determines its function. Some proteins consist of
more than one amino acid chain (quaternary struc-
ture). Hemoglobin, for example, has four amino acid
chains (see Box 3–2). Notice that myoglobin contains
an atom of iron (a hemoglobin molecule has four iron
Some Basic Chemistry
37
Table 2–4
LIPIDS
Name
Structure
Function
True fats
Phospholipids
Steroids (cholesterol)
A triglyceride consists of three
fatty acid molecules bonded to
a glycerol molecule (some are
monoglycerides or diglycerides)
Diglycerides with a phosphate
group bonded to the glycerol
molecule
Four carbon–hydrogen rings
• Storage form for excess food molecules in
subcutaneous tissue
• Cushion organs such as the eyes and kidneys
• Part of cell membranes (lecithin)
• Form the myelin sheath to provide electrical
insulation for neurons
• Part of cell membranes
• Converted to vitamin D in the skin on exposure to
UV rays of the sun
• Converted by the liver to bile salts, which emulsify
fats during digestion
• Precursor for the steroid hormones such as estrogen
in women (ovaries) or testosterone in men (testes)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

atoms). Some proteins require a trace element such as
iron or zinc to complete their structure and permit
them to function properly.
Our body proteins have many functions; some of
these are listed in Table 2–5 and will be mentioned
again in later chapters. And though we usually do not
think of protein as an energy food, if our diet includes
more amino acids than are necessary for our protein
synthesis, those excess amino acids will be converted
to simple carbohydrates or even to fat, to be stored as
potential energy. (See Box 2–4: A Protein Mystery:
Prions, for a discussion of disease-causing proteins.)
One very important function of proteins will be dis-
cussed further here: the role of proteins as enzymes.
Enzymes
Enzymes are catalysts, which means that they speed
up chemical reactions without the need for an external
source of energy such as heat. The many reactions
that take place within the body are catalyzed by spe-
ciﬁc enzymes; all of these reactions must take place at
body temperature.
The way in which enzymes function as catalysts is
called the active site theory, and is based on the
shape of the enzyme and the shapes of the reacting
molecules, called substrates. A simple synthesis reac-
tion is depicted in Fig. 2–9A. Notice that the enzyme
has a speciﬁc shape, as do the substrate molecules.
38
Some Basic Chemistry
NH2              C            COOH
H
R
•
Amino
group
•
Carboxyl
group
•
Variable portion
•
•
Peptide bonds
•
Iron in heme
A    Amino acid
B    Polypeptide
C    Primary structure
D    Secondary structure-
alpha helix
E    Tertiary structure-
myoglobin
Figure 2–8.
Amino acid and protein structure. (A) The structural formula of an amino
acid. The “R” represents the variable portion of the molecule. (B) A polypeptide. Several
amino acids, represented by different shapes, are linked by peptide bonds. (C) The primary
structure of a protein. (D) The secondary structure of a protein. (E) The tertiary structure
of the protein myoglobin. See text for further description.
QUESTION: What mineral is part of myoglobin, and what is its function?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

tween them, creating a new compound. The product
of the reaction, the new compound, is then released,
leaving the enzyme itself unchanged and able to cat-
alyze another reaction of the same type.
The reaction shown in Fig. 2–9B is a decomposition
reaction. As the substrate molecule bonds to the active
site of the enzyme, strain is put on its internal bonds,
which break, forming two product molecules and
again leaving the enzyme unchanged. Each enzyme is
speciﬁc in that it will catalyze only one type of reac-
tion. An enzyme that digests the protein in food, for
example, has the proper shape for that reaction but
cannot digest starches. For starch digestion, another
enzyme with a differently shaped active site is needed.
Thousands of chemical reactions take place within the
body, and therefore we have thousands of enzymes,
each with its own shape and active site.
The ability of enzymes to function may be limited
or destroyed by changes in the intracellular or extra-
cellular ﬂuids in which they are found. Changes in pH
and temperature are especially crucial. Recall that the
pH of intracellular ﬂuid is approximately 6.8, and that
a decrease in pH means that more H ions are pres-
ent. If pH decreases signiﬁcantly, the excess H ions
will react with the active sites of cellular enzymes,
change their shapes, and prevent them from catalyzing
reactions. This is why a state of acidosis may cause the
death of cells—the cells’ enzymes are unable to func-
tion properly.
Some Basic Chemistry
39
Table 2–5
FUNCTIONS OF PROTEINS
Type of Protein
Function
Structural
proteins
Hormones
Hemoglobin
Myoglobin
Antibodies
Myosin and actin
Enzymes
• Form pores and receptor sites in
cell membranes
• Keratin—part of skin and hair
• Collagen—part of tendons and
ligaments
• Insulin—enables cells to take in
glucose; lowers blood glucose level
• Growth hormone—increases
protein synthesis and cell division
• Enables red blood cells to carry
oxygen
• Stores oxygen in muscle cells
• Produced by lymphocytes (white
blood cells); label pathogens for
destruction
• Muscle structure and contraction
• Catalyze reactions
BOX 2–4
A PROTEIN MYSTERY: PRIONS
ing misfolding, which brings about deterioration of
brain tissue. We do not know how to destroy prions.
Prions are not living; they do not contain genetic
material or carry out processes that might be dis-
rupted by antibiotics or antiviral medications.
Standard sterilization practices that kill bacteria and
viruses do not seem to inactivate prions.
Prevention of prion disease depends upon
keeping animal brain tissue from contaminating
meat destined for human or animal consumption.
In Great Britain, where the human form of mad-
cow disease emerged and killed nearly 100 people,
butchering practices are now stringently regulated.
The ﬁrst cases of mad-cow disease in Canada
and the United States were found in 2003, in cattle.
As of this writing, people have not yet been
affected.
Prions are proteinaceous infectious particles, the
cause of lethal diseases of the nervous system in
people and animals. Mad-cow disease is perhaps
the best known; its formal name is bovine spongi-
form encephalopathy (BSE). The name tells us about
the disease: Encephalopathy means that the brain is
affected, and spongiform indicates that brain tissue
becomes spongy, full of holes. People may acquire
BSE by eating beef contaminated with infected cow
brain tissue. They develop what is called variant
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD). CJD is characterized
by loss of coordination, loss of memory and person-
ality, and death within a few months. There is no
treatment.
How do prions cause this disease? We do not yet
have the entire answer. We do know that prions
change the structure of other brain proteins, caus-
The active site of the enzyme is the part that matches
the shapes of the substrates. The substrates must “ﬁt”
into the active site of the enzyme, and temporary
bonds may form between the enzyme and the sub-
strate. This is called the enzyme–substrate complex. In
this case, two substrate molecules are thus brought
close together so that chemical bonds are formed be-
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

With respect to temperature, most human enzymes
have their optimum functioning in the normal range
of body temperature: 97 to 99F (36 to 38C). A tem-
perature of 106F, a high fever, may break the chemi-
cal bonds that maintain the shapes of enzymes (see
Fig. 2–9C). If an enzyme loses its shape, it is said to be
denatured, and a denatured enzyme is unable to func-
tion as a catalyst. Some human enzymes, when dena-
tured by a high fever, may revert to their original
shapes if the fever is lowered quickly. Others, however,
will not. (An example of irreversible denaturation is a
hard-boiled egg; the proteins in the egg white and
yolk will never revert to what they were in the original
egg.) A high fever may cause brain damage or death
because enzymes in the brain have become perma-
nently denatured.
You already know that metals such as lead and mer-
cury are harmful to humans and that both may cause
serious damage to the nervous system and other body
tissues. These heavy metals are harmful to us because
they are very reactive and block the actions of our
enzymes. Fig. 2–9D depicts what happens. Notice that
the heavy metal ion bonds with part of the active site
of the enzyme and changes its shape. The substrate
molecule cannot ﬁt, and the enzyme is useless. Many
other chemicals are poisonous to us for the very same
reason: They destroy the functioning of our enzymes,
and essential reactions cannot take place.
40
Some Basic Chemistry
Active site
Enzyme
Substrates
Enzyme-substrate
complex
Enzyme
Product
Enzyme
Substrate
Enzyme-substrate
complex
Enzyme
Products
Enzyme
Enzyme
Denatured enzyme
Heavy-metal ion
or toxin
Nonfunctional
enzyme
•
A
B
C
D
Figure 2–9.
Active site theory. (A) Synthesis reaction. (B) Decomposition reaction.
(C) The effect of heat. (D) The effect of poisons. See text for description.
QUESTION: Which of these four pictures best represents the effect of an acidic pH on an
enzyme, and why?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

NUCLEIC ACIDS
DNA and RNA
The nucleic acids, DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and
RNA (ribonucleic acid), are large molecules made of
smaller subunits called nucleotides. A nucleotide con-
sists of a pentose sugar, a phosphate group, and one of
several nitrogenous bases. In DNA nucleotides, the
sugar is deoxyribose, and the bases are adenine, gua-
nine, cytosine, or thymine. In RNA nucleotides, the
sugar is ribose, and the bases are adenine, guanine,
cytosine, or uracil. DNA and RNA molecules are
shown in Fig. 2–10. Notice that DNA looks somewhat
like a twisted ladder; this ladder is two strands of
Some Basic Chemistry
41
•
Deoxyribose (DNA)
Ribose (RNA)
Phosphate
Adenine
Guanine
Thymine (DNA)
Uracil (RNA)
Cytosine
Chromatin in
the nucleus
•
Cell
Double helix
DNA strands
Hydrogen
bonds
RNA strand
Figure 2–10.
DNA and RNA. Both molecules are shown, with each part of a nucleotide
represented by its shape and in a different color. Note the complementary base pairing of
DNA (A–T and G–C). When RNA is synthesized, it is a complementary copy of half the DNA
molecule (with U in place of T).
QUESTION: Why can’t adenine pair with guanine to form a rung of the DNA ladder?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

nucleotides called a double helix (two coils). Alterna-
ting phosphate and sugar molecules form the uprights
of the ladder, and pairs of nitrogenous bases form the
rungs. The size of the bases and the number of hydro-
gen bonds each can form the complementary base
pairing of the nucleic acids. In DNA, adenine is always
paired with thymine (with two hydrogen bonds), and
guanine is always paired with cytosine (with three
hydrogen bonds).
DNA makes up the chromosomes of cells and is,
therefore, the genetic code for hereditary characteris-
tics. The sequence of bases in the DNA strands is actu-
ally a code for the many kinds of proteins living things
produce; the code is the same in plants, other animals,
and microbes. The sequence of bases for one protein is
called a gene. Human genes are the codes for the pro-
teins produced by human cells (though many of these
genes are also found in all other forms of life—we are
all very much related). The functioning of DNA will
be covered in more detail in the next chapter.
RNA is often a single strand of nucleotides (see Fig.
2–10), with uracil nucleotides in place of thymine
nucleotides. RNA is synthesized from DNA in the
nucleus of a cell but carries out a major function in the
cytoplasm. This function is protein synthesis, which
will also be discussed in the following chapter.
ATP
ATP
(adenosine triphosphate) is a specialized
nucleotide that consists of the base adenine, the sugar
ribose, and three phosphate groups. Mention has
already been made of ATP as a product of cell respira-
tion that contains biologically useful energy. ATP is
one of several “energy transfer” molecules within
cells, transferring the potential energy in food mole-
cules to cell processes. When a molecule of glucose is
broken down into carbon dioxide and water with the
release of energy, the cell uses some of this energy to
synthesize ATP. Present in cells are molecules of ADP
(adenosine diphosphate) and phosphate. The energy
released from glucose is used to loosely bond a third
phosphate to ADP, forming ATP. When the bond of
this third phosphate is again broken and energy is
released, ATP then becomes the energy source for cell
processes such as mitosis.
All cells have enzymes that can remove the third
phosphate group from ATP to release its energy,
forming ADP and phosphate. As cell respiration con-
tinues, ATP is resynthesized from ADP and phos-
phate. ATP formation to trap energy from food and
breakdown to release energy for cell processes is a
continuing cycle in cells.
The structure and functions of the nucleic acids are
summarized in Table 2–6.
SUMMARY
All of the chemicals we have just described are consid-
ered to be non-living, even though they are essential
parts of all living organisms. The cells of our bodies
are precise arrangements of these non-living chemi-
cals and yet are considered living matter. The cellular
level, therefore, is the next level of organization we
will examine.
42
Some Basic Chemistry
Table 2–6
NUCLEIC ACIDS
Name
Structure
Function
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid)
RNA (ribonucleic acid)
ATP (adenosine triphosphate)
A double helix of nucleotides;
adenine paired with
thymine, and guanine
paired with cytosine
A single strand of nucleotides;
adenine, guanine, cytosine,
and uracil
A single adenine nucleotide
with three phosphate
groups
• Found in the chromosomes in the nucleus of a cell
• Is the genetic code for hereditary characteristics
• Copies the genetic code of DNA to direct protein
synthesis in the cytoplasm of cells
• An energy-transferring molecule
• Formed when cell respiration releases energy from
food molecules
• Used for energy-requiring cellular processes
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Elements
1. Elements are the simplest chemicals, which make
up all matter.
2. Carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus,
sulfur, and calcium make up 99% of the human
body.
3. Elements combine in many ways to form mole-
cules.
Atoms (see Fig. 2–1)
1. Atoms are the smallest part of an element that still
retains the characteristics of the element.
2. Atoms consist of positively and negatively charged
particles and neutral (or uncharged) particles.
• Protons have a positive charge and are found in
the nucleus of the atom.
• Neutrons have no charge and are found in the
nucleus of the atom.
• Electrons have a negative charge and orbit the
nucleus.
3. The number and arrangement of electrons give an
atom its bonding capabilities.
Chemical Bonds
1. An ionic bond involves the loss of electrons by one
atom and the gain of these electrons by another
atom: Ions are formed that attract one another (see
Fig. 2–2).
• Cations are ions with positive charges: Na,
Ca2.
• Anions are ions with negative charges: Cl,
HCO3
.
• Salts, acids, and bases are formed by ionic bond-
ing.
• In water, many ionic bonds break; dissociation
releases ions for other reactions.
2. A covalent bond involves the sharing of electrons
between two atoms (see Fig. 2–3).
• Oxygen gas (O2) and water (H2O) are covalently
bonded molecules.
• Carbon always forms covalent bonds; these are
the basis for the organic compounds.
• Covalent bonds are not weakened in an aqueous
solution.
3. A disulﬁde bond is a covalent bond between two
sulfur atoms in a protein; it helps maintain the
three-dimensional shape of some proteins.
4. A hydrogen bond is the attraction of a covalently
bonded hydrogen to a nearby oxygen or nitrogen
atom.
• The three-dimensional shape of proteins and
nucleic acids is maintained by hydrogen bonds.
• Water is cohesive because of hydrogen bonds.
Chemical Reactions
1. A change brought about by the formation or break-
ing of chemical bonds.
2. Synthesis—bonds are formed to join two or more
molecules.
3. Decomposition—bonds are broken within a mole-
cule.
Inorganic Compounds of Importance
1. Water—makes up 60% to 75% of the body.
• Solvent—for transport of nutrients in the blood
and excretion of wastes in urine.
• Lubricant—mucus in the digestive tract.
• Changes temperature slowly, and prevents sud-
den changes in body temperature; absorbs body
heat in evaporation of sweat.
• Water compartments—the locations of water
within the body (see Fig. 2–4).
• Intracellular—within cells; 65% of total body
water.
• Extracellular—35% of total body water
— Plasma—in blood vessels.
— Lymph—in lymphatic vessels.
— Tissue ﬂuid—in tissue spaces between
cells.
2. Oxygen—21% of the atmosphere.
• Essential for cell respiration: the breakdown of
food molecules to release energy.
3. Carbon dioxide
• Produced as a waste product of cell respiration.
• Must be exhaled; excess CO2 causes acidosis.
4. Cell respiration—the energy-producing processes
of cells.
• Glucose  O2 →CO2  H2O  ATP  heat
• This is why we breathe: to take in oxygen to
break down food to produce energy, and to
exhale the CO2 produced.
5. Trace elements—minerals needed in small amounts
(see Table 2–2).
Some Basic Chemistry
43
STUDY OUTLINE
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

6. Acids, bases, and pH
• The pH scale ranges from 0 to 14; 7 is neutral;
below 7 is acidic; above 7 is alkaline.
• An acid increases the H ion concentration of a
solution; a base decreases the H ion concentra-
tion (or increases the OH– ion concentration)
(see Fig. 2–5).
• The pH of cells is about 6.8. The pH range of
blood is 7.35 to 7.45.
• Buffer systems maintain normal pH by react-
ing with strong acids or strong bases to change
them to substances that do not greatly change
pH.
• The bicarbonate buffer system consists of H2CO3
and NaHCO3.
Organic Compounds of Importance
1. Carbohydrates (see Table 2–3 and Fig. 2–6).
• Monosaccharides are simple sugars. Glucose, a
hexose sugar (C6H12O6), is the primary energy
source for cell respiration.
• Pentose sugars are part of the nucleic acids
DNA and RNA.
• Disaccharides are made of two hexose sugars.
Sucrose, lactose, and maltose are digested to
monosaccharides and used for cell respiration.
• Oligosaccharides consist of from 3 to 20 mono-
saccharides; they are antigens on the cell mem-
brane that identify cells as “self.”
• Polysaccharides are made of thousands of glu-
cose molecules.
• Starches are plant products broken down in
digestion to glucose.
• Glycogen is the form in which glucose is
stored in the liver and muscles.
• Cellulose, the ﬁber portion of plant cells, can-
not be digested but promotes efficient peristal-
sis in the colon.
2. Lipids (see Table 2–4 and Fig. 2–7).
• True fats are made of fatty acids and glycerol;
triglycerides are a storage form for potential
energy in adipose tissue. The eyes and kidneys
are cushioned by fat. Fatty acids may be saturated
or unsaturated. Saturated fats and hydrogenated
or trans fats contribute to atherosclerosis.
• Phospholipids are diglycerides such as lecithin
that are part of cell membranes. Myelin is a
phospholipid that provides electrical insulation
for nerve cells.
• Steroids consist of four rings of carbon and
hydrogen. Cholesterol, produced by the liver
and consumed in food, is the basic steroid from
which the body manufactures others: steroid
hormones, vitamin D, and bile salts.
3. Proteins
• Amino acids are the subunits of proteins; 20
amino acids make up human proteins. Peptide
bonds join amino acids to one another (see Fig.
2–8).
• A protein consists of from 50 to thousands of
amino acids in a speciﬁc sequence (primary
structure) that is folded into a speciﬁc shape (sec-
ondary and tertiary structures). Some proteins
are made of two or more amino acid chains;
some proteins contain trace elements.
• Protein functions—see Table 2–5.
• Amino acids in excess of the need for protein
synthesis are converted to simple carbohydrates
or to fat, for energy production.
• Enzymes are catalysts, which speed up reactions
without additional energy. The active site theory
is based on the shapes of the enzyme and the sub-
strate molecules: These must “ﬁt” (see Fig. 2–9).
The enzyme remains unchanged after the prod-
uct of the reaction is released. Each enzyme is
speciﬁc for one type of reaction. The functioning
of enzymes may be disrupted by changes in pH
or body temperature or by the presence of a poi-
son, which changes the shape of the active sites
of enzymes.
4. Nucleic acids (see Table 2–6 and Fig. 2–10).
• Nucleotides are the subunits of nucleic acids. A
nucleotide consists of a pentose sugar, a phos-
phate group, and a nitrogenous base.
• DNA is a double strand of nucleotides, coiled
into a double helix, with complementary base
pairing: A–T and G–C. DNA makes up the
chromosomes of cells and is the genetic code for
the synthesis of proteins.
• RNA is a single strand of nucleotides, synthe-
sized from DNA, with U in place of T. RNA
functions in protein synthesis.
• ATP is a nucleotide that is specialized to trap
and release energy. Energy released from food in
cell respiration is used to synthesize ATP from
ADP  P. When cells need energy, ATP is bro-
ken down to ADP  P and the energy is released
for cell processes.
44
Some Basic Chemistry
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

1. State the chemical symbol for each of the following
elements: sodium, potassium, iron, calcium, oxy-
gen, carbon, hydrogen, copper, and chlorine.
(p. 24)
2. Explain, in terms of their electrons, how an atom of
sodium and an atom of chlorine form a molecule of
sodium chloride. (p. 25)
3. a. Explain, in terms of their electrons, how an
atom of carbon and two atoms of oxygen form a
molecule of carbon dioxide. (pp. 26–28)
b. Explain the functions of hydrogen bonds
c. Explain the function of disulﬁde bonds
4. Name the subunits (smaller molecules) of which
each of the following is made: DNA, glycogen, a
true fat, and a protein. (pp. 34, 37, 41)
5. State precisely where in the body each of these ﬂu-
ids is found: plasma, intracellular water, lymph, and
tissue ﬂuid. (p. 29)
6. Explain the importance of the fact that water
changes temperature slowly. (pp. 28–29)
7. Describe two ways in which the solvent ability of
water is important to the body. (p. 28)
8. Name the organic molecule with each of the fol-
lowing functions: (pp. 34–36, 42)
a. The genetic code in chromosomes
b. “Self” antigens in our cell membranes
c. The storage form for glucose in the liver
d. The storage form for excess food in adipose
tissue
e. The precursor molecule for the steroid hor-
mones
f. The undigested part of food that promotes
peristalsis
g. The sugars that are part of the nucleic acids
9. State the summary equation of cell respiration.
(p. 30)
10. State the role or function of each of the following
in cell respiration: CO2, glucose, O2, heat, and
ATP. (p. 30)
11. State a speciﬁc function of each of the following
in the human body: Ca, Fe, Na, I, and Co. (p. 31)
12. Explain, in terms of relative concentrations of H
ions and OH ions, each of the following: acid,
base, and neutral substance. (p. 31)
13. State the normal pH range of blood. (p. 31)
14. Complete the following equation, and state how
each of the products affects pH: (p. 33)
HCl  NaHCO3 →_______  _______.
15. Explain the active site theory of enzyme function-
ing. (p. 38–39)
16. Explain the difference between a synthesis reac-
tion and a decomposition reaction. (p. 28)
Some Basic Chemistry
45
REVIEW QUESTIONS
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
1. Orange juice usually has a pH of around 4. How
does this compare with the pH of the blood? Why
is it possible for us to drink orange juice without
disrupting the pH of our blood?
2. Estrela, age 7, has cereal with milk and sugar for
breakfast, then walks to school. Explain the rela-
tionship between eating and walking, and remem-
ber that Estrela is breathing.
3. The body is able to store certain nutrients. Name
the storage forms, and state an advantage and a dis-
advantage.
4. Many “vitamin pills” also contain minerals. Which
minerals are likely to be found in such dietary sup-
plements? What purpose do they have; that is, what
are their functions?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CHAPTER 3
Chapter Outline
Cell Structure
Cell Membrane
Nucleus
Cytoplasm and Cell Organelles
Cellular Transport Mechanisms
Diffusion
Osmosis
Facilitated Diffusion
Active Transport
Filtration
Phagocytosis and Pinocytosis
The Genetic Code and Protein Synthesis
DNA and the Genetic Code
RNA and Protein Synthesis
Cell Division
Mitosis
Meiosis
Aging and Cells
BOX 3–1
TERMINOLOGY OF SOLUTIONS
BOX 3–2
GENETIC DISEASE—SICKLE-CELL ANEMIA
BOX 3–3
ABNORMAL CELLULAR FUNCTIONING—
CANCER
Student Objectives
• Name the organic molecules that make up cell
membranes and state their functions.
• State the functions of the nucleus and chromo-
somes.
• Describe the functions of the cell organelles.
• Deﬁne each of these cellular transport mecha-
nisms and give an example of the role of each in
the body: diffusion, osmosis, facilitated diffusion,
active transport, ﬁltration, phagocytosis, and
pinocytosis.
• Describe the triplet code of DNA.
• Explain how the triplet code of DNA is tran-
scribed and translated in the synthesis of proteins.
• Describe what happens in mitosis and in meiosis.
• Use examples to explain the importance of mitosis.
• Explain the importance of meiosis.
46
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Cells
47
New Terminology
Absorption (ab-ZORB-shun)
Active transport (AK-tiv TRANS-port)
Aerobic (air-ROH-bik)
Cell membrane (SELL MEM-brayn)
Chromosomes (KROH-muh-sohms)
Cytoplasm (SIGH-toh-plazm)
Diffusion (di-FEW-zhun)
Diploid number (DIH-ployd)
Filtration (ﬁll-TRAY-shun)
Gametes (GAM-eets)
Gene (JEEN)
Haploid number (HA-ployd)
Meiosis (my-OH-sis)
Microvilli (MY-kro-VILL-eye)
Mitochondria (MY-toh-KAHN-dree-ah)
Mitosis (my-TOH-sis)
Nucleus (NEW-klee-us)
Organelles (OR-gan-ELLS)
Osmosis (ahs-MOH-sis)
Phagocytosis (FAG-oh-sigh-TOH-sis)
Pinocytosis (PIN-oh-sigh-TOH-sis)
Selectively permeable (se-LEK-tiv-lee PER-me-uh-
buhl)
Theory (THEER-ree)
Related Clinical Terminology
Benign (bee-NINE)
Carcinogen (kar-SIN-oh-jen)
Chemotherapy (KEE-moh-THER-uh-pee)
Genetic disease (je-NET-ik di-ZEEZ)
Hypertonic (HIGH-per-TAHN-ik)
Hypotonic (HIGH-poh-TAHN-ik)
Isotonic (EYE-soh-TAHN-ik)
Malignant (muh-LIG-nunt)
Metastasis (muh-TASS-tuh-sis)
Mutation (mew-TAY-shun)
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

All living organisms are made of cells and cell
products. This simple statement, called the cell the-
ory, was ﬁrst proposed more than 150 years ago. You
may think of a theory as a guess or hypothesis, and
sometimes this is so. A scientiﬁc theory, however, is
actually the best explanation of all available evidence.
All of the evidence science has gathered so far sup-
ports the validity of the cell theory.
Cells are the smallest living subunits of a multicel-
lular organism such as a human being. A cell is a com-
plex arrangement of the chemicals discussed in the
previous chapter, is living, and carries out speciﬁc
activities. Microorganisms, such as amoebas and bac-
teria, are single cells that function independently.
Human cells, however, must work together and func-
tion interdependently. Homeostasis depends upon the
contributions of all of the different kinds of cells.
Human cells vary in size, shape, and function. Most
human cells are so small they can only be seen with
the aid of a microscope and are measured in units
called micrometers (formerly called microns). One
micrometer  1/1,000,000 of a meter or 1/25,000 of
an inch (see Appendix A: Units of Measure). One
exception is the human ovum or egg cell, which is
about 1 millimeter in diameter, just visible to the
unaided eye. Some nerve cells, although microscopic
in diameter, may be quite long. Those in our arms and
legs, for example, are at least 2 feet (60 cm) long.
With respect to shape, human cells vary greatly.
Some are round or spherical, others rectangular, still
others irregular. White blood cells even change shape
as they move.
Cell functions also vary, and since our cells do not
act independently, we will cover specialized cell func-
tions as part of tissue functions in Chapter 4. Based on
function, there are more than 200 different kinds of
human cells. This chapter is concerned with the basic
structure of cells and the cellular activities common to
all our cells.
CELL STRUCTURE
Despite their many differences, human cells have sev-
eral similar structural features: a cell membrane, a
nucleus, and cytoplasm and cell organelles. Red blood
cells are an exception because they have no nuclei
when mature. The cell membrane forms the outer
boundary of the cell and surrounds the cytoplasm,
organelles, and nucleus.
CELL MEMBRANE
Also called the plasma membrane, the cell mem-
brane is made of phospholipids, cholesterol, and pro-
teins. The arrangement of these organic molecules is
shown in Fig. 3–1. The phospholipids are diglyc-
erides, and form a bilayer, or double layer, which
makes up most of the membrane. Phospholipids
permit lipid-soluble materials to easily enter or leave
the cell by diffusion through the cell membrane. The
presence of cholesterol decreases the ﬂuidity of
the membrane, thus making it more stable. The pro-
teins have several functions: Some form channels or
pores to permit passage of materials such as water or
ions; others are carrier enzymes or transporters that
also help substances enter the cell. Still other proteins,
with oligosaccharides on their outer surface, are anti-
gens, markers that identify the cells of an individual as
“self.” Yet another group of proteins serves as recep-
tor sites for hormones. Many hormones bring about
their speciﬁc effects by ﬁrst bonding to a particular
receptor on the cell membrane, a receptor with the
proper shape. This bonding, or ﬁt, then triggers
chemical reactions within the cell membrane or the
interior of the cell (see Box 10–3 for an illustration
involving the hormone insulin).
Many receptors for other molecules are also part of
cell membranes. These molecules are part of the
chemical communication networks our cells have. An
unavoidable consequence of having so many receptors
for chemical communication is that some pathogens
have evolved shapes to match certain receptors. For
example, HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, just hap-
pens to ﬁt a particular surface receptor on our white
blood cells. When the virus ﬁts in, the receptor
becomes a gateway into the cell, which begins the
takeover of the cell by the virus.
Most often, however, the cell membrane is a bene-
ﬁcial structure. Although the cell membrane is the
outer boundary of the cell, it should already be appar-
ent to you that it is not a static or wall-like boundary,
but rather an active, dynamic one. It is much more like
a line of tollbooths than a concrete barrier. The cell
membrane is selectively permeable; that is, certain
substances are permitted to pass through and others
48
Cells
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

are not. These mechanisms of cellular transport will
be covered later in this chapter. The cell membrane is
of particular importance for muscle cells and nerve
cells because it carries electrical impulses. This will be
covered in Chapters 7 and 8.
NUCLEUS
With the exception of mature red blood cells, all
human cells have a nucleus. The nucleus is within the
cytoplasm and is bounded by a double-layered nuclear
membrane with many pores. It contains one or more
nucleoli and the chromosomes of the cell (Fig. 3–2).
A nucleolus is a small sphere made of DNA, RNA,
and protein. The nucleoli form a type of RNA called
ribosomal RNA, which becomes part of ribosomes
(a cell organelle) and is involved in protein synthesis.
The nucleus is the control center of the cell
because it contains the chromosomes. Even with a
microscope, the 46 chromosomes of a human cell are
usually not visible; they are long threads called chro-
matin. Before a cell divides, however, the chromatin
coils extensively into visible chromosomes. Chromo-
somes are made of DNA and protein. Some chromo-
somal proteins provide the structural framework for
the coiling of the chromatin into chromosomes so
that cell division can take place. Other chromosomal
proteins help regulate the activity of the DNA.
Remember from our earlier discussion that the DNA
is the genetic code for the characteristics and activities
of the cell. Although the DNA in the nucleus of each
cell contains all of the genetic information for all
human traits, only a small number of genes (a gene is
the genetic code for one protein) are actually active, or
Cells
49
Receptor site
Outside of cell
Oligosaccharide antigens
Cholesterol
Inside of cell
Protein forming a pore
Phospholipid
bilayer
Figure 3–1.
The cell (plasma) membrane depicting the types of molecules present.
QUESTION: The receptor site shown is probably what type of organic molecule?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

“switched on,” in a particular cell. These active genes
are the codes for the proteins necessary for the speciﬁc
cell type and its functions. For example, the gene for
insulin is present in all human cells, but only in certain
islet cells of the pancreas is the gene active or switched
on. Only in these cells is insulin produced. How the
genetic code in chromosomes is translated into pro-
teins will be covered in a later section.
CYTOPLASM AND CELL ORGANELLES
Cytoplasm is a watery solution of minerals, gases,
organic molecules, and cell organelles that is found
between the cell membrane and the nucleus. Cytosol
is the water portion of cytoplasm, and many chemical
reactions take place within it. Cell organelles are
intracellular structures, often bounded by their own
50
Cells
Nuclear
membrane
Nucleolus
Nucleus
Chromatin
Golgi apparatus
Cilia
Microvilli
Smooth endoplasmic
reticulum
Centrioles
Cell membrane
Rough endoplasmic
reticulum
Ribosomes
Cytoplasm
Mitochondrion
Lysosome
Proteasome
Figure 3–2.
Generalized human cell depicting the structural components. See text and
Table 3–1 for descriptions.
QUESTION: How do cilia differ in structure from microvilli?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

membranes, that have speciﬁc functions in cellular
metabolism. They are also shown in Fig. 3–2.
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is an extensive
network of membranous tubules that extend from
the nuclear membrane to the cell membrane. Rough
ER has numerous ribosomes on its surface, whereas
smooth ER has no ribosomes. As a network of inter-
connected tunnels, the ER is a passageway for the
transport of the materials necessary for cell function
within the cell. These include proteins synthesized by
the ribosomes on the rough ER, and lipids synthesized
by the smooth ER.
Ribosomes are very small structures made of pro-
tein and ribosomal RNA. Some are found on the sur-
face of rough ER, while others ﬂoat freely within the
cytoplasm. Ribosomes are the site of protein synthesis.
The proteins produced may be structural proteins
such as collagen in the skin, enzymes, or hormones
such as insulin that regulate cellular processes. These
proteins may function within the cell or be secreted
from the cell to be used elsewhere in the body.
Our protein molecules are subject to damage, and
some cellular proteins, especially regulatory proteins,
may be needed just for a very short time. All such
proteins must be destroyed, and this is the function
of proteasomes. A proteasome is a barrel-shaped
organelle made of enzymes that cut protein molecules
apart (protease enzymes). Proteins that are to be des-
troyed, that is, those no longer needed or those that
are damaged or misfolded, are tagged by a protein
called ubiquitin (sort of a cellular mop or broom) and
carried into a proteasome. The protein is snipped
into peptides or amino acids, which may be used again
for protein synthesis on ribosomes. Proteasomes are
particularly important during cell division and during
embryonic development, when great changes are tak-
ing place very rapidly as cells become specialized.
Many of our cells have secretory functions, that is,
they produce speciﬁc products to be used elsewhere in
tissues. Secretion is one task of the Golgi apparatus,
a series of ﬂat, membranous sacs, somewhat like
a stack of saucers. Carbohydrates are synthesized
within the Golgi apparatus, and are packaged, along
with other materials, for secretion from the cell.
Proteins from the ribosomes or lipids from the
smooth endoplasmic reticulum may also be secreted in
this way. To secrete a substance, small sacs of the
Golgi membrane break off and fuse with the cell
membrane, releasing the substance to the exterior of
the cell. This is exocytosis, exo meaning “to go out”
of the cell.
Mitochondria are oval or spherical organelles
bounded by a double membrane. The inner mem-
brane has folds called cristae. Within the mitochon-
dria, the aerobic (oxygen-requiring) reactions of cell
respiration take place. Therefore, mitochondria are
the site of ATP (and hence energy) production. Cells
that require large amounts of ATP, such as muscle
cells, have many mitochondria to meet their need for
energy. Mitochondria contain their own genes in a
single DNA molecule and duplicate themselves when
a cell divides. An individual’s mitochondrial DNA
(mDNA) is of maternal origin, that is, from the mito-
chondria that were present in the ovum, or egg cell,
which was then fertilized by a sperm cell. The mito-
chondria of the sperm cell usually do not enter the
ovum during fertilization, because they are not found
in the head of the sperm with the chromosomes (see
Fig. 20–1).
Lysosomes are single-membrane structures that
contain digestive enzymes. When certain white blood
cells engulf bacteria, the bacteria are digested and
destroyed by these lysosomal enzymes. Worn-out cell
parts and dead cells are also digested by these enzymes.
This is a beneﬁcial process, and is necessary before tis-
sue repair can begin. But it does have a disadvantage in
that lysosomal digestion contributes to inﬂammation
in damaged tissues. An excess of inﬂammation can
start a vicious cycle, actually a positive feedback mech-
anism, that results in extensive tissue damage.
Many of our cells are capable of dividing, or repro-
ducing, themselves. Centrioles are a pair of rod-
shaped structures perpendicular to one another,
located just outside the nucleus. Their function is to
organize the spindle ﬁbers during cell division. The
spindle ﬁbers are contracting proteins that pull the
two sets of chromosomes apart, toward the ends of the
original cell as it divides into two new cells. Each new
cell then has a full set of chromosomes.
Cilia and ﬂagella are mobile thread-like projec-
tions through the cell membrane; each is anchored by
a basal body just within the membrane. Cilia are usu-
ally shorter than ﬂagella, and an individual cell has
many of them on its free surface. The cilia of a cell
beat in unison and sweep materials across the cell sur-
face. Cells lining the fallopian tubes, for example, have
cilia to sweep the egg cell toward the uterus. The only
human cell with a ﬂagellum is the sperm cell. The ﬂa-
gellum provides motility, or movement, for the sperm
cell.
Microvilli are folds of the cell membrane on the
free surface of a cell. These folds greatly increase the
Cells
51
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

surface area of the membrane, and are part of the cells
lining organs that absorb materials. The small intes-
tine, for example, requires a large surface area for the
absorption of nutrients, and many of its lining cells
have microvilli. Some cells of the kidney tubules also
have microvilli (see Fig. 1–1) that provide for the effi-
cient reabsorption of useful materials back to the
blood.
The functions of the cell organelles are summa-
rized in Table 3–1.
CELLULAR TRANSPORT
MECHANISMS
Living cells constantly interact with the blood or tis-
sue ﬂuid around them, taking in some substances and
secreting or excreting others. There are several mech-
anisms of transport that enable cells to move materials
into or out of the cell: diffusion, osmosis, facilitated
diffusion, active transport, ﬁltration, phagocytosis,
and pinocytosis. Some of these take place without the
52
Cells
Table 3–1 FUNCTIONS OF CELL
ORGANELLES
Organelle
Function
Endoplasmic
reticulum (ER)
Ribosomes
Proteasomes
Golgi apparatus
Mitochondria
Lysosomes
Centrioles
Cilia
Flagellum
Microvilli
• Passageway for transport of
materials within the cell
• Synthesis of lipids
• Site of protein synthesis
• Site of destruction of old
or damaged proteins
• Synthesis of carbohydrates
• Packaging of materials for secretion
from the cell
• Site of aerobic cell respiration—ATP
production
• Contain enzymes to digest ingested
material or damaged tissue
• Organize the spindle ﬁbers during
cell division
• Sweep materials across the cell
surface
• Enables a cell to move
• Increase a cell’s surface area for
absorption
expenditure of energy by the cells. But others do
require energy, often in the form of ATP. Each of
these mechanisms is described in the following sec-
tions and an example is included to show how each is
important to the body.
DIFFUSION
Diffusion is the movement of molecules from an area
of greater concentration to an area of lesser concen-
tration (that is, with or along a concentration gradi-
ent). Diffusion occurs because molecules have free
energy; that is, they are always in motion. The mole-
cules in a solid move very slowly; those in a liquid
move faster; and those in a gas move faster still, such
as when ice absorbs heat energy, melts, and then evap-
orates. Imagine a green sugar cube at the bottom of a
glass of water (green so that we can see it). As the
sugar dissolves, the sugar molecules collide with one
another or the water molecules, and the green color
seems to rise in the glass. These collisions spread out
the sugar molecules until they are evenly dispersed
among the water molecules (this would take a very
long time), and the water eventually becomes entirely
green. The molecules are still moving, but as some go
to the top, others go to the bottom, and so on. Thus,
an equilibrium (or steady state) is reached.
Diffusion is a very slow process, but may be an
effective transport mechanism across microscopic dis-
tances. Within the body, the gases oxygen and carbon
dioxide move by diffusion. In the lungs, for example,
there is a high concentration of oxygen in the alveoli
(air sacs) and a low concentration of oxygen in the
blood in the surrounding pulmonary capillaries (see
Fig. 3–3). The opposite is true for carbon dioxide: a
low concentration in the air in the alveoli and a high
concentration in the blood in the pulmonary capillar-
ies. These gases diffuse in opposite directions, each
moving from where there is more to where there is
less. Oxygen diffuses from the air to the blood to be
circulated throughout the body. Carbon dioxide dif-
fuses from the blood to the air to be exhaled.
OSMOSIS
Osmosis may be simply deﬁned as the diffusion of
water through a selectively permeable membrane.
That is, water will move from an area with more water
present to an area with less water. Another way to say
this is that water will naturally tend to move to an area
where there is more dissolved material, such as salt or
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

sugar. If a 2% salt solution and a 6% salt solution are
separated by a membrane allowing water but not salt
to pass through it, water will diffuse from the 2% salt
solution to the 6% salt solution. The result is that the
2% solution will become more concentrated, and the
6% solution will become more dilute.
In the body, the cells lining the small intestine
absorb water from digested food by osmosis. These
cells have ﬁrst absorbed salts, have become more
“salty,” and water follows salt into the cells (see Fig.
3–3). The process of osmosis also takes place in the
kidneys, which reabsorb large amounts of water (many
gallons each day) to prevent its loss in urine. Box 3–1:
Terminology of Solutions lists some terminology we
use when discussing solutions and the effects of vari-
ous solutions on cells.
Cells
53
BOX 3–1
TERMINOLOGY OF SOLUTIONS
Human cells or other body ﬂuids contain many dis-
solved substances (called solutes) such as salts,
sugars, acids, and bases. The concentration of
solutes in a ﬂuid creates the osmotic pressure of
the solution, which in turn determines the move-
ment of water through membranes.
As an example here, we will use sodium chloride
(NaCl). Human cells have an NaCl concentration of
0.9%. With human cells as a reference point, the
relative NaCl concentrations of other solutions may
be described with the following terms:
Isotonic—a solution with the same salt concentra-
tion as in cells.
The blood plasma is isotonic to red blood cells.
Hypotonic—a solution with a lower salt concentra-
tion than in cells.
Distilled water (0% salt) is hypotonic to human
cells.
Hypertonic—a solution with a higher salt concen-
tration than in cells.
Seawater (3% salt) is hypertonic to human cells.
Refer now to the diagrams shown in Box
Figure 3–A of red blood cells (RBCs) in each
of these different types of solutions, and
note the effect of each on osmosis:
• When RBCs are in plasma, water moves into
and out of them at equal rates, and the cells
remain normal in size and water content.
• If RBCs are placed in distilled water, more
water will enter the cells than leave, and the
cells will swell and eventually burst.
• If RBCs are placed in seawater, more water will
leave the cells than enter, and the cells will
shrivel and die.
This knowledge of osmotic pressure is used
when replacement ﬂuids are needed for a patient
who has become dehydrated. Isotonic solutions
are usually used; normal saline and Ringer’s solu-
tion are examples. These will provide rehydration
without causing osmotic damage to cells or
extensive shifts of ﬂuid between the blood and
tissues.
Box Figure 3–A
Red blood cells in different solutions and the effect of osmosis in each.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

FACILITATED DIFFUSION
The word facilitate means to help or assist. In facili-
tated diffusion, molecules move through a membrane
from an area of greater concentration to an area of
lesser concentration, but they need some help to do
this.
In the body, our cells must take in glucose to use for
ATP production. Glucose, however, will not diffuse
through most cell membranes by itself, even if there is
more outside the cell than inside. Diffusion of glucose
into most cells requires a glucose transporter, which
may also be called a carrier enzyme. These trans-
porters are proteins that are part of the cell mem-
brane. Glucose bonds to the transporter (see Fig. 3–3),
and by doing so changes the shape of the protein. This
physical change propels the glucose into the interior
of the cell. Other transporters are speciﬁc for other
organic molecules such as amino acids.
ACTIVE TRANSPORT
Active transport requires the energy of ATP to move
molecules from an area of lesser concentration to an
area of greater concentration. Notice that this is the
opposite of diffusion, in which the free energy of mol-
ecules causes them to move to where there are fewer
of them. Active transport is therefore said to be move-
ment against a concentration gradient.
In the body, nerve cells and muscle cells have
“sodium pumps” to move sodium ions (Na) out of
the cells. Sodium ions are more abundant outside the
cells, and they constantly diffuse into the cell (through
speciﬁc diffusion channels), their area of lesser con-
centration (see Fig. 3–3). Without the sodium pumps
to return them outside, the incoming sodium ions
would bring about an unwanted nerve impulse or
muscle contraction. Nerve and muscle cells constantly
produce ATP to keep their sodium pumps (and simi-
lar potassium pumps) working and prevent sponta-
neous impulses.
Another example of active transport is the absorp-
tion of glucose and amino acids by the cells lining
the small intestine. The cells use ATP to absorb these
nutrients from digested food, even when their intra-
cellular concentration becomes greater than their
extracellular concentration.
FILTRATION
The process of ﬁltration also requires energy, but the
energy needed does not come directly from ATP. It is
the energy of mechanical pressure. Filtration means
that water and dissolved materials are forced through
a membrane from an area of higher pressure to an area
of lower pressure.
In the body, blood pressure is created by the
54
Cells
Table 3–2
CELLULAR TRANSPORT MECHANISMS
Mechanism
Deﬁnition
Example in the Body
Diffusion
Osmosis
Facilitated diffusion
Active transport
Filtration
Phagocytosis
Pinocytosis
Movement of molecules from an area of
greater concentration to an area of
lesser concentration.
The diffusion of water.
Carrier and transporter enzymes move mole-
cules across cell membranes.
Movement of molecules from an area of
lesser concentration to an area of greater
concentration (requires ATP).
Movement of water and dissolved substances
from an area of higher pressure to an area
of lower pressure (blood pressure).
A moving cell engulfs something.
A stationary cell engulfs something.
Exchange of gases in the lungs or body tissues.
Absorption of water by the small intestine
or kidneys.
Intake of glucose by most cells.
Absorption of amino acids and glucose from food
by the cells of the small intestine.
Sodium and potassium pumps in muscle and
nerve cells.
Formation of tissue ﬂuid; the ﬁrst step in the for-
mation of urine.
White blood cells engulf bacteria.
Cells of the kidney tubules reabsorb small proteins.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

55
•
A   Diffusion
B   Osmosis
C   Facilitated Diffusion
D   Active transport
E   Filtration
F   Phagocytosis
G   Pinocytosis
Small protein
Cell of
kidney
tubule
•
•
•
Lysosome
Bacterium
White blood cell
•
•
•
•
•
H2O
BP
Glucose
Amino
acid
RBC
Capillary in
tissues
•
•
•
•
Cell
membrane
Na+
Tissue fluid
ATP Active
transport
channel
Cytoplasm
Diffusion
channel
•
•
•
Cell membrane of intestinal cell
H2O
Na+
Cytoplasm
•
Alveolus of lung
•
Capillary
O2
O2
O2
O2
O2
O2
O2
O2
O2
O2
O2
CO2 CO2
CO2
CO2
CO2
CO2
•
Glucose
•
Transporter
Cytoplasm
Tissue fluid
•
Cell membrane
Figure 3–3.
Cellular transport mechanisms. (A) Diffusion in an alveolus in the lung.
(B) Osmosis in the small intestine. (C) Facilitated diffusion in a muscle cell. (D) Active trans-
port in a muscle cell. (E) Filtration in a capillary. (F) Phagocytosis by a white blood cell.
(G) Pinocytosis by a cell of the kidney tubules. See text for description.
QUESTION: Which mechanism depends on blood pressure? Which depends on the move-
ment of a cell?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

pumping of the heart. Filtration occurs when blood
ﬂows through capillaries, whose walls are only one
cell thick and very permeable. The blood pressure in
capillaries is higher than the pressure of the surround-
ing tissue ﬂuid. In capillaries throughout the body,
blood pressure forces plasma (water) and dissolved
materials through the capillary membranes into the
surrounding tissue spaces (see Fig. 3–3). This cre-
ates more tissue ﬂuid and is how cells receive glu-
cose, amino acids, and other nutrients. Blood pressure
in the capillaries of the kidneys also brings about
ﬁltration, which is the ﬁrst step in the formation of
urine.
PHAGOCYTOSIS AND PINOCYTOSIS
These two processes are similar in that both involve a
cell engulﬁng something, and both are forms of endo-
cytosis, endo meaning “to take into” a cell. An exam-
ple of phagocytosis is a white blood cell engulﬁng
bacteria. The white blood cell ﬂows around the bac-
terium (see Fig. 3–3), taking it in and eventually
digesting it. Digestion is accomplished by the enzymes
in the cell’s lysosomes.
Other cells that are stationary may take in small
molecules that become adsorbed or attached to their
membranes. The cells of the kidney tubules reabsorb
small proteins by pinocytosis (see Fig. 3–3) so that
the protein is not lost in urine.
Table 3–2 summarizes the cellular transport mech-
anisms.
THE GENETIC CODE
AND PROTEIN SYNTHESIS
The structure of DNA, RNA, and protein was
described in Chapter 2. We will review some of the
essentials here, and go a step further with a simple
description of how all of these organic molecules are
involved in the process of protein synthesis.
DNA AND THE GENETIC CODE
DNA is a double strand of nucleotides in the form of
a double helix, very much like a spiral ladder. The
uprights of the ladder are made of alternating phos-
phate groups and deoxyribose sugar molecules. The
rungs of the ladder are made of the four nitrogenous
bases, always found in complementary pairs: adenine
with thymine (A–T) and guanine with cytosine (G–C).
Although DNA contains just these four bases, the
bases may be arranged in many different sequences
(reading up or down the ladder). It is the sequence of
bases, the sequence of A, T, C, and G, that is the
genetic code. The DNA of our 46 chromosomes may
also be called our genome, which is the term for the
total genetic information in a particular species. The
human genome is believed to contain about 3 billion
base pairs, and the number of our genes is now esti-
mated to be between 20,000 and 25,000 (or perhaps as
many as 30,000, but much lower than previously
thought).
56
Cells
Table 3–3
PROTEIN SYNTHESIS
Molecule or Organelle
Function
DNA
mRNA (messenger RNA)
Ribosomes
tRNA (transfer RNA)
• A double strand (helix) of nucleotides that is the genetic code in the chromosomes
of cells.
• A gene is the sequence of bases (segment of DNA) that is the code for one protein.
• A single strand of nucleotides formed as a complementary copy of a gene in the DNA.
• Now contains the triplet code: three bases is the code for one amino acid (a codon).
• Leaves the DNA in the nucleus, enters the cytoplasm of the cell, and becomes
attached to ribosomes.
• The cell organelles that are the site of protein synthesis.
• Attach the mRNA molecule.
• Contain enzymes to form peptide bonds between amino acids.
• Picks up amino acids (from food) in the cytoplasm and transports them to their proper
sites (triplets) along the mRNA molecule; has anticodons to match mRNA codons.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

57
Cell nucleus
Nuclear pore
Nuclear membrane
A
A   Codon
A
DNA
Amino acids
Peptide bonds
mRNA
tRNA
Ribosome
Anticodon
A
A
G
C
A
U
A
A
A
G
U
C
U
U
U
G
U
A
U
U
U
Figure 3–4.
Protein synthesis. The mRNA is formed as a copy of a portion of the DNA in
the nucleus of a cell. In the cytoplasm, the mRNA becomes attached to ribosomes. See text
for further description.
QUESTION: A tRNA molecule has two attachment sites; what is each for?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Recall that in Chapter 2 you read that a gene is the
genetic code for one protein. This is a simpliﬁcation,
and the functioning of genes is often much more com-
plex. We have genes with segments that may be shuf-
ﬂed or associated in many combinations, with the
potential for coding for many more proteins. A full
explanation is beyond the scope of our book, so for the
sake of simplicity, and in the following discussion, we
will say that a gene is the code for one protein. Recall
too that a protein is a speciﬁc sequence of amino acids.
Therefore, a gene, or segment of DNA, is the code for
the sequence of amino acids in a particular protein.
The code for a single amino acid consists of three
bases in the DNA molecule; this triplet of bases may
be called a codon (see Fig. 3–4). There is a triplet of
bases in the DNA for each amino acid in the protein.
If a protein consists of 100 amino acids, the gene for
that protein would consist of 100 triplets, or 300 bases.
Some of the triplets will be the same, since the same
amino acid may be present in several places within the
protein. Also part of the gene are other triplets that
start and stop the process of making the protein,
rather like capital letters or punctuation marks start
and stop sentences.
RNA AND PROTEIN SYNTHESIS
RNA, the other nucleic acid, has become a surprising
molecule, in that it has been found to have quite a few
functions. It may be involved in the repair of DNA,
and it is certainly involved in gene expression. The
expression of a gene means that the product of the
gene is somehow apparent to us, in a way we can see
or measure, or is not apparent when it should be.
Examples would be having brown eyes or blue eyes, or
having or not having the intestinal enzyme lactase to
digest milk sugar. Although these functions of RNA
are essential for us, they too are beyond the scope of
our book, so the roles of RNA in the process of pro-
tein synthesis will be our focus.
The transcription and translation of the genetic
code in DNA into proteins require RNA. DNA is
found in the chromosomes in the nucleus of the cell,
but protein synthesis takes place on the ribosomes in
the cytoplasm. Messenger RNA (mRNA) is the
intermediary molecule between these two sites.
When a protein is to be made, the segment of DNA
that is its gene uncoils, and the hydrogen bonds
between the base pairs break (see Fig. 3–4). Within
the nucleus are RNA nucleotides (A, C, G, U) and
enzymes to construct a single strand of nucleotides
that is a complementary copy of half the DNA gene
(with uracil in place of thymine). This process is tran-
scription, or copying, and the copy of the gene is
mRNA, which now has the codons for the amino acids
of the protein, and then separates from the DNA. The
gene coils back into the double helix, and the mRNA
leaves the nucleus, enters the cytoplasm, and becomes
attached to ribosomes.
As the copy of the gene, mRNA is a series of triplets
of bases; each triplet is a codon, the code for one
amino acid. Another type of RNA, called transfer
RNA (tRNA), is also found in the cytoplasm. Each
tRNA molecule has an anticodon, a triplet comple-
mentary to a triplet on the mRNA. The tRNA
molecules pick up speciﬁc amino acids (which have
come from protein in our food) and bring them to
their proper triplets on the mRNA. This process is
translation; that is, it is as if we are translating from
one language to another—the language of nucleotide
bases to that of amino acids. The ribosomes contain
enzymes to catalyze the formation of peptide bonds
between the amino acids. When an amino acid has
been brought to each triplet on the mRNA, and
all peptide bonds have been formed, the protein is
ﬁnished.
The protein then leaves the ribosomes and may be
transported by the endoplasmic reticulum to wherever
it is needed in the cell, or it may be packaged by the
Golgi apparatus for secretion from the cell. A sum-
mary of the process of protein synthesis is found in
Table 3–3.
Thus, the expression of the genetic code may be
described by the following sequence:
Each of us is the sum total of our genetic charac-
teristics. Blood type, hair color, muscle proteins, nerve
cells, and thousands of other aspects of our structure
and functioning have their basis in the genetic code of
DNA.
If there is a “mistake” in the DNA, that is, incorrect
bases or triplets of bases, this mistake will be copied by
the mRNA. The result is the formation of a malfunc-
tioning or non-functioning protein. This is called a
genetic or hereditary disease, and a speciﬁc example
is described in Box 3–2: Genetic Disease—Sickle-Cell
Anemia.
DNA
RNA
Proteins:
Structural
Enzymes
Catalyze Reactions
Hereditary Characteristics
Proteins
58
Cells
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

59
BOX 3–2
GENETIC DISEASE—SICKLE-CELL ANEMIA
Normal hemoglobin
Normal red blood cells (RBCs)
Sickle red blood cells
Sickle
hemoglobin
(HbS)
Deoxygenation
α
β
β
α
Iron in heme
Box Figure 3–B
Structure of hemo-
globin A and sickle-cell hemoglobin and
their effect on red blood cells.
A genetic disease is a hereditary disorder, one
that may be passed from generation to generation.
Although there are hundreds of genetic diseases,
they all have the same basis: a mistake in DNA.
Because DNA makes up the chromosomes that are
found in eggs and sperm, this mistake may be
passed from parents to children.
Sickle-cell anemia is the most common genetic
disorder among people of African descent and
affects the hemoglobin in red blood cells. Normal
hemoglobin, called hemoglobin A (HbA), is a pro-
tein made of two alpha chains (141 amino acids
each) and two beta chains (146 amino acids each).
In sickle-cell hemoglobin (HbS), the sixth amino
acid in each beta chain is incorrect; valine instead of
the glutamic acid found in HbA. This difference
seems minor—only 2 incorrect amino acids out of
more than 500—but the consequences for the per-
son are very serious.
HbS has a great tendency to crystallize when
oxygen levels are low, as is true in capillaries. When
HbS crystallizes, the red blood cells are deformed
into crescents (sickles) and other irregular shapes.
These irregular, rigid red blood cells clog and rup-
ture capillaries, causing internal bleeding and
severe pain. These cells are also fragile and break up
easily, leading to anemia and hypoxia (lack of oxy-
gen). Treatment of this disease has improved
greatly, but it is still incurable.
What has happened to cause the formation of
HbS rather than HbA? Hemoglobin is a protein; the
gene for its beta chain is in DNA (chromosome 11).
One amino acid in the beta chains is incorrect,
therefore, one triplet in its DNA gene must be, and
is, incorrect. This mistake is copied by mRNA in the
cells of the red bone marrow, and HbS is synthe-
sized in red blood cells.
Sickle-cell anemia is a recessive genetic disease,
which means that a person with one gene for HbS
and one gene for HbA will have “sickle-cell trait.”
Such a person usually will not have the severe
effects of sickle-cell anemia, but may pass the gene
for HbS to children. It is estimated that 9% of
African-Americans have sickle-cell trait and about
1% have sickle-cell anemia.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CELL DIVISION
Cell division is the process by which a cell reproduces
itself. There are two types of cell division, mitosis and
meiosis. Although both types involve cell reproduc-
tion, their purposes are very different.
MITOSIS
Each of us began life as one cell, a fertilized egg. Each
of us now consists of billions of cells produced by the
process of mitosis. In mitosis, one cell with the
diploid number of chromosomes (the usual number,
46 for people) divides into two identical cells, each
with the diploid number of chromosomes. This pro-
duction of identical cells is necessary for the growth of
the organism and for repair of tissues (see also Box
3–3: Abnormal Cellular Functioning—Cancer).
Before mitosis can take place, a cell must have two
complete sets of chromosomes, because each new cell
must have the diploid number. The process of DNA
replication enables each chromosome (in the form of
chromatin) to make a copy of itself. The time during
which this takes place is called interphase, the time
between mitotic divisions. Although interphase is
sometimes referred to as the resting stage, resting
means “not dividing” rather than “inactive.” The cell
is quite actively producing a second set of chromo-
somes and storing energy in ATP.
The long, thin, and invisible chromatin molecules
then begin to coil very precisely and extensively, and if
we were looking at the nucleus of a living cell under a
microscope, we would see the duplicated chromo-
somes appear. Each would look somewhat like the let-
ter X, because the original DNA molecule and its copy
(now called chromatids) are still attached.
The stages of mitosis are prophase, metaphase,
anaphase, and telophase. What happens in each of
these stages is described in Table 3–4. As you read the
events of each stage, refer to Fig. 3–5, which depicts
mitosis in a cell with a diploid number of four.
As mentioned previously, mitosis is essential for
repair of tissues, to replace damaged or dead cells.
Some examples may help illustrate this. In several
areas of the body, mitosis takes place constantly. These
sites include the epidermis of the skin, the stomach
lining, and the red bone marrow. For each of these
sites, there is a speciﬁc reason why this constant mito-
sis is necessary.
What happens to the surface of the skin? The dead,
outer cells are worn off by contact with the environ-
ment. Mitosis of the epidermal cells in the lower liv-
ing layer replaces these cells, and the epidermis
maintains its normal thickness.
The stomach lining, although internal, is also con-
stantly worn away. Gastric juice, especially hydrochlo-
ric acid, is very damaging to cells. Rapid mitosis of the
several kinds of lining cells replaces damaged cells and
keeps the stomach lining intact.
One of the functions of red bone marrow is the
production of red blood cells. Because red blood cells
have a life span of only about 120 days, new ones are
needed to replace the older ones that die. Very rapid
mitosis in the red bone marrow produces approxi-
mately 2 million new red blood cells every second.
These dividing cells in the red bone marrow are
among the stem cells present in the body. A stem cell
is an unspecialized cell that may develop into several
different kinds of cells. Stem cells in the red bone mar-
row may become red blood cells, white blood cells, or
platelets. These marrow stem cells are often called
adult stem cells, and many, if not all, of the body’s
organs have such cells. Embryonic stem cells will be
described in a later chapter; these are cells in which all
of the DNA still has the potential to be active. They
may become any of the more than 200 different kinds
of human cells. The stem cells found in the umbilical
cords of newborns are between the adult and embry-
onic cells in terms of their potential.
It is also important to be aware of the areas of the
body where mitosis does not take place. In an adult,
most muscle cells and neurons (nerve cells) do not
reproduce themselves. If they die, their functions are
also lost. Someone whose spinal cord has been severed
will have paralysis and loss of sensation below the level
of the injury. The spinal cord neurons do not undergo
mitosis to replace the ones that were lost, and such an
injury is permanent.
Skeletal muscle cells are capable of limited mitosis
for repair. The heart is made of cardiac muscle cells,
which, like neurons, seem to be incapable of mitosis. A
heart attack (myocardial infarction) means that a por-
tion of cardiac muscle dies because of lack of oxygen.
These cells are not replaced, and the heart will be a
less effective pump. If a large enough area of the heart
muscle dies, the heart attack may be fatal.
Some research has found evidence for the potential
for mitosis after damage in both the central nervous
system and the heart. Such cell division may be that of
neurons or muscle cells that were stimulated to divide
60
Cells
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

by chemicals from the adjacent damaged tissue. Or the
dividing cells may be stem cells that are among the
specialized cells. (A region of the brain called the hip-
pocampus, which is necessary to form new memories,
seems to have cells capable of division.) At present we
do not have deﬁnitive knowledge, but we do know that
for most people with heart damage or central nervous
system injury, mitosis does not take place, or not suf-
ﬁciently enough to replace the cells that have died and
preserve or restore normal functioning of the organ.
Research is continuing, and may eventually ﬁnd the
stimulus necessary to produce extended mitosis that
would bring about true tissue repair.
MEIOSIS
Meiosis is a more complex process of cell division that
results in the formation of gametes, which are egg
and sperm cells. In meiosis, one cell with the diploid
number of chromosomes divides twice to form four
Cells
61
BOX 3–3
ABNORMAL CELLULAR FUNCTIONING—CANCER
the trigger is believed to be infection with certain
viruses that cause cellular mutations. Carriers of
hepatitis B virus, for example, are more likely to
develop primary liver cancer than are people who
have never been exposed to this virus. Research has
discovered two genes, one on chromosome 2 and
the other on chromosome 3, that contribute to a
certain form of colon cancer. Both of these genes
are the codes for proteins that correct the “mis-
takes” that may occur when the new DNA is syn-
thesized. When these repair proteins do not
function properly, the mistakes (mutations) in the
DNA lead to the synthesis of yet other faulty pro-
teins that impair the functioning of the cell and pre-
dispose it to becoming malignant.
Once cells have become malignant, their func-
tioning cannot return to normal, and though the
immune system will often destroy such cells, some-
times it does not, especially as we get older.
Therefore, the treatments for cancer are directed at
removing or destroying the abnormal cells. Surgery
to remove tumors, radiation to destroy cells, and
chemotherapy to stop cell division or interfere
with other aspects of cell metabolism are all aspects
of cancer treatment.
New chemotherapy drugs are becoming more
speciﬁc, with very precise targets. For example, the
cells of several types of solid-tumor cancers have
been found to have mutations in the gene for the
cell membrane receptor for a natural growth factor
(epidermal growth factor receptor, or EGFR). These
altered receptors, when triggered by their usual
growth factor, then cause the cell to divide uncon-
trollably, an abnormal response. Medications that
target only these altered receptors have already
been developed for some forms of lung cancer and
breast cancer. Not only do they show promise in
treating the cancer, they do not have the side
effects of other forms of chemotherapy.
There are more than 200 different types of cancer,
all of which are characterized by abnormal cellular
functioning. Normally, our cells undergo mitosis
only when necessary and stop when appropriate. A
cut in the skin, for example, is repaired by mitosis,
usually without formation of excess tissue. The new
cells ﬁll in the damaged area, and mitosis slows
when the cells make contact with surrounding cells.
This is called contact inhibition, which limits the
new tissue to just what is needed. Malignant
(cancer) cells, however, are characterized by uncon-
trolled cell division. Our cells are genetically pro-
grammed to have particular life spans and to divide
or die. One gene is known to act as a brake on cell
division; another gene enables cells to live indeﬁ-
nitely, beyond their normal life span, and to keep
dividing. Any imbalance in the activity of these
genes may lead to abnormal cell division. Such cells
are not inhibited by contact with other cells, keep
dividing, and tend to spread.
A malignant tumor begins in a primary site such
as the colon, then may spread or metastasize. Often
the malignant cells are carried by the lymph or
blood to other organs such as the liver, where sec-
ondary tumors develop. Metastasis is characteris-
tic only of malignant cells; benign tumors do not
metastasize but remain localized in their primary
site.
What causes normal cells to become malignant?
At present, we have only partial answers. A malig-
nant cell is created by a mutation, a genetic
change that brings about abnormal cell functions
or responses and often leads to a series of muta-
tions. Environmental substances that cause muta-
tions are called carcinogens. One example is the
tar found in cigarette smoke, which is deﬁnitely a
cause of lung cancer. Ultraviolet light may also
cause mutations, especially in skin that is overex-
posed to sunlight. For a few speciﬁc kinds of cancer,
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

cells, each with the haploid number (half the usual
number) of chromosomes. In women, meiosis takes
place in the ovaries and is called oogenesis. In men,
meiosis takes place in the testes and is called sper-
matogenesis. The differences between oogenesis and
spermatogenesis will be discussed in Chapter 20, The
Reproductive Systems.
The egg and sperm cells produced by meiosis have
the haploid number of chromosomes, which is 23 for
humans. Meiosis is sometimes called reduction divi-
sion because the division process reduces the chromo-
some number in the egg or sperm. Then, during
fertilization, in which the egg unites with the sperm,
the 23 chromosomes of the sperm plus the 23 chro-
mosomes of the egg will restore the diploid number
of 46 in the fertilized egg. Thus, the proper chromo-
62
Cells
Interphase
Nucleus
Prophase
Centrioles
Pair of chromatids
Centromere
Equator of cell
Spindle
fibers
Metaphase
Anaphase
Nuclear membrane re-forms
Telophase
Cytoplasm divides
Figure 3–5.
Stages of mitosis in a cell with the diploid number of four. See Table 3–4 for
description.
QUESTION: In prophase, what is a pair of chromatids made of?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

some number is maintained in the cells of the new
individual.
AGING AND CELLS
Multicellular organisms, including people, age and
eventually die; our cells do not have inﬁnite life spans.
It has been proposed that some cells capable of mito-
sis are limited to a certain number of divisions; that is,
every division is sort of a tick-tock off a biological
clock. We do not yet know exactly what this cellular
biological clock is. There is evidence that the ends of
chromosomes, called telomeres, may be an aspect of it.
With each cell division, part of the telomeres is lost
(rather like a piece of rope fraying at both ends), and
eventually the telomeres are gone. With the next divi-
sion, the ends of the chromosomes, actual genes,
begin to be lost. This may be one signal that a cell’s life
span has come to an end (there are probably many dif-
ferent kinds of signals).
Cellular aging also involves the inevitable deterio-
ration of membranes and cell organelles. Just as the
parts of a car break down in time, so too will cells.
Unlike cars or machines, however, cells can often
repair themselves, but they do have limits. As cells
age, structural proteins break down and are not
replaced, or necessary enzymes are not synthesized.
Proteins called chaperones, which are responsible
for the proper folding of many other proteins and
for the repair or disposal of damaged proteins, no
longer function as well as cells age. Without chaper-
ones, damaged proteins accumulate within cells and
disrupt normal cellular processes. Clinical manifesta-
tions of impaired chaperones include cataracts (see
Box 9–1) and neurodegenerative diseases such as
Alzheimer’s disease (see Box 8–6), Parkinson’s dis-
ease (see Box 8–7), and Huntington’s disease (see
Table 21–4).
Much about the chemistry of the aging process
remains a mystery, though we can describe what hap-
pens to organs and to the body as a whole. Each of the
following chapters on body systems provides a brief
discussion of how aging affects the system. Keep in
mind that a system is the sum of its cells, in tissues and
organs, and that all aging is ultimately at the cellular
level.
SUMMARY
As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, human
cells work closely together and function interdepend-
ently. Each type of human cell makes a contribution to
the body as a whole. Usually, however, cells do not
function as individuals, but rather in groups. Groups
of cells with similar structure and function form a tis-
sue, which is the next level of organization.
Cells
63
Table 3–4
STAGES OF MITOSIS
Stage
Events
Prophase
Metaphase
Anaphase
Telophase
Cytokinesis
1. The chromosomes coil up and become visible as short rods. Each chromosome is really two
chromatids (original DNA plus its copy) still attached at a region called the centromere.
2. The nuclear membrane disappears.
3. The centrioles move toward opposite poles of the cell and organize the spindle ﬁbers,
which extend across the equator of the cell.
1. The pairs of chromatids line up along the equator of the cell. The centromere of each pair
is attached to a spindle ﬁber.
2. The centromeres now divide.
1. Each chromatid is now considered a separate chromosome; there are two complete and
separate sets.
2. The spindle ﬁbers contract and pull the chromosomes, one set toward each pole of the cell.
1. The sets of chromosomes reach the poles of the cell and become indistinct as their DNA
uncoils to form chromatin.
2. A nuclear membrane re-forms around each set of chromosomes.
1. The cytoplasm divides; new cell membrane is formed.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Human cells vary in size, shape, and function.
Our cells function interdependently to main-
tain homeostasis.
Cell Structure—the major parts of a cell are
the cell membrane, nucleus (except mature
RBCs), cytoplasm, and cell organelles
1. Cell membrane—the selectively permeable bound-
ary of the cell (see Fig. 3–1).
• Phospholipids permit diffusion of lipid-soluble
materials.
• Cholesterol provides stability.
• Proteins form channels, transporters, “self” anti-
gens, and receptor sites for hormones or other
signaling molecules.
2. Nucleus—the control center of the cell; has a
double-layer membrane.
• Nucleolus—forms ribosomal RNA.
• Chromosomes—made of DNA and protein;
DNA is the genetic code for the structure and
functioning of the cell. A gene is a segment of
DNA that is the code for one protein. Human
cells have 46 chromosomes, and their genetic
information is called the genome.
3. Cytoplasm—a watery solution of minerals, gases,
and organic molecules; contains the cell organelles;
site for many chemical reactions.
4. Cell organelles—intracellular structures with spe-
ciﬁc functions (see Table 3–1 and Fig. 3–2).
Cellular Transport Mechanisms—the proces-
ses by which cells take in or secrete or
excrete materials through the selectively
permeable cell membrane (see Fig. 3–3 and
Table 3–2).
1. Diffusion—movement of molecules from an area
of greater concentration to an area of lesser con-
centration; occurs because molecules have free
energy: They are constantly in motion. Oxygen
and carbon dioxide are exchanged by diffusion in
the lungs and tissues.
2. Osmosis—the diffusion of water. Water diffuses to
an area of less water, that is, to an area of more dis-
solved material. The small intestine absorbs water
from digested food by osmosis. Isotonic, hyper-
tonic, and hypotonic (see Box 3–1).
3. Facilitated 
diffusion—transporters 
(carrier
enzymes) that are part of the cell membrane permit
cells to take in materials that would not diffuse by
themselves. Most cells take in glucose by facilitated
diffusion.
4. Active transport—a cell uses ATP to move sub-
stances from an area of lesser concentration to an
area of greater concentration. Nerve cells and mus-
cle cells have sodium pumps to return Na ions to
the exterior of the cells; this prevents spontaneous
impulses. Cells of the small intestine absorb glu-
cose and amino acids from digested food by active
transport.
5. Filtration—pressure forces water and dissolved
materials through a membrane from an area of
higher pressure to an area of lower pressure. Tissue
ﬂuid is formed by ﬁltration: Blood pressure forces
plasma and dissolved nutrients out of capillaries
and into tissues. Blood pressure in the kidney cap-
illaries creates ﬁltration, which is the ﬁrst step in
the formation of urine.
6. Phagocytosis—(a form of endocytosis) a moving
cell engulfs something; white blood cells phagocy-
tize bacteria to destroy them.
7. Pinocytosis—(a form of endocytosis) a stationary
cell engulfs small molecules; kidney tubule cells
reabsorb small proteins by pinocytosis.
The Genetic Code and Protein Synthesis (see
Fig. 3–4 and Table 3–3)
1. DNA and the genetic code
• DNA is a double helix with complementary base
pairing: A–T and G–C.
• The sequence of bases in the DNA is the genetic
code for proteins.
• The triplet code: three bases (a codon) is the
code for one amino acid.
• A gene consists of all the triplets that code for a
single protein.
2. RNA and protein synthesis
• Transcription—mRNA is formed as a comple-
mentary copy of the sequence of bases in a gene
(DNA).
• mRNA moves from the nucleus to the ribosomes
in the cytoplasm.
• tRNA molecules (in the cytoplasm) have anti-
codons for the triplets on the mRNA.
• Translation—tRNA molecules bring amino acids
to their proper triplets on the mRNA.
• Ribosomes contain enzymes to form peptide
bonds between the amino acids.
3. Expression of the genetic code
64
Cells
STUDY OUTLINE
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

• DNA →RNA →proteins (structural proteins
and enzymes that catalyze reactions) →heredi-
tary characteristics.
• A genetic disease is a “mistake” in the DNA,
which is copied by mRNA and results in a mal-
functioning protein.
Cell Division
1. Mitosis—one cell with the diploid number of chro-
mosomes divides once to form two cells, each with
the diploid number of chromosomes (46 for
humans).
• DNA replication forms two sets of chromosomes
during interphase.
• Stages of mitosis (see Fig. 3–5 and Table 3–4):
prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase.
Cytokinesis is the division of the cytoplasm fol-
lowing telophase.
• Mitosis is essential for growth and for repair and
replacement of damaged cells.
• Most adult nerve and muscle cells seem unable to
divide; their loss may involve permanent loss of
function.
2. Meiosis—one cell with the diploid number of chro-
mosomes divides twice to form four cells, each with
the haploid number of chromosomes (23 for
humans).
• Oogenesis in the ovaries forms egg cells.
• Spermatogenesis in the testes forms sperm cells.
• Fertilization of an egg by a sperm restores the
diploid number in the fertilized egg.
Cells
65
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. State the functions of the organic molecules of
cell membranes: cholesterol, proteins, and phos-
pholipids. (p. 48)
2. Describe the function of each of these cell
organelles: mitochondria, lysosomes, Golgi appa-
ratus, ribosomes, proteasomes, and endoplasmic
reticulum. (p. 51)
3. Explain why the nucleus is the control center of
the cell. (p. 49)
4. What part of the cell membrane is necessary for
facilitated diffusion? Describe one way this
process is important within the body. (p. 54)
5. What provides the energy for ﬁltration? Describe
one way this process is important within the body.
(p. 54)
6. What provides the energy for diffusion? Describe
one way this process is important within the body.
(p. 52)
7. What provides the energy for active transport?
Describe one way this process is important within
the body. (p. 54)
8. Deﬁne osmosis, and describe one way this process
is important within the body. (p. 52–53)
9. Explain the difference between hypertonic and
hypotonic, using human cells as a reference point.
(p. 53)
10. In what way are phagocytosis and pinocytosis sim-
ilar? Describe one way each process is important
within the body. (p. 56)
11. How many chromosomes does a human cell have?
What are these chromosomes made of? (p. 56)
12. Name the stage of mitosis in which each of the
following takes place: (p. 63)
a. The two sets of chromosomes are pulled
toward opposite poles of the cell
b. The chromosomes become visible as short rods
c. A nuclear membrane re-forms around each
complete set of chromosomes
d. The pairs of chromatids line up along the
equator of the cell
e. The centrioles organize the spindle ﬁbers
f. Cytokinesis takes place after this stage
13. Describe two speciﬁc ways mitosis is important
within the body. Explain why meiosis is impor-
tant. (pp. 60, 62)
14. Compare mitosis and meiosis in terms of: (pp.
60–62)
a. Number of divisions
b. Number of cells formed
c. Chromosome number of the cells formed
15. Explain the triplet code of DNA. Name the mol-
ecule that copies the triplet code of DNA. Name
the organelle that is the site of protein synthesis.
What other function does this organelle have in
protein formation? (pp. 56–58)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

1. Antibiotics are drugs used to treat bacterial infec-
tions. Some antibiotics disrupt the process of pro-
tein synthesis within bacteria. Others block DNA
synthesis and cell division by the bacteria. Still oth-
ers inhibit cell wall synthesis by the bacteria. If all
antibiotics worked equally well against bacteria,
would any of those mentioned here be better than
the others, from the patient’s perspective? Explain
your answer.
2. A new lab instructor wants his students to see liv-
ing cells. He puts a drop of his own blood on a glass
slide, adds two drops of distilled water “so the cells
will be spread out and easier to see,” puts on a
cover glass, and places the slide under a microscope
on high power. He invites his students to see living
red blood cells. The students claim that they can-
not see any cells. Explain what has happened. How
could this have been prevented?
3. A friend asks you how DNA can be used to identify
someone, and why it is called a “DNA ﬁngerprint.”
What simple explanation can you give?
4. A cell has extensive rough ER and Golgi apparatus.
Give a brief explanation of its function. A second
cell has microvilli and many mitochondria. Give a
brief explanation of its function.
5. A bacterial toxin is found to cause harm by ﬁrst ﬁt-
ting into a receptor on human cell membranes;
once the toxin ﬁts, the cell will be destroyed. A
medication is going to be made to stop this toxin,
and can work in one of two ways: The drug can
block the receptors to prevent the toxin from ﬁt-
ting in, or the drug can act as decoy molecules
shaped like the receptors. Which one of these
might be better, and why?
66
Cells
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CHAPTER 4
Tissues and Membranes
67
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CHAPTER 4
Chapter Outline
Epithelial Tissue
Simple Squamous Epithelium
Stratiﬁed Squamous Epithelium
Transitional Epithelium
Simple Cuboidal Epithelium
Simple Columnar Epithelium
Ciliated Epithelium
Glands
Unicellular glands
Multicellular glands
Connective Tissue
Blood
Areolar Connective Tissue
Adipose Tissue
Fibrous Connective Tissue
Elastic Connective Tissue
Bone
Cartilage
Muscle Tissue
Skeletal Muscle
Smooth Muscle
Cardiac Muscle
Nerve Tissue
Membranes
Epithelial Membranes
Serous membranes
Mucous membranes
Connective Tissue Membranes
Aging and Tissues
68
BOX 4–1
CYSTIC FIBROSIS
BOX 4–2
VITAMIN C AND COLLAGEN
BOX 4–3
COSMETIC COLLAGEN
Student Objectives
• Describe the general characteristics of each of the
four major categories of tissues.
• Describe the functions of the types of epithelial
tissues with respect to the organs in which they
are found.
• Describe the functions of the connective tissues,
and relate them to the functioning of the body or
a speciﬁc organ system.
• Explain the differences, in terms of location and
function, among skeletal muscle, smooth muscle,
and cardiac muscle.
• Name the three parts of a neuron and state the
function of each. Name the organs made of nerve
tissue.
• Describe the locations of the pleural membranes,
the pericardial membranes, and the peritoneum-
mesentery. State the function of serous ﬂuid in
each of these locations.
• State the locations of mucous membranes and the
functions of mucus.
• Name some membranes made of connective
tissue.
• Explain the difference between exocrine and
endocrine glands, and give an example of each.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Tissues and Membranes
69
New Terminology
Bone (BOWNE)
Cartilage (KAR-ti-lidj)
Chondrocyte (KON-droh-sight)
Collagen (KAH-lah-jen)
Connective tissue (kah-NEK-tiv TISH-yoo)
Elastin (eh-LAS-tin)
Endocrine gland (EN-doh-krin GLAND)
Epithelial tissue (EP-i-THEE-lee-uhl TISH-yoo)
Exocrine gland (EK-so-krin GLAND)
Hemopoietic (HEE-moh-poy-ET-ik)
Matrix (MAY-triks)
Mucous membrane (MEW-kuss MEM-brayn)
Muscle tissue (MUSS-uhl TISH-yoo)
Myocardium (MY-oh-KAR-dee-um)
Nerve tissue (NERV TISH-yoo)
Neuron (NYOOR-on)
Neurotransmitter (NYOOR-oh-TRANS-mih-ter)
Osteocyte (AHS-tee-oh-sight)
Plasma (PLAZ-mah)
Secretion (see-KREE-shun)
Serous membrane (SEER-us MEM-brayn)
Synapse (SIN-aps)
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

A tissue is a group of cells with similar structure
and function. The tissue contributes to the function-
ing of the organs in which it is found. You may recall
that in Chapter 1 the four major groups of tissues were
named and very brieﬂy described. These four groups
are epithelial, connective, muscle, and nerve tissue.
This chapter presents more detailed descriptions of
the tissues in these four categories. For each tissue, its
functions are related to the organs of which it is a part.
Also in this chapter is a discussion of membranes,
which are sheets of tissues. As you might expect, each
type of membrane has its speciﬁc locations and func-
tions.
EPITHELIAL TISSUE
Epithelial tissues are found on surfaces as either cov-
erings (outer surfaces) or linings (inner surfaces).
Because they have no capillaries of their own, epithe-
lial tissues receive oxygen and nutrients from the
blood supply of the connective tissue beneath them.
Many epithelial tissues are capable of secretion and
may be called glandular epithelium, or more simply,
glands.
Classiﬁcation of the epithelial tissues is based on
the type of cell of which the tissue is made, its charac-
teristic shape, and the number of layers of cells. There
are three distinctive shapes: squamous cells are ﬂat,
cuboidal cells are cube shaped, and columnar cells
are tall and narrow. “Simple” is the term for a single
layer of cells, and “stratiﬁed” means that many layers
of cells are present (Fig. 4–1).
SIMPLE SQUAMOUS EPITHELIUM
Simple squamous epithelium is a single layer of ﬂat
cells (Fig. 4–2). These cells are very thin and very
smooth—these are important physical characteristics.
The alveoli (air sacs) of the lungs are simple squamous
epithelium. The thinness of the cells permits the dif-
fusion of gases between the air and blood.
Another location of this tissue is capillaries, the
smallest blood vessels. Capillary walls are only one cell
thick, which permits the exchange of gases, nutrients,
and waste products between the blood and tissue ﬂuid.
The interior surface of capillaries is also very smooth
(and these cells continue as the lining of the arteries,
veins, and heart); this is important because it prevents
abnormal blood clotting within blood vessels.
70
Tissues and Membranes
Columnar
Cuboidal
Squamous
Simple columnar
Simple cuboidal
Simple squamous
Stratified squamous
Stratified
Simple
Shapes
Figure 4–1.
Classiﬁcation of epithelial tissues
based on the shape of the cells and the number of
layers of cells.
QUESTION: Which of these might be best for effi-
cient diffusion, and why?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

STRATIFIED SQUAMOUS EPITHELIUM
Stratiﬁed squamous epithelium consists of many
layers of mostly ﬂat cells, although lower cells are
rounded. Mitosis takes place in the lowest layer to
continually produce new cells to replace those worn
off the surface (see Fig. 4–2). This type of epithelium
makes up the epidermis of the skin, where it is called
“keratinizing” because the protein keratin is produced,
and the surface cells are dead. Stratiﬁed squamous
epithelium of the non-keratinizing type lines the oral
cavity, the esophagus, and, in women, the vagina. In
these locations the surface cells are living and make up
the mucous membranes of these organs. In all of its
body locations, this tissue is a barrier to microorgan-
isms because the cells of which it is made are very
close together. The more specialized functions of the
epidermis will be covered in the next chapter.
TRANSITIONAL EPITHELIUM
Transitional epithelium is a type of stratiﬁed epithe-
lium in which the surface cells change shape from
round to squamous. The urinary bladder is lined with
transitional epithelium. When the bladder is empty,
the surface cells are rounded (see Fig. 4–2). As the
Tissues and Membranes
71
Free surface
Stratified squamous
Connective tissues
Transitional
Simple squamous
Example: Lung (approximately 430X)
Alveolar sacs
Example: Esophagus
(approximately 430X)
B
Free surface
Example: Urinary bladder (approximately 430X)
C
A
Figure 4–2.
Epithelial tissues. (A) Simple squamous. (B) Stratified squamous.
(C) Transitional.
QUESTION: Which two of these tissues seem to be most related in structure?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

bladder ﬁlls, these cells become ﬂattened. Transitional
epithelium enables the bladder to ﬁll and stretch with-
out tearing the lining.
SIMPLE CUBOIDAL EPITHELIUM
Simple cuboidal epithelium is a single layer of cube-
shaped cells (Fig. 4–3). This type of tissue makes up
the functional units of the thyroid gland and salivary
glands. These are examples of glandular epithelium;
their function is secretion. In these glands the
cuboidal cells are arranged in small spheres and secrete
into the cavity formed by the sphere. In the thyroid
gland, the cuboidal epithelium secretes the thyroid
hormones; thyroxine is an example. In the salivary
glands the cuboidal cells secrete saliva. Cuboidal
epithelium also makes up portions of the kidney
tubules. Here the cells have microvilli (see Fig. 1–1),
and their function is the reabsorption of useful materi-
als back to the blood.
SIMPLE COLUMNAR EPITHELIUM
Columnar cells are taller than they are wide and are
specialized for secretion and absorption. The stom-
ach lining is made of columnar epithelium that
secretes gastric juice for digestion. The lining of the
small intestine (see Fig. 4–3) secretes digestive
enzymes, but these cells also absorb the end products
of digestion from the cavity of the intestine into the
blood and lymph. To absorb efficiently, the columnar
cells of the small intestine have microvilli, which you
72
Tissues and Membranes
Thyroid secretions (hormones)
Simple cuboidal
Simple columnar
Goblet cells
Cilia
Connective tissue
Ciliated
Example: Small intestine
(approximately 430X)
B
Example: Trachea (approximately 430X)
C
A
Example: Thyroid gland (approximately 430X)
Figure 4–3.
Epithelial tissues. (A) Simple cuboidal. (B) Simple columnar. (C) Ciliated.
QUESTION: What is the function of the cilia that line the trachea?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

may recall are folds of the cell membrane on their free
surfaces (see Fig. 3–2). These microscopic folds
greatly increase the surface area for absorption.
Yet another type of columnar cell is the goblet cell,
which is a unicellular gland. Goblet cells secrete
mucus and are found in the lining of the intestines
and the lining of parts of the respiratory tract such as
the trachea. Mucous membranes will be described in a
later section.
CILIATED EPITHELIUM
Ciliated epithelium consists of columnar cells that
have cilia on their free surfaces (see Fig. 4–3). Recall
from Chapter 3 that the function of cilia is to sweep
materials across the cell surface. Ciliated epithelium
lines the nasal cavities, larynx, trachea, and large
bronchial tubes. The cilia sweep mucus, with trapped
dust and bacteria from the inhaled air, toward the
pharynx to be swallowed. Bacteria are then destroyed
by the hydrochloric acid in the stomach. The air that
reaches the lungs is almost entirely free of pathogens
and particulate pollution.
Another location of ciliated epithelium in women is
the lining of the fallopian tubes. The cilia here sweep
the ovum, which has no means of self-locomotion,
toward the uterus.
The epithelial tissues are summarized in Table 4–1.
GLANDS
Glands are cells or organs that secrete something;
that is, they produce a substance that has a function
either at that site or at a more distant site.
Unicellular Glands
Unicellular means “one cell.” Goblet cells are an
example of unicellular glands. As mentioned earlier,
goblet cells are found in the lining of the respiratory
and digestive tracts. Their secretion is mucus (see also
Box 4–1: Cystic Fibrosis).
Multicellular Glands
Most glands are made of many similar cells, or of a
variety of cells with their secretions mingled into a
collective secretion. Multicellular glands may be
divided into two major groups: exocrine glands and
endocrine glands.
Exocrine glands have ducts (tubes) to take the
secretion away from the gland to the site of its func-
tion. Salivary glands, for example, secrete saliva that is
carried by ducts to the oral cavity. Sweat glands secrete
sweat that is transported by ducts to the skin surface,
where it can be evaporated by excess body heat. The
gastric glands of the stomach lining contain different
kinds of cells (see Fig. 16–5), which produce
Tissues and Membranes
73
Table 4–1 TYPES OF EPITHELIAL TISSUE
Type
Structure
Location and Function
Simple squamous
Stratiﬁed squamous
Transitional
Cuboidal
Columnar
Ciliated
One layer of ﬂat cells
Many layers of cells; surface cells
ﬂat; lower cells rounded;
lower layer undergoes mitosis
Many layers of cells; surface cells
change from rounded to ﬂat
One layer of cube-shaped cells
One layer of column-shaped cells
One layer of columnar cells with
cilia on their free surfaces
• Alveoli of the lungs—thin to permit diffusion of gases
• Capillaries—thin to permit exchanges of materials;
smooth to prevent abnormal blood clotting
• Epidermis—surface cells are dead; a barrier to pathogens
• Lining of esophagus, vagina—surface cells are living; a
barrier to pathogens
• Lining of urinary bladder—permits expansion without
tearing the lining
• Thyroid gland—secretes thyroxine
• Salivary glands—secrete saliva
• Kidney tubules—permit reabsorption of useful materials
back to the blood
• Lining of stomach—secretes gastric juice
• Lining of small intestine—secretes enzymes and absorbs
end products of digestion (microvilli present)
• Lining of trachea—sweeps mucus and dust to the pharynx
• Lining of fallopian tube—sweeps ovum toward uterus
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

hydrochloric acid and the enzyme pepsin. Both of
these secretions are part of gastric juice.
Endocrine glands are ductless glands. The secre-
tions of endocrine glands are a group of chemicals
called hormones, which enter capillaries and are cir-
culated throughout the body. Hormones then bring
about speciﬁc effects in their target organs. These
effects include aspects of growth, use of minerals and
other nutrients, and regulation of blood pressure, and
will be covered in more detail in Chapter 10.
Examples of endocrine glands are the thyroid gland,
adrenal glands, and pituitary gland.
The pancreas is an organ that is both an exocrine
and an endocrine gland. The exocrine portions secrete
digestive enzymes that are carried by ducts to the
duodenum of the small intestine, their site of action.
The endocrine portions of the pancreas, called pan-
creatic islets or islets of Langerhans, secrete the hor-
mones insulin and glucagon directly into the blood.
CONNECTIVE TISSUE
There are several kinds of connective tissue, some of
which may at ﬁrst seem more different than alike. The
types of connective tissue include areolar, adipose,
ﬁbrous, and elastic tissue as well as blood, bone, and
cartilage; these are summarized in Table 4–2. A char-
acteristic that all connective tissues have in common is
the presence of a matrix in addition to cells. The
matrix is a structural network or solution of non-
living intercellular material. Each connective tissue
has its own speciﬁc kind of matrix. The matrix of
blood, for example, is blood plasma, which is mostly
water. The matrix of bone is made primarily of cal-
cium salts, which are hard and strong. As each type of
connective tissue is described in the following sec-
tions, mention will be made of the types of cells pres-
ent as well as the kind of matrix.
BLOOD
Although blood is the subject of Chapter 11, a brief
description will be given here. Blood consists of cells
and plasma; cells are the living portion. The matrix of
blood is plasma, which is about 52% to 62% of the
total blood volume in the body. The water of plasma
contains dissolved salts, nutrients, gases, and waste
products. As you might expect, one of the primary
functions of plasma is transport of these materials
within the body.
Blood cells are produced from stem cells in the red
bone marrow, the body’s primary hemopoietic tissue
(blood-forming tissue), which is found in ﬂat and
irregular bones such as the hip bone and vertebrae.
The blood cells are red blood cells, platelets, and the
five kinds of white blood cells: neutrophils,
eosinophils, basophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes
(see Figs. 4–4 and 11–2). Lymphocytes mature and
divide in lymphatic tissue, which makes up the spleen,
74
Tissues and Membranes
BOX 4–1
CYSTIC FIBROSIS
defensin, a bacterium called Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa stimulates the lung cells to produce copious
thick mucus, an ideal growth environment for bac-
teria. Defensive white blood cells cannot get
through the thick mucus, and their activity mistak-
enly destroys lung tissue. A person with CF has
clogged bronchial tubes, frequent episodes of
pneumonia, and, ultimately, lungs that cannot carry
out gas exchange. CF is a chronic, progressive dis-
ease that is eventually fatal unless a lung transplant
is performed.
CF is one of several disorders believed to be cor-
rectable by gene therapy, but because it involves
human subjects, this kind of work proceeds very
slowly.
Cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) is a genetic disorder (there are
many forms) of certain exocrine glands including
the salivary glands, the sweat glands, the pancreas,
and the mucous glands of the respiratory tract.
In the pancreas, thick mucus clogs the ducts and
prevents pancreatic enzymes from reaching the
small intestine, thus impairing digestion, especially
of fats. But the most serious effects of CF are in the
lungs. The genetic mistake in CF often involves a
gene called CFTR, which codes for chloride ion
channels (proteins) in the membranes of epithelial
cells. In the lungs, the defective channels are
destroyed (by proteasomes), which causes a change
in the composition of the tissue ﬂuid around the
cells. This change inactivates defensin, a natural
antibiotic produced by lung tissue. In the absence of
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

the lymph nodes, and the thymus gland. The thymus
also contains stem cells, but they produce only a
subset of lymphocytes. Stem cells are present in the
spleen and lymph nodes as well, though the number of
lymphocytes they produce is a small fraction of the
total.
The blood cells make up 38% to 48% of the total
blood, and each type of cell has its speciﬁc function.
Red blood cells (RBCs) carry oxygen bonded to the
iron in their hemoglobin. White blood cells (WBCs)
destroy pathogens by phagocytosis, the production of
antibodies, or other chemical methods, and provide us
with immunity to some diseases. Platelets prevent
blood loss; the process of blood clotting involves
platelets.
AREOLAR CONNECTIVE TISSUE
The cells of areolar (or loose) connective tissue are
called ﬁbroblasts. A blast cell is a “producing” cell,
and ﬁbroblasts produce protein ﬁbers. Collagen ﬁbers
are very strong; elastin ﬁbers are elastic, that is, able
to return to their original length, or recoil, after being
stretched. These protein ﬁbers and tissue ﬂuid make
up the matrix, or non-living portion, of areolar con-
nective tissue (see Fig. 4–4). Also within the matrix are
mast cells that release inﬂammatory chemicals when
tissue is damaged, and many white blood cells, which
are capable of self-locomotion. Their importance here
is related to the locations of areolar connective tissue.
Areolar tissue is found beneath the dermis of the
Tissues and Membranes
75
Blood
Areolar
Adipose
White blood cell
Fibroblast
Collagen fibers
Elastin fiber
Adipocytes
(Approximately 430X)
Red blood cells
White blood cell
(Approximately 300X)
(Approximately 150X)
A
B
C
Platelets
Figure 4–4.
Connective tissues. (A) Blood. (B) Areolar. (C) Adipose.
QUESTION: What is the matrix of blood, and what is found in adipocytes?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

skin and beneath the epithelial tissue of all the body
systems that have openings to the environment. Recall
that one function of white blood cells is to destroy
pathogens. How do pathogens enter the body? Many
do so through breaks in the skin. Bacteria and viruses
also enter with the air we breathe and the food we eat,
and some may get through the epithelial linings of the
respiratory and digestive tracts and cause tissue dam-
age. Areolar connective tissue with its mast cells and
many white blood cells is strategically placed to inter-
cept pathogens before they get to the blood and circu-
late throughout the body.
ADIPOSE TISSUE
The cells of adipose tissue are called adipocytes and
are specialized to store fat in microscopic droplets.
True fats are the chemical form of long-term energy
storage. Excess nutrients have calories that are not
wasted but are converted to fat to be stored for use
when food intake decreases. Any form of excess calo-
ries, whether in the form of fats, carbohydrates, or
amino acids from protein, may be changed to triglyc-
erides and stored. The amount of matrix in adipose
tissue is small and consists of tissue ﬂuid and a few col-
lagen ﬁbers (see Fig. 4–4).
Most fat is stored subcutaneously in the areolar
connective tissue between the dermis and the muscles.
This layer varies in thickness among individuals; the
more excess calories consumed, the thicker the layer.
As mentioned in Chapter 2, adipose tissue also cush-
ions organs such as the eyes and kidneys.
Recent research has discovered that adipose tissue
does much more than provide a cushion or store
energy. Adipose tissue is now considered an endocrine
tissue, because it produces at least one hormone.
Leptin is an appetite-suppressing hormone secreted
by adipocytes to signal the hypothalamus in the brain
that fat storage is sufficient (see also Chapter 17).
When leptin secretion diminishes, appetite increases.
Adipocytes secrete at least two chemicals that help
regulate the use of insulin in glucose and fat metabo-
lism. Adipose tissue is also involved in inﬂammation,
the body’s ﬁrst response to injury, in that it produces
cytokines, chemicals that activate white blood cells.
Our adipose tissue is not simply an inert depository of
76
Tissues and Membranes
Fibrous tissue
Fibrous tissue
Collagen
 fibers
Fibroblasts
Example: Trachea
(approximately 430X)
B
A
C
(Approximately 430X)
Haversian canal
Canaliculi
Matrix
Osteocytes
Bone
Chondrocytes
Matrix
Cartilage
Example: Tendons
(approximately 430X)
Figure 4–5.
Connective tissues. (A) Fibrous. (B) Cartilage. (C) Bone.
QUESTION: What is the matrix of ﬁbrous tissue, and of bone?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

fat, rather it is part of the complex systems that ensure
we are nourished properly or that protect us from
pathogens that get through the skin.
FIBROUS CONNECTIVE TISSUE
Fibrous connective tissue consists mainly of parallel
(regular) collagen ﬁbers with a few ﬁbroblasts scat-
tered among them (Fig. 4–5). This parallel arrange-
ment of collagen provides great strength, yet is
ﬂexible. The locations of this tissue are related to
the need for ﬂexible strength. The outer walls of arter-
ies are reinforced with ﬁbrous connective tissue,
because the blood in these vessels is under high pres-
sure. The strong outer wall prevents rupture of the
artery (see also Box 4–2: Vitamin C and Collagen).
Tendons and ligaments are made of ﬁbrous connective
tissue. Tendons connect muscle to bone; ligaments
connect bone to bone. When the skeleton is moved,
these structures must be able to withstand the great
mechanical forces exerted upon them.
Fibrous connective tissue has a relatively poor
blood supply, which makes repair a slow process. If
you have ever had a severely sprained ankle (which
Tissues and Membranes
77
Table 4–2
TYPES OF CONNECTIVE TISSUE
Type
Structure
Location and Function
Blood
Areolar (loose)
Adipose
Fibrous
Elastic
Bone
Cartilage
Within blood vessels
• Plasma—transports materials
• RBCs—carry oxygen
• WBCs—destroy pathogens
• Platelets—prevent blood loss
Subcutaneous
• Connects skin to muscles; WBCs destroy pathogens
Mucous membranes (digestive, respiratory, urinary,
reproductive tracts)
• WBCs destroy pathogens
Subcutaneous
• Stores excess energy
• Produces chemicals that inﬂuence appetite, use
of nutrients, and inﬂammation
Around eyes and Kidneys
• Cushions
Tendons and ligaments (regular)
• Strong to withstand forces of movement of joints
Dermis (irregular)
• The strong inner layer of the skin
Walls of large arteries
• Helps maintain blood pressure Around alveoli in lungs
• Promotes normal exhalation
Bones
• Support the body
• Protect internal organs from mechanical injury
• Store excess calcium
• Contain and protect red bone marrow
Wall of trachea
• Keeps airway open
On joint surfaces of bones
• Smooth to prevent friction
Tip of nose and outer ear
• Support
Between vertebrae
• Absorb shock
Plasma (matrix) and red blood cells,
white blood cells, and platelets
Fibroblasts and a matrix of tissue
ﬂuid, collagen, and elastin ﬁbers
Adipocytes that store fat (little matrix)
Mostly collagen ﬁbers (matrix) with
few ﬁbroblasts
Mostly elastin ﬁbers (matrix) with few
ﬁbroblasts
Osteocytes in a matrix of calcium
salts and collagen
Chondrocytes in a ﬂexible protein
matrix
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

means the ligaments have been overly stretched), you
know that complete healing may take several months.
An irregular type of ﬁbrous connective tissue forms
the dermis of the skin and the fasciae (membranes)
around muscles. Although the collagen ﬁbers here are
not parallel to one another, the tissue is still strong.
The dermis is different from other ﬁbrous connective
tissue in that it has a good blood supply (see also Box
4–3: Cosmetic Collagen).
ELASTIC CONNECTIVE TISSUE
As its name tells us, elastic connective tissue is pri-
marily elastin ﬁbers. One of its locations is in the walls
of large arteries. These vessels are stretched when the
heart contracts and pumps blood, then they recoil, or
snap back, when the heart relaxes. This recoil helps
keep the blood moving away from the heart, and is
important to maintain normal blood pressure.
Elastic connective tissue is also found surrounding
the alveoli of the lungs. The elastic ﬁbers are stretched
during inhalation, then recoil during exhalation to
squeeze air out of the lungs. If you pay attention to
your breathing for a few moments, you will notice that
normal exhalation does not require “work” or energy.
This is because of the normal elasticity of the lungs.
BONE
The preﬁx that designates bone is “osteo,” so bone
cells are called osteocytes. The matrix of bone is
made of calcium salts and collagen and is strong, hard,
78
Tissues and Membranes
BOX 4–2
VITAMIN C AND COLLAGEN
Many people take extra vitamin C, for various rea-
sons. Vitamin C has several functions, and an im-
portant one is the synthesis of collagen.
Imagine the protein collagen as a ladder with
three uprights and rungs that connect adjacent
uprights. Vitamin C is essential for forming the
“rungs,” without which the uprights will not stay
together as a strong unit. Collagen formed in the
absence of vitamin C is weak, and the effects of
weak collagen are dramatically seen in the disease
called scurvy.
In 1753 James Lind, a Scottish surgeon, recom-
mended to the British Navy that lime juice be taken
on long voyages to prevent scurvy among the
sailors. Scurvy is characterized by bleeding gums
and loss of teeth, poor healing of wounds, fractures,
and bleeding in the skin, joints, and elsewhere in
the body. The lime juice did prevent this potentially
fatal disease, as did consumption of fresh fruits and
vegetables, although at the time no one knew why.
Vitamin C was ﬁnally isolated in the laboratory in
1928.
BOX 4–3
COSMETIC COLLAGEN
system as foreign tissue. More seriously, an autoim-
mune response may be triggered in some individu-
als, and the immune system may begin to destroy
the person’s own connective tissue.
In an effort to avoid these problems, some cos-
metic surgeons now use the person’s own collagen
and fat, which may be extracted from the thigh,
hip, or abdomen. The long-term consequences and
outcomes of such procedures have yet to be evalu-
ated. We might remember that for many years the
use of silicone injections had been considered safe.
Silicone injections are now banned by the FDA,
since we now know that they carry signiﬁcant risk
of serious tissue damage.
Collagen is the protein that makes tendons, liga-
ments, and other connective tissues strong. In 1981,
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved
the use of cattle collagen by injection for cosmetic
purposes, to minimize wrinkles and scars. Indeed,
collagen injected below the skin will ﬂatten out
deep facial wrinkles and make them less prominent,
and many people have had this seemingly simple
cosmetic surgery.
There are, however, drawbacks. Injected colla-
gen lasts only a few months; the injections must be
repeated several times a year, and they are expen-
sive. Some people have allergic reactions to the cat-
tle collagen, which is perceived by the immune
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

and not ﬂexible. In the shafts of long bones such as the
femur, the osteocytes, matrix, and blood vessels are
in very precise arrangements called haversian sys-
tems or osteons (see Fig. 4–5). Bone has a good blood
supply, which enables it to serve as a storage site for
calcium and to repair itself relatively rapidly after a
simple fracture. Some bones, such as the sternum
(breastbone) and pelvic bone, contain red bone mar-
row, the primary hemopoietic tissue that produces
blood cells.
Other functions of bone tissue are related to the
strength of bone matrix. The skeleton supports the
body, and some bones protect internal organs from
mechanical injury. A more complete discussion of
bone is found in Chapter 6.
CARTILAGE
The protein–carbohydrate matrix of cartilage does
not contain calcium salts, and also differs from that of
bone in that it contains more water, which makes it
resilient. It is ﬁrm, yet smooth and ﬂexible. Cartilage
is found on the joint surfaces of bones, where its
smooth surface helps prevent friction. The tip of the
nose and external ear are supported by ﬂexible carti-
lage. The wall of the trachea, the airway to the lungs,
contains ﬁrm rings of cartilage to maintain an open air
passageway. Discs of cartilage are found between the
vertebrae of the spine. Here the cartilage is a ﬁrm
cushion; it absorbs shock and permits movement.
Within the cartilage matrix are the chondrocytes,
or cartilage cells (see Fig. 4–5). There are no capillar-
ies within the cartilage matrix, so these cells are nour-
ished by diffusion through the matrix, a slow process.
This becomes clinically important when cartilage is
damaged, for repair will take place very slowly or not
at all. Athletes sometimes damage cartilage within the
knee joint. Such damaged cartilage is usually surgically
removed in order to preserve as much joint mobility as
possible.
MUSCLE TISSUE
Muscle tissue is specialized for contraction. When
muscle cells contract, they shorten and bring about
some type of movement. There are three types of
muscle tissue: skeletal, smooth, and cardiac (Table
4–3). The movements each can produce have very dif-
ferent purposes.
SKELETAL MUSCLE
Skeletal muscle may also be called striated muscle or
voluntary muscle. Each name describes a particular
aspect of this tissue, as you will see. The skeletal mus-
cle cells are cylindrical, have several nuclei each, and
appear striated, or striped (Fig. 4–6). The striations
are the result of the precise arrangement of the con-
tracting proteins within the cells.
Skeletal muscle tissue makes up the muscles that
are attached to bones. These muscles are supplied
with motor nerves, and thus move the skeleton. They
also produce a signiﬁcant amount of heat, which is
important to help maintain the body’s constant tem-
perature. Each muscle cell has its own motor nerve
ending. The nerve impulses that can then travel to the
muscles are essential to cause contraction. Although
we do not have to consciously plan all our movements,
the nerve impulses for them originate in the cere-
brum, the “thinking” part of the brain.
Let us return to the three names for this tissue:
“skeletal” describes its location, “striated” describes its
appearance, and “voluntary” describes how it func-
tions. The skeletal muscles and their functioning are
the subject of Chapter 7.
SMOOTH MUSCLE
Smooth muscle may also be called involuntary mus-
cle or visceral muscle. The cells of smooth muscle
have tapered ends, a single nucleus, and no striations
(see Fig. 4–6). Although nerve impulses do bring
about contractions, this is not something most of us
can control, hence the name involuntary. The term vis-
ceral refers to internal organs, many of which contain
smooth muscle. The functions of smooth muscle are
actually functions of the organs in which the muscle is
found.
In the stomach and intestines, smooth muscle con-
tracts in waves called peristalsis to propel food
through the digestive tract. In the walls of arteries and
veins, smooth muscle constricts or dilates the vessels
to maintain normal blood pressure. The iris of the eye
has two sets of smooth muscle ﬁbers to constrict or
dilate the pupil, which regulates the amount of light
that strikes the retina.
Other functions of smooth muscle are mentioned
in later chapters. This is an important tissue that you
will come across again and again in our study of the
human body.
Tissues and Membranes
79
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

80
Skeletal muscle
(Approximately 430X)
A
Smooth muscle
(Approximately 430X)
B
Cardiac muscle
(Approximately 430X)
C
Intercalated
discs
Figure 4–6.
Muscle tissues. (A) Skeletal. (B) Smooth. (C) Cardiac.
QUESTION: Which kinds of muscle cells have striations? What forms these striations?
Table 4–3
TYPES OF MUSCLE TISSUE
Type
Structure
Location and Function
Effect of Nerve Impulses
Skeletal
Smooth
Cardiac
Large cylindrical cells with
striations and several
nuclei each
Small tapered cells with no
striations and one nucleus
each
Branched cells with faint stria-
tions and one nucleus
each
Attached to bones
• Moves the skeleton and
produces heat
Walls of arteries
• Maintains blood pressure
Walls of stomach and intestines
• Peristalsis
Iris of eye
• Regulates size of pupil
Walls of the chambers of the heart
• Pumps blood
Essential to cause contraction
(voluntary)
Bring about contraction or
regulate the rate of con-
traction (involuntary)
Regulate only the rate of con-
traction
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CARDIAC MUSCLE
The cells of the heart, cardiac muscle, are shown in
Fig. 4–6. They are branched, have one nucleus each,
and have faint striations. The cell membranes at the
ends of these cells are somewhat folded and ﬁt into
matching folds of the membranes of the next cells.
(Interlock the ﬁngers of both hands to get an idea of
what these adjacent membranes look like.) These
interlocking folds are called intercalated discs, and
permit the electrical impulses of muscle contraction to
pass swiftly from cell to cell. This enables the heart to
beat in a very precise wave of contraction from the
upper chambers to the lower chambers. Cardiac mus-
cle as a whole is called the myocardium, and forms
the walls of the four chambers of the heart. Its func-
tion, therefore, is the function of the heart, to pump
blood. The contractions of the myocardium create
blood pressure and keep blood circulating throughout
the body, so that the blood can carry out its many
functions.
Cardiac muscle cells have the ability to contract by
themselves. Thus the heart maintains its own beat.
The role of nerve impulses is to increase or decrease
the heart rate, depending upon whatever is needed
by the body in a particular situation. We will return to
the heart in Chapter 12.
NERVE TISSUE
Nerve tissue consists of nerve cells called neurons
and some specialized cells found only in the nervous
system. The nervous system has two divisions: the
central nervous system (CNS) and the peripheral
nervous system (PNS). The brain and spinal cord are
the organs of the CNS. They are made of neurons and
specialized cells called neuroglia. The CNS and the
neuroglia are discussed in detail in Chapter 8. The
PNS consists of all of the nerves that emerge from
the CNS and supply the rest of the body. These nerves
are made of neurons and specialized cells called
Schwann cells. The Schwann cells form the myelin
sheath to electrically insulate neurons.
Neurons are capable of generating and transmit-
ting electrochemical impulses. There are many differ-
ent kinds of neurons, but they all have the same basic
structure (Fig. 4–7). The cell body contains the
nucleus and is essential for the continuing life of the
neuron. An axon is a process (the term “process” here
means “something that sticks out,” a cellular exten-
sion) that carries impulses away from the cell body; a
neuron has only one axon. Dendrites are processes
that carry impulses toward the cell body; a neuron
may have several dendrites. A nerve impulse travels
along the cell membrane of a neuron, and is electrical,
but where neurons meet there is a small space called a
synapse, which an electrical impulse cannot cross. At
a synapse, between the axon of one neuron and the
dendrite or cell body of the next neuron, impulse
transmission depends upon chemicals called neuro-
transmitters. A summary of nerve tissue is found in
Table 4–4, and each of these aspects of nerve tissue is
covered in more detail in Chapter 8.
Nerve tissue makes up the brain, spinal cord, and
Tissues and Membranes
81
Table 4–4
NERVE TISSUE
Part
Structure
Function
Neuron (nerve cell)
Cell body
Axon
Dendrites
Synapse
Neurotransmitters
Neuroglia
Schwann cells
Contains the nucleus
Cellular process (extension)
Cellular process (extension)
Space between axon of one neuron and the
dendrite or cell body of the next neuron
Chemicals released by axons
Specialized cells in the central nervous
system
Specialized cells in the peripheral nervous
system
• Regulates the functioning of the neuron
• Carries impulses away from the cell body
• Carry impulses toward the cell body
• Transmits impulses from one neuron
to others
• Transmit impulses across synapses
• Form myelin sheaths and other functions
• Form the myelin sheaths around neurons
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

peripheral nerves. As you can imagine, each of these
organs has very speciﬁc functions. For now, we will
just mention the categories of the functions of nerve
tissue. These include feeling and interpreting sensa-
tion, initiation of movement, the rapid regulation of
body functions such as heart rate and breathing, and
the organization of information for learning and
memory.
MEMBRANES
Membranes are sheets of tissue that cover or line sur-
faces or that separate organs or parts (lobes) of organs
from one another. Many membranes produce secre-
tions that have speciﬁc functions. The two major cat-
egories of membranes are epithelial membranes and
connective tissue membranes.
EPITHELIAL MEMBRANES
There are two types of epithelial membranes, serous
and mucous. Each type is found in speciﬁc locations
within the body and secretes a ﬂuid. These ﬂuids are
called serous ﬂuid and mucus.
Serous Membranes
Serous membranes are sheets of simple squamous
epithelium that line some closed body cavities and
cover the organs in these cavities (Fig. 4–8). The
pleural membranes are the serous membranes of the
thoracic cavity. The parietal pleura lines the chest wall
and the visceral pleura covers the lungs. (Notice that
line means “on the inside” and cover means “on the
outside.” These terms cannot be used interchangeably,
because each indicates a different location.) The pleu-
ral membranes secrete serous ﬂuid, which prevents
friction between them as the lungs expand and recoil
during breathing.
The heart, in the thoracic cavity between the lungs,
has its own set of serous membranes. The parietal
pericardium lines the ﬁbrous pericardium (a connec-
tive tissue membrane), and the visceral pericardium,
or epicardium, is on the surface of the heart muscle
(see also Fig. 12–1). Serous ﬂuid is produced to pre-
vent friction as the heart beats.
In the abdominal cavity, the peritoneum is the
serous membrane that lines the cavity. The mesen-
tery, or visceral peritoneum, is folded over and covers
the abdominal organs. Here, the serous ﬂuid prevents
friction as the stomach and intestines contract and
slide against other organs (see also Fig. 16–4).
Mucous Membranes
Mucous membranes line the body tracts (systems)
that have openings to the environment. These are the
respiratory, digestive, urinary, and reproductive tracts.
The epithelium of a mucous membrane (mucosa)
varies with the different organs involved. The mucosa
of the esophagus and of the vagina is stratiﬁed squa-
mous epithelium; the mucosa of the trachea is ciliated
epithelium; the mucosa of the stomach is columnar
epithelium.
82
Tissues and Membranes
Figure 4–7.
Nerve tissue of the central nervous system
(CNS).
QUESTION: How many processes does the central neu-
ron have, and what are they called?
Cell body
Neuron
Neurons
Nucleus
(Approximately 250X)
Neuroglia
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

83
Mucous Membranes
Parietal Pleura
Visceral Pleura
Mesentery
Peritoneum
Figure 4–8.
Epithelial membranes. Mucous membranes line body tracts that open to the
environment. Serous membranes are found within closed body cavities such as the thoracic
and abdominal cavities. See text for further description.
QUESTION: Name another organ covered by mesentery.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The mucus secreted by these membranes keeps the
lining epithelial cells wet. Remember that these are
living cells, and if they dry out, they will die. In the
digestive tract, mucus also lubricates the surface to
permit the smooth passage of food. In the respiratory
tract the mucus traps dust and bacteria, which are then
swept to the pharynx by ciliated epithelium.
CONNECTIVE TISSUE MEMBRANES
Many membranes are made of connective tissue.
Because these will be covered with the organ systems
of which they are a part, their locations and functions
are summarized in Table 4–5.
AGING AND TISSUES
As mentioned in the previous chapter, aging takes
place at the cellular level, but of course is apparent in
the groups of cells we call tissues. In muscle tissue, for
example, the proteins that bring about contraction
deteriorate and are not repaired or replaced. The same
is true of collagen and elastin, the proteins of connec-
tive tissue such as the dermis of the skin. Other aspects
of the aging of tissues will be more meaningful to you
in the context of the functions of organs and systems,
so we will save those for the following chapters.
SUMMARY
The tissues and membranes described in this chapter
are more complex than the individual cells of which
they are made. However, we have only reached an
intermediate level with respect to the structural and
functional complexity of the body as a whole. The fol-
lowing chapters are concerned with the organ systems,
the most complex level. In the descriptions of the
organs of these systems, you will ﬁnd mention of the
tissues and their contributions to each organ and
organ system.
84
Tissues and Membranes
Table 4–5
CONNECTIVE TISSUE
MEMBRANES
Membrane
Location and Function
Superﬁcial
fascia
Periosteum
Perichondrium
Synovial
Deep fascia
Meninges
Fibrous
pericardium
• Between the skin and muscles;
adipose tissue stores fat
• Covers each bone; contains
blood vessels that enter the
bone
• Anchors tendons and ligaments
• Covers cartilage; contains capil-
laries, the only blood supply for
cartilage
• Lines joint cavities; secretes syn-
ovial ﬂuid to prevent friction
when joints move
• Covers each skeletal muscle;
anchors tendons
• Cover the brain and spinal cord;
contain cerebrospinal ﬂuid
• Forms a sac around the heart;
lined by the serous parietal peri-
cardium
STUDY OUTLINE
A tissue is a group of cells with similar struc-
ture and function. The four main groups of
tissues are epithelial, connective, muscle, and
nerve.
Epithelial Tissue—found on surfaces; have no
capillaries; some are capable of secretion;
classiﬁed as to shape of cells and number of
layers of cells (see Table 4–1 and Figs. 4–1,
4–2, and 4–3)
1. Simple squamous—one layer of ﬂat cells; thin and
smooth. Sites: alveoli (to permit diffusion of gases);
capillaries (to permit exchanges between blood and
tissues).
2. Stratiﬁed squamous—many layers of mostly ﬂat
cells; mitosis takes place in lowest layer. Sites: epi-
dermis, where surface cells are dead (a barrier to
pathogens); lining of mouth; esophagus; and vagina
(a barrier to pathogens).
3. Transitional—stratified, yet surface cells are
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

rounded and ﬂatten when stretched. Site: urinary
bladder (to permit expansion without tearing the
lining).
4. Simple cuboidal—one layer of cube-shaped cells.
Sites: thyroid gland (to secrete thyroid hormones);
salivary glands (to secrete saliva); kidney tubules (to
reabsorb useful materials back to the blood).
5. Simple columnar—one layer of column-shaped
cells. Sites: stomach lining (to secrete gastric juice);
small intestinal lining (to secrete digestive enzymes
and absorb nutrients—microvilli increase surface
area for absorption).
6. Ciliated—columnar cells with cilia on free surfaces.
Sites: trachea (to sweep mucus and bacteria to the
pharynx); fallopian tubes (to sweep ovum to
uterus).
7. Glands—epithelial tissues that produce secretions.
• Unicellular—one-celled glands. Goblet cells
secrete mucus in the respiratory and digestive
tracts.
• Multicellular—many-celled glands.
• Exocrine glands have ducts; salivary glands
secrete saliva into ducts that carry it to the oral
cavity.
• Endocrine glands secrete hormones directly
into capillaries (no ducts); thyroid gland se-
cretes thyroxine.
Connective Tissue—all have a non-living
intercellular matrix and specialized cells (see
Table 4–2 and Figs. 4–4 and 4–5)
1. Blood—the matrix is plasma, mostly water; trans-
ports materials in the blood. Red blood cells carry
oxygen; white blood cells destroy pathogens and
provide immunity; platelets prevent blood loss, as
in clotting. Blood cells are made in red bone mar-
row.
2. Areolar (loose)—cells are ﬁbroblasts, which pro-
duce protein ﬁbers: collagen is strong, elastin is
elastic; the matrix is collagen, elastin, and tissue
ﬂuid. White blood cells and mast cells are also
present. Sites: below the dermis and below the
epithelium of tracts that open to the environment
(to destroy pathogens that enter the body).
3. Adipose—cells are adipocytes that store fat; little
matrix. Sites: between the skin and muscles (to
store energy); around the eyes and kidneys (to
cushion). Also involved in appetite, use of insulin,
and inﬂammation.
4. Fibrous—mostly matrix, strong collagen ﬁbers;
cells are ﬁbroblasts. Regular ﬁbrous sites: tendons
(to connect muscle to bone); ligaments (to connect
bone to bone); poor blood supply, slow healing.
Irregular ﬁbrous sites: dermis of the skin and the
fascia around muscles.
5. Elastic—mostly matrix, elastin ﬁbers. Sites: walls of
large arteries (to maintain blood pressure); around
alveoli (to promote normal exhalation).
6. Bone—cells are osteocytes; matrix is calcium salts
and collagen, strong and not ﬂexible; good blood
supply, rapid healing. Sites: bones of the skeleton
(to support the body and protect internal organs
from mechanical injury).
7. Cartilage—cells are chondrocytes; protein matrix is
ﬁrm yet ﬂexible; no capillaries in matrix, very slow
healing. Sites: joint surfaces of bones (to prevent
friction); tip of nose and external ear (to support);
wall of trachea (to keep air passage open); discs
between vertebrae (to absorb shock).
Muscle Tissue—specialized to contract and
bring about movement (see Table 4–3 and
Fig. 4–6)
1. Skeletal—also called striated or voluntary muscle.
Cells are cylindrical, have several nuclei, and have
striations. Each cell has a motor nerve ending;
nerve impulses are essential to cause contraction.
Site: skeletal muscles attached to bones (to move
the skeleton and produce heat).
2. Smooth—also called visceral or involuntary mus-
cle. Cells have tapered ends, one nucleus each, and
no striations. Contraction is not under voluntary
control. Sites: stomach and intestines (peristalsis);
walls of arteries and veins (to maintain blood pres-
sure); iris (to constrict or dilate pupil).
3. Cardiac—cells are branched, have one nucleus
each, and faint striations. Site: walls of the four
chambers of the heart (to pump blood; nerve
impulses regulate the rate of contraction).
Nerve Tissue—neurons are specialized to
generate and transmit impulses (see Table
4–4 and Fig. 4–7)
1. Cell body contains the nucleus; axon carries
impulses away from the cell body; dendrites carry
impulses toward the cell body.
2. A synapse is the space between two neurons; a neu-
rotransmitter carries the impulse across a synapse.
Tissues and Membranes
85
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

3. Specialized cells in nerve tissue are neuroglia in the
CNS and Schwann cells in the PNS.
4. Sites: brain; spinal cord; and peripheral nerves (to
provide sensation, movement, regulation of body
functions, learning, and memory).
Membranes—sheets of tissue on surfaces, or
separating organs or lobes
1. Epithelial membranes (see Fig. 4–8)
• Serous membranes—in closed body cavities; the
serous ﬂuid prevents friction between the two
layers of the serous membrane.
• Thoracic cavity—partial pleura lines chest
wall; visceral pleura covers the lungs.
• Pericardial sac—parietal pericardium lines
ﬁbrous pericardium; visceral pericardium (epi-
cardium) covers the heart muscle.
• Abdominal cavity—peritoneum lines the
abdominal cavity; mesentery covers the
abdominal organs.
• Mucous membranes—line body tracts that open
to the environment: respiratory, digestive, uri-
nary, and reproductive. Mucus keeps the living
epithelium wet; provides lubrication in the diges-
tive tract; traps dust and bacteria in the respira-
tory tract.
2. Connective tissue membranes—see Table 4–5.
86
Tissues and Membranes
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Explain the importance of each tissue in its loca-
tion: (pp. 70, 73, 79)
a. Simple squamous epithelium in the alveoli of
the lungs
b. Ciliated epithelium in the trachea
c. Cartilage in the trachea
2. Explain the importance of each tissue in its loca-
tion: (pp. 77, 79)
a. Bone tissue in bones
b. Cartilage on the joint surfaces of bones
c. Fibrous connective tissue in ligaments
3. State the functions of red blood cells, white blood
cells, and platelets. (p. 75)
4. Name two organs made primarily of nerve tissue,
and state the general functions of nerve tissue.
(p. 81)
5. State the location and function of cardiac muscle.
(p. 81)
6. Explain the importance of each of these tissues in
the small intestine: smooth muscle and columnar
epithelium. (pp. 72, 79)
7. State the precise location of each of the following
membranes: (p. 82)
a. Peritoneum
b. Visceral pericardium
c. Parietal pleura
8. State the function of: (pp. 74, 82, 84)
a. Serous ﬂuid
b. Mucus
c. Blood plasma
9. State two functions of skeletal muscles. (p. 79)
10. Name three body tracts lined with mucous mem-
branes. (p. 82)
11. Explain how endocrine glands differ from exocrine
glands. (pp. 73–74)
12. State the function of adipose tissue: (p. 76)
a. Around the eyes
b. Between the skin and muscles
13. State the location of: (p. 84)
a. Meninges
b. Synovial membranes
14. State the important physical characteristics of col-
lagen and elastin, and name the cells that produce
these protein ﬁbers (p. 75)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

1. A friend suffers a knee injury involving damage to
bone, cartilage, and ligaments. What can you tell
your friend about the healing of these tissues?
2. Stratiﬁed squamous keratinizing epithelium is an
excellent barrier to pathogens in the epidermis of
the skin. Despite the fact that it is such a good bar-
rier, this tissue would not be suitable for the lining
of the trachea or small intestine. Explain why.
3. Many tissues have protective functions, but it is
important to be speciﬁc about the kind of protec-
tion provided. Name at least three tissues with a
protective function, and state what each protects
the body (or parts of the body) against.
4. Why is blood classiﬁed as a connective tissue?
What does it connect? What kinds of connections
does it make?
Tissues and Membranes
87
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

88
CHAPTER 5
Chapter Outline
The Skin
Epidermis
Stratum germinativum
Stratum corneum
Langerhans cells
Melanocytes
Dermis
Hair follicles
Nail follicles
Receptors
Glands
Blood vessels
Subcutaneous Tissue
Aging and the Integumentary System
BOX 5–1
BURNS
BOX 5–2
PREVENTING SKIN CANCER: COMMON
SENSE AND SUNSCREENS
BOX 5–3
COMMON SKIN DISORDERS
BOX 5–4
ADMINISTERING MEDICATIONS
Student Objectives
• Name the two major layers of the skin and the
tissue of which each is made.
• State the locations and describe the functions of
the stratum germinativum and stratum corneum.
• Describe the function of Langerhans cells.
• Describe the function of melanocytes and melanin.
• Describe the functions of hair and nails.
• Name the cutaneous senses and explain their
importance.
• Describe the functions of the secretions of seba-
ceous glands, ceruminous glands, and eccrine
sweat glands.
• Describe how the arterioles in the dermis respond
to heat, cold, and stress.
• Name the tissues that make up the subcutaneous
tissue, and describe their functions.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Integumentary System
89
New Terminology
Arterioles (ar-TEER-ee-ohls)
Ceruminous gland/Cerumen (suh-ROO-mi-nus
GLAND/suh-ROO-men)
Dermis (DER-miss)
Eccrine sweat gland (EK-rin SWET GLAND)
Epidermis (EP-i-DER-miss)
Hair follicle (HAIR FAH-li-kull)
Keratin (KER-uh-tin)
Melanin (MEL-uh-nin)
Melanocyte (muh-LAN-oh-sight)
Nail follicle (NAIL FAH-li-kull)
Papillary layer (PAP-i-LAR-ee LAY-er)
Receptors (ree-SEP-turs)
Sebaceous gland/Sebum (suh-BAY-shus
GLAND/SEE-bum)
Stratum corneum (STRA-tum KOR-nee-um)
Stratum germinativum (STRA-tum JER-min-ah-
TEE-vum)
Subcutaneous tissue (SUB-kew-TAY-nee-us TISH-
yoo)
Vasoconstriction (VAY-zoh-kon-STRIK-shun)
Vasodilation (VAY-zoh-dye-LAY-shun)
Related Clinical Terminology
Acne (AK-nee)
Alopecia (AL-oh-PEE-she-ah)
Biopsy (BYE-op-see)
Carcinoma (KAR-sin-OH-mah)
Circulatory shock (SIR-kew-lah-TOR-ee SHAHK)
Contusion (kon-TOO-zhun)
Decubitus ulcer (dee-KEW-bi-tuss UL-ser)
Dehydration (DEE-high-DRAY-shun)
Dermatology (DER-muh-TAH-luh-gee)
Eczema (EK-zuh-mah)
Erythema (ER-i-THEE-mah)
Histamine (HISS-tah-meen)
Hives (HIGH-VZ)
Inﬂammation (IN-ﬂuh-MAY-shun)
Melanoma (MEL-ah-NOH-mah)
Nevus (NEE-vus)
Pruritus (proo-RYE-tus)
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The integumentary system consists of the skin, its
accessory structures such as hair and sweat glands, and
the subcutaneous tissue below the skin. The skin is
made of several different tissue types and is considered
an organ. Because the skin covers the surface of the
body, one of its functions is readily apparent: It sepa-
rates the internal environment of the body from the
external environment and prevents the entry of many
harmful substances. The subcutaneous tissue directly
underneath the skin connects it to the muscles and has
other functions as well.
THE SKIN
The two major layers of the skin are the outer
epidermis and the inner dermis. Each of these layers
is made of different tissues and has very different func-
tions.
EPIDERMIS
The epidermis is made of stratiﬁed squamous kera-
tinizing epithelial tissue and is thickest on the palms
and soles. The cells that are most abundant are called
keratinocytes, and there are no capillaries present
between them. Although the epidermis may be further
subdivided into four or ﬁve sublayers, two of these are
of greatest importance: the innermost layer, the stra-
tum germinativum, and the outermost layer, the stra-
tum corneum (Fig. 5–1).
Stratum Germinativum
The stratum germinativum may also be called the
stratum basale. Each name tells us something about
this layer. To germinate means “to sprout” or “to
grow.” Basal means the “base” or “lowest part.” The
stratum germinativum is the base of the epidermis, the
innermost layer in which mitosis takes place. New
cells are continually being produced, pushing the
older cells toward the skin surface. These cells pro-
duce the protein keratin, and as they get farther away
from the capillaries in the dermis, they die. As dead
cells are worn off the skin’s surface, they are replaced
by cells from the lower layers. Scattered among the
keratinocytes of the stratum germinativum are very
different cells called Merkel cells (or Merkel discs);
these are receptors for the sense of touch (Fig. 5–2).
The living keratinocytes are able to synthesize
antimicrobial peptides called defensins; these and
other chemicals are produced following any injury to
the skin, as part of the process of inﬂammation.
Defensins rupture the membranes of pathogens such
as bacteria that may enter by way of breaks in the skin.
The living portion of the epidermis also produces a
vitamin; the cells have a form of cholesterol that, on
exposure to ultraviolet light, is changed to vitamin D
(then modiﬁed by the liver and kidneys to the most
active form, called 1,25-D, or calcitriol, which is con-
sidered a hormone). This is why vitamin D is some-
times referred to as the “sunshine vitamin.” People
who do not get much sunlight depend more on nutri-
tional sources of vitamin D, such as fortiﬁed milk. But
sunlight is probably the best way to get vitamin D, and
15 minutes a day a few times a week is often enough.
Vitamin D is important for the absorption of calcium
and phosphorus from food in the small intestine; this
function has been known for years. Recent research,
however, suggests that vitamin D is also involved in
maintaining muscle strength, especially in elderly peo-
ple, in the functioning of insulin, and in some immune
responses, where it may be protective for some types
of cancer.
Stratum Corneum
The stratum corneum, the outermost epidermal
layer, consists of many layers of dead cells; all that is
left is their keratin. The protein keratin is relatively
waterproof, and though the stratum corneum should
not be thought of as a plastic bag encasing the body, it
does prevent most evaporation of body water. Also of
importance, keratin prevents the entry of water. With-
out a waterproof stratum corneum, it would be impos-
sible to swim in a pool or even take a shower without
damaging our cells.
The stratum corneum is also a barrier to pathogens
and chemicals. Most bacteria and other microorgan-
isms cannot penetrate unbroken skin. The ﬂaking of
dead cells from the skin surface helps remove micro-
organisms, and the fatty acids in sebum help inhibit
their growth. Most chemicals, unless they are corro-
sive, will not get through unbroken skin to the living
tissue within. One painful exception is the sap of poi-
son ivy. This resin does penetrate the skin and initiates
an allergic reaction in susceptible people. The inﬂam-
matory response that characterizes allergies causes
90
The Integumentary System
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

blisters and severe itching. The importance of the
stratum corneum becomes especially apparent when it
is lost (see Box 5–1: Burns).
Certain minor changes in the epidermis are
undoubtedly familiar to you. When ﬁrst wearing new
shoes, for example, the skin of the foot may be sub-
jected to friction. This will separate layers of the epi-
dermis, or separate the epidermis from the dermis,
and tissue ﬂuid may collect, causing a blister. If the
skin is subjected to pressure, the rate of mitosis in the
stratum germinativum will increase and create a
thicker epidermis; we call this a callus. Although cal-
luses are more common on the palms and soles, they
may occur on any part of the skin.
The Integumentary System
91
Sebaceous gland
Receptor for touch
(encapsulated)
Hair follicle
Receptor for pressure
(encapsulated)
Pore
Stratum germinativum
Stratum corneum
Epidermis
Dermis
Papillary layer
with capillaries
Pilomotor
muscle
Subcutaneous
tissue
Fascia of
muscle
Adipose tissue
Eccrine sweat gland
Free nerve ending
Nerve
Arteriole
Venule
Figure 5–1.
Skin. Structure of the skin and subcutaneous tissue.
QUESTION: Which layers of the integumentary system have blood vessels?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

92
Stratum corneum
Langerhans cell
Mitosis
Capillary
Stratum germinativum
Sensory neuron
Dermis
Melanocyte
Merkel cell
Figure 5–2.
The epidermis, show-
ing the different kinds of cells pres-
ent and the blood supply in the
upper dermis.
QUESTION: Which type of cell
shown is capable of self-locomotion,
and what does it carry?
BOX 5–1
BURNS
Burns of the skin may be caused by ﬂames, hot
water or steam, sunlight, electricity, or corrosive
chemicals. The severity of burns ranges from minor
to fatal, and the classiﬁcation of burns is based on
the extent of damage.
First-Degree Burn—only the superﬁcial epidermis
is burned, and is painful but not blistered. Light-
colored skin will appear red due to localized
vasodilation in the damaged area. Vasodilation is
part of the inﬂammatory response that brings more
blood to the injured site.
Second-Degree Burn—deeper layers of the epi-
dermis are affected. Another aspect of inﬂam-
mation is that damaged cells release histamine,
which makes capillaries more permeable. More
plasma leaves these capillaries and becomes tissue
ﬂuid, which collects at the burn site, creating blis-
ters. The burned skin is often very painful.
Third-Degree Burn—the entire epidermis is
charred or burned away, and the burn may extend
into the dermis or subcutaneous tissue. Often such
a burn is not painful at ﬁrst, if the receptors in the
dermis have been destroyed.
Extensive third-degree burns are potentially life-
threatening because of the loss of the stratum
corneum. Without this natural barrier, living tissue is
exposed to the environment and is susceptible to
infection and dehydration.
Bacterial infection is a serious problem for burn
patients; the pathogens may get into the blood
(septicemia) and quickly spread throughout
the body. Dehydration may also be fatal if medical
intervention does not interrupt and correct the
following sequence: Tissue ﬂuid evaporates from
the burned surface, and more plasma is pulled
out of capillaries into the tissue spaces. As more
plasma is lost, blood volume and blood pressure
decrease. This is called circulatory shock; eventu-
ally the heart simply does not have enough blood
to pump, and heart failure is the cause of death. To
prevent these serious consequences, third-degree
burns are covered with donor skin or artiﬁcial skin
until skin grafts of the patient’s own skin can be put
in place.
(Continued on following page)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Integumentary System
93
BOX 5–1
BURNS (Continued)
Normal skin
First-degree burn
Second-degree burn
Third-degree burn
Box Figure 5–A
Normal skin section and representative sections showing ﬁrst-degree, second-
degree, and third-degree burns.
Langerhans Cells
Within the epidermis are Langerhans cells, which
are also called dendritic cells because of their
branched appearance when they move (see Fig. 5–2).
These cells originate in the red bone marrow, and are
quite mobile. They are able to phagocytize foreign
material, such as bacteria that enter the body through
breaks in the skin. With such ingested pathogens, the
Langerhans cells migrate to lymph nodes and present
the pathogen to lymphocytes, a type of white blood
cell. This triggers an immune response such as the
production of antibodies (antibodies are proteins that
label foreign material for destruction). Because of its
position adjacent to the external environment, the skin
is an important component of the body’s protective
responses, though many of the exact aspects of this
have yet to be determined. Immunity is covered in
Chapter 14.
Melanocytes
Another type of cell found in the lower epidermis is
the melanocyte, which is also shown in Fig. 5–2.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Melanocytes produce another protein, a pigment
called melanin. People of the same size have approxi-
mately the same number of melanocytes, though these
cells may differ in their level of activity. In people with
dark skin, the melanocytes continuously produce large
amounts of melanin. The melanocytes of light-
skinned people produce less melanin. The activity of
melanocytes is genetically regulated; skin color is one
of our hereditary characteristics.
In all people, melanin production is increased by
exposure of the skin to ultraviolet rays, which are part
of sunlight and are damaging to living cells. As more
melanin is produced, it is taken in by the epidermal
cells as they are pushed toward the surface. This gives
the skin a darker color, which prevents further expo-
sure of the living stratum germinativum to ultraviolet
rays. People with dark skin already have good protec-
tion against the damaging effects of ultraviolet rays;
people with light skin do not (see Box 5–2: Preventing
Skin Cancer: Common Sense and Sunscreens).
Melanin also gives color to hair, though its protective
function is conﬁned to the hair of the head. Two parts
of the eye obtain their color from melanin: the iris and
the interior choroid layer of the eyeball (the eye is dis-
cussed in Chapter 9).The functions of the epidermis
and its cells are summarized in Table 5–1.
94
The Integumentary System
BOX 5–2
PREVENTING SKIN CANCER: COMMON SENSE AND SUNSCREENS
B
A
Anyone can get skin cancer, and the most impor-
tant factor is exposure to sunlight. Light-skinned
people are, of course, more susceptible to the
effects of ultraviolet (UV) rays, which may trigger
mutations in living epidermal cells.
Squamous cell carcinoma and basal cell carci-
noma (see A in Box Fig. 5–B) are the most common
forms of skin cancer. The lesions are visible as
changes in the normal appearance of the skin, and
a biopsy (microscopic examination of a tissue spec-
imen) is used to conﬁrm the diagnosis. These lesions
usually do not metastasize rapidly, and can be
completely removed using simple procedures
Malignant melanoma (see B in Box Fig. 5–B) is
a more serious form of skin cancer, which begins in
melanocytes. Any change in a pigmented spot or
mole (nevus) should prompt a person to see a doc-
tor. Melanoma is serious not because of its growth
in the skin, but because it may metastasize very
rapidly to the lungs, liver, or other vital organ.
Researchers are testing individualized vaccines for
people who have had melanoma. The purpose of
the vaccine is to stimulate the immune system
strongly enough to prevent a second case, for such
recurrences are often fatal.
Although the most common forms of skin cancer
are readily curable, prevention is a better strategy.
We cannot, and we would not want to, stay out of
the sun altogether (because sunlight may be the
best way to get sufficient vitamin D), but we may
be able to do so when sunlight is most damaging.
During the summer months, UV rays are especially
intense between 10 A.M. and 2 P.M. If we are or
must be outdoors during this time, dermatologists
recommend use of a sunscreen.
Sunscreens contain chemicals such as PABA
(para-amino benzoic acid) that block UV rays and
prevent them from damaging the epidermis. An
SPF (sun protection factor) of 15 or higher is con-
sidered good protection. Use of a sunscreen on
exposed skin not only helps prevent skin cancer but
also prevents sunburn and its painful effects. It is
especially important to prevent children from get-
ting severely sunburned, because such burns have
been linked to the development of skin cancer years
later.
Box Figure 5–B
(A) Classic basal cell carcinoma on face. (B) Melanoma in ﬁnger web. (From
Goldsmith, LA, Lazarus, GS, and Tharp, MD: Adult and Pediatric Dermatology: A Color Guide to
Diagnosis and Treatment. FA Davis, 1997, pp 137 and 144, with permission.)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

DERMIS
The dermis is made of an irregular type of ﬁbrous
connective tissue, irregular meaning that the ﬁbers are
not parallel, but run in all directions. Fibroblasts pro-
duce both collagen and elastin ﬁbers. Recall that col-
lagen ﬁbers are strong, and elastin ﬁbers are able to
recoil after being stretched. Strength and elasticity are
two characteristics of the dermis. With increasing age,
however, the deterioration of the elastin ﬁbers causes
the skin to lose its elasticity. We can all look forward
to at least a few wrinkles as we get older.
The uneven junction of the dermis with the epider-
mis is called the papillary layer (see Fig. 5–1). Capil-
laries are abundant here to nourish not only the
dermis but also the stratum germinativum. The epi-
dermis has no capillaries of its own, and the lower, liv-
ing cells depend on the blood supply in the dermis for
oxygen and nutrients.
Within the dermis are the accessory skin structures:
hair and nail follicles, sensory receptors, and several
types of glands. Some of these project through the
epidermis to the skin surface, but their active portions
are in the dermis.
Hair Follicles
Hair follicles are made of epidermal tissue, and the
growth process of hair is very similar to growth of the
epidermis. At the base of a follicle is the hair root,
which contains cells called the matrix, where mitosis
takes place (Fig. 5–3). The new cells produce keratin,
get their color from melanin, then die and become
incorporated into the hair shaft, which is pushed
toward the surface of the skin. The hair that we comb
and brush every day consists of dead, keratinized cells.
The rate of hair growth averages 0.3 to 0.4 in./month
(8 to 10 mm).
Compared to some other mammals, humans do not
have very much hair. The actual functions of human
hair are quite few. Eyelashes and eyebrows help to
keep dust and perspiration out of the eyes, and the
hairs just inside the nostrils help to keep dust out of
the nasal cavities. Hair of the scalp does provide insu-
lation from cold for the head. The hair on our bodies,
however, no longer serves this function, but we have
the evolutionary remnants of it. Attached to each hair
follicle is a small, smooth muscle called the pilomotor
The Integumentary System
95
Hair shaft
Follicle
Hair root
B
Capillary
Venule
Fat cells
A
Figure 5–3.
Structure of a hair follicle. (A) Longitudinal
section. (B) Cross-section.
QUESTION: What is the hair shaft made of?
Table 5–1 EPIDERMIS
Part
Function
Stratum corneum
(keratin)
Stratum germina-
tivum (stratum
basale)
Langerhans cells
Merkel cells
Melanocytes
Melanin
• Prevents loss or entry of water
• If unbroken, prevents entry of
pathogens and most chemi-
cals
• Continuous mitosis produces
new cells to replace worn-off
surface cells
• Produces antimicrobial
defensins
• Cholesterol is changed to vita-
min D on exposure to UV rays
• Phagocytize foreign material
and stimulate an immune
response by lymphocytes
• Receptors for sense of touch
• Produce melanin on exposure
to UV rays
• Protects living skin layers from
further exposure to UV rays
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

or arrector pili muscle. When stimulated by cold or
emotions such as fear, these muscles pull the hair fol-
licles upright. For an animal with fur, this would trap
air and provide greater insulation. Because people do
not have thick fur, all this does for us is give us “goose
bumps.”
Nail Follicles
Found on the ends of ﬁngers and toes, nail follicles
produce nails just as hair follicles produce hair. Mitosis
takes place in the nail root at the base of the nail (Fig.
5–4), and the new cells produce keratin (a stronger
form of this protein than is found in hair) and then die.
Although the nail itself consists of keratinized dead
cells, the ﬂat nail bed is living epidermis and dermis.
This is why cutting a nail too short can be quite
painful. Nails protect the ends of the ﬁngers and toes
from mechanical injury and give the ﬁngers greater
ability to pick up small objects. Fingernails are also
good for scratching. This is more important than it
may seem at ﬁrst. An itch might mean the presence of
an arthropod parasite, mosquito, tick, ﬂea, or louse.
These parasites (all but the tick are insects) feed on
blood, and all are potential vectors of diseases caused
by bacteria, viruses, or protozoa. A quick and vigorous
scratch may kill or at least dislodge the arthropod and
prevent the transmission of the disease. Fingernails
grow at the rate of about 0.12 in./month (3 mm), and
growth is a little faster during the summer months.
Receptors
Most sensory receptors for the cutaneous senses
are found in the dermis (Merkel cells are in the stra-
tum germinativum, as are some nerve endings). The
cutaneous senses are touch, pressure, heat, cold, and
pain. For each sensation there is a speciﬁc type of
receptor, which is a structure that will detect a partic-
ular change. For pain, heat, and cold, the receptors are
free nerve endings. For touch and pressure, the
receptors are called encapsulated nerve endings,
which means there is a cellular structure around the
sensory nerve ending (see Fig. 5–1). The purpose of
these receptors and sensations is to provide the central
nervous system with information about the external
environment and its effect on the skin. This informa-
tion may stimulate responses, such as washing a
painful cut finger, scratching an insect bite, or
responding to a feeling of cold by putting on a sweater.
The sensitivity of an area of skin is determined by
how many receptors are present. The skin of the ﬁn-
gertips, for example, is very sensitive to touch because
there are many receptors per square inch. The skin of
the upper arm, with few touch receptors per square
inch, is less sensitive.
When receptors detect changes, they generate
nerve impulses that are carried to the brain, which
interprets the impulses as a particular sensation.
Sensation, therefore, is actually a function of the brain
(we will return to this in Chapters 8 and 9).
Glands
Glands are made of epithelial tissue. The exocrine
glands of the skin have their secretory portions in the
dermis. Some of these are shown in Fig. 5–1.
Sebaceous Glands. The ducts of sebaceous glands
open into hair follicles or directly to the skin surface.
Their secretion is sebum, a lipid substance that we
commonly refer to as oil. As mentioned previously,
sebum inhibits the growth of bacteria on the skin sur-
face. Another function of sebum is to prevent drying of
skin and hair. The importance of this may not be read-
ily apparent, but skin that is dry tends to crack more
easily. Even very small breaks in the skin are potential
entryways for bacteria. Decreased sebum production is
another consequence of getting older, and elderly peo-
ple often have dry and more fragile skin.
Adolescents may have the problem of overactive
sebaceous glands. Too much sebum may trap bacteria
96
The Integumentary System
Nail root
Nail bed
Cuticle
Nail body
Free edge of nail
Lunula
Figure 5–4.
Structure of a ﬁngernail shown in longitu-
dinal section.
QUESTION: The nail bed is which part of the skin?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

within hair follicles and create small infections.
Because sebaceous glands are more numerous around
the nose and mouth, these are common sites of pim-
ples in young people (see also Box 5–3: Common Skin
Disorders).
Ceruminous Glands. These glands are located in the
dermis of the ear canals. Their secretion is called
cerumen or ear wax (which includes the sebum
secreted in the ear canals). Cerumen keeps the outer
surface of the eardrum pliable and prevents drying.
The Integumentary System
97
BOX 5–3
COMMON SKIN DISORDERS
Impetigo—a bacterial infection often caused by
streptococci or staphylococci. The characteristic
pustules (pus-containing lesions) crust as they heal;
the infection is contagious to others.
Eczema—a symptom of what is more properly
called atopic dermatitis. This may be an allergic
reaction, and is more common in children than
adults; the rash is itchy (pruritus) and may blister
or ooze. Eczema may be related to foods such as
ﬁsh, eggs, or milk products, or to inhaled allergens
such as dust, pollens, or animal dander. Prevention
depends upon determining what the child is aller-
gic to and eliminating or at least limiting exposure.
Warts—caused by a virus that makes epidermal
cells divide abnormally, producing a growth on the
skin that is often raised and has a rough or pitted
surface. Warts are probably most common on the
hands, but they may be anywhere on the skin.
Plantar warts on the sole of the foot may become
quite painful because of the constant pressure of
standing and walking.
Fever blisters (cold sores)—caused by the herpes
simplex virus, to which most people are exposed
as children. An active lesion, usually at the edge
of the lip (but may be anywhere on the skin), is
painful and oozes. If not destroyed by the immune
system, the virus “hides out” and becomes dor-
mant in nerves of the face. Another lesion, weeks
or months later, may be triggered by stress or
another illness.
A
B
C
D
Box Figure 5–C
(A) Impetigo. (B) Eczema of atopic dermatitis. (C) Warts on back
of hands. (D) Fever blister on ﬁnger, localized but severe. (From Goldsmith, LA,
Lazarus, GS, and Tharp, MD: Adult and Pediatric Dermatology: A Color Guide
to Diagnosis and Treatment. FA Davis, 1997, pp 80, 241, 306, and 317, with per-
mission.)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

However, if excess cerumen accumulates in the ear
canal, it may become impacted against the eardrum.
This might diminish the acuity of hearing by prevent-
ing the eardrum from vibrating properly.
Sweat Glands. There are two types of sweat glands,
apocrine and eccrine. Apocrine glands are most
numerous in the axillae (underarm) and genital areas
and are most active in stressful and emotional situa-
tions. Although their secretion does have an odor, it is
barely perceptible to other people. Animals such as
dogs, however, can easily distinguish among people
because of their individual scents. If the apocrine
secretions are allowed to accumulate on the skin, bac-
teria metabolize the chemicals in the sweat and pro-
duce waste products that have distinct odors that
many people ﬁnd unpleasant.
Eccrine glands are found all over the body but are
especially numerous on the forehead, upper lip, palms,
and soles. The secretory portion of these glands is
simply a coiled tube in the dermis. The duct of this
tube extends to the skin’s surface, where it opens into
a pore.
The sweat produced by eccrine glands is important
in the maintenance of normal body temperature. In a
warm environment, or during exercise, more sweat is
secreted onto the skin surface, where it is then evapo-
rated by excess body heat. Recall that water has a high
heat of vaporization, which means that a great deal of
heat can be lost in the evaporation of a relatively small
amount of water. Although this is a very effective
mechanism of heat loss, it has a potentially serious dis-
advantage. Loss of too much body water in sweat may
lead to dehydration, as in heat exhaustion or even
after exercise on a hot and humid day. Increased
sweating during exercise or on warm days should
always be accompanied by increased ﬂuid intake.
Those who exercise regularly know that they must
replace salt as well as water. Sodium chloride is also
lost in sweat, as are small amounts of urea (a nitroge-
nous waste product of amino acid metabolism). This
excretory function of the skin is very minor, however;
the kidneys are primarily responsible for removing
waste products from the blood and for maintaining
the body’s proper salt-to-water proportion.
Blood Vessels
Besides the capillaries in the dermis, the other blood
vessels of great importance are the arterioles.
Arterioles are small arteries, and the smooth muscle
in their walls permits them to constrict (close) or
dilate (open). This is important in the maintenance of
body temperature, because blood carries heat, which is
a form of energy.
In a warm environment the arterioles dilate
(vasodilation), which increases blood ﬂow through the
dermis and brings excess heat close to the body surface
to be radiated to the environment. In a cold environ-
ment, however, body heat must be conserved if possi-
ble, so the arterioles constrict. The vasoconstriction
decreases the ﬂow of blood through the dermis and
keeps heat within the core of the body. This adjusting
mechanism is essential for maintaining homeostasis.
Regulation of the diameter of the arterioles in
response to external temperature changes is controlled
by the nervous system. These changes can often be
seen in light-skinned people. Flushing, especially in
the face, may be observed in hot weather. In cold, the
skin of the extremities may become even paler as blood
ﬂow through the dermis decreases. In people with dark
skin, such changes are not as readily apparent because
they are masked by melanin in the epidermis.
Vasoconstriction in the dermis may also occur dur-
ing stressful situations. For our ancestors, stress usu-
ally demanded a physical response: Either stand and
ﬁght or run away to safety. This is called the “ﬁght or
ﬂight response.” Our nervous systems are still pro-
grammed to respond as if physical activity were neces-
sary to cope with the stress situation. Vasoconstriction
in the dermis will shunt, or redirect, blood to more
vital organs such as the muscles, heart, and brain. In
times of stress, the skin is a relatively unimportant
organ and can function temporarily with a minimal
blood ﬂow. You have probably heard the expression
“broke out in a cold sweat,” and may even have felt it
in a stressful situation. Such sweating feels cold
because vasoconstriction in the dermis makes the skin
relatively cool.
Blood ﬂow in the dermis may be interrupted by
prolonged pressure on the skin. For example, a hospi-
tal patient who cannot turn over by herself may
develop a decubitus ulcer, also called a pressure ulcer
or pressure sore. The skin is compressed between the
object outside, such as a bed, and a bony prominence
within, such as the heel bone or the sacrum in the
lower back. Without its blood supply the skin dies,
and the dead tissue is a potential site for bacterial
infection.
The functions of dermal structures are summarized
in Table 5–2.
98
The Integumentary System
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
The subcutaneous tissue may also be called the
superﬁcial fascia, one of the connective tissue mem-
branes. Made of areolar connective tissue and adipose
tissue, the superﬁcial fascia connects the dermis to the
underlying muscles. Its other functions are those of its
tissues, as you may recall from Chapter 4.
Areolar connective tissue, or loose connective tis-
sue, contains collagen and elastin ﬁbers and many
white blood cells that have left capillaries to wander
around in the tissue ﬂuid between skin and muscles.
These migrating white blood cells destroy pathogens
that enter the body through breaks in the skin. Mast
cells are specialized connective tissue cells found in
areolar tissue; they produce histamine, leukotrienes,
and other chemicals that help bring about inﬂamma-
tion, the body’s response to damage (inﬂammation is
described in Chapters 10 and 14).
The cells (adipocytes) of adipose tissue are special-
ized to store fat, and our subcutaneous layer of fat
stores excess nutrients as a potential energy source.
This layer also cushions bony prominences, such as
when sitting, and provides some insulation from cold.
For people, this last function is relatively minor,
because we do not have a thick layer of fat, as do ani-
mals such as whales and seals. As mentioned in
Chapter 4, adipose tissue is involved in the onset or
cessation of eating and in the use of insulin by body
cells, and it contributes to inﬂammation by produc-
ing cytokines, chemicals that activate white blood
cells.
Just as the epidermis forms a continuous sheet that
covers the body, the subcutaneous tissue is a continu-
ous layer, though it is internal. If we consider the epi-
dermis as the ﬁrst line of defense against pathogens,
we can consider the subcutaneous tissue a secondary
line of defense. There is, however, a signiﬁcant
anatomic difference. The cells of the epidermis are
very closely and tightly packed, but the cells and
protein ﬁbers of subcutaneous tissue are farther apart,
and there is much more tissue ﬂuid. If we imagine the
epidermis as a four-lane highway during rush hour
with bumper-to-bumper traffic, the superﬁcial fascia
would be that same highway at three o’clock in the
morning, when it is not crowded and cars can move
much faster. This is an obvious beneﬁt for the migrat-
ing white blood cells, but may become a disadvantage
because some bacterial pathogens, once established,
can spread even more rapidly throughout subcuta-
neous tissue.
Group A streptococcus, for example, is a cause of
necrotizing fasciitis. Necrotizing means “to cause
death,” and fasciitis is the inﬂammation of a fascia, in
this case the superﬁcial fascia and the deep fasciae
around muscles. Necrotizing fasciitis is an extremely
serious infection and requires surgical removal of the
infected tissue, or even amputation of an infected
limb, to try to stop the spread of the bacteria. The
body’s defenses have been overwhelmed because what
is usually an anatomic beneﬁt, the “looseness” of are-
olar connective tissue, has been turned against us and
become a detriment.
The functions of subcutaneous tissue are summa-
rized in Table 5–3. Box 5–4: Administering Medica-
tions, describes ways in which we give medications
through the skin.
The Integumentary System
99
Table 5–2
DERMIS
Part
Function
Papillary layer
Hair (follicles)
Nails (follicles)
Receptors
Sebaceous glands
Ceruminous
glands
Eccrine sweat
glands
Arterioles
• Contains capillaries that nourish
the stratum germinativum
• Eyelashes and nasal hair keep
dust out of eyes and nasal
cavities
• Scalp hair provides insulation
from cold for the head
• Protect ends of ﬁngers and
toes from mechanical injury
• Detect changes that are felt as
the cutaneous senses: touch,
pressure, heat, cold, and pain
• Produce sebum, which prevents
drying of skin and hair and
inhibits growth of bacteria
• Produce cerumen, which pre-
vents drying of the eardrum
• Produce watery sweat that is
evaporated by excess body heat
to cool the body
• Dilate in response to warmth
to increase heat loss
• Constrict in response to cold
to conserve body heat
• Constrict in stressful situations
to shunt blood to more vital
organs
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

100
The Integumentary System
Table 5–3
SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
Part
Function
Areolar connective tissue
Adipose tissue
• Connects skin to muscles
• Contains many WBCs to destroy pathogens that enter breaks in the skin
• Contains mast cells that release histamine, leukotrienes, and other
chemicals involved in inﬂammation
• Contains stored energy in the form of true fats
• Cushions bony prominences
• Provides some insulation from cold
• Contributes to appetite
• Contributes to use of insulin
• Produces cytokines that activate WBCs
BOX 5–4
ADMINISTERING MEDICATIONS
You have probably seen television or print adver-
tisements for skin patches that supply nicotine, and
you know that their purpose is to help smokers give
up cigarettes. This method of supplying a medica-
tion is called transdermal administration. The name
is a little misleading because the most difficult part
of cutaneous absorption of a drug is absorption
through the stratum corneum of the epidermis.
Because such absorption is slow, skin patches are
useful for medications needed in small but continu-
ous amounts, and over a prolonged period of time.
You would expect that such patches should be
worn where the epidermis is thin. These sites
include the upper arm and the chest. The recom-
mended site for a patch to prevent motion sickness
is the skin behind the ear. Also available in patch
form are medications for birth control, overactive
bladder, high blood pressure, and both systemic
and localized pain relief.
Medications may also be injected through the
skin. Some injections are given subcutaneously, that
is, into subcutaneous tissue (see Box Fig. 5–D).
Subcutaneous adipose tissue has a moderate blood
supply, so the rate of absorption of the drug will be
moderate, but predictable. Insulin is given subcuta-
neously. Other injections are intramuscular, and
absorption into the blood is rapid because muscle
tissue has a very good blood supply. Most injectable
vaccines are given intramuscularly, to promote
rapid absorption to stimulate antibody production.
Stratum
corneum
Dermis
Adipose
tissue
Skeletal
muscle
Patch
Subcutaneous
Intramuscular
Box Figure 5–D
The skin, subcutaneous tissue, and muscle sites for the delivery of
medications.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

AGING AND THE
INTEGUMENTARY SYSTEM
The effects of age on the integumentary system are
often quite visible. Both layers of skin become thinner
and more fragile as mitosis in the epidermis slows and
ﬁbroblasts in the dermis die and are not replaced;
repair of even small breaks or cuts is slower. The skin
becomes wrinkled as collagen and elastin ﬁbers in the
dermis deteriorate. Sebaceous glands and sweat glands
become less active; the skin becomes dry, and temper-
ature regulation in hot weather becomes more diffi-
cult. Hair follicles become inactive and hair on the
scalp and body thins. Melanocytes die and are not
replaced; the hair that remains becomes white. There
is often less fat in the subcutaneous tissue, which may
make an elderly person more sensitive to cold. It is
important for elderly people (and those who care for
them) to realize that extremes of temperature may be
harmful and to take special precautions in very hot or
very cold weather.
SUMMARY
The integumentary system is the outermost organ
system of the body. You have probably noticed that
many of its functions are related to this location. The
skin protects the body against pathogens and chemi-
cals, minimizes loss or entry of water, blocks the
harmful effects of sunlight, and produces vitamin D.
Sensory receptors in the skin provide information
about the external environment, and the skin helps
regulate body temperature in response to environ-
mental changes. The subcutaneous tissue is a second-
ary line of defense against pathogens, a site of fat
storage and of the other metabolic functions of adi-
pose tissue.
The Integumentary System
101
STUDY OUTLINE
The integumentary system consists of the
skin and its accessory structures and the
subcutaneous tissue. The two major layers of
the skin are the outer epidermis and the
inner dermis.
Epidermis—made of stratified squamous
epithelium; no capillaries; cells called ker-
atinocytes (see Figs. 5–1 and 5–2 and Table
5–1)
1. Stratum germinativum—the innermost layer
where mitosis takes place; new cells produce ker-
atin and die as they are pushed toward the surface.
Defensins are antimicrobial peptides produced
when the skin is injured. Vitamin D is formed from
cholesterol on exposure to the UV rays of sunlight.
2. Stratum corneum—the outermost layers of dead
cells; keratin prevents loss and entry of water and
resists entry of pathogens and chemicals.
3. Langerhans cells—phagocytize foreign material,
take it to lymph nodes, and stimulate an immune
response by lymphocytes.
4. Melanocytes—in the lower epidermis, produce
melanin. UV rays stimulate melanin production;
melanin prevents further exposure of the stratum
germinativum to UV rays by darkening the
skin.
Dermis—made of irregular ﬁbrous connec-
tive tissue; collagen provides strength, and
elastin provides elasticity; capillaries in the
papillary layer nourish the stratum germina-
tivum (see Fig. 5–1 and Table 5–2)
1. Hair follicles—mitosis takes place in the hair root;
new cells produce keratin, die, and become the hair
shaft. Hair of the scalp provides insulation from
cold for the head; eyelashes keep dust out of eyes;
nostril hairs keep dust out of nasal cavities (see
Figs. 5–1 and 5–3).
2. Nail follicles—at the ends of ﬁngers and toes; mito-
sis takes place in the nail root; the nail itself is dead,
keratinized cells. Nails protect the ends of the ﬁn-
gers and toes, enable the ﬁngers to pick up small
objects, and provide for efficient scratching (see
Fig. 5–4).
3. Receptors—detect changes in the skin: touch, pres-
sure, heat, cold, and pain; provide information
about the external environment that initiates appro-
priate responses; sensitivity of the skin depends on
the number of receptors present.
4. Sebaceous glands—secrete sebum into hair follicles
or to the skin surface; sebum inhibits the growth of
bacteria and prevents drying of skin and hair.
5. Ceruminous glands—secrete cerumen in the ear
canals; cerumen prevents drying of the eardrum.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

6. Apocrine sweat glands—modiﬁed scent glands in
axillae and genital area; activated by stress and
emotions.
7. Eccrine sweat glands—most numerous on face,
palms, soles. Activated by high external tempera-
ture or exercise; sweat on skin surface is evaporated
by excess body heat; potential disadvantage is dehy-
dration. Excretion of small amounts of NaCl and
urea is a very minor function.
8. Arterioles—smooth muscle permits constriction
or dilation. Vasoconstriction in cold temperatures
decreases dermal blood ﬂow to conserve heat in
the body core. Vasodilation in warm temperatures
increases dermal blood ﬂow to bring heat to the
surface to be lost. Vasoconstriction during stress
shunts blood away from the skin to more vital
organs, such as muscles, to permit a physical
response, if necessary.
Subcutaneous Tissue—also called the superﬁ-
cial fascia; connects skin to muscles (see Fig.
5–1 and Table 5–3)
1. Areolar tissue—also called loose connective tissue;
the matrix contains tissue ﬂuid and WBCs that
destroy pathogens that get through breaks in the
skin; mast cells produce chemicals that bring about
inﬂammation.
2. Adipose tissue—stores fat as potential energy;
cushions bony prominences; provides some insula-
tion from cold. Other functions: contributes to
appetite, the use of insulin, and the activation of
WBCs.
102
The Integumentary System
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Name the parts of the integumentary system.
(p. 90)
2. Name the two major layers of skin, the location
of each, and the tissue of which each is made.
(pp. 90, 95)
3. In the epidermis: (pp. 90, 93)
a. Where does mitosis take place?
b. What protein do the new cells produce?
c. What happens to these cells?
d. What is the function of Langerhans cells?
4. Describe the functions of the stratum corneum.
(p. 90)
5. Name the cells that produce melanin. What is
the stimulus? Describe the function of melanin
(p. 94)
6. Where, on the body, does human hair have impor-
tant functions? Describe these functions. (p. 95)
7. Describe the functions of nails. (p. 96)
8. Name the cutaneous senses. Describe the impor-
tance of these senses. (p. 96)
9. Explain the functions of sebum and cerumen.
(pp. 96–97)
10. Explain how sweating helps maintain normal
body temperature. (p. 98)
11. Explain how the arterioles in the dermis respond
to cold or warm external temperatures and to
stress situations. (p. 98)
12. What vitamin is produced in the skin? What is the
stimulus for the production of this vitamin?
(p. 90)
13. Name the tissues of which the superﬁcial fascia is
made. Describe the functions of these tissues.
(p. 99)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Integumentary System
103
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
1. The epidermis has no capillaries of its own; the
stratum corneum is made of dead cells and doesn’t
need a blood supply at all. Explain why the epider-
mis is affected by a decubitus ulcer. Name another
group of people, besides hospital or nursing home
patients, that is especially susceptible to developing
pressure ulcers.
2. Going out in the sun stimulates quite a bit of activ-
ity in the skin, especially on a hot summer day.
Describe what is happening in the skin in response
to sunlight.
3. Ringworm is a skin condition characterized by
scaly red patches, often circular or oval in shape. It
is not caused by a worm, but rather by certain
fungi. What is the food of these fungi; that is, what
are they digesting?
4. There are several kinds of cells in the epidermis.
Which cells exert their functions when they are
dead? Which cells must be living in order to func-
tion?
5. Wearing a hat in winter is a good idea. What hap-
pens to the arterioles in the dermis in a cold envi-
ronment? How does this affect heat loss? Is the
head an exception? Explain.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

104
CHAPTER 6
Chapter Outline
Functions of the Skeleton
Types of Bone Tissue
Classiﬁcation of Bones
Embryonic Growth of Bone
Factors That Affect Bone Growth and
Maintenance
The Skeleton
Skull
Vertebral Column
Rib Cage
The Shoulder and Arm
The Hip and Leg
Joints—Articulations
The Classiﬁcation of Joints
Synovial Joints
Aging and the Skeletal System
BOX 6–1
FRACTURES AND THEIR REPAIR
BOX 6–2
OSTEOPOROSIS
BOX 6–3
HERNIATED DISC
BOX 6–4
ABNORMALITIES OF THE CURVES
OF THE SPINE
BOX 6–5
ARTHRITIS
Student Objectives
• Describe the functions of the skeleton.
• Explain how bones are classiﬁed, and give an
example of each type.
• Describe how the embryonic skeleton model is
replaced by bone.
• Name the nutrients necessary for bone growth,
and explain their functions.
• Name the hormones involved in bone growth and
maintenance, and explain their functions.
• Explain what is meant by “exercise” for bones, and
explain its importance.
• Name all the bones of the human skeleton (be able
to point to each on diagrams, skeleton models, or
yourself).
• Describe the functions of the skull, vertebral col-
umn, rib cage, scapula, and pelvic bone.
• Explain how joints are classiﬁed. For each type,
give an example, and describe the movement pos-
sible.
• Describe the parts of a synovial joint, and explain
their functions.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Skeletal System
105
New Terminology
Appendicular (AP-en-DIK-yoo-lar)
Articulation (ar-TIK-yoo-LAY-shun)
Axial (AK-see-uhl)
Bursa (BURR-sah)
Diaphysis (dye-AFF-i-sis)
Epiphyseal disc (e-PIFF-i-SEE-al DISK)
Epiphysis (e-PIFF-i-sis)
Fontanel (FON-tah-NELL)
Haversian system (ha-VER-zhun SIS-tem)
Ligament (LIG-uh-ment)
Ossiﬁcation (AHS-i-ﬁ-KAY-shun)
Osteoblast (AHS-tee-oh-BLAST)
Osteoclast (AHS-tee-oh-KLAST)
Paranasal sinus (PAR-uh-NAY-zuhl SIGH-nus)
Periosteum (PER-ee-AHS-tee-um)
Suture (SOO-cher)
Symphysis (SIM-ﬁ-sis)
Synovial ﬂuid (sin-OH-vee-al FLOO-id)
Related Clinical Terminology
Autoimmune disease
(AW-toh-im-YOON di-ZEEZ)
Bursitis (burr-SIGH-tiss)
Cleft palate (KLEFT PAL-uht)
Fracture (FRAK-chur)
Herniated disc (HER-nee-ay-ted DISK)
Kyphosis (kye-FOH-sis)
Lordosis (lor-DOH-sis)
Osteoarthritis (AHS-tee-oh-ar-THRY-tiss)
Osteomyelitis (AHS-tee-oh-my-uh-LYE-tiss)
Osteoporosis (AHS-tee-oh-por-OH-sis)
Rheumatoid arthritis
(ROO-muh-toyd ar-THRY-tiss)
Rickets (RIK-ets)
Scoliosis (SKOH-lee-OH-sis)
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Imagine for a moment that people did not have
skeletons. What comes to mind? Probably that each of
us would be a little heap on the ﬂoor, much like a jel-
lyﬁsh out of water. Such an image is accurate and
reﬂects the most obvious function of the skeleton: to
support the body. Although it is a framework for the
body, the skeleton is not at all like the wooden beams
that support a house. Bones are living organs that
actively contribute to the maintenance of the internal
environment of the body.
The skeletal system consists of bones and other
structures that make up the joints of the skeleton. The
types of tissue present are bone tissue, cartilage, and
ﬁbrous connective tissue, which forms the ligaments
that connect bone to bone.
FUNCTIONS OF THE SKELETON
1. Provides a framework that supports the body; the
muscles that are attached to bones move the skele-
ton.
2. Protects some internal organs from mechanical
injury; the rib cage protects the heart and lungs, for
example.
3. Contains and protects the red bone marrow, the
primary hemopoietic (blood-forming) tissue.
4. Provides a storage site for excess calcium. Calcium
may be removed from bone to maintain a normal
blood calcium level, which is essential for blood
clotting and proper functioning of muscles and
nerves.
TYPES OF BONE TISSUE
Bone was described as a tissue in Chapter 4. Recall
that bone cells are called osteocytes, and the matrix
of bone is made of calcium salts and collagen. The
calcium salts are calcium carbonate (CaCO3) and cal-
cium phosphate (Ca3(PO4)2), which give bone the
strength required to perform its supportive and pro-
tective functions. Bone matrix is non-living, but it
changes constantly, with calcium that is taken from
bone into the blood replaced by calcium from the diet.
In normal circumstances, the amount of calcium that
is removed is replaced by an equal amount of calcium
deposited. This is the function of osteocytes, to regu-
late the amount of calcium that is deposited in, or
removed from, the bone matrix.
In bone as an organ, two types of bone tissue are
present (Fig. 6–1). Compact bone looks solid but is
very precisely structured. Compact bone is made of
osteons or haversian systems, microscopic cylinders
of bone matrix with osteocytes in concentric rings
around central haversian canals. In the haversian
canals are blood vessels; the osteocytes are in contact
with these blood vessels and with one another through
microscopic channels (canaliculi) in the matrix.
The second type of bone tissue is spongy bone,
which does look rather like a sponge with its visible
holes or cavities. Osteocytes, matrix, and blood vessels
are present but are not arranged in haversian systems.
The cavities in spongy bone often contain red bone
marrow, which produces red blood cells, platelets,
and the ﬁve kinds of white blood cells.
CLASSIFICATION OF BONES
1. Long bones—the bones of the arms, legs, hands,
and feet (but not the wrists and ankles). The shaft
of a long bone is the diaphysis, and the ends are
called epiphyses (see Fig. 6–1). The diaphysis is
made of compact bone and is hollow, forming a
canal within the shaft. This marrow canal (or
medullary cavity) contains yellow bone marrow,
which is mostly adipose tissue. The epiphyses are
made of spongy bone covered with a thin layer of
compact bone. Although red bone marrow is pres-
ent in the epiphyses of children’s bones, it is largely
replaced by yellow bone marrow in adult bones.
2. Short bones—the bones of the wrists and ankles.
3. Flat bones—the ribs, shoulder blades, hip bones,
and cranial bones.
4. Irregular bones—the vertebrae and facial bones.
Short, ﬂat, and irregular bones are all made of
spongy bone covered with a thin layer of compact
bone. Red bone marrow is found within the spongy
bone.
The joint surfaces of bones are covered with artic-
ular cartilage, which provides a smooth surface. Cov-
ering the rest of the bone is the periosteum, a ﬁbrous
connective tissue membrane whose collagen ﬁbers
merge with those of the tendons and ligaments that
106
The Skeletal System
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

107
Diaphysis
Proximal
epiphysis
Distal
epiphysis
Yellow bone
marrow
Marrow (medullary)
cavity
Periosteum
Compact bone
Spongy bone
Marrow
Canaliculi
Venule
Osteocyte
Fibrous layer
Osteogenic layer
(osteoblasts)
Periosteum
Osteon
(haversian system)
Haversian canal
Concentric rings
of osteocytes
A
B
Arteriole
Figure 6–1.
Bone tissue. (A) Femur with distal end cut in longitudinal section.
(B) Compact bone showing haversian systems (osteons).
QUESTION: What is the purpose of the blood vessels in bone tissue?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

are attached to the bone. The periosteum anchors
these structures and contains both the blood vessels
that enter the bone itself and osteoblasts that will
become active if the bone is damaged.
EMBRYONIC GROWTH OF BONE
During embryonic development, the skeleton is ﬁrst
made of cartilage and ﬁbrous connective tissue, which
are gradually replaced by bone. Bone matrix is pro-
duced by cells called osteoblasts (a blast cell is a “grow-
ing” or “producing” cell, and osteo means “bone”). In
the embryonic model of the skeleton, osteoblasts dif-
ferentiate from the ﬁbroblasts that are present. The
production of bone matrix, called ossiﬁcation, begins
in a center of ossiﬁcation in each bone.
The cranial and facial bones are ﬁrst made of
ﬁbrous connective tissue. In the third month of fetal
development, ﬁbroblasts (spindle-shaped connective
tissue cells) become more specialized and differentiate
into osteoblasts, which produce bone matrix. From
each center of ossiﬁcation, bone growth radiates out-
ward as calcium salts are deposited in the collagen of
the model of the bone. This process is not complete
at birth; a baby has areas of ﬁbrous connective tissue
remaining between the bones of the skull. These
are called fontanels (Fig. 6–2), which permit com-
pression of the baby’s head during birth without
breaking the still thin cranial bones. The fontanels
also permit the growth of the brain after birth. You
may have heard fontanels referred to as “soft spots,”
and indeed they are. A baby’s skull is quite fragile and
must be protected from trauma. By the age of 2 years,
all the fontanels have become ossiﬁed, and the skull
becomes a more effective protective covering for the
brain.
The rest of the embryonic skeleton is ﬁrst made of
cartilage, and ossiﬁcation begins in the third month of
gestation in the long bones. Osteoblasts produce bone
matrix in the center of the diaphyses of the long bones
and in the center of short, ﬂat, and irregular bones.
Bone matrix gradually replaces the original cartilage
(Fig. 6–3).
The long bones also develop centers of ossiﬁcation
in their epiphyses. At birth, ossiﬁcation is not yet com-
plete and continues throughout childhood. In long
bones, growth occurs in the epiphyseal discs at the
junction of the diaphysis with each epiphysis. An epi-
physeal disc is still cartilage, and the bone grows in
length as more cartilage is produced on the epiphysis
side (see Fig. 6–3). On the diaphysis side, osteoblasts
produce bone matrix to replace the cartilage. Between
the ages of 16 and 25 years (inﬂuenced by estrogen or
testosterone), all of the cartilage of the epiphyseal
discs is replaced by bone. This is called closure of the
epiphyseal discs (or we say the discs are closed), and
the bone lengthening process stops.
Also in bones are specialized cells called osteo-
clasts (a clast cell is a “destroying” cell), which are able
to dissolve and reabsorb the minerals of bone matrix,
a process called resorption. Osteoclasts are very
active in embryonic long bones, and they reabsorb
bone matrix in the center of the diaphysis to form the
marrow canal. Blood vessels grow into the marrow
canals of embryonic long bones, and red bone marrow
is established. After birth, the red bone marrow is
replaced by yellow bone marrow. Red bone marrow
remains in the spongy bone of short, ﬂat, and irregu-
lar bones. For other functions of osteoclasts and
osteoblasts, see Box 6–1: Fractures and Their Repair.
FACTORS THAT AFFECT BONE
GROWTH AND MAINTENANCE
1. Heredity—each person has a genetic potential for
height, that is, a maximum height, with genes
inherited from both parents. Many genes are
involved, and their interactions are not well under-
stood. Some of these genes are probably those for
the enzymes involved in cartilage and bone pro-
duction, for this is how bones grow.
2. Nutrition—nutrients are the raw materials of
which bones are made. Calcium, phosphorus, and
protein become part of the bone matrix itself.
Vitamin D is needed for the efficient absorption of
calcium and phosphorus by the small intestine.
Vitamins A and C do not become part of bone but
are necessary for the process of bone matrix forma-
tion (ossiﬁcation). Without these and other nutri-
ents, bones cannot grow properly. Children who
are malnourished grow very slowly and may not
reach their genetic potential for height.
3. Hormones—endocrine glands produce hormones
that stimulate speciﬁc effects in certain cells.
108
The Skeletal System
(text continued on page 112)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Frontal bone
Anterior fontanel
Parietal bone
Posterior fontanel
Posterior fontanel
Mastoid fontanel  
Temporal bone
Sphenoid fontanel
Mandible
Sphenoid bone
Zygomatic bone
Maxilla
Occipital bone
Occipital bone
Frontal bone
Parietal bone
Anterior fontanel
A
B
C
D
Figure 6–2.
Infant skull with fontanels. (A) Lateral view of left side. (B) Superior view.
(C) Fetal skull in anterior superior view. (D) Fetal skull in left lateral view. Try to name the
bones; use part A as a guide. The fontanels are translucent connective tissue. (C and D pho-
tographs by Dan Kaufman.)
QUESTION: What is the difference between the frontal bone of the infant skull and that of
the adult skull?
109
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

B
Epiphyseal disc
Chondrocytes producing cartilage 
Bone
Cartilage
Epiphyseal
disc
Cartilaginous
model
Medullary cavity
containing
marrow
Bone collar
and calcifying
cartilage in
ossification center
Secondary
ossification
center
Compact bone
Compact bone
Spongy bone
Articular cartilage
Medullary cavity and development
of secondary ossification centers
A
Osteoblasts producing bone
Figure 6–3.
The ossiﬁcation process in a long bone. (A) Progression of ossiﬁcation from
the cartilage model of the embryo to the bone of a young adult. (B) Microscopic view of
an epiphyseal disc showing cartilage production and bone replacement.
QUESTION: The epiphyseal discs of the bone on the far right are closed. What does that
mean?
110
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

111
BOX 6–1
FRACTURES AND THEIR REPAIR
Box Figure 6–A
Types of fractures. Several types of
fractures are depicted in the right arm.
A fracture means that a bone has been broken.
There are different types of fractures classiﬁed as to
extent of damage.
Simple (closed)—the broken parts are still in nor-
mal anatomic position; surrounding tissue damage
is minimal (skin is not pierced).
Compound (open)—the broken end of a bone
has been moved, and it pierces the skin; there may
be extensive damage to surrounding blood vessels,
nerves, and muscles.
Greenstick—the bone splits longitudinally. The
bones of children contain more collagen than do
adult bones and tend to splinter rather than break
completely.
Comminuted—two or more intersecting breaks
create several bone fragments.
Impacted—the broken ends of a bone are forced
into one another; many bone fragments may be
created.
Pathologic (spontaneous)—a bone breaks with-
out apparent trauma; may accompany bone disor-
ders such as osteoporosis.
The Repair Process
Even a simple fracture involves signiﬁcant bone
damage that must be repaired if the bone is to
resume its normal function. Fragments of dead or
damaged bone must ﬁrst be removed. This is
accomplished by osteoclasts, which dissolve and
reabsorb the calcium salts of bone matrix. Imagine
a building that has just collapsed; the rubble must
be removed before reconstruction can take place.
This is what the osteoclasts do. Then, new bone
must be produced. The inner layer of the perios-
teum contains osteoblasts that are activated when
bone is damaged. The osteoblasts produce bone
matrix to knit the broken ends of the bone
together.
Because most bone has a good blood supply, the
repair process is usually relatively rapid, and a sim-
ple fracture often heals within 6 weeks. Some parts
of bones, however, have a poor blood supply, and
repair of fractures takes longer. These areas are the
neck of the femur (the site of a “fractured hip”) and
the lower third of the tibia.
Other factors that inﬂuence repair include the
age of the person, general state of health, and
nutrition. The elderly and those in poor health often
have slow healing of fractures. A diet with sufficient
calcium, phosphorus, vitamin D, and protein is also
important. If any of these nutrients is lacking, bone
repair will be a slower process.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Several hormones make important contributions to
bone growth and maintenance. These include
growth hormone, thyroxine, parathyroid hormone,
and insulin, which help regulate cell division, pro-
tein synthesis, calcium metabolism, and energy
production. The sex hormones estrogen or testos-
terone help bring about the cessation of bone
growth. The hormones and their speciﬁc functions
are listed in Table 6–1.
4. Exercise or “stress”—for bones, exercise means
bearing weight, which is just what bones are spe-
cialized to do. Without this stress (which is nor-
mal), bones will lose calcium faster than it is
replaced. Exercise need not be strenuous; it can be
as simple as the walking involved in everyday activ-
ities. Bones that do not get this exercise, such as
those of patients conﬁned to bed, will become thin-
ner and more fragile. This condition is discussed
further in Box 6–2: Osteoporosis.
THE SKELETON
The human skeleton has two divisions: the axial skele-
ton, which forms the axis of the body, and the appen-
dicular skeleton, which supports the appendages or
limbs. The axial skeleton consists of the skull, vertebral
column, and rib cage. The bones of the arms and
legs and the shoulder and pelvic girdles make up the
appendicular skeleton. Many bones are connected to
other bones across joints by ligaments, which are
strong cords or sheets of ﬁbrous connective tissue. The
importance of ligaments becomes readily apparent
when a joint is sprained. A sprain is the stretching or
even tearing of the ligaments of a joint, and though the
bones are not broken, the joint is weak and unsteady.
We do not often think of our ligaments, but they are
necessary to keep our bones in the proper positions to
keep us upright or to bear weight.
There are 206 bones in total, and the complete
skeleton is shown in Fig. 6–4.
SKULL
The skull consists of 8 cranial bones and 14 facial
bones. Also in the head are three small bones in each
middle ear cavity and the hyoid bone that supports the
base of the tongue. The cranial bones form the brain-
case (lined with the meninges) that encloses and pro-
tects the brain, eyes, and ears. The names of some of
these bones will be familiar to you; they are the same
as the terminology used (see Chapter 1) to describe
areas of the head. These are the frontal bone, parietal
bones (two), temporal bones (two), and occipital bone.
The sphenoid bone and ethmoid bone are part of the
ﬂoor of the braincase and the orbits (sockets) for
the eyes. The frontal bone forms the forehead and
the anterior part of the top of the skull. Parietal means
“wall,” and the two large parietal bones form the pos-
terior top and much of the side walls of the skull. Each
temporal bone on the side of the skull contains an
external auditory meatus (ear canal), a middle ear cav-
112
The Skeletal System
Table 6–1 HORMONES INVOLVED IN BONE GROWTH AND MAINTENANCE
Growth hormone (anterior pituitary gland)
Thyroxine (thyroid gland)
Insulin (pancreas)
Parathyroid hormone (parathyroid glands)
Calcitonin (thyroid gland)
Estrogen (ovaries) or
Testosterone (testes)
• Increases the rate of mitosis of chondrocytes and osteoblasts
• Increases the rate of protein synthesis (collagen, cartilage matrix,
and enzymes for cartilage and bone formation)
• Increases the rate of protein synthesis
• Increases energy production from all food types
• Increases energy production from glucose
• Increases the reabsorption of calcium from bones to the blood
(raises blood calcium level)
• Increases the absorption of calcium by the small intestine and kid-
neys (to the blood)
• Decreases the reabsorption of calcium from bones (lowers blood
calcium level)
• Promotes closure of the epiphyses of long bones (growth stops)
• Helps retain calcium in bones to maintain a strong bone matrix
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

ity, and an inner ear labyrinth. The occipital bone
forms the lower, posterior part of the braincase. Its
foramen magnum is a large opening for the spinal
cord, and the two condyles (rounded projections) on
either side articulate with the atlas, the ﬁrst cervical
vertebra. The sphenoid bone is said to be shaped like
a bat, and the greater wing is visible on the side of the
skull between the frontal and temporal bones. The
body of the bat has a depression called the sella tur-
cica, which encloses the pituitary gland. The ethmoid
bone has a vertical projection called the crista galli
(“rooster’s comb”) that anchors the cranial meninges.
The rest of the ethmoid bone forms the roof and
upper walls of the nasal cavities, and the upper part of
the nasal septum.
All of the joints between cranial bones are immov-
able joints called sutures. It may seem strange to refer
to a joint without movement, but the term joint (or
articulation) is used for any junction of two bones.
(The classiﬁcation of joints will be covered later in
The Skeletal System
113
BOX 6–2
OSTEOPOROSIS
Normal Bone
Osteoporosis
A
B
Box Figure 6–B
(A) Normal spongy bone, as in the body of a vertebra. (B) Spongy bone thinned
by osteoporosis.
Bone is an active tissue; calcium is constantly being
removed to maintain normal blood calcium levels.
Usually, however, calcium is replaced in bones at a
rate equal to its removal, and the bone matrix
remains strong.
Osteoporosis is characterized by excessive loss
of calcium from bones without sufficient replace-
ment. Research has suggested that a certain gene
for bone buildup in youth is an important factor;
less buildup would mean earlier bone thinning.
Contributing environmental factors include smok-
ing, insufficient dietary intake of calcium, inactivity,
and lack of the sex hormones. Osteoporosis is most
common among elderly women, because estrogen
secretion decreases sharply at menopause (in older
men, testosterone is still secreted in signiﬁcant
amounts). Factors such as bed rest or inability to
get even minimal exercise will make calcium loss
even more rapid.
As bones lose calcium and become thin and brit-
tle, fractures are much more likely to occur. Among
elderly women, a fractured hip (the neck of the
femur) is an all-too-common consequence of this
degenerative bone disorder. Such a serious injury is
not inevitable, however, and neither is the thinning
of the vertebrae that bows the spines of some eld-
erly people. After menopause, women may wish to
have a bone density test to determine the strength
of their bone matrix. Several medications are avail-
able that diminish the rate of bone loss. A diet high
in calcium and vitamin D is essential for both men
and women, as is moderate exercise. Young women
and teenagers should make sure they get adequate
dietary calcium to form strong bone matrix,
because this will delay the serious effects of osteo-
porosis later in life.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

this chapter.) In a suture, the serrated, or sawtooth,
edges of adjacent bones ﬁt into each other. These
interlocking projections prevent sliding or shifting of
the bones if the skull is subjected to a blow or pres-
sure. In Fig. 6–5 you can see the coronal suture
between the frontal and parietal bones, the squamosal
suture between the parietal and temporal bones, and
the lambdoidal suture between the occipital and pari-
etal bones. Not visible is the sagittal suture, where the
two parietal bones articulate along the midline of the
top of the skull. All the bones of the skull, as well as
the large sutures, are shown in Figs. 6–5 through 6–8.
Their anatomically important parts are described in
Table 6–2.
114
The Skeletal System
Phalanges
Phalanges
Tarsals
Metatarsals
Humerus
Radius
Ulna
Carpals
Metacarpals
Maxilla
Mandible
Skull (cranium)
Sternum
Clavicle
Scapula
Sacrum
Zygomatic arch
Cervical vertebrae
Thoracic vertebrae
Ribs
Lumbar vertebrae
Ilium
Coccyx
Pubis
Ischium
Femur
Patella
Tibia
Fibula
Figure 6–4.
Skeleton. Anterior
view.
QUESTION: Which of the bones
shown here would be classiﬁed
as irregular bones?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

115
Parietal bone
Parietal bone
Maxillary bone
Squamosal suture
Squamosal suture
Temporal bone
Mandible
Occipital bone
Occipital bone
Zygomatic process
Mandibular fossa
Mastoid process
External auditory
meatus
Coronoid process
Body
Mandible
Mandible
Mental foramen
Mental foramen
Maxilla
Maxilla
Condyloid process
Zygomatic bone
Zygomatic bone
Zygomatic bone
Lambdoidal suture
Nasal bone
Sphenoid bone
Lacrimal canal
Lacrimal bone
Lacrimal bone
Temporal bone
Sphenoid bone
Sphenoid bone
Parietal bone
Frontal bone
Frontal bone
Frontal bone
Coronal suture
Coronal suture
Ethmoid bone
Ethmoid bone
Nasal bone
Inferior nasal concha
Vomer
Inferior nasal concha
Middle nasal concha (ethmoid)
Vomer
Palatine bone
Temporal bone
Nasal bone
Perpendicular plate (ethmoid)
QUESTION: What might be the purpose of the openings at the back of the eye sockets?
Figure 6–5.
Skull. Lateral view of right side.
Figure 6–6.
Skull. Anterior view.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

116
The Skeletal System
Palatine process (maxilla)
Palatine bone
Zygomatic bone
Vomer
Zygomatic process
Temporal bone
Styloid process
External auditory meatus
Mastoid process
Occipital condyles
Foramen magnum
Occipital bone
Figure 6–7.
Skull. Inferior view with mandible removed.
QUESTION: What is the purpose of the foramen magnum?
Of the 14 facial bones, only the mandible (lower
jaw) is movable; it forms a condyloid joint with each
temporal bone. The other joints between facial bones
are all sutures. The maxillae are the two upper jaw
bones, which also form the anterior portion of the
hard palate (roof of the mouth). Sockets for the roots
of the teeth are found in the maxillae and the
mandible. The two nasal bones form the bridge of
the nose where they articulate with the frontal bone
(the rest of the nose is supported by cartilage). There
is a lacrimal bone at the medial side of each orbit; the
lacrimal canal contains the lacrimal sac, a passageway
for tears. Each of the two zygomatic bones forms the
point of a cheek, and articulates with the maxilla,
frontal bone, and temporal bone. The two palatine
bones are the posterior portion of the hard palate.
The plow-shaped vomer forms the lower part of the
nasal septum; it articulates with the ethmoid bone. On
either side of the vomer are the conchae, six scroll-
like bones that curl downward from the sides of the
nasal cavities; they help increase the surface area of the
nasal mucosa. These facial bones are included in Table
6–2.
Paranasal sinuses are air cavities located in the
maxillae and frontal, sphenoid, and ethmoid bones
(Fig. 6–9). As the name paranasal suggests, they open
into the nasal cavities and are lined with ciliated
epithelium continuous with the mucosa of the nasal
cavities. We are aware of our sinuses only when they
become “stuffed up,” which means that the mucus
they produce cannot drain into the nasal cavities. This
may happen during upper respiratory infections such
(text continued on page 119)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

117
Crista galli
Cribriform plate
Olfactory foramina
Greater wing
Lambdoidal suture
Frontal bone
Sphenoid bone
Sella turcica
Squamosal suture
Temporal bone
Parietal bone
Foramen magnum
Occipital bone
Ethmoid bone
A
C
B
Crista galli
Sella turcica
Figure 6–8.
(A) Skull. Superior view with the top of cranium removed. (B) Sphenoid
bone in superior view. (C) Ethmoid bone in superior view. (B and C photographs by Dan
Kaufman.)
QUESTION: What are the olfactory foramina of the ethmoid bone for?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Table 6–2
BONES OF THE SKULL—IMPORTANT PARTS
Terminology of Bone Markings
Foramen—a hole or opening
Meatus—a tunnel-like cavity
Condyle—a rounded projection
Fossa—a depression
Process—a projection
Plate—a ﬂat projection
Crest—a ridge or edge
Facet—a ﬂat projection
Tubercle—a round projection
Bone
Part
Description
Frontal
Parietal (2)
Temporal (2)
Occipital
Sphenoid
Ethmoid
Mandible
Maxilla (2)
Nasal (2)
Lacrimal (2)
Zygomatic (2)
Palatine (2)
Vomer
• Frontal sinus
• Coronal suture
• Sagittal suture
• Squamosal suture
• External auditory meatus
• Mastoid process
• Mastoid sinus
• Mandibular fossa
• Zygomatic process
• Foramen magnum
• Condyles
• Lambdoidal suture
• Greater wing
• Sella turcica
• Sphenoid sinus
• Ethmoid sinus
• Crista galli
• Cribriform plate and
olfactory foramina
• Perpendicular plate
• Conchae (4 are part of
ethmoid; 2 inferior are
separate bones)
• Body
• Condyles
• Sockets
• Maxillary sinus
• Palatine process
• Sockets
—
• Lacrimal canal
—
—
—
• Air cavity that opens into nasal cavity
• Joint between frontal and parietal bones
• Joint between the 2 parietal bones
• Joint between temporal and parietal bone
• The tunnel-like ear canal
• Oval projection behind the ear canal
• Air cavity that opens into middle ear
• Oval depression anterior to the ear canal; artic-
ulates with mandible
• Anterior projection that articulates with the
zygomatic bone
• Large opening for the spinal cord
• Oval projections on either side of the foramen
magnum; articulate with the atlas
• Joint between occipital and parietal bones
• Flat, lateral portion between the frontal and
temporal bones
• Central depression that encloses the pituitary
gland
• Air cavity that opens into nasal cavity
• Air cavity that opens into nasal cavity
• Superior projection for attachment of
meninges
• On either side of base of crista galli; olfactory
nerves pass through foramina
• Upper part of nasal septum
• Shelf-like projections into nasal cavities that
increase surface area of nasal mucosa
• U-shaped portion with lower teeth
• Oval projections that articulate with the tem-
poral bones
• Conical depressions that hold roots of lower
teeth
• Air cavity that opens into nasal cavity
• Projection that forms anterior part of hard
palate
• Conical depressions that hold roots of upper
teeth
• Form the bridge of the nose
• Opening for nasolacrimal duct to take tears to
nasal cavity
• Form point of cheek; articulate with frontal,
temporal, and maxillae
• Form the posterior part of hard palate
• Lower part of nasal septum
118
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

as colds, or with allergies such as hay fever. These
sinuses, however, do have functions: They make the
skull lighter in weight, because air is lighter than bone,
and they provide resonance for the voice, meaning
more air to vibrate and thus deepen the pitch of the
voice.
The mastoid sinuses are air cavities in the mastoid
process of each temporal bone; they open into the
middle ear. Before the availability of antibiotics, mid-
dle ear infections often caused mastoiditis, infection of
these sinuses.
Within each middle ear cavity are three auditory
bones: the malleus, incus, and stapes. As part of the
hearing process (discussed in Chapter 9), these bones
transmit vibrations from the eardrum to the receptors
in the inner ear (see Fig. 9–7).
VERTEBRAL COLUMN
The vertebral column (spinal column or backbone) is
made of individual bones called vertebrae. The names
of vertebrae indicate their location along the length of
the spinal column. There are 7 cervical vertebrae, 12
thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral fused into 1 sacrum, and
4 to 5 small coccygeal vertebrae fused into 1 coccyx
(Fig. 6–10).
The seven cervical vertebrae are those within the
neck. The ﬁrst vertebra is called the atlas, which artic-
ulates with the occipital bone to support the skull and
forms a pivot joint with the odontoid process of the
axis, the second cervical vertebra. This pivot joint
allows us to turn our heads from side to side. The
remaining ﬁve cervical vertebrae do not have individ-
ual names.
The thoracic vertebrae articulate (form joints)
with the ribs on the posterior side of the trunk. The
lumbar vertebrae, the largest and strongest bones of
the spine, are found in the small of the back. The
sacrum permits the articulation of the two hip bones:
the sacroiliac joints. The coccyx is the remnant of
tail vertebrae, and some muscles of the perineum
(pelvic ﬂoor) are anchored to it.
The Skeletal System
119
Frontal sinus
Ethmoid sinus
Maxillary sinus
Sphenoid sinus
Ethmoid sinus
A
B
Figure 6–9.
Paranasal sinuses. (A) Anterior view of the skull. (B) Left lateral view of skull.
QUESTION: Which of these sinuses often cause the pain of a sinus headache?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

120
The Skeletal System
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
Coccyx
Sacrum
Lumbar
 vertebrae
Thoracic  
  vertebrae
Cervical  
 vertebrae
•
•
Intervertebral
discs
•
Articular surface
for ilium
•
•
Vertebral body
Vertebral
canal
•
•
Spinous process
Facet for rib
•
Transverse process
•
•
Odontoid process
•
Vertebral canal
Spinous process
of axis
Facets of atlas for occipital condyles
D
1st Lumbar
C
7th Lumbar
B
Atlas/Axis
A
Figure 6–10.
Vertebral column. (A) Lateral view of left
side. (B) Atlas and axis, superior view. (C) 7th thoracic
vertebra, left lateral view. (D) 1st lumbar vertebra, left lat-
eral view.
QUESTION: Compare the size of the individual thoracic
and lumbar vertebrae. What is the reason for this differ-
ence?
All of the vertebrae articulate with one another in
sequence, connected by ligaments, to form a ﬂexible
backbone that supports the trunk and head. They also
form the vertebral canal, a continuous tunnel (lined
with the meninges) within the bones that contains the
spinal cord and protects it from mechanical injury.
The spinous and transverse processes are projections
for the attachment of the muscles that bend the verte-
bral column. The facets of some vertebrae are small
ﬂat surfaces for articulation with other bones, such as
the ribs with the facets of the thoracic vertebrae.
The supporting part of a vertebra is its body; the
bodies of adjacent vertebrae are separated by discs
of ﬁbrous cartilage. These discs cushion and absorb
shock and permit some movement between vertebrae
(symphysis joints). Since there are so many joints,
the backbone as a whole is quite ﬂexible (see also Box
6–3: Herniated Disc).
The normal spine in anatomic position has four
natural curves, which are named after the vertebrae
that form them. Refer to Fig. 6–10, and notice that the
cervical curve is forward, the thoracic curve backward,
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

BOX 6–3
HERNIATED DISC
The vertebrae are separated by discs of ﬁbrous car-
tilage that act as cushions to absorb shock. An inter-
vertebral disc has a tough outer covering and a soft
center called the nucleus pulposus. Extreme pres-
sure on a disc may rupture the outer layer and force
the nucleus pulposus out. This may occur when a
person lifts a heavy object improperly, that is, using
the back rather than the legs and jerking upward,
which puts sudden, intense pressure on the spine.
Most often this affects discs in the lumbar region.
Although often called a “slipped disc,” the
affected disc is usually not moved out of position.
Box Figure 6–C
Herniated disc. As a result of compression, a ruptured intervertebral disc puts pres-
sure on a spinal nerve.
The terms herniated disc or ruptured disc more
accurately describe what happens. The nucleus pul-
posus is forced out, often posteriorly, where it puts
pressure on a spinal nerve. For this reason a herni-
ated disc may be very painful or impair function in
the muscles supplied by the nerve.
Healing of a herniated disc may occur naturally if
the damage is not severe and the person rests and
avoids activities that would further compress the
disc. Surgery may be required, however, to remove
the portion of the nucleus pulposus that is out of
place and disrupting nerve functioning.
121
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

the lumbar curve forward, and the sacral curve back-
ward. These curves center the skull over the rest of the
body, which enables a person to more easily walk
upright (see Box 6–4: Abnormalities of the Curves of
the Spine).
RIB CAGE
The rib cage consists of the 12 pairs of ribs and the
sternum, or breastbone. The three parts of the ster-
num are the upper manubrium, the central body, and
the lower xiphoid process (Fig. 6–11).
All of the ribs articulate posteriorly with the tho-
racic vertebrae. The ﬁrst seven pairs of ribs are called
true ribs; they articulate directly with the manubrium
and body of the sternum by means of costal cartilages.
The next three pairs are called false ribs; their carti-
lages join the 7th rib cartilage. The last two pairs are
called ﬂoating ribs because they do not articulate
with the sternum at all (see Fig. 6–10).
An obvious function of the rib cage is that it en-
closes and protects the heart and lungs. Keep in mind,
though, that the rib cage also protects organs in the
upper abdominal cavity, such as the liver and spleen.
The other important function of the rib cage depends
upon its ﬂexibility: The ribs are pulled upward and
outward by the external intercostal muscles. This
enlarges the chest cavity, which expands the lungs and
contributes to inhalation.
THE SHOULDER AND ARM
The shoulder girdles attach the arms to the axial skele-
ton. Each consists of a scapula (shoulder blade) and
clavicle (collarbone). The scapula is a large, ﬂat bone
with several projections (the spine of the scapula, the
coracoid process) that anchor some of the muscles that
move the upper arm and the forearm. A shallow
depression called the glenoid fossa forms a ball-and-
socket joint with the humerus, the bone of the upper
arm (Fig. 6–12).
Each clavicle articulates laterally with a scapula
and medially with the manubrium of the sternum. In
this position the clavicles act as braces for the scapulae
and prevent the shoulders from coming too far for-
ward. Although the shoulder joint is capable of a wide
range of movement, the shoulder itself must be rela-
tively stable if these movements are to be effective.
The humerus is the long bone of the upper arm. In
Fig. 6–12, notice the deltoid tubercle (or tuberosity);
the triangular deltoid muscle that caps the shoulder
joint is anchored here. Proximally, the humerus forms
a ball-and-socket joint with the scapula. Distally, the
humerus forms a hinge joint with the ulna of the
forearm. This hinge joint, the elbow, permits move-
ment in one plane, that is, back and forth with no lat-
eral movement.
The forearm bones are the ulna on the little ﬁnger
side and the radius on the thumb side. The semilunar
notch of the ulna is part of the hinge joint of the
elbow; it articulates with the trochlea of the humerus.
The radius and ulna articulate proximally to form a
pivot joint, which permits turning the hand palm up
to palm down. You can demonstrate this yourself by
holding your arm palm up in front of you, and noting
that the radius and ulna are parallel to each other.
Then turn your hand palm down, and notice that your
122
The Skeletal System
BOX 6–4
ABNORMALITIES OF THE
CURVES OF THE SPINE
Scoliosis—an abnormal lateral curvature, which
may be congenital, the result of having one leg
longer than the other, or the result of chronic
poor posture during childhood while the verte-
brae are still growing. Usually the thoracic verte-
brae are affected, which displaces the rib cage to
one side. In severe cases, the abdominal organs
may be compressed, and the expansion of the
rib cage during inhalation may be impaired.
Kyphosis*—an exaggerated thoracic curve;
sometimes referred to as hunchback.
Lordosis*—an exaggerated lumbar curve;
sometimes referred to as swayback.
These abnormal curves are usually the result
of degenerative bone diseases such as osteo-
porosis or tuberculosis of the spine. If osteoporo-
sis, for example, causes the bodies of the thoracic
vertebrae to collapse, the normal thoracic curve
will be increased. Most often the vertebral body
“settles” slowly (rather than collapses suddenly)
and there is little, if any, damage to the spinal
nerves. The damage to the vertebrae, however,
cannot be easily corrected, so these conditions
should be thought of in terms of prevention
rather than cure.
*Although descriptive of normal anatomy, the terms
kyphosis and lordosis, respectively, are commonly used to
describe the abnormal condition associated with each.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

upper arm does not move. The radius crosses over the
ulna, which permits the hand to perform a great vari-
ety of movements without moving the entire arm.
The carpals are eight small bones in the wrist;
gliding joints between them permit a sliding move-
ment. The carpals also articulate with the distal ends
of the ulna and radius, and with the proximal ends of
the metacarpals, the ﬁve bones of the palm of the
hand. All of the joints formed by the carpals and
metacarpals make the hand very ﬂexible at the wrist
(try this yourself: ﬂexion to extension should be almost
180 degrees), but the thumb is more movable than the
ﬁngers because of its carpometacarpal joint. This is a
saddle joint, which enables the thumb to cross over
the palm, and permits gripping.
The phalanges are the bones of the ﬁngers. There
are two phalanges in each thumb and three in each
of the ﬁngers. Between phalanges are hinge joints,
which permit movement in one plane. Important
parts of the shoulder and arm bones are described
in Table 6–3.
THE HIP AND LEG
The pelvic girdle (or pelvic bone) consists of the two
hip bones (coxae or innominate bones), which articu-
late with the axial skeleton at the sacrum. Each hip
bone has three major parts: the ilium, ischium, and
pubis, and these are shown in Fig. 6–13, which depicts
both a male and a female pelvis. The ilium is the
ﬂared, upper portion that forms the sacroiliac joint.
The ischium is the lower, posterior part that we sit
on. The pubis is the lower, most anterior part. The
two pubic bones articulate with one another at the
pubic symphysis, with a disc of ﬁbrous cartilage
between them. Notice the pubic angle of both the
male and female pelvises in Fig. 6–13. The wider
female angle is an adaptation for childbirth, in that it
helps make the pelvic outlet larger.
The acetabulum is the socket in the hip bone that
forms a ball-and-socket joint with the femur.
Compared to the glenoid fossa of the scapula, the
acetabulum is a much deeper socket. This has great
The Skeletal System
123
Manubrium
Body of sternum
Costal
cartilages
Xiphoid process
12th thoracic vertebra
1st rib
1st thoracic vertebra
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
12th
Figure 6–11.
Rib cage. Anterior view.
QUESTION: With what bones do all of the ribs articulate?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
••
•
Clavicle
Sternal end
Glenoid fossa
Scapula
Trochlea
Semilunar notch
Olecranon process
On posterior side
Ulna
Lunate
Triquetrum
Pisiform
Hamate
Carpals
Metacarpals
Phalanges
Capitate
Trapezoid
Trapezium
Scaphoid
Carpals
Radius
Radial tuberosity
Head
Capitulum
Humerus
Deltoid tubercle
Head
Coracoid process
Acromicon process
Acromial end
Figure 6–12.
Bones of arm and shoulder girdle. Anterior view of right arm.
QUESTION: What types of joints are found in the arm? Begin at the shoulder and work
downward.
124
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

functional importance because the hip is a weight-
bearing joint, whereas the shoulder is not. Because the
acetabulum is deep, the hip joint is not easily dislo-
cated, even by activities such as running and jumping
(landing), which put great stress on the joint.
The femur is the long bone of the thigh. As men-
tioned, the femur forms a very movable ball-and-
socket joint with the hip bone. At the proximal end of
the femur are the greater and lesser trochanters, large
projections that are anchors for muscles. At its distal
end, the femur forms a hinge joint, the knee, with the
tibia of the lower leg. Notice in Fig. 6–14 that each
bone has condyles, which are the rounded projections
that actually form the joint. The patella, or kneecap,
is anterior to the knee joint, enclosed in the tendon of
the quadriceps femoris, a large muscle group of the
thigh.
The tibia is the weight-bearing bone of the lower
leg. You can feel the tibial tuberosity (a bump) and
anterior crest (a ridge) on the front of your own leg.
The medial malleolus, what we may call the “inner
ankle bone,” is at the distal end. Notice in Fig. 6–14
that the ﬁbula is not part of the knee joint and does
not bear much weight. The lateral malleolus of the
ﬁbula is the “outer ankle bone” you can ﬁnd just above
your foot. Though not a weight-bearing bone, the
ﬁbula is important in that leg muscles are attached and
anchored to it, and it helps stabilize the ankle. Two
bones on one is a much more stable arrangement than
one bone on one, and you can see that the malleoli of
the tibia and ﬁbula overlap the sides of the talus. The
tibia and ﬁbula do not form a pivot joint as do the
radius and ulna in the forearm; this also contributes to
the stability of the lower leg and foot and the support
of the entire body.
The tarsals are the seven bones in the ankle. As
you would expect, they are larger and stronger than
the carpals of the wrist, and their gliding joints do not
provide nearly as much movement. The largest is the
calcaneus, or heel bone; the talus transmits weight
between the calcaneus and the tibia. Metatarsals are
the ﬁve long bones of each foot, and phalanges are
the bones of the toes. There are two phalanges in the
big toe and three in each of the other toes. The pha-
langes of the toes form hinge joints with each other.
Because there is no saddle joint in the foot, the big toe
is not as movable as the thumb. The foot has two
major arches, longitudinal and transverse, that are
supported by ligaments. These are adaptations for
walking completely upright, in that arches provide for
spring or bounce in our steps. Important parts of hip
and leg bones are described in Table 6–4.
The Skeletal System
125
Table 6–3
BONES OF THE SHOULDER AND ARM—IMPORTANT PARTS
Bone
Part
Description
Scapula
Clavicle
Humerus
Radius
Ulna
Carpals (8)
• Glenoid fossa
• Spine
• Acromion process
• Acromial end
• Sternal end
• Head
• Deltoid tubercle
• Olecranon fossa
• Capitulum
• Trochlea
• Head
• Olecranon process
• Semilunar notch
• Scaphoid
• Lunate
• Triquetrum
• Pisiform
• Trapezium
• Trapezoid
• Capitate
• Hamate
• Depression that articulates with humerus
• Long, posterior process for muscle attachment
• Articulates with clavicle
• Articulates with scapula
• Articulates with manubrium of sternum
• Round process that articulates with scapula
• Round process for the deltoid muscle
• Posterior, oval depression for the olecranon process
of the ulna
• Round process superior to radius
• Concave surface that articulates with ulna
• Articulates with the ulna
• Fits into olecranon fossa of humerus
• “Half-moon” depression that articulates with the
trochlea of ulna
• Proximal row
• Distal row
(text continued on page 128)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Figure 6–13.
Hip bones and sacrum. (A) Male pelvis, anterior view. (B) Male pelvis, lat-
eral view of right side. (C) Female pelvis, anterior view. (D) Female pelvis, lateral view of
right side.
QUESTION: Compare the male and female pelvic inlets. What is the reason for this differ-
ence?
126
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Ischium
Medial condyle
Medial condyle
Tibial tuberosity
Pubis
Tibia
Medial malleolus
Talus
Navicular
Tarsals
Cuneiforms
         First
         Second
         Third
Acetabulum
Femur
Patella
Lateral condyle
Lateral condyle
Head
Greater trochanter
Neck
Lesser trochanter
Fibula
Lateral malleolus
Calcaneus
Cuboid
Tarsals
Metatarsals
Phalanges
A
Fibula
Talus
Calcaneus
Cuboid
Tibia
Metatarsals
Phalanges
B
Anterior crest
Head
Figure 6–14.
(A) Bones of the leg and portion of hip bone, anterior view of left leg.
(B) Lateral view of left foot.
QUESTION: What types of joints found in the arm do not have counterparts in the leg?
127
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

128
The Skeletal System
Table 6–4
BONES OF THE HIP AND LEG—IMPORTANT PARTS
Bone
Part
Description
Pelvic (2 hip bones)
Femur
Tibia
Fibula
Tarsals (7)
• Ilium
• Iliac crest
• Posterior superior iliac spine
• Ischium
• Pubis
• Pubic symphysis
• Acetabulum
• Head
• Neck
• Greater trochanter
• Lesser trochanter
• Condyles
• Condyles
• Tibial tuberosity
• Anterior crest
• Medial malleolus
• Head
• Lateral malleolus
• Calcaneus
• Talus
• Cuboid, navicular
• Cuneiform: 1st, 2nd, 3rd
• Flared, upper portion
• Upper edge of ilium
• Posterior continuation of iliac crest
• Lower, posterior portion
• Anterior, medial portion
• Joint between the 2 pubic bones
• Deep depression that articulates with femur
• Round process that articulates with hip bone
• Constricted portion distal to head
• Large lateral process for muscle attachment
• Medial process for muscle attachment
• Rounded processes that articulate with tibia
• Articulate with the femur
• Round process for the patellar ligament
• Vertical ridge
• Distal process; medial “ankle bone”
• Articulates with tibia
• Distal process; lateral “ankle bone”
• Heel bone
• Articulates with calcaneus and tibia
—
—
JOINTS—ARTICULATIONS
A joint is where two bones meet, or articulate.
THE CLASSIFICATION OF JOINTS
The classiﬁcation of joints is based on the amount
of movement possible. A synarthrosis is an immovable
joint, such as a suture between two cranial bones.
An amphiarthrosis is a slightly movable joint, such
as the symphysis joint between adjacent vertebrae. A
diarthrosis is a freely movable joint. This is the largest
category of joints and includes the ball-and-socket
joint, the pivot, hinge, and others. Examples of each
type of joint are described in Table 6–5, and many of
these are illustrated in Fig. 6–15.
SYNOVIAL JOINTS
All diarthroses, or freely movable joints, are synovial
joints because they share similarities of structure. A
typical synovial joint is shown in Fig. 6–16. On the
joint surface of each bone is the articular cartilage,
which provides a smooth surface. The joint capsule,
made of ﬁbrous connective tissue, encloses the joint in
a strong sheath, like a sleeve. Lining the joint capsule
is the synovial membrane, which secretes synovial
ﬂuid into the joint cavity. Synovial ﬂuid is thick and
slippery and prevents friction as the bones move.
Many synovial joints also have bursae (or bursas),
which are small sacs of synovial ﬂuid between the joint
and the tendons that cross over the joint. Bursae per-
mit the tendons to slide easily as the bones are moved.
If a joint is used excessively, the bursae may become
inﬂamed and painful; this condition is called bursitis.
Some other disorders of joints are described in Box
6–5: Arthritis.
AGING AND THE SKELETAL SYSTEM
With age, bone tissue tends to lose more calcium than
is replaced. Bone matrix becomes thinner, the bones
themselves more brittle, and fractures are more likely
to occur with mild trauma.
Erosion of the articular cartilages of joints is also a
common consequence of aging. Joints affected include
weight-bearing joints such as the knees, and active,
small joints such as those of the ﬁngers.
(text continued on page 131)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

•
•
•
•
•
•
Carpals
•
•
Head of
femur
Acetabulum of
hip bone
•
•
Trochlea
of humerus
Semilunar notch
of ulna
Bodies of
vertebra
Intervertebral
disc
•
•
Metacarpal
of thumb
Trapezium
(carpal)
•
•
Atlas
Odontoid process
of axis
D   Gliding
E   Symphysis
F   Saddle
B   Hinge
C   Pivot
A   Ball and socket
Figure 6–15.
Types of joints. For each type, a speciﬁc joint is depicted, and a simple
diagram shows the position of the joint surfaces. (A) Ball and socket. (B) Hinge. (C) Pivot.
(D) Gliding. (E) Symphysis. (F) Saddle.
QUESTION: Which of these types of joints is most movable? Which is least movable?
Table 6–5
TYPES OF JOINTS
Category
Type and Description
Examples
Synarthrosis (immovable)
Amphiarthrosis (slightly
movable)
Diarthrosis (freely movable)
Suture—ﬁbrous connective tissue
between bone surfaces
Symphysis—disc of ﬁbrous cartilage
between bones
Ball and socket—movement in all
planes
Hinge—movement in one plane
Condyloid—movement in one plane
with some lateral movement
Pivot—rotation
Gliding—side-to-side movement
Saddle—movement in several planes
• Between cranial bones; between
facial bones
• Between vertebrae; between pubic
bones
• Scapula and humerus; pelvic bone
and femur
• Humerus and ulna; femur and tibia;
between phalanges
• Temporal bone and mandible
• Atlas and axis; radius and ulna
• Between carpals
• Carpometacarpal of thumb
129
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

130
Bone
Synovial
membrane
Joint
capsule
Joint cavity
(synovial fluid)
Bursa
Articular
cartilage
Tendon
Bone
Figure 6–16.
Structure of a synovial joint. See
text for description.
QUESTION: How can you tell that this is a joint
between two long bones? Give an example.
BOX 6–5
ARTHRITIS
bacterial and viral infections have been suggested
as possibilities.
Rheumatoid arthritis often begins in joints of the
extremities, such as those of the ﬁngers. The
autoimmune activity seems to affect the synovial
membrane, and joints become painful and stiff.
Sometimes the disease progresses to total destruc-
tion of the synovial membrane and calciﬁcation of
the joint. Such a joint is then fused and has no
mobility at all. Autoimmune damage may also
occur in the heart and blood vessels, and those with
RA are more prone to heart attacks and strokes (RA
is a systemic, not a localized, disease).
Treatment of rheumatoid arthritis is directed at
reducing inﬂammation as much as possible, for it is
the inﬂammatory process that causes the damage.
Therapies being investigated involve selectively
blocking speciﬁc aspects of the immune response,
such as antibody production. At present there is no
cure for autoimmune diseases.
The term arthritis means “inﬂammation of a
joint.” Of the many types of arthritis, we will con-
sider two: osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis.
Osteoarthritis is a natural consequence of get-
ting older. In joints that have borne weight for
many years, the articular cartilage is gradually worn
away. The once smooth joint surface becomes
rough, and the affected joint is stiff and painful. As
you might guess, the large, weight-bearing joints
are most often subjected to this form of arthritis. If
we live long enough, most of us can expect some
osteoarthritis in knees, hips, or ankles.
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) can be a truly crip-
pling disease that may begin in early middle age
or, less commonly, during adolescence. It is an
autoimmune disease, which means that the
immune system mistakenly directs its destructive
capability against part of the body. Exactly what
triggers this abnormal response by the immune
system is not known with certainty, but certain
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Although the normal wear and tear of joints cannot
be prevented, elderly people can preserve their bone
matrix with exercise (dancing counts) and diets high in
calcium and vitamin D.
SUMMARY
Your knowledge of the bones and joints will be useful
in the next chapter as you learn the actions of the mus-
cles that move the skeleton. It is important to remem-
ber, however, that bones have other functions as well.
As a storage site for excess calcium, bones contribute
to the maintenance of a normal blood calcium level.
The red bone marrow found in ﬂat and irregular
bones produces the blood cells: red blood cells, white
blood cells, and platelets. Some bones protect vital
organs such as the brain, heart, and lungs. As you can
see, bones themselves may also be considered vital
organs.
The Skeletal System
131
STUDY OUTLINE
The skeleton is made of bone and cartilage
and has these functions:
1. Is a framework for support, connected by liga-
ments, moved by muscles.
2. Protects internal organs from mechanical injury.
3. Contains and protects red bone marrow.
4. Stores excess calcium; important to regulate blood
calcium level.
Bone Tissue (see Fig. 6–1)
1. Osteocytes (cells) are found in the matrix of cal-
cium phosphate, calcium carbonate, and collagen.
2. Compact bone—haversian systems are present.
3. Spongy bone—no haversian systems; red bone
marrow present.
4. Articular cartilage—smooth, on joint surfaces.
5. Periosteum—ﬁbrous connective tissue membrane;
anchors tendons and ligaments; has blood vessels
that enter the bone.
Classiﬁcation of Bones
1. Long—arms, legs; shaft is the diaphysis (compact
bone) with a marrow cavity containing yellow bone
marrow (fat); ends are epiphyses (spongy bone) (see
Fig. 6–1).
2. Short—wrists, ankles (spongy bone covered with
compact bone).
3. Flat—ribs, pelvic bone, cranial bones (spongy bone
covered with compact bone).
4. Irregular—vertebrae, facial bones (spongy bone
covered with compact bone).
Embryonic Growth of Bone
1. The embryonic skeleton is ﬁrst made of other tis-
sues that are gradually replaced by bone. Ossiﬁca-
tion begins in the third month of gestation;
osteoblasts differentiate from ﬁbroblasts and pro-
duce bone matrix.
2. Cranial and facial bones are ﬁrst made of ﬁbrous
connective tissue; osteoblasts produce bone matrix
in a center of ossiﬁcation in each bone; bone growth
radiates outward; fontanels remain at birth, permit
compression of infant skull during birth; fontanels
are calciﬁed by age 2 (see Fig. 6–2).
3. All other bones are ﬁrst made of cartilage; in a long
bone the ﬁrst center of ossiﬁcation is in the diaph-
ysis, other centers develop in the epiphyses. After
birth a long bone grows at the epiphyseal discs:
Cartilage is produced on the epiphysis side, and
bone replaces cartilage on the diaphysis side.
Osteoclasts form the marrow cavity by reabsorb-
ing bone matrix in the center of the diaphysis (see
Fig. 6–3).
Factors That Affect Bone Growth and
Maintenance
1. Heredity—many pairs of genes contribute to
genetic potential for height.
2. Nutrition—calcium, phosphorus, and protein be-
come part of the bone matrix; vitamin D is needed
for absorption of calcium in the small intestine;
vitamins C and A are needed for bone matrix pro-
duction (calciﬁcation).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

3. Hormones—produced by endocrine glands; con-
cerned with cell division, protein synthesis, calcium
metabolism, and energy production (see Table 6–1).
4. Exercise or stress—weight-bearing bones must
bear weight or they will lose calcium and become
brittle.
The Skeleton—206 bones (see Fig. 6–4);
bones are connected by ligaments
1. Axial—skull, vertebrae, rib cage.
• Skull—see Figs. 6–5 through 6–8 and Table 6–2.
• Eight cranial bones form the braincase, which
also protects the eyes and ears; 14 facial bones
make up the face; the immovable joints
between these bones are called sutures.
• Paranasal sinuses are air cavities in the maxil-
lae, frontal, sphenoid, and ethmoid bones; they
lighten the skull and provide resonance for
voice (see Fig. 6–9).
• Three auditory bones in each middle ear cav-
ity transmit vibrations for the hearing process.
• Vertebral column—see Fig. 6–10.
• Individual bones are called vertebrae: 7 cervi-
cal, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral (fused into
one sacrum), 4 to 5 coccygeal (fused into one
coccyx). Supports trunk and head, encloses
and protects the spinal cord in the vertebral
canal. Discs of ﬁbrous cartilage absorb shock
between the bodies of adjacent vertebrae, also
permit slight movement. Four natural curves
center head over body for walking upright (see
Table 6–5 for joints).
• Rib cage—see Fig. 6–11.
• Sternum and 12 pairs of ribs; protects thoracic
and upper abdominal organs from mechanical
injury and is expanded to contribute to inhala-
tion. Sternum consists of manubrium, body,
and xiphoid process. All ribs articulate with
thoracic vertebrae; true ribs (ﬁrst seven pairs)
articulate directly with sternum by means of
costal cartilages; false ribs (next three pairs)
articulate with 7th costal cartilage; ﬂoating
ribs (last two pairs) do not articulate with the
sternum.
2. Appendicular—bones of the arms and legs and the
shoulder and pelvic girdles.
• Shoulder and arm—see Fig. 6–12 and Table 6–3.
• Scapula—shoulder muscles are attached; gle-
noid fossa articulates with humerus.
• Clavicle—braces the scapula.
• Humerus—upper arm; articulates with the
scapula and the ulna (elbow).
• Radius and ulna—forearm—articulate with
one another and with carpals.
• Carpals—eight—wrist; metacarpals—five—
hand; phalanges—14—ﬁngers (for joints, see
Table 6–5).
• Hip and leg—see Figs. 6–13 and 6–14 and Table
6–4.
• Pelvic bone—two hip bones; ilium, ischium,
pubis; acetabulum articulates with femur.
• Femur—thigh; articulates with pelvic bone
and tibia (knee).
• Patella—kneecap; in tendon of quadriceps
femoris muscle.
• Tibia and ﬁbula—lower leg; tibia bears weight;
ﬁbula does not bear weight, but does anchor
muscles and stabilizes ankle.
• Tarsals—seven—ankle; calcaneus is heel bone.
• Metatarsals—ﬁve—foot; phalanges—14—toes
(see Table 6–5 for joints).
Joints—Articulations
1. Classiﬁcation based on amount of movement:
• Synarthrosis—immovable.
• Amphiarthrosis—slightly movable.
• Diarthrosis—freely movable (see Table 6–5 for
examples; see also Fig. 6–15).
2. Synovial joints—all diarthroses have similar struc-
ture (see Fig. 6–16):
• Articular cartilage—smooth on joint surfaces.
• Joint capsule—strong ﬁbrous connective tissue
sheath that encloses the joint.
• Synovial membrane—lines the joint capsule;
secretes synovial ﬂuid that prevents friction.
• Bursae—sacs of synovial ﬂuid that permit ten-
dons to slide easily across joints.
132
The Skeletal System
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Skeletal System
133
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Explain the differences between compact bone
and spongy bone, and state where each type is
found. (p. 106)
2. State the locations of red bone marrow, and name
the blood cells it produces. (p. 106)
3. Name the tissue of which the embryonic skull is
ﬁrst made. Explain how ossiﬁcation of cranial
bones occurs. (p. 108)
4. State what fontanels are, and explain their func-
tion. (p. 108)
5. Name the tissue of which the embryonic femur
is ﬁrst made. Explain how ossiﬁcation of this
bone occurs. Describe what happens in epiphy-
seal discs to produce growth of long bones.
(p. 108)
6. Explain what is meant by “genetic potential” for
height, and name the nutrients a child must have
in order to attain genetic potential. (p. 108)
7. Explain the functions of calcitonin and parathy-
roid hormone with respect to bone matrix and to
blood calcium level. (p. 112)
8. Explain how estrogen or testosterone affects bone
growth, and when. (p. 112)
9. State one way each of the following hormones
helps promote bone growth: insulin, thyroxine,
growth hormone. (p. 112)
10. Name the bones that make up the braincase.
(p. 112)
11. Name the bones that contain paranasal sinuses
and explain the functions of these sinuses.
(pp. 116, 119)
12. Name the bones that make up the rib cage, and
describe two functions of the rib cage. (p. 122)
13. Describe the functions of the vertebral column.
State the number of each type of vertebra.
(pp. 119–120)
14. Explain how the shoulder and hip joints are simi-
lar and how they differ. (pp. 122, 125)
15. Give a speciﬁc example (name two bones) for each
of the following types of joints: (p. 129)
a. Hinge
b. Symphysis
c. Pivot
d. Saddle
e. Suture
f. Ball and socket
16. Name the part of a synovial joint with each of the
following functions: (p. 128)
a. Fluid within the joint cavity that prevents fric-
tion
b. Encloses the joint in a strong sheath
c. Provides a smooth surface on bone surfaces
d. Lines the joint capsule and secretes synovial
ﬂuid
17. Refer to the diagram (Fig. 6–4) of the full skeleton,
and point to each bone on yourself. (p. 114)
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
1. Following a severe spinal cord injury in the lumbar
region, the voluntary muscles of the legs and hips
will be paralyzed. Describe the effects of paralysis
on the skeleton.
2. The sutures of the adult skull are joints that do not
allow movement. Why have joints at all if no move-
ment is permitted? Explain.
3. Without looking at any of the illustrations, try to
name all the bones that form the orbits, the sockets
for the eyes. Check your list with Figs. 6–5 and
6–6.
4. In an effort to prevent sudden infant death syn-
drome (SIDS), parents were advised to put their
infants to sleep lying on their backs, not their
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

stomachs. Since then (1994), the number of SIDS
deaths has decreased markedly. What do you think
has happened to the skulls of many of those
infants? Explain.
5. A 5-month-old infant is brought to a clinic after
having diarrhea for 2 days. The nurse checks the
baby’s anterior fontanel and notices that it appears
sunken. What has caused this?
6. Look at the lateral view of the adult skull in Fig.
6–5 and notice the size of the face part in propor-
tion to the braincase part. Compare the infant skull
in Fig. 6–2, and notice how small the infant face is,
relative to the size of the braincase. There is a very
good reason for this. What do you think it is?
7. Look at the photograph here, Question Fig. 6–A.
Name the bone and the type of section in which it
is cut. What are the large arrows indicating? What
are the smaller arrows indicating? Look carefully
at this site, describe it, and explain possible conse-
quences.
134
The Skeletal System
Question Figure 6–A
(Photograph by Dan Kaufman.)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CHAPTER 7
The Muscular System
135
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

136
CHAPTER 7
Chapter Outline
Muscle Structure
Muscle Arrangements
Antagonistic muscles
Synergistic muscles
The Role of the Brain
Muscle Tone
Exercise
Muscle Sense
Energy Sources for Muscle Contraction
Muscle Fiber—Microscopic Structure
Sarcolemma—Polarization
Sarcolemma—Depolarization
Contraction—The Sliding Filament Mechanism
Responses to Exercise—Maintaining
Homeostasis
Aging and the Muscular System
Major Muscles of the Body
Muscles of the Head and Neck
Muscles of the Trunk
Muscles of the Shoulder and Arm
Muscles of the Hip and Leg
BOX 7–1
ANABOLIC STEROIDS
BOX 7–2
TETANUS AND BOTULISM
BOX 7–3
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY
BOX 7–4
MYASTHENIA GRAVIS
BOX 7–5
COMMON INJECTION SITES
Student Objectives
• Name the organ systems directly involved in
movement, and state how they are involved.
• Describe muscle structure in terms of muscle cells,
tendons, and bones.
• Describe the difference between antagonistic and
synergistic muscles, and explain why such arrange-
ments are necessary.
• Explain the role of the brain with respect to skele-
tal muscle.
• Deﬁne muscle tone and explain its importance.
• Explain the difference between isotonic and iso-
metric exercise.
• Deﬁne muscle sense and explain its importance.
• Name the energy sources for muscle contraction,
and state the simple equation for cell respiration.
• Explain the importance of hemoglobin and myo-
globin, oxygen debt, and lactic acid.
• Describe the neuromuscular junction and state the
function of each part.
• Describe the structure of a sarcomere.
• Explain the following in terms of ions and charges:
polarization, depolarization, and repolarization.
• Describe the sliding ﬁlament mechanism of mus-
cle contraction.
• Describe some of the body’s responses to exercise
and explain how each maintains homeostasis.
• Learn the major muscles of the body and their
functions.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Muscular System
137
New Terminology
Actin (AK-tin)
Antagonistic muscles (an-TAG-on-ISS-tik MUSS-
uhls)
Creatine phosphate (KREE-ah-tin FOSS-fate)
Depolarization (DE-poh-lahr-i-ZAY-shun)
Fascia (FASH-ee-ah)
Insertion (in-SIR-shun)
Isometric (EYE-so-MEH-trik)
Isotonic (EYE-so-TAHN-ik)
Lactic acid (LAK-tik ASS-id)
Muscle fatigue (MUSS-uhl fah-TEEG)
Muscle sense (MUSS-uhl SENSE)
Muscle tone (MUSS-uhl TONE)
Myoglobin (MYE-oh-GLOW-bin)
Myosin (MYE-oh-sin)
Neuromuscular junction (NYOOR-oh-MUSS-kyoo-
ler JUNK-shun)
Origin (AHR-i-jin)
Oxygen debt (AHKS-ah-jen DET)
Polarization (POH-lahr-i-ZAY-shun)
Prime mover (PRIME MOO-ver)
Sarcolemma (SAR-koh-LEM-ah)
Sarcomeres (SAR-koh-meers)
Synergistic muscles (SIN-er-JIS-tik MUSS-uhls)
Tendon (TEN-dun)
Related Clinical Terminology
Anabolic steroids (an-a-BOLL-ik STEER-oyds)
Atrophy (AT-ruh-fee)
Botulism (BOTT-yoo-lizm)
Hypertrophy (high-PER-truh-fee)
Intramuscular injection (IN-trah-MUSS-kyoo-ler in-
JEK-shun)
Muscular dystrophy (MUSS-kyoo-ler DIS-truh-fee)
Myalgia (my-AL-jee-ah)
Myasthenia gravis (MY-ass-THEE-nee-yuh GRAH-
viss)
Myopathy (my-AH-puh-thee)
Paralysis (pah-RAL-i-sis)
Range-of-motion exercises (RANJE-of-MOH-shun
EKS-err-sigh-zez)
Sex-linked trait (SEX LINKED TRAYT)
Tetanus (TET-uh-nus)
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Do you like to dance? Most of us do, or we may
simply enjoy watching good dancers. The grace and
coordination involved in dancing result from the
interaction of many of the organ systems, but the one
you think of ﬁrst is probably the muscular system.
There are more than 600 muscles in the human
body. Most of these muscles are attached to the bones
of the skeleton by tendons, although a few muscles
are attached to the undersurface of the skin. The pri-
mary function of the muscular system is to move
the skeleton. The muscle contractions required for
movement also produce heat, which contributes to the
maintenance of a constant body temperature. The
other body systems directly involved in movement
are the nervous, respiratory, and circulatory systems.
The nervous system transmits the electrochemical
impulses that cause muscle cells to contract. The res-
piratory system exchanges oxygen and carbon dioxide
between the air and blood. The circulatory system
brings oxygen to the muscles and takes carbon
dioxide away.
These interactions of body systems are covered in
this chapter, which focuses on the skeletal muscles.
You may recall from Chapter 4 that there are two
other types of muscle tissue: smooth muscle and car-
diac muscle. These types of muscle tissue will be dis-
cussed in other chapters in relation to the organs of
which they are part. Before you continue, you may
ﬁnd it helpful to go back to Chapter 4 and review the
structure and characteristics of skeletal muscle tissue.
In this chapter we will begin with the gross (large)
anatomy and physiology of muscles, then discuss the
microscopic structure of muscle cells and the bio-
chemistry of muscle contraction.
MUSCLE STRUCTURE
All muscle cells are specialized for contraction. When
these cells contract, they shorten and pull a bone to
produce movement. Each skeletal muscle is made of
thousands of individual muscle cells, which also may
be called muscle ﬁbers (see Fig. 7–3 later in this
chapter). Depending on the work a muscle is required
to do, variable numbers of muscle ﬁbers contract.
When picking up a pencil, for example, only a small
portion of the muscle ﬁbers in each ﬁnger muscle will
contract. If the muscle has more work to do, such as
picking up a book, more muscle ﬁbers will contract to
accomplish the task.
Muscles are anchored ﬁrmly to bones by tendons.
Most tendons are rope-like, but some are ﬂat; a ﬂat
tendon is called an aponeurosis. (See Fig. 7–9 later in
this chapter for the epicranial aponeurosis, but before
you look, decide what epicranial means.) Tendons are
made of ﬁbrous connective tissue, which, you may
remember, is very strong and merges with the fascia
that covers the muscle and with the periosteum, the
ﬁbrous connective tissue membrane that covers bones.
A muscle usually has at least two tendons, each
attached to a different bone. The more immobile or
stationary attachment of the muscle is its origin; the
more movable attachment is called the insertion. The
muscle itself crosses the joint of the two bones to
which it is attached, and when the muscle contracts it
pulls on its insertion and moves the bone in a speciﬁc
direction.
MUSCLE ARRANGEMENTS
Muscles are arranged around the skeleton so as to
bring about a variety of movements. The two general
types of arrangements are the opposing antagonists
and the cooperative synergists.
Antagonistic Muscles
Antagonists are opponents, so we use the term antag-
onistic muscles for muscles that have opposing or
opposite functions. An example will be helpful here—
refer to Fig. 7–1 as you read the following. The biceps
brachii is the muscle on the front of the upper arm.
The origin of the biceps is on the scapula (there are
actually two tendons, hence the name biceps), and the
insertion is on the radius. When the biceps contracts,
it ﬂexes the forearm, that is, bends the elbow (see
Table 7–2 later in this chapter). Recall that when a
muscle contracts, it gets shorter and pulls. Muscles
cannot push, for when they relax they exert no force.
Therefore, the biceps can bend the elbow but cannot
straighten it; another muscle is needed. The triceps
brachii is located on the back of the upper arm. Its ori-
gins (the preﬁx tri tells you that there are three of
them) are on the scapula and humerus, and its inser-
tion is on the ulna. When the triceps contracts and
pulls, it extends the forearm, that is, straightens the
elbow.
138
The Muscular System
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Joints that are capable of a variety of movements
have several sets of antagonists. Notice how many
ways you can move your upper arm at the shoulder, for
instance. Abducting (laterally raising) the arm is the
function of the deltoid. Adducting the arm is brought
about by the pectoralis major and latissimus dorsi.
Flexion of the arm (across the chest) is also a function
of the pectoralis major, and extension of the arm
(behind the back) is also a function of the latissimus
dorsi. All of these muscles are described and depicted
in the tables and ﬁgures later in the chapter. Without
antagonistic muscles, this variety of movements would
not be possible.
You may be familiar with range-of-motion (or
ROM) exercises that are often recommended for
patients conﬁned to bed. Such exercises are designed
to stretch and contract the antagonistic muscles of a
joint to preserve as much muscle function and joint
mobility as possible.
Synergistic Muscles
Synergistic muscles are those with the same func-
tion, or those that work together to perform a partic-
ular function. Recall that the biceps brachii ﬂexes the
forearm. The brachioradialis, with its origin on the
humerus and insertion on the radius, also ﬂexes
the forearm. There is even a third ﬂexor of the fore-
arm, the brachialis. You may wonder why we need
three muscles to perform the same function, and the
explanation lies in the great mobility of the hand. If
the hand is palm up, the biceps does most of the work
of ﬂexing and may be called the prime mover. When
the hand is thumb up, the brachioradialis is in position
to be the prime mover, and when the hand is palm
down, the brachialis becomes the prime mover. If you
have ever tried to do chin-ups, you know that it is
much easier with your palms toward you than with
palms away from you. This is because the biceps is a
larger, and usually much stronger, muscle than is the
brachialis.
Muscles may also be called synergists if they help to
stabilize or steady a joint to make a more precise
movement possible. If you drink a glass of water, the
biceps brachii may be the prime mover to ﬂex the
forearm. At the same time, the muscles of the shoul-
der keep that joint stable, so that the water gets to
your mouth, not over your shoulder or down your
chin. The shoulder muscles are considered synergists
for this movement because their contribution makes
the movement effective.
THE ROLE OF THE BRAIN
Even our simplest movements require the interaction
of many muscles, and the contraction of skeletal mus-
cles depends on the brain. The nerve impulses for
movement come from the frontal lobes of the cere-
brum. The cerebrum is the largest part of the brain;
the frontal lobes are beneath the frontal bone. The
The Muscular System
139
Radius
Ulna
Humerus
Triceps (contracted)
Biceps (relaxed)
Scapula
Triceps (relaxed)
Biceps (contracted)
B  Flexion
A  Extension
Figure 7–1.
Antagonistic muscles. (A) Extension of the forearm. (B) Flexion of the
forearm.
QUESTION: When the biceps contracts, what happens to its length, and what kind of force
does it exert?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

motor areas of the frontal lobes generate electro-
chemical impulses that travel along motor nerves to
muscle ﬁbers, causing the muscle ﬁbers to contract.
For a movement to be effective, some muscles must
contract while others relax. When walking, for exam-
ple, antagonistic muscles on the front and back of the
thigh or the lower leg will alternate their contractions
and relaxations, and our steps will be smooth and effi-
cient. This is what we call coordination, and we do not
have to think about making it happen. Coordination
takes place below the level of conscious thought and is
regulated by the cerebellum, which is located below
the occipital lobes of the cerebrum.
MUSCLE TONE
Except during certain stages of sleep, most of our
muscles are in a state of slight contraction; this is what
is known as muscle tone. When sitting upright, for
example, the tone of your neck muscles keeps your
head up, and the tone of your back muscles keeps your
back straight. This is an important function of muscle
tone for human beings, because it helps us to maintain
an upright posture. For a muscle to remain slightly
contracted, only a few of the muscle ﬁbers in that
muscle must contract. Alternate ﬁbers contract so that
the muscle as a whole does not become fatigued. This
is similar to a pianist continuously rippling her ﬁngers
over the keys of the piano—some notes are always
sounding at any given moment, but the notes that are
sounding are always changing. This contraction of
alternate ﬁbers, muscle tone, is also regulated by the
cerebellum of the brain.
Muscle ﬁbers need the energy of ATP (adenosine
triphosphate) in order to contract. When they pro-
duce ATP in the process of cell respiration, muscle
ﬁbers also produce heat. The heat generated by nor-
mal muscle tone is approximately 25% of the total
body heat at rest. During exercise, of course, heat pro-
duction increases signiﬁcantly.
EXERCISE
Good muscle tone improves coordination. When
muscles are slightly contracted, they can react more
rapidly if and when greater exertion is necessary.
Muscles with poor tone are usually soft and ﬂabby, but
exercise will improve muscle tone.
There are two general types of exercise: isotonic
and isometric. In isotonic exercise, muscles contract
and bring about movement. Jogging, swimming, and
weight lifting are examples. Isotonic exercise improves
muscle tone, muscle strength, and, if done repetitively
against great resistance (as in weight lifting), muscle
size. This type of exercise also improves cardiovascu-
lar and respiratory efficiency, because movement
exerts demands on the heart and respiratory muscles.
If done for 30 minutes or longer, such exercise may be
called aerobic, because it strengthens the heart and res-
piratory muscles as well as the muscles attached to the
skeleton.
Isotonic contractions are of two kinds, concentric
or eccentric. A concentric contraction is the short-
ening of a muscle as it exerts force. An eccentric
contraction is the lengthening of a muscle as it still
exerts force. Imagine lifting a book straight up (or try
it); the triceps brachii contracts and shortens to
straighten the elbow and raise the book, a concentric
contraction. Now imagine slowly lowering the book.
The triceps brachii is still contracting even as it is
lengthening, exerting force to oppose gravity (which
would make the book drop quickly). This is an eccen-
tric contraction.
Isometric exercise involves contraction without
movement. If you put your palms together and push
one hand against the other, you can feel your arm
muscles contracting. If both hands push equally, there
will be no movement; this is isometric contraction.
Such exercises will increase muscle tone and muscle
strength but are not considered aerobic. When the
body is moving, the brain receives sensory informa-
tion about this movement from the joints involved,
and responds with reﬂexes that increase heart rate and
respiration. Without movement, the brain does not
get this sensory information, and heart rate and
breathing do not increase nearly as much as they
would during an equally strenuous isotonic exercise.
Many of our actions involve both isotonic and iso-
metric contractions. Pulling open a door requires iso-
tonic contractions of arm muscles, but if the door is
then held open for someone else, those contractions
become isometric. Picking up a pencil is isotonic;
holding it in your hand is isometric. Walking uphill
involves concentric isotonic contractions, and may be
quite strenuous. Walking downhill seems easier, but is
no less complex. The eccentric isotonic contractions
involved make each step a precisely aimed and con-
140
The Muscular System
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

trolled fall against gravity. Without such control
(which we do not have to think about) a downhill walk
would quickly become a roll. These various kinds of
contractions are needed for even the simplest activi-
ties. (With respect to increasing muscle strength, see
Box 7–1: Anabolic Steroids.)
MUSCLE SENSE
When you walk up a ﬂight of stairs, do you have to
look at your feet to be sure each will get to the next
step? Most of us don’t (an occasional stumble doesn’t
count), and for this freedom we can thank our
muscle sense. Muscle sense (proprioception) is the
brain’s ability to know where our muscles are and what
they are doing, without our having to consciously
look at them.
Within muscles are receptors called stretch recep-
tors (proprioceptors or muscle spindles). The general
function of all sensory receptors is to detect changes.
The function of stretch receptors is to detect changes
in the length of a muscle as it is stretched. The sen-
sory impulses generated by these receptors are inter-
preted by the brain as a mental “picture” of where the
muscle is.
We can be aware of muscle sense if we choose to be,
but usually we can safely take it for granted. In fact,
that is what we are meant to do. Imagine what life
would be like if we had to watch every move to be sure
that a hand or foot performed its intended action.
Even simple activities such as walking or eating would
require our constant attention.
At times, we may become aware of our muscle
sense. Learning a skill such as typing or playing the
guitar involves very precise movements of the ﬁngers,
and beginners will often watch their ﬁngers to be sure
they are moving properly. With practice, however,
the movements simply “feel” right, which means that
the brain has formed a very good mental picture of the
task. Muscle sense again becomes unconscious, and
the experienced typist or guitarist need not watch
every movement.
All sensation is a function of brain activity, and
muscle sense is no exception. The impulses for muscle
sense are integrated in the parietal lobes of the cere-
brum (conscious muscle sense) and in the cerebellum
(unconscious muscle sense) to be used to promote
coordination.
ENERGY SOURCES FOR
MUSCLE CONTRACTION
Before discussing the contraction process itself, let us
look ﬁrst at how muscle ﬁbers obtain the energy they
need to contract. The direct source of energy for mus-
cle contraction is ATP. ATP, however, is not stored in
large amounts in muscle ﬁbers and is depleted in a few
seconds.
The secondary energy sources are creatine phos-
phate and glycogen. Creatine phosphate is, like
ATP, an energy-transferring molecule. When it is bro-
ken down (by an enzyme) to creatine, phosphate, and
energy, the energy is used to synthesize more ATP.
Most of the creatine formed is used to resynthesize
creatine phosphate, but some is converted to creati-
nine, a nitrogenous waste product that is excreted by
the kidneys.
The most abundant energy source in muscle ﬁbers
The Muscular System
141
BOX 7–1
ANABOLIC STEROIDS
will increase muscle size, but there are hazards,
some of them very serious. Side effects of such
self-medication include liver damage, kidney dam-
age, disruption of reproductive cycles, and
mental changes such as irritability and aggres-
siveness.
Female athletes may develop increased growth
of facial and body hair and may become sterile as a
result of the effects of a male hormone on their own
hormonal cycles.
Anabolic steroids are synthetic drugs very similar
in structure and action to the male hormone testos-
terone. Normal secretion of testosterone, begin-
ning in males at puberty, increases muscle size and
is the reason men usually have larger muscles than
do women.
Some athletes, both male and female, both
amateur and professional, take anabolic steroids to
build muscle mass and to increase muscle strength.
There is no doubt that the use of anabolic steroids
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

is glycogen. When glycogen is needed to provide
energy for sustained contractions (more than a few
seconds), it is ﬁrst broken down into the glucose mol-
ecules of which it is made. Glucose is then further bro-
ken down in the process of cell respiration to produce
ATP, and muscle ﬁbers may continue to contract.
Recall from Chapter 2 our simple reaction for cell
respiration:
Glucose  O2 →CO2  H2O  ATP  heat
Look ﬁrst at the products of this reaction. ATP will
be used by the muscle ﬁbers for contraction. The heat
produced will contribute to body temperature, and if
exercise is strenuous, will increase body temperature.
The water becomes part of intracellular water, and the
carbon dioxide is a waste product that will be exhaled.
Now look at what is needed to release energy from
glucose: oxygen. Muscles have two sources of oxygen.
The blood delivers a continuous supply of oxygen
from the lungs, which is carried by the hemoglobin in
red blood cells. Within muscle ﬁbers themselves there
is another protein called myoglobin, which stores
some oxygen within the muscle cells. Both hemoglo-
bin and myoglobin contain the mineral iron, which
enables them to bond to oxygen. (Iron also makes
both molecules red, and it is myoglobin that gives
muscle tissue a red or dark color.)
During strenuous exercise, the oxygen stored in
myoglobin is quickly used up, and normal circulation
may not deliver oxygen fast enough to permit the
completion of cell respiration. Even though the respi-
ratory rate increases, the muscle ﬁbers may literally
run out of oxygen. This state is called oxygen debt,
and in this case, glucose cannot be completely broken
down into carbon dioxide and water. If oxygen is not
present (or not present in sufficient amounts), glucose
is converted to an intermediate molecule called lactic
acid, which causes muscle fatigue.
In a state of fatigue, muscle ﬁbers cannot contract
efficiently, and contraction may become painful. To be
in oxygen debt means that we owe the body some oxy-
gen. Lactic acid from muscles enters the blood and
circulates to the liver, where it is converted to pyruvic
acid, a simple carbohydrate (three carbons, about
half a glucose molecule). This conversion requires
ATP, and oxygen is needed to produce the necessary
ATP in the liver. This is why, after strenuous exercise,
the respiratory rate and heart rate remain high for a
time and only gradually return to normal. Another
name proposed for this state is recovery oxygen
uptake, which is a little longer but also makes sense.
Oxygen uptake means a faster and deeper respiratory
rate. What is this uptake for? For recovery from stren-
uous exercise.
MUSCLE FIBER—
MICROSCOPIC STRUCTURE
We will now look more closely at a muscle ﬁber, keep-
ing in mind that there are thousands of these cylindri-
cal cells in one muscle. Each muscle ﬁber has its own
motor nerve ending; the neuromuscular junction is
where the motor neuron terminates on the muscle
ﬁber (Fig. 7–2). The axon terminal is the enlarged tip
of the motor neuron; it contains sacs of the neuro-
transmitter acetylcholine (ACh). The membrane of
the muscle ﬁber is the sarcolemma, which contains
receptor sites for acetylcholine, and an inactivator
called cholinesterase. The synapse (or synaptic cleft)
is the small space between the axon terminal and the
sarcolemma.
Within the muscle ﬁber are thousands of individual
contracting units called sarcomeres, which are
arranged end to end in cylinders called myoﬁbrils.
The structure of a sarcomere is shown in Fig. 7–3:
The Z lines are the end boundaries of a sarcomere.
Filaments of the protein myosin are in the center of
the sarcomere, and ﬁlaments of the protein actin are
at the ends, attached to the Z lines. Myosin ﬁlaments
are anchored to the Z lines by the protein titin.
Myosin and actin are the contractile proteins of a
muscle ﬁber. Their interactions produce muscle con-
traction. Also present are two inhibitory proteins, tro-
ponin and tropomyosin, which are part of the actin
ﬁlaments and prevent the sliding of actin and myosin
when the muscle ﬁber is relaxed.
Surrounding the sarcomeres is the sarcoplasmic
reticulum, the endoplasmic reticulum of muscle cells.
The sarcoplasmic reticulum is a reservoir for calcium
ions (Ca2), which are essential for the contraction
process.
All of these parts of a muscle ﬁber are involved in
the contraction process. Contraction begins when a
nerve impulse arrives at the axon terminal and stimu-
lates the release of acetylcholine. Acetylcholine gener-
ates electrical changes (the movement of ions) at the
sarcolemma of the muscle ﬁber. These electrical
changes initiate a sequence of events within the mus-
cle ﬁber that is called the sliding ﬁlament mecha-
nism of muscle contraction. We will begin our
discussion with the sarcolemma.
142
The Muscular System
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

SARCOLEMMA—POLARIZATION
When a muscle ﬁber is relaxed, the sarcolemma is
polarized (has a resting potential), which refers to a
difference in electrical charges between the outside
and the inside. During polarization, the outside of
the sarcolemma has a positive charge relative to the
inside, which is said to have a negative charge. Sodium
ions (Na) are more abundant outside the cell, and
potassium ions (K) and negative ions are more abun-
dant inside (Fig. 7–4).
The Na ions outside tend to diffuse into the cell,
and the sodium pump transfers them back out. The
K ions inside tend to diffuse outside, and the potas-
The Muscular System
143
ACh
Muscle
fiber
Synaptic
cleft
Vesicles of
acetylcholine
Axon terminal
Mitochondria
Motor neuron
Sarcolemma
1
2
3
ACh receptor
Cholinesterase
Na+
Na+
Na+
Sarcomere
T tubule
Figure 7–2.
Structure of the neuromuscular junction, showing an axon terminal adja-
cent to the sarcolemma of a muscle ﬁber. Schematic of events: (1) Acetylcholine is about
to bond to the ACh receptor in the sarcolemma. (2) Channel opens to allow Na ions into
the muscle cell. (3) Cholinesterase inactivates acetylcholine.
QUESTION: What event opens a sodium channel in the sarcolemma?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

B  Bundles of
       muscle cells
Muscle cells (fibers)
Myofibril
Fascia and
connective tissue
Myofibrils
C  Muscle fiber
Sarcomere
Z line
Myosin filaments
Myosin cross bridges
Troponin
Tropomyosin
Myosin-binding
site
E  Muscle filaments
D  Sarcomere
Titin
filament
Actin
filament
Z line
Myosin filament
Transverse
tubule
Sarcoplasmic
reticulum
Sarcolemma
A  Entire muscle
Actin
Figure 7–3.
Structure of skeletal muscle. (A) Entire muscle. (B) Bundles of muscle cells
within a muscle. (C) Single muscle ﬁber, microscopic structure. (D) A sarcomere.
(E) Structure of muscle ﬁlaments.
QUESTION: What is the unit of contraction of a muscle ﬁber?
144
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

sium pump returns them inside. Both of these pumps
are active transport mechanisms, which, you may
recall, require ATP. Muscle ﬁbers use ATP to maintain
a high concentration of Na ions outside the cell and
a high concentration of K inside. The pumps, there-
fore, maintain polarization and relaxation until a nerve
impulse stimulates a change.
SARCOLEMMA—DEPOLARIZATION
When a nerve impulse arrives at the axon terminal, it
causes the release of acetylcholine, which diffuses
across the synapse and bonds to ACh receptors on
the sarcolemma. By doing so, acetylcholine makes the
sarcolemma very permeable to Na ions, which rush
into the cell. This makes the inside of the sarcolemma
positive relative to the outside, which is now consid-
ered negative. This reversal of charges is called depo-
larization. The electrical impulse thus generated
(called an action potential) then spreads along the
entire sarcolemma of a muscle ﬁber. The sarcolemma
has inward folds called T tubules (transverse tubules,
shown in Fig. 7–2), which carry the action potential to
the interior of the muscle cell. Depolarization initiates
changes within the cell that bring about contraction.
The electrical changes that take place at the sar-
colemma are summarized in Table 7–1 and shown in
Fig. 7–4.
The Muscular System
145
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
K+
K+
K+
K+
K+
K+
K+
K+
K+
K+
ACh
A
B
C
Polarization
Depolarization
Repolarization
K+
K+
K+
K+
Figure 7–4.
Electrical charges and ion concentrations
at the sarcolemma. (A) Polarization, when the muscle
ﬁber is relaxed. (B) Wave of depolarization in response to
stimulus of acetylcholine. (C) Wave of repolarization.
QUESTION: Which ion enters the cell during depolariza-
tion? Which ion leaves during repolarization?
Table 7–1
SARCOLEMMA—
ELECTRICAL CHANGES
State or Event
Description
Resting Potential
Polarization
Action Potential
Depolarization
Repolarization
• Sarcolemma has a () charge
outside and a () charge inside.
• Na ions are more abundant
outside the cell; as they diffuse
inward, the sodium pump
returns them outside.
• K ions are more abundant
Inside the cell; as they diffuse
out, the potassium pump
returns them inside.
• ACh makes the sarcolemma very
permeable to Na ions, which
rush into the cell.
• Reversal of charges on the sar-
colemma: now () outside and
() inside.
• The reversal of charges spreads
along the entire sarcolemma
• Cholinesterase at the sar-
colemma inactivates ACh.
• Sarcolemma becomes very per-
meable to K ions, which rush
out of the cell.
• Restoration of charges on the
sarcolemma: () outside and
() inside.
• The sodium and potassium
pumps return Na ions outside
and K ions inside.
• The muscle ﬁber is now able to
respond to ACh released by
another nerve impulse arriving
at the axon terminal.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CONTRACTION—THE SLIDING
FILAMENT MECHANISM
All of the parts of a muscle ﬁber and the electrical
changes described earlier are involved in the contrac-
tion process, which is a precise sequence of events
called the sliding ﬁlament mechanism.
In summary, a nerve impulse causes depolarization
of a muscle ﬁber, and this electrical change enables the
myosin ﬁlaments to pull the actin ﬁlaments toward the
center of the sarcomere, making the sarcomere
shorter. All of the sarcomeres shorten and the muscle
ﬁber contracts. A more detailed description of this
process is the following:
1. A nerve impulse arrives at the axon terminal;
acetylcholine is released and diffuses across the
synapse.
2. Acetylcholine makes the sarcolemma more per-
meable to Na ions, which rush into the cell.
3. The sarcolemma depolarizes, becoming negative
outside and positive inside. The T tubules bring
the reversal of charges to the interior of the mus-
cle cell.
4. Depolarization stimulates the release of Ca2 ions
from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Ca2 ions bond
to the troponin–tropomyosin complex, which
shifts it away from the actin ﬁlaments.
5. Myosin splits ATP to release its energy; bridges
on the myosin attach to the actin ﬁlaments and
pull them toward the center of the sarcomere,
thus making the sarcomere shorter (Fig. 7–5).
6. All of the sarcomeres in a muscle ﬁber shorten—
the entire muscle ﬁber contracts.
7. The sarcolemma repolarizes: K ions leave the
cell, restoring a positive charge outside and a neg-
ative charge inside. The pumps then return Na
ions outside and K ions inside.
8. Cholinesterase in the sarcolemma inactivates
acetylcholine.
9. Subsequent nerve impulses will prolong contrac-
tion (more acetylcholine is released).
10. When there are no further impulses, the muscle
ﬁber will relax and return to its original length.
Steps 1 through 8 of this sequence describe a single
muscle ﬁber contraction (called a twitch) in response to
a single nerve impulse. Because all of this takes place
in less than a second, useful movements would not be
possible if muscle ﬁbers relaxed immediately after
contracting. Normally, however, nerve impulses arrive
in a continuous stream and produce a sustained con-
traction called tetanus, which is a normal state not to
be confused with the disease tetanus (see Box 7–2:
Tetanus and Botulism). When in tetanus, muscle
ﬁbers remain contracted and are capable of effective
movements. In a muscle such as the biceps brachii that
ﬂexes the forearm, an effective movement means that
many of its thousands of muscle ﬁbers are in tetanus,
a sustained contraction.
As you might expect with such a complex process,
muscle contraction may be impaired in many different
ways. Perhaps the most obvious is the loss of nerve
impulses to muscle ﬁbers, which can occur when
nerves or the spinal cord are severed, or when a stroke
146
The Muscular System
BOX 7–2
TETANUS AND BOTULISM
tetanus the cause of death is spasm of the respira-
tory muscles.
Botulism is usually a type of food poisoning, but
it is not characterized by typical food poisoning
symptoms such as diarrhea or vomiting. The neuro-
toxin produced by the botulism bacteria (Clostridium
botulinum) prevents the release of acetylcholine at
neuromuscular junctions. Without acetylcholine,
muscle ﬁbers cannot contract, and muscles become
paralyzed. Early symptoms of botulism include
blurred or double vision and difficulty speaking or
swallowing. Weakness and paralysis spread to other
muscle groups, eventually affecting all voluntary
muscles. Without rapid treatment with the antitoxin
(the speciﬁc antibody to this toxin), botulism is fatal
because of paralysis of the respiratory muscles.
Some bacteria cause disease by producing toxins. A
neurotoxin is a chemical that in some way dis-
rupts the normal functioning of the nervous system.
Because skeletal muscle contraction depends on
nerve impulses, the serious consequences for the
individual may be seen in the muscular system.
Tetanus is characterized by the inability of mus-
cles to relax. The toxin produced by the tetanus
bacteria (Clostridium tetani) affects the nervous sys-
tem in such a way that muscle ﬁbers receive too
many impulses, and muscles go into spasms. Lock-
jaw, the common name for tetanus, indicates one
of the ﬁrst symptoms, which is difficulty opening
the mouth because of spasms of the masseter mus-
cles. Treatment requires the antitoxin (an antibody
to the toxin) to neutralize the toxin. In untreated
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

(cerebrovascular accident) occurs in the frontal
lobes of the cerebrum. Without nerve impulses, skele-
tal muscles become paralyzed, unable to contract.
Paralyzed muscles eventually atrophy, that is, become
smaller from lack of use. Other disorders that affect
muscle functioning are discussed in Box 7–3: Muscular
Dystrophy and Box 7–4: Myasthenia Gravis.
RESPONSES TO EXERCISE—
MAINTAINING HOMEOSTASIS
Although entire textbooks are devoted to exercise
physiology, we will discuss it only brieﬂy here as an
example of the body’s ability to maintain homeostasis.
Engaging in moderate or strenuous exercise is a phys-
iological stress situation, a change that the body must
cope with and still maintain a normal internal envi-
ronment, that is, homeostasis.
Some of the body’s responses to exercise are dia-
grammed in Fig. 7–6; notice how they are related to
cell respiration. As you can see, the respiratory and
cardiovascular systems make essential contributions to
exercise. The integumentary system also has a role,
since it eliminates excess body heat. Although not
shown, the nervous system is also directly involved, as
we have seen. The brain generates the impulses for
muscle contraction, coordinates those contractions,
and regulates heart rate, breathing rate, and the diam-
eter of blood vessels. The next time you run up a ﬂight
The Muscular System
147
A Relaxed muscle
B  Contracted muscle
Sarcolemma
T tubule
Sarcoplasmic
reticulum
Calcium
ions
Calcium ions released from
sarcoplasmic reticulum
Calcium ions
bonded to
troponin
Myosin cross bridges
attach to actin
Actin
Myosin-binding site
Tropomyosin
Troponin
Figure 7–5.
Sliding ﬁlament mechanism. (A) Sarcomere in relaxed muscle ﬁber.
(B) Sarcomere in contracted muscle ﬁber. See text for description.
QUESTION: During contraction, which ﬁlaments do the pulling?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

BOX 7–3
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY
Muscular dystrophy is really a group of genetic
diseases in which muscle tissue is replaced by
ﬁbrous connective tissue or by fat. Neither of these
tissues is capable of contraction, and the result is
progressive loss of muscle function. The most com-
mon form is Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy, in
which the loss of muscle function affects not only
skeletal muscle but also cardiac muscle. Death usu-
ally occurs before the age of 20 due to heart failure,
and at present there is no cure.
Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy is a sex-
linked (or X-linked) trait, which means that the
gene for it is on the X chromosome and is recessive.
The female sex chromosomes are XX. If one X chro-
mosome has a gene for muscular dystrophy, and
the other X chromosome has a dominant gene for
normal muscle function, the woman will not have
muscular dystrophy but will be a carrier who may
pass the muscular dystrophy gene to her children.
The male sex chromosomes are XY, and the Y has
no gene at all for muscle function, that is, no gene
to prevent the expression of the gene on the X
chromosome. If the X chromosome has a gene for
muscular dystrophy, the male will have the disease.
This is why Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy is more
common in males; the presence of only one gene
means the disease will be present.
The muscular dystrophy gene on the X chromo-
some has been located, and the protein the gene
codes for has been named dystrophin. Dystrophin is
necessary for the stability of the sarcolemma and
the proper movement of ions. Treatments for mus-
cular dystrophy that are being investigated include
the injection of normal muscle cells or stem cells
into affected muscles, and the insertion (using
viruses) of normal genes for dystrophin into
affected muscle cells.
Increased muscle
contraction
Increased cell
respiration
Increased ATP
production
Increased need
for O2
Increased CO2
production
Increased heat
production
Increased
sweating
Increased respiration
Increased heart rate
Vasodilation in muscles
Figure 7–6.
Responses of the
body during exercise.
QUESTION: Name all the organ
systems depicted here.
BOX 7–4
MYASTHENIA GRAVIS
which acetylcholine bonds and stimulates the entry
of Na ions. Without these receptors, the acetyl-
choline released by the axon terminal cannot cause
depolarization of a muscle ﬁber.
Treatment of myasthenia gravis may involve
anticholinesterase medications. Recall that cholin-
esterase is present in the sarcolemma to inactivate
acetylcholine and prevent continuous, unwanted
impulses. If this action of cholinesterase is inhibited,
acetylcholine remains on the sarcolemma for a
longer time and may bond to any remaining recep-
tors to stimulate depolarization and contraction.
Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disorder
characterized by extreme muscle fatigue even after
minimal exertion. Women are affected more often
than are men, and symptoms usually begin in middle
age. Weakness may ﬁrst be noticed in the facial or
swallowing muscles and may progress to other mus-
cles. Without treatment, the respiratory muscles will
eventually be affected, and respiratory failure is the
cause of death.
In myasthenia gravis, the autoantibodies (self-
antibodies) destroy the acetylcholine receptors
on the sarcolemma. These receptors are the sites to
148
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

of stairs, hurry to catch a bus, or just go dancing, you
might reﬂect a moment on all of the things that are
actually happening to your body . . . after you catch
your breath.
AGING AND THE
MUSCULAR SYSTEM
With age, muscle cells die and are replaced by ﬁbrous
connective tissue or by fat. Regular exercise, however,
delays atrophy of muscles. Although muscles become
slower to contract and their maximal strength de-
creases, exercise can maintain muscle functioning at a
level that meets whatever a person needs for daily
activities. The lifting of small weights is recom-
mended as exercise for elderly people, women as well
as men. Such exercise also beneﬁts the cardiovascular,
respiratory, and skeletal systems.
The loss of muscle ﬁbers also contributes to a loss
of proprioception, because the brain is getting less
information about where and how the body is posi-
tioned. The loss of muscle sense contributes to
unsteadiness in elderly people and to an impaired
sense of balance, which in turn may lead to a fall.
Simple awareness of this may help an elderly person
prevent such accidents.
MAJOR MUSCLES OF THE BODY
The actions that muscles perform are listed in Table
7–2 and some are shown in Fig. 7–7. Most are in pairs
as antagonistic functions.
After the brief summaries of the muscles of each
body area that follow, the major muscles are shown in
Fig. 7–8. They are listed, according to body area, in
Tables 7–3 through 7–7, with associated Figs. 7–9
through 7–13, respectively. When you study the dia-
grams of these muscles, and the tables that accompany
them, keep in mind the types of joints formed by the
bones of their origins and insertions. Muscles pull
bones to produce movement, and if you can remember
the joints involved, you can easily learn the locations
and actions of the muscles.
The name of the muscle may also be helpful, and
again, many of the terms are ones you have already
learned. Some examples: “abdominis” refers to an
abdominal muscle, “femoris” to a thigh muscle,
“brachii” to a muscle of the upper arm, “oculi” to an
The Muscular System
149
eye muscle, and so on. Other parts of muscle names
may be words such as “longus” or “maximus” that
tell you about size, or “ﬂexor” that tells you about
function.
Muscles that are sites for intramuscular injections
are shown in Box 7–5.
BOX 7–5
COMMON INJECTION SITES
Intramuscular injections are used when rapid
absorption is needed, because muscle has a
good blood supply. Common sites are the but-
tock (gluteus medius), the lateral thigh (vastus lat-
eralis), and the shoulder (deltoid). These sites are
shown; also shown are the large nerves to be
avoided when giving such injections.
Box Figure 7–A
Sites for intramuscular injections.
Posterior view of right side of body.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

150
The Muscular System
MUSCLES OF THE HEAD AND NECK
Three general groups of muscles are found in the head
and neck: those that move the head or neck, the mus-
cles of facial expression, and the muscles for chewing.
The muscles that turn or bend the head, such as the
sternocleidomastoids (ﬂexion) and the pair of splenius
capitis muscles (extension), are anchored to the skull
and to the clavicle and sternum anteriorly or the ver-
tebrae posteriorly. The muscles for smiling or frown-
ing or raising our eyebrows in disbelief are anchored
to the bones of the head or to the undersurface of the
skin of the face. The masseter is an important chewing
muscle in that it raises the mandible (closes the jaw).
Flexion
Flexion
Extension
Extension
Abduction
Adduction
Abduction
Adduction
Figure 7–7.
Actions of muscles.
QUESTION: Crossing the arm in front of the chest would
be which of these actions?
Table 7–2
ACTIONS OF MUSCLES
Action
Deﬁnition
Flexion
Extension
Adduction
Abduction
Pronation
Supination
Dorsiﬂexion
Plantar ﬂexion
Rotation
Most are grouped in pairs of antagonistic functions.
• To decrease the angle of a joint
• To increase the angle of a joint
• To move closer to the midline
• To move away from the midline
• To turn the palm down
• To turn the palm up
• To elevate the foot
• To lower the foot (point the toes)
• To move a bone around its
longitudinal axis
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Muscular System
151
MUSCLES OF THE TRUNK
The muscles of the trunk cannot be described with
one or two general functions. Some form the wall of
the trunk and bend the trunk, such as the rectus abdo-
minis (f lexion) and the sacrospinalis group (exten-
sion). The trapezius (both together form the shape of
a trapezoid) is a large muscle that can raise (shrug) the
shoulder or pull it back, and can help extend the head.
Other muscles found on the trunk help move the arm
at the shoulder. The pectoralis major is a large muscle
of the chest that pulls the arm across the chest (ﬂexion
and adduction). On the posterior side of the trunk, the
latissimus dorsi pulls the arm downward and behind
the back (extension and adduction). These muscles
have their origins on the bones of the trunk, the ster-
num, the or vertebrae, which are strong, stable
anchors. Another set of muscles forms the pelvic ﬂoor,
where the muscles support the pelvic organs and assist
with urination and defecation. Yet another category is
the muscles that are concerned with breathing. These
are the intercostal muscles between the ribs and the
diaphragm that separates the thoracic and abdominal
cavities (see Fig. 15–6).
MUSCLES OF THE
SHOULDER AND ARM
The triangular deltoid muscle covers the point of the
shoulder like a cap, and can pull the humerus to the
side (abduction), forward (flexion), or backward
(extension). You already know the functions of the
biceps brachii and triceps brachii, the muscles that
form the bulk of the upper arm. Other muscles par-
tially in the upper arm help bend the elbow (ﬂexion).
The muscles that form the bulk of the forearm are the
ﬂexors and extensors of the hand and ﬁngers. You can
demonstrate this yourself by clasping the middle of
your right forearm with your left hand, then moving
your right hand at the wrist and closing and opening a
ﬁst; you can both feel and see the hand and ﬁnger
muscles at work.
MUSCLES OF THE HIP AND LEG
The hip muscles that move the thigh are anchored to
the pelvic bone and cross the hip joint to the femur.
Among these are the gluteus maximus (extension),
gluteus medius (abduction), and iliopsoas (ﬂexion).
The muscles that form the thigh include the quadri-
ceps group anteriorly and the hamstring group
posteriorly. For most people, the quadriceps is
stronger than the hamstrings, which is why athletes
more often have a “pulled hamstring” rather than a
“pulled quadriceps.” Movement of the knee joint
depends on thigh muscles and lower leg muscles.
Movement of the foot depends on lower leg muscles
such as the gastrocnemius (dorsiﬂexion or ﬂexion) and
the tibialis anterior (plantar ﬂexion or extension).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

152
Brachioradialis
Biceps
brachii
Brachialis
Triceps
brachii
Latissimus dorsi
External oblique
Gluteus medius
Gluteus maximus
Vastus lateralis
Biceps femoris
Semitendinosus
Soleus
A
Achilles tendon
Trapezius
Deltoid
Infraspinatus
Teres major
Triceps brachii
Brachioradialis
Adductor magnus
Gracilis
Semimembranosus
Gastrocnemius
Figure 7–8.
Major muscles of the body. (A) Posterior view.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

B
Pectineus
Masseter
Sternocleidomastoid
Deltoid
Pectoralis major
Brachialis
Biceps
brachii
Brachioradialis
Gastrocnemius
Tibialis anterior
Soleus
Vastus medialis
Vastus lateralis
Gracilis
Rectus femoris
Adductor longus
Sartorius
Iliopsoas
Rectus abdominis
External oblique
Triceps
brachii
Figure 7–8.
Major muscles of the body. (B) Anterior view.
QUESTION: Find a muscle named for: shape, size, location, a bone it is near, and function.
153
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

154
Levator labii
superioris
Zygomaticus
Orbicularis oris
Mentalis
Platysma
Anterior—left lateral view
Orbicularis oculi
Temporalis
Buccinator
Masseter
Sternohyoid
Sternocleidomastoid
Trapezius
Frontalis
Epicranial
aponeurosis
Figure 7–9.
Muscles of the
head and neck in anterior, left-lat-
eral view.
QUESTION: In what way are both
orbicularis muscles similar?
Table 7–3
MUSCLES OF THE HEAD AND NECK
Muscle
Function
Origin
Insertion
Frontalis
Orbicularis oculi
Orbicularis oris
Masseter
Buccinator
Sternocleidomastoid
Semispinalis capitis
(a deep muscle)
Splenius capitis
Raises eyebrows, wrinkles skin
of forehead
Closes eye
Puckers lips
Closes jaw
Pulls corners of mouth laterally
Turns head to opposite side
(both—ﬂex head and neck)
Turns head to same side (both—
extend head and neck)
Turns head to same side (both—
extend head)
• epicranial aponeurosis
• medial side of orbit
• encircles mouth
• maxilla and zygomatic
• maxilla and mandible
• sternum and clavicle
• 7th cervical and ﬁrst 6
thoracic vertebrae
• 7th cervical and ﬁrst 4
thoracic vertebrae
• skin above supraorbital
margin
• encircles eye
• skin at corners of mouth
• mandible
• orbicularis oris
• temporal bone (mastoid
process)
• occipital bone
• occipital bone
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

155
Table 7–4
MUSCLES OF THE TRUNK
Muscle
Function
Origin
Insertion
Trapezius
External intercostals
Internal intercostals
Diaphragm
Rectus abdominis
External oblique
Sacrospinalis group
(deep muscles)
Raises, lowers, and adducts
shoulders
Pull ribs up and out (inhalation)
Pull ribs down and in (forced
exhalation)
Flattens (down) to enlarge
chest cavity for inhalation
Flexes vertebral column, com-
presses abdomen
Rotates and ﬂexes vertebral col-
umn, compresses abdomen
Extends vertebral column
• occipital bone and all
thoracic vertebrae
• superior rib
• inferior rib
• last 6 costal cartilages
and lumbar vertebrae
• pubic bones
• lower 8 ribs
• ilium, lumbar, and
some thoracic vertebrae
• spine of scapula and
clavicle
• inferior rib
• superior rib
• central tendon
• 5th–7th costal cartilages
and xiphoid process
• iliac crest and linea alba
• ribs, cervical, and
thoracic vertebrae
External oblique
Internal oblique
Transversus
abdominis
Rectus abdominis
Sternocleidomastoid
Trapezius
Pectoralis major
Serratus anterior
Trapezius
Splenius capitis
Deltoid
Teres major
Infraspinatus
Rhomboideus
major
Gluteus maximus
Latissimus
dorsi
External
oblique
A
B
Figure 7–10.
Muscles of the trunk. (A) Anterior view. (B) Posterior view.
QUESTION: Which muscles of the trunk move the arm? Why are they on the trunk?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

156
The Muscular System
Deltoid
Biceps
Brachialis
Extensor carpi
radialis longus
Extensor carpi
radialis longus
Brachioradialis
Flexor
carpi radialis
Extensor carpi
radialis brevis
Abductor
pollicis
brevis
Abductor
pollicis
Triceps
Palmaris longus
Flexor pollicis longus
Deltoid
Brachialis
Brachioradialis
Extensor carpi
radialis brevis
Extensor
digitorum
A
B
Flexor digitorum
superficialis
Abductor
pollicis longus
Extensor
pollicis brevis
Anconeus
Flexor carpi ulnaris
Extensor carpi ulnaris
Extensor digiti minimi
Figure 7–11.
Muscles of the arm. (A) Anterior view. (B) Posterior view.
QUESTION: Where are the muscles that ﬂex the ﬁngers located? How did you know?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Muscular System
157
Table 7–5
MUSCLES OF THE SHOULDER AND ARM
Muscle
Function
Origin
Insertion
Deltoid
Pectoralis major
Latissimus dorsi
Teres major
Triceps brachii
Biceps brachii
Brachioradialis
Abducts the humerus
Flexes and adducts the
humerus
Extends and adducts
the humerus
Extends and adducts
the humerus
Extends the forearm
Flexes the forearm
Flexes the forearm
• scapula and clavicle
• clavicle, sternum, 2nd–6th costal
cartilages
• last 6 thoracic vertebrae, all lum-
bar vertebrae, sacrum, iliac crest
• scapula
• humerus and scapula
• scapula
• humerus
• humerus
• humerus
• humerus
• humerus
• ulna
• radius
• radius
Table 7–6
MUSCLES OF THE HIP AND LEG
Muscle
Function
Origin
Insertion
Iliopsoas
Gluteus maximus
Gluteus medius
Quadriceps femoris group:
Rectus femoris
Vastus lateralis
Vastus medialis
Vastus intermedius
Hamstring group
Biceps femoris
Semimembranosus
Semitendinosus
Adductor group
Sartorius
Gastrocnemius
Soleus
Tibialis anterior
Flexes femur
Extends femur
Abducts femur
Flexes femur and extends
lower leg
Extends femur and ﬂexes
lower leg
Adducts femur
Flexes femur and lower leg
Plantar ﬂexes foot
Plantar ﬂexes foot
Dorsiﬂexes foot
• ilium, lumbar vertebrae
• iliac crest, sacrum, coccyx
• ilium
• ilium and femur
• ischium
• ischium and pubis
• ilium
• femur
• tibia and ﬁbula
• tibia
• femur
• femur
• femur
• tibia
• tibia and ﬁbula
• femur
• tibia
• calcaneus (Achilles tendon)
• calcaneus (Achilles tendon)
• metatarsals
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

158
Sartorius
Rectus femoris
Vastus lateralis
Peroneus longus
Tibialis anterior
Extensor digitorum brevis
Extensor digitorum longus
Extensor
 hallucis brevis
Iliopsoas
Pectineus
Adductor
longus
Adductor
magnus
Gracilis
Semitendinosus
Vastus medialis
Semimembranosus
Gastrocnemius
Soleus
A
B
Flexor
digitorum longus
Peroneus brevis
Extensor hallucis longus
Gluteus maximus
Vastus lateralis
Plantaris
Peroneus longus
Biceps femoris
Figure 7–12.
Muscles of the leg. (A) Anterior view. (B) Posterior view.
QUESTION: How does the gastrocnemius compare in size to the tibialis anterior? What is
the reason for this difference?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Muscular System
159
Clitoris
Urethra
Vagina
Ischium
Central
tendon
Anus
Gluteus
maximus
Anococcygeal
ligament
Coccyx
Ischiocavernosus
Bulbospongiosus
Transverse perineus
Levator ani
External
anal
sphincter
Coccygeus
Figure 7–13.
Muscles of the female pelvic ﬂoor.
QUESTION: In women, what organs are directly supported by this “ﬂoor” of muscles?
Table 7–7
MUSCLES OF THE PELVIC FLOOR
Muscle
Function
Origin
Insertion
Levator ani
Coccygeus
Ischiocavernosus
Bulbospongiosus
Transverse perineus
(superﬁcial and deep)
External anal sphincter
Supports pelvic organs, especially dur-
ing defecation, urination, coughing,
and forced exhalation; constricts
anus, urethra, and vagina
Supports pelvic organs, especially dur-
ing defecation, urination, coughing,
and forced exhalation
Erection of clitoris in female, penis in
male
Assists urination; erection in female;
erection and ejaculation in male
Assists urination in female; urination and
ejaculation in male
Closes anus
• pubis and ischium
• ischium
• ischium and pubis
• central tendon of
perineum
• ischium
• anococcygeal
ligament
• coccyx, anal canal,
urethra
• coccyx and sacrum
• clitoris or penis
• fasciae, pubic arch,
clitoris, or penis
• central tendon of
perineum
• central tendon of
perineum
STUDY OUTLINE
Organ Systems Involved in Movement
1. Muscular—moves the bones.
2. Skeletal—bones are moved, at their joints, by mus-
cles.
3. Nervous—transmits impulses to muscles to cause
contraction.
4. Respiratory—exchanges O2 and CO2 between the
air and blood.
5. Circulatory—transports O2 to muscles and removes
CO2.
Muscle Structure
1. Muscle ﬁbers (cells) are specialized to contract,
shorten, and produce movement.
2. A skeletal muscle is made of thousands of
muscle ﬁbers. Varying movements require contrac-
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

tion of variable numbers of muscle ﬁbers in a
muscle.
3. Tendons attach muscles to bone; the origin is the
more stationary bone, the insertion is the more
movable bone. A tendon merges with the fascia of
a muscle and the periosteum of a bone; all are made
of ﬁbrous connective tissue.
Muscle Arrangements
1. Antagonistic muscles have opposite functions. A
muscle pulls when it contracts, but exerts no force
when it relaxes and it cannot push. When one mus-
cle pulls a bone in one direction, another muscle is
needed to pull the bone in the other direction (see
also Table 7–2 and Fig. 7–1).
2. Synergistic muscles have the same function and
alternate as the prime mover depending on the
position of the bone to be moved. Synergists also
stabilize a joint to make a more precise movement
possible.
3. The frontal lobes of the cerebrum generate the
impulses necessary for contraction of skeletal mus-
cles. The cerebellum regulates coordination.
Muscle Tone—the state of slight contraction
present in muscles
1. Alternate ﬁbers contract to prevent muscle fatigue;
regulated by the cerebellum.
2. Good tone helps maintain posture, produces 25%
of body heat (at rest), and improves coordination.
3. Isotonic exercise involves contraction with move-
ment; improves tone and strength and improves
cardiovascular and respiratory efficiency (aerobic
exercise).
• Concentric contraction—muscle exerts force
while shortening.
• Eccentric contraction—muscle exerts force
while lengthening.
4. Isometric exercise involves contraction without
movement; improves tone and strength but is not
aerobic.
Muscle Sense—proprioception: knowing
where our muscles are without looking
at them
1. Permits us to perform everyday activities without
having to concentrate on muscle position.
2. Stretch receptors (proprioceptors) in muscles
respond to stretching and generate impulses that
the brain interprets as a mental “picture” of where
the muscles are. Parietal lobes: conscious muscle
sense; cerebellum: unconscious muscle sense used
to promote coordination.
Energy Sources for Muscle Contraction
1. ATP is the direct source; the ATP stored in muscles
lasts only a few seconds.
2. Creatine phosphate is a secondary energy source; is
broken down to creatine  phosphate  energy.
The energy is used to synthesize more ATP. Some
creatine is converted to creatinine, which must be
excreted by the kidneys. Most creatine is used for
the resynthesis of creatine phosphate.
3. Glycogen is the most abundant energy source and
is ﬁrst broken down to glucose. Glucose is broken
down in cell respiration:
Glucose  O2 →CO2  H2O  ATP  heat
ATP is used for contraction; heat contributes to
body temperature; H2O becomes part of intracellu-
lar ﬂuid; CO2 is eventually exhaled.
4. Oxygen is essential for the completion of cell res-
piration. Hemoglobin in red blood cells carries
oxygen to muscles; myoglobin stores oxygen in
muscles; both of these proteins contain iron, which
enables them to bond to oxygen.
5. Oxygen debt (recovery oxygen uptake): Muscle
ﬁbers run out of oxygen during strenuous exercise,
and glucose is converted to lactic acid, which causes
fatigue. Breathing rate remains high after exercise
to deliver more oxygen to the liver, which converts
lactic acid to pyruvic acid, a simple carbohydrate
(ATP required).
Muscle Fiber—microscopic structure
1. Neuromuscular junction: axon terminal and sar-
colemma; the synapse is the space between. The
axon terminal contains acetylcholine (a neurotrans-
mitter), and the sarcolemma contains cholinesterase
(an inactivator) (see Fig. 7–2).
2. Sarcomeres are the contracting units of a muscle
ﬁber. Myosin and actin ﬁlaments are the contract-
ing proteins of sarcomeres. Troponin and tropo-
myosin are proteins that inhibit the sliding of
myosin and actin when the muscle ﬁber is relaxed
(see Figs. 7–3 and 7–5).
3. The sarcoplasmic reticulum surrounds the sarco-
meres and is a reservoir for calcium ions.
4. Polarization (resting potential): When the muscle
ﬁber is relaxed, the sarcolemma has a () charge
160
The Muscular System
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

1. Name the organ systems directly involved in
movement, and for each state how they are
involved. (p. 138)
2. State the function of tendons. Name the part of a
muscle and a bone to which a tendon is attached.
(p. 138)
3. State the term for: (pp. 138–139)
a. Muscles with the same function
b. Muscles with opposite functions
c. The muscle that does most of the work in a
movement
4. Explain why antagonistic muscle arrangements
are necessary. Give two examples. (p. 138)
5. State three reasons why good muscle tone is
important. (p. 140)
6. Explain why muscle sense is important. Name the
receptors involved and state what they detect.
(p. 141)
7. With respect to muscle contraction, state the
functions of the cerebellum and the frontal lobes
of the cerebrum. (p. 140)
8. Name the direct energy source for muscle con-
traction. Name the two secondary energy sources.
Which of these is more abundant? (p. 141)
9. State the simple equation of cell respiration and
what happens to each of the products of this reac-
tion. (p. 142)
10. Name the two sources of oxygen for muscle
ﬁbers. State what the two proteins have in com-
mon. (p. 142)
11. Explain what is meant by oxygen debt. What is
needed to correct oxygen debt, and where does it
come from? (p. 142)
12. Name these parts of the neuromuscular junction:
(p. 142)
a. The membrane of the muscle ﬁber
b. The end of the motor neuron
c. The space between neuron and muscle cell
State the locations of acetylcholine and cholin-
esterase.
13. Name the contracting proteins of sarcomeres, and
describe their locations in a sarcomere. Where is
the sarcoplasmic reticulum and what does it con-
tain? (p. 142)
The Muscular System
161
REVIEW QUESTIONS
outside and a () charge inside. Na ions are more
abundant outside the cell and K ions are more
abundant inside the cell. The Na and K pumps
maintain these relative concentrations on either
side of the sarcolemma (see Table 7–1 and Fig.
7–4).
5. Depolarization: This process is started by a nerve
impulse. Acetylcholine released by the axon termi-
nal makes the sarcolemma very permeable to Na
ions, which enter the cell and cause a reversal of
charges to () outside and () inside. The depo-
larization spreads along the entire sarcolemma and
initiates the contraction process. Folds of the sar-
colemma called T tubules carry the depolarization
into the interior of the muscle cell.
Contraction—the sliding ﬁlament mecha-
nism (see Fig. 7–5)
1. Depolarization stimulates a sequence of events
that enables myosin ﬁlaments to pull the actin ﬁla-
ments to the center of the sarcomere, which short-
ens.
2. All of the sarcomeres in a muscle ﬁber contract in
response to a nerve impulse; the entire cell con-
tracts.
3. Tetanus is a sustained contraction brought about by
continuous nerve impulses; all our movements
involve tetanus.
4. Paralysis: Muscles that do not receive nerve
impulses are unable to contract and will atrophy.
Paralysis may be the result of nerve damage, spinal
cord damage, or brain damage.
Responses to Exercise—maintaining homeo-
stasis
See section in chapter and Fig. 7–6.
Major Muscles
See Tables 7–2 through 7–7 and Figs. 7–7 through
7–13.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

1. In an accident with farm machinery, Mr. R. had his
left arm severed just below the elbow. Mrs. R.
stopped the bleeding, called for an ambulance,
and packed the severed arm in ice for the EMTs
to take to the hospital. Will Mr. R. ever be able
to move the ﬁngers of his left hand again? What
structures must be reattached, and what has to
happen?
2. Name all of the muscles you can think of that move
the thigh at the hip. Group them as synergists, if
possible. Then pair those groups or individual
muscles as antagonists.
3. Muscle contraction is important for posture.
Muscles oppose each other, contracting equally to
keep us upright. Picture the body in anatomic posi-
tion, and describe what would happen if each of
these muscles relaxed completely:
Semispinalis capitis
Masseter
Rectus abdominis
Sacrospinalis
Quadriceps femoris
Gluteus maximus
4. An exercise for skiers involves sitting against a wall
as if you were sitting in a chair, but without a chair.
Thighs should be parallel to the ﬂoor and the knees
should make a 90o angle. Try it. What kind of
exercise is this? Which muscles are doing most of
the work (which ones begin to hurt)? Which do
you think would be easier: 3 minutes of this exer-
cise or 3 minutes of jogging? Can you think of an
explanation?
5. Can you juggle? Don’t just say “no”—have you
ever tried? Find some old tennis balls and try jug-
gling two balls with one hand, or three balls with
two hands. Explain how muscle sense is involved in
juggling.
Now try to imagine what it would be like to be
without muscle sense. Some people do not have
muscle sense in certain parts of their bodies. Who
are these people, and what has happened that cost
them their muscle sense (and muscle contraction)?
162
The Muscular System
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
14. In terms of ions and charges, describe: (p. 145)
a. Polarization
b. Depolarization
c. Repolarization
15. With respect to the sliding ﬁlament mechanism,
explain the function of: (p. 146)
a. Acetylcholine
b. Calcium ions
c. Myosin and actin
d. Troponin and tropomyosin
e. Cholinesterase
16. State three of the body’s physiological responses
to exercise, and explain how each helps maintain
homeostasis. (pp. 147–148)
17. Find the major muscles on yourself, and state a
function of each muscle
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CHAPTER 8
The Nervous System
163
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

164
CHAPTER 8
Chapter Outline
Nervous System Divisions
Nerve Tissue
Synapses
Types of Neurons
Nerves and Nerve Tracts
The Nerve Impulse
The Spinal Cord
Spinal Nerves
Spinal Cord Reﬂexes
Reﬂex arc
The Brain
Ventricles
Medulla
Pons
Midbrain
Cerebellum
Hypothalamus
Thalamus
Cerebrum
Frontal lobes
Parietal lobes
Temporal lobes
Occipital lobes
Association areas
Basal ganglia
Corpus callosum
Meninges and Cerebrospinal Fluid
Cranial Nerves
The Autonomic Nervous System
Autonomic Pathways
Sympathetic Division
Parasympathetic Division
Neurotransmitters
Aging and the Nervous System
BOX 8–1
MULTIPLE MCLEROSIS
BOX 8–2
SHINGLES
BOX 8–3
SPINAL CORD INJURIES
BOX 8–4
CEREBROVASCULAR ACCIDENTS
BOX 8–5
APHASIA
BOX 8–6
ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE
BOX 8–7
PARKINSON’S DISEASE
BOX 8–8
LUMBAR PUNCTURE
Student Objectives
• Name the divisions of the nervous system and the
parts of each, and state the general functions of
the nervous system.
• Name the parts of a neuron and state the function
of each.
• Explain the importance of Schwann cells in the
peripheral nervous system and neuroglia in the
central nervous system.
• Describe the electrical nerve impulse, and describe
impulse transmission at synapses.
• Describe the types of neurons, nerves, and nerve
tracts.
• State the names and numbers of the spinal nerves,
and their destinations.
• Explain the importance of stretch reﬂexes and
ﬂexor reﬂexes.
• State the functions of the parts of the brain; be
able to locate each part on a diagram.
• Name the meninges and describe their locations.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Nervous System
165
Student Objectives (Continued)
• State the locations and functions of cerebrospinal
ﬂuid.
• Name the cranial nerves, and state their functions.
• Explain how the sympathetic division of the auto-
nomic nervous system enables the body to adapt
to a stress situation.
• Explain how the parasympathetic division of the
autonomic nervous system promotes normal body
functioning in relaxed situations.
New Terminology
Afferent (AFF-uh-rent)
Autonomic nervous system (AW-toh-NOM-ik)
Cauda equina (KAW-dah ee-KWHY-nah)
Cerebral cortex (se-REE-bruhl KOR-teks)
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid (se-REE-broh-SPY-nuhl)
Choroid plexus (KOR-oid PLEK-sus)
Corpus callosum (KOR-pus kuh-LOH-sum)
Cranial nerves (KRAY-nee-uhl NERVS)
Efferent (EFF-uh-rent)
Gray matter (GRAY MA-TUR)
Neuroglia (new-ROG-lee-ah)
Neurolemma (NYOO-ro-LEM-ah)
Parasympathetic (PAR-uh-SIM-puh-THET-ik)
Reﬂex (REE-ﬂeks)
Somatic (soh-MA-tik)
Spinal nerves (SPY-nuhl NERVS)
Sympathetic (SIM-puh-THET-ik)
Ventricles of brain (VEN-trick’ls)
Visceral (VISS-er-uhl)
White matter (WIGHT MA-TUR)
Related Clinical Terminology
Alzheimer’s disease (ALZ-high-mer’s)
Aphasia (ah-FAY-zee-ah)
Blood–brain barrier (BLUHD BRAYNE)
Cerebrovascular accident (CVA) (se-REE-broh-
VAS-kyoo-lur)
Lumbar puncture (LUM-bar PUNK-chur)
Meningitis (MEN-in-JIGH-tis)
Multiple sclerosis (MS) (MULL-ti-puhl skle-
ROH-sis)
Neuralgia (new-RAL-jee-ah)
Neuritis (new-RYE-tis)
Neuropathy (new-RAH-puh-thee)
Parkinson’s disease (PAR-kin-son’s)
Remission (ree-MISH-uhn)
Spinal shock (SPY-nuhl SHAHK)
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Most of us can probably remember being told,
when we were children, not to touch the stove or some
other source of potential harm. Because children are
curious, such warnings often go unheeded. The
result? Touching a hot stove brings about an immedi-
ate response of pulling away and a vivid memory of
painful ﬁngers. This simple and familiar experience
illustrates the functions of the nervous system:
1. To detect changes and feel sensations
2. To initiate appropriate responses to changes
3. To organize information for immediate use and
store it for future use
The nervous system is one of the regulating sys-
tems (the endocrine system is the other and is dis-
cussed in Chapter 10). Electrochemical impulses of
the nervous system make it possible to obtain infor-
mation about the external or internal environment
and do whatever is necessary to maintain homeostasis.
Some of this activity is conscious, but much of it hap-
pens without our awareness.
NERVOUS SYSTEM DIVISIONS
The nervous system has two divisions. The central
nervous system (CNS) consists of the brain and
spinal cord. The peripheral nervous system (PNS)
consists of cranial nerves and spinal nerves. The PNS
includes the autonomic nervous system (ANS).
The peripheral nervous system relays information
to and from the central nervous system, and the brain
is the center of activity that integrates this informa-
tion, initiates responses, and makes us the individuals
we are.
NERVE TISSUE
Nerve tissue was brieﬂy described in Chapter 4, so we
will begin by reviewing what you already know and
then add to it.
Nerve cells are called neurons, or nerve ﬁbers.
Whatever their speciﬁc functions, all neurons have the
same physical parts. The cell body contains the
nucleus (Fig. 8–1) and is essential for the continued
life of the neuron. As you will see, neuron cell bodies
are found in the central nervous system or close to it
in the trunk of the body. In these locations, cell bodies
are protected by bone. There are no cell bodies in the
arms and legs, which are much more subject to injury.
Dendrites are processes (extensions) that transmit
impulses toward the cell body. The one axon of a neu-
ron transmits impulses away from the cell body. It is
the cell membrane of the dendrites, cell body, and
axon that carries the electrical nerve impulse.
In the peripheral nervous system, axons and den-
drites are “wrapped” in specialized cells called
Schwann cells (see Fig. 8–1). During embryonic
development, Schwann cells grow to surround the
neuron processes, enclosing them in several layers of
Schwann cell membrane. These layers are the myelin
sheath; myelin is a phospholipid that electrically insu-
lates neurons from one another. Without the myelin
sheath, neurons would short-circuit, just as electrical
wires would if they were not insulated (see Box 8–1:
Multiple Sclerosis).
The spaces between adjacent Schwann cells, or seg-
ments of the myelin sheath, are called nodes of
Ranvier (neuroﬁbril nodes). These nodes are the parts
of the neuron cell membrane that depolarize when an
electrical impulse is transmitted (see “The Nerve
Impulse” section, on pages 171–172).
The nuclei and cytoplasm of the Schwann cells are
wrapped around the outside of the myelin sheath and
are called the neurolemma, which becomes very
important if nerves are damaged. If a peripheral nerve
is severed and reattached precisely by microsurgery,
the axons and dendrites may regenerate through the
tunnels formed by the neurolemmas. The Schwann
cells are also believed to produce a chemical growth
factor that stimulates regeneration. Although this re-
generation may take months, the nerves may eventu-
ally reestablish their proper connections, and the
person may regain some sensation and movement in
the once-severed limb.
In the central nervous system, the myelin sheaths
are formed by oligodendrocytes, one of the neu-
roglia (glial cells), the specialized cells found only in
the brain and spinal cord. Because no Schwann cells
are present, however, there is no neurolemma, and
regeneration of neurons does not occur. This is why
severing of the spinal cord, for example, results in per-
manent loss of function. Another kind of neuroglia are
microglia,which are constantly moving, phagocytiz-
ing cellular debris, damaged cells, and pathogens.
166
The Nervous System
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Yet another type of glial cell is the astrocyte (liter-
ally, “star cell”). In the embryo, these cells provide a
framework for the migrating neurons that will form
the brain. Thereafter, the extensions of astrocytes are
wrapped around brain capillaries and contribute to the
blood–brain barrier, which prevents potentially
harmful waste products in the blood from diffusing
out into brain tissue. These waste products are normal
in the blood and tissue ﬂuid, but brain tissue is much
more sensitive to even low levels of them than are
other tissues such as muscle tissue or connective tis-
sue. The capillaries of the brain also contribute to this
barrier, because they are less permeable than are other
capillaries. A disadvantage of the blood–brain barrier
is that some useful medications cannot cross it, and
the antibodies produced by lymphocytes cross only
with difficulty. This becomes an important considera-
tion when treating brain infections or other diseases
The Nervous System
167
Afferent (sensory) neuron
Axon terminal
Axon
Nucleus
Cell body
Functional dendrite
Myelin sheath
Receptors
Dendrites
Nucleus
Axon terminal
Efferent (motor) neuron
Cell body
Axon
Schwann cell nucleus
Myelin sheath
Node of
Ranvier
A
B
Schwann cell
Axon
Neurolemma
Layers of myelin sheath
C
Figure 8–1.
Neuron struc-
ture. (A) A typical sensory neu-
ron. (B) A typical motor neuron.
The arrows indicate the direc-
tion of impulse transmission.
(C) Details of the myelin sheath
and neurolemma formed by
Schwann cells.
QUESTION: The axon terminal
of the motor neuron would be
found at what kinds of effec-
tors?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

or disorders (Table 8–1 summarizes the functions of
the neuroglia).
SYNAPSES
Neurons that transmit impulses to other neurons do
not actually touch one another. The small gap or space
between the axon of one neuron and the dendrites or
cell body of the next neuron is called the synapse.
Within the synaptic knob (terminal end) of the presy-
naptic axon is a chemical neurotransmitter that is
released into the synapse by the arrival of an electrical
nerve impulse (Fig. 8–2). The neurotransmitter dif-
fuses across the synapse, combines with speciﬁc recep-
tor sites on the cell membrane of the postsynaptic
neuron, and there generates an electrical impulse that
is, in turn, carried by this neuron’s axon to the next
synapse, and so forth. A chemical inactivator at the
cell body or dendrite of the postsynaptic neuron
quickly inactivates the neurotransmitter. This pre-
vents unwanted, continuous impulses, unless a new
impulse from the ﬁrst neuron releases more neuro-
transmitter.
Many synapses are termed excitatory, because the
neurotransmitter causes the postsynaptic neuron to
depolarize (become more negative outside as Na ions
enter the cell) and transmit an electrical impulse to
another neuron, muscle cell, or gland. Some synapses,
however, are inhibitory, meaning that the neurotrans-
mitter causes the postsynaptic neuron to hyperpolar-
ize (become even more positive outside as K ions
leave the cell or Cl ions enter the cell) and therefore
not transmit an electrical impulse. Such inhibitory
synapses are important, for example, for slowing the
heart rate, and for balancing the excitatory impulses
transmitted to skeletal muscles. With respect to the
skeletal muscles, this inhibition prevents excessive
contraction and is important for coordination.
168
The Nervous System
BOX 8–1
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
protect the axon. Because loss of myelin may
occur in many parts of the central nervous system,
the symptoms vary, but they usually include muscle
weakness or paralysis, numbness or partial loss
of sensation, double vision, and loss of spinal
cord reﬂexes, including those for urination and
defecation.
The ﬁrst symptoms usually appear between the
ages of 20 and 40 years, and the disease may
progress either slowly or rapidly. Some MS patients
have remissions, periods of time when their symp-
toms diminish, but remissions and progression of
the disease are not predictable. There is still no cure
for MS, but therapies include suppression of the
immune response, and interferon, which seems to
prolong remissions in some patients. The possibility
of stimulating remyelination of neurons is also
being investigated.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a demyelinating dis-
ease; that is, it involves deterioration of the myelin
sheath of neurons in the central nervous system.
Without the myelin sheath, the impulses of these
neurons are short-circuited and do not reach their
proper destinations, and the neuron axons are
damaged and gradually die.
Multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune disorder
that may be triggered by a virus or bacterial infec-
tion. Research has also uncovered a genetic com-
ponent to some clusters of MS cases in families.
Exactly how such genes would increase a person’s
susceptibility to an autoimmune disease is not
yet known. In MS, the autoantibodies destroy
the oligodendrocytes, the myelin-producing neu-
roglia of the central nervous system, which results
in the formation of scleroses, or plaques of scar
tissue, that do not provide electrical insulation or
Table 8–1 NEUROGLIA
Name
Function
Oligodendrocytes
Microglia
Astrocytes
Ependyma
• Produce the myelin sheath to
electrically insulate neurons of
the CNS.
• Capable of movement and
phagocytosis of pathogens
and damaged tissue.
• Support neurons, help main-
tain K level, contribute to the
blood–brain barrier.
• Line the ventricles of the
brain; many of the cells have
cilia; involved in circulation of
cerebrospinal ﬂuid.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

One important consequence of the presence of
synapses is that they ensure one-way transmission of
impulses in a living person. A nerve impulse cannot go
backward across a synapse because there is no neuro-
transmitter released by the dendrites or cell body.
Neurotransmitters can be released only by a neuron’s
axon, which does not have receptor sites for it, as does
the postsynaptic membrane. Keep this in mind when
we discuss the types of neurons later in the chapter.
An example of a neurotransmitter is acetylcholine,
which is found at neuromuscular junctions, in the
CNS, and in much of the peripheral nervous system.
Acetylcholine usually makes a postsynaptic membrane
more permeable to Na ions, which brings about
depolarization of the postsynaptic neuron. Cholin-
esterase is the inactivator of acetylcholine. There are
many other neurotransmitters, especially in the cen-
tral nervous system. These include dopamine, GABA,
norepinephrine, glutamate, and serotonin. Each of
these neurotransmitters has its own chemical inactiva-
tor. Some neurotransmitters are reabsorbed into the
neurons that secreted them; this process is called
reuptake and also terminates the effect of the trans-
mitter.
The complexity and variety of synapses make them
frequent targets of medications. For example, drugs
that alter mood or behavior often act on speciﬁc neu-
rotransmitters in the brain, and antihypertensive
drugs affect synapse transmission at the smooth mus-
cle of blood vessels.
The Nervous System
169
Na+
Na+
Na+
Axon of presynaptic
neuron
Vesicles of neurotransmitter
Receptor site
Inactivator
(cholinesterase)
Dendrite of
postsynaptic
neuron
Inactivated
neurotransmitter
Neurotransmitter
(acetylcholine)
Mitochondrion
Figure 8–2.
Impulse transmission at a synapse. The arrow indicates the direction of the
electrical impulse.
QUESTION: Is this an excitatory synapse or an inhibitory synapse? Explain your answer.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

TYPES OF NEURONS
Neurons may be classiﬁed into three groups: sensory
neurons, motor neurons, and interneurons (Fig. 8–3).
Sensory neurons (or afferent neurons) carry im-
pulses from receptors to the central nervous system.
Receptors detect external or internal changes and
send the information to the CNS in the form of
impulses by way of the afferent neurons. The central
nervous system interprets these impulses as a sensa-
tion. Sensory neurons from receptors in skin, skeletal
muscles, and joints are called somatic; those from
receptors in internal organs are called visceral sensory
neurons.
Motor neurons (or efferent neurons) carry
impulses from the central nervous system to effectors.
The two types of effectors are muscles and glands. In
response to impulses, muscles contract or relax and
glands secrete. Motor neurons linked to skeletal mus-
cle are called somatic; those to smooth muscle, cardiac
muscle, and glands are called visceral.
170
The Nervous System
Dorsal root
Dorsal root ganglion
Cell body of
sensory neuron
Dendrite of
sensory neuron
Receptor
Ventral root
Axon of motor neuron
Synaptic knobs
Effector muscle
Cell body of motor neuron
Gray matter
White matter
Spinothalamic tract
Rubrospinal tract
Corticospinal tract
Dorsal column
Central canal
Interneuron
Synapse
Figure 8–3.
Cross-section of the spinal cord and the three types of neurons. Spinal nerve
roots and their neurons are shown on the left side. Spinal nerve tracts are shown in the
white matter on the right side. All tracts and nerves are bilateral (both sides).
QUESTION: The dorsal column is an ascending tract, and the corticospinal tract is
descending. Explain what this means.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Sensory and motor neurons make up the peripheral
nervous system. Visceral motor neurons form the
autonomic nervous system, a specialized subdivision
of the PNS that will be discussed later in this chapter.
Interneurons are found entirely within the central
nervous system. They are arranged so as to carry only
sensory or motor impulses, or to integrate these func-
tions. Some interneurons in the brain are concerned
with thinking, learning, and memory.
A neuron carries impulses in only one direction.
This is the result of the neuron’s structure and loca-
tion, as well as its physical arrangement with other
neurons and the resulting pattern of synapses. The
functioning nervous system, therefore, is an enormous
network of “one-way streets,” and there is no danger
of impulses running into and canceling one another
out.
NERVES AND NERVE TRACTS
A nerve is a group of axons and/or dendrites of many
neurons, with blood vessels and connective tissue.
Sensory nerves are made only of sensory neurons.
The optic nerves for vision and olfactory nerves for
smell are examples of nerves with a purely sensory
function. Motor nerves are made only of motor neu-
rons; autonomic nerves are motor nerves. A mixed
nerve contains both sensory and motor neurons. Most
of our peripheral nerves, such as the sciatic nerves in
the legs, are mixed nerves.
The term nerve tract refers to groups of neurons
within the central nervous system. All the neurons in
a nerve tract are concerned with either sensory or
motor activity. These tracts are often referred to as
white matter; the myelin sheaths of the neurons give
them a white color.
THE NERVE IMPULSE
The events of an electrical nerve impulse are the same
as those of the electrical impulse generated in muscle
ﬁbers, which is discussed in Chapter 7. Stated simply,
a neuron not carrying an impulse is in a state of polar-
ization, with Na ions more abundant outside the
cell, and K ions and negative ions more abundant
inside the cell. The neuron has a positive charge on
the outside of the cell membrane and a relative nega-
tive charge inside. A stimulus (such as a neurotrans-
mitter) makes the membrane very permeable to Na
ions, which rush into the cell. This brings about
depolarization, a reversal of charges on the mem-
brane. The outside now has a negative charge, and the
inside has a positive charge.
As soon as depolarization takes place, the neuron
membrane becomes very permeable to K ions, which
rush out of the cell. This restores the positive charge
outside and the negative charge inside, and is called
repolarization. (The term action potential refers to
depolarization followed by repolarization.) Then the
sodium and potassium pumps return Na ions outside
and K ions inside, and the neuron is ready to respond
to another stimulus and transmit another impulse. An
action potential in response to a stimulus takes place
very rapidly and is measured in milliseconds. An indi-
vidual neuron is capable of transmitting hundreds of
action potentials (impulses) each second. A summary
of the events of nerve impulse transmission is given in
Table 8–2.
Transmission of electrical impulses is very rapid.
The presence of an insulating myelin sheath increases
the velocity of impulses, since only the nodes of
Ranvier depolarize. This is called saltatory conduc-
tion. Many of our neurons are capable of transmitting
impulses at a speed of many meters per second.
Imagine a person 6 feet (about 2 meters) tall who stubs
his toe; sensory impulses travel from the toe to the
brain in less than a second (crossing a few synapses
along the way). You can see how the nervous system
can communicate so rapidly with all parts of the body,
and why it is such an important regulatory system.
At synapses, nerve impulse transmission changes
from electrical to chemical and depends on the release
of neurotransmitters. Although diffusion across
synapses is slow, the synapses are so small that this
does not signiﬁcantly affect the velocity of impulses in
a living person.
THE SPINAL CORD
The spinal cord transmits impulses to and from the
brain and is the integrating center for the spinal cord
reﬂexes. Although this statement of functions is very
brief and sounds very simple, the spinal cord is of
great importance to the nervous system and to the
body as a whole.
Enclosed within the vertebral canal and the menin-
ges, the spinal cord is well protected from mechanical
The Nervous System
171
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

injury. In length, the spinal cord extends from the
foramen magnum of the occipital bone to the disc
between the ﬁrst and second lumbar vertebrae.
A cross-section of the spinal cord is shown in Fig.
8–3; refer to it as you read the following. The internal
gray matter is shaped like the letter H; gray matter
consists of the cell bodies of motor neurons and
interneurons. The external white matter is made of
myelinated axons and dendrites of interneurons.
These nerve ﬁbers are grouped into nerve tracts based
on their functions. Ascending tracts (such as the dor-
sal columns and spinothalamic tracts) carry sensory
impulses to the brain. Descending tracts (such as the
corticospinal and rubrospinal tracts) carry motor
impulses away from the brain. Lastly, ﬁnd the central
canal; this contains cerebrospinal ﬂuid and is con-
tinuous with cavities in the brain called ventricles.
SPINAL NERVES
There are 31 pairs of spinal nerves, those that emerge
from the spinal cord. The nerves are named according
to their respective vertebrae: 8 cervical pairs, 12 tho-
racic pairs, 5 lumbar pairs, 5 sacral pairs, and 1 very
small coccygeal pair. These are shown in Fig. 8–4;
notice that each nerve is designated by a letter and a
number. The 8th cervical nerve is C8, the 1st thoracic
nerve is T1, and so on.
In general, the cervical nerves supply the back of
the head, neck, shoulders, arms, and diaphragm (the
phrenic nerves). The ﬁrst thoracic nerve also con-
tributes to nerves in the arms. The remaining thoracic
nerves supply the trunk of the body. The lumbar and
sacral nerves supply the hips, pelvic cavity, and legs.
Notice that the lumbar and sacral nerves hang below
the end of the spinal cord (in order to reach their
proper openings to exit from the vertebral canal); this
is called the cauda equina, literally, the “horse’s tail.”
Some of the important peripheral nerves and their
destinations are listed in Table 8–3.
Each spinal nerve has two roots, which are neurons
entering or leaving the spinal cord (see Fig. 8–3). The
dorsal root is made of sensory neurons that carry
impulses into the spinal cord. The dorsal root gan-
glion is an enlarged part of the dorsal root that con-
tains the cell bodies of the sensory neurons. The term
ganglion means a group of cell bodies outside the
CNS. These cell bodies are within the vertebral canal
and are thereby protected from injury (see Box 8–2:
Shingles).
The ventral root is the motor root; it is made of
the axons of motor neurons carrying impulses from
the spinal cord to muscles or glands. The cell bodies
of these motor neurons, as mentioned previously, are
in the gray matter of the spinal cord. When the two
nerve roots merge, the spinal nerve thus formed is a
mixed nerve.
SPINAL CORD REFLEXES
When you hear the term reﬂex, you may think of an
action that “just happens,” and in part this is so. A
reﬂex is an involuntary response to a stimulus, that is,
172
The Nervous System
Table 8–2
THE NERVE IMPULSE
State or Event
Description
Polarization
(the neuron
is not carrying
an electrical
impulse)
Depolarization
(generated
by a stimulus)
Propagation of
the impulse
from point
of stimulus
Repolarization
(immediately
follows
depolarization)
• Neuron membrane has a ()
charge outside and a () charge
inside.
• Na ions are more abundant out-
side the cell.
• K ions and negative ions are
more abundant inside the cell.
Sodium and potassium pumps
maintain these ion concentrations.
• Neuron membrane becomes very
permeable to Na ions, which
rush into the cell.
• The neuron membrane then has a
() charge outside and a ()
charge inside.
• Depolarization of part of the
membrane makes adjacent mem-
brane very permeable to Na ions,
and subsequent depolarization,
which similarly affects the next
part of the membrane, and so on.
• The depolarization continues
along the membrane of the neu-
ron to the end of the axon.
• Neuron membrane becomes very
permeable to K ions, which rush
out of the cell. This restores the
() charge outside and ()
charge inside the membrane.
• The Na ions are returned outside
and the K ions are returned
inside by the sodium and potas-
sium pumps.
• The neuron is now able to
respond to another stimulus and
generate another impulse.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

173
Spinal cord
Phrenic nerve
Intercostal nerves
Radial nerve
Median nerve
Ulnar nerve
Cauda equina
Femoral nerve
Sciatic nerve
Cervical plexus
Brachial plexus
Lumbar plexus
Sacral plexus
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
S1
S2
S3 S4
S5
CO1
Figure 8–4.
The spinal cord
and spinal nerves. The distribu-
tion of spinal nerves is shown
only on the left side. The nerve
plexuses are labeled on the
right side. A nerve plexus is a
network of neurons from sev-
eral segments of the spinal cord
that combine to form nerves to
speciﬁc parts of the body. For
example, the radial and ulnar
nerves to the arm emerge from
the brachial plexus (see also
Table 8–3).
QUESTION: Where does the
spinal cord end? Why is this
important clinically?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

an automatic action stimulated by a speciﬁc change of
some kind. Spinal cord reﬂexes are those that do not
depend directly on the brain, although the brain may
inhibit or enhance them. We do not have to think
about these reﬂexes, which is very important, as you
will see.
Reﬂex Arc
A reﬂex arc is the pathway that nerve impulses travel
when a reﬂex is elicited, and there are ﬁve essential
parts:
1. Receptors—detect a change (the stimulus) and
generate impulses.
2. Sensory neurons—transmit impulses from recep-
tors to the CNS.
3. Central nervous system—contains one or more
synapses (interneurons may be part of the pathway).
4. Motor neurons—transmit impulses from the
CNS to the effector.
5. Effector—performs its characteristic action.
Let us now look at the reﬂex arc of a speciﬁc reﬂex,
the patellar (or knee-jerk) reﬂex, with which you are
174
The Nervous System
Table 8–3
MAJOR PERIPHERAL NERVES
Spinal Nerves
Nerve
That Contribute
Distribution
Phrenic
Radial
Median
Ulnar
Intercostal
Femoral
Sciatic
C3–C5
C5–C8, T1
C5–C8, T1
C8, T1
T2–T12
L2–L4
L4–S3
• Diaphragm
• Skin and muscles of posterior arm, forearm, and hand; thumb and ﬁrst 2 ﬁngers
• Skin and muscles of anterior arm, forearm, and hand
• Skin and muscles of medial arm, forearm, and hand; little ﬁnger and ring ﬁnger
• Intercostal muscles, abdominal muscles; skin of trunk
• Skin and muscles of anterior thigh, medial leg, and foot
• Skin and muscles of posterior thigh, leg and foot
BOX 8–2
SHINGLES
Shingles is caused by the same virus that causes
chickenpox: the herpes varicella-zoster virus.
Varicella is chickenpox, which many of us probably
had as children (there is now a vaccine). When a
person recovers from chickenpox, the virus may
survive in a dormant (inactive) state in the dorsal
root ganglia of some spinal nerves. For most peo-
ple, the immune system is able to prevent reactiva-
tion of the virus. With increasing age, however, the
immune system is not as effective, and the virus
may become active and cause zoster, or shingles.
The virus is present in sensory neurons, often
those of the trunk, but the damage caused by the
virus is seen in the skin over the affected nerve. The
raised, red lesions of shingles are often very painful
and follow the course of the nerve on the skin exter-
nal to it. Pain may continue even after the rash
heals; this is postherpetic neuralgia. Occasionally
the virus may affect a cranial nerve and cause facial
paralysis called Bell’s palsy (7th cranial) or extensive
facial lesions, or, rarely, blindness. Although not a
cure, some antiviral medications lessen the duration
of the illness. A vaccine is being developed for
adults. Though it may not completely prevent shin-
gles, it is expected to lessen the chance of posther-
petic neuralgia.
Box Figure 8–A
Lesions of shingles on skin of trunk. (From
Goldsmith, LA, Lazarus, GS, and Tharp, MD: Adult and Pediatric
Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Treatment. FA
Davis, Philadelphia, 1997, p 307, with permission.)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

probably familiar. In this reﬂex, a tap on the patellar
tendon just below the kneecap causes extension of the
lower leg. This is a stretch reﬂex, which means that a
muscle that is stretched will automatically contract.
Refer now to Fig. 8–5 as you read the following:
In the quadriceps femoris muscle are (1) stretch
receptors that detect the stretching produced by strik-
ing the patellar tendon. These receptors generate
impulses that are carried along (2) sensory neurons in
the femoral nerve to (3) the spinal cord. In the spinal
cord, the sensory neurons synapse with (4) motor neu-
rons (this is a two-neuron reﬂex). The motor neurons
in the femoral nerve carry impulses back to (5) the
quadriceps femoris, the effector, which contracts and
extends the lower leg.
The patellar reﬂex is one of many used clinically to
determine whether the nervous system is functioning
properly. If the patellar reﬂex were absent in a patient,
the problem could be in the thigh muscle, the femoral
nerve, or the spinal cord. Further testing would be
needed to determine the precise break in the reﬂex
arc. If the reﬂex is normal, however, that means that
all parts of the reﬂex arc are intact. So the testing of
reﬂexes may be a ﬁrst step in the clinical assessment of
neurologic damage.
You may be wondering why we have such reﬂexes,
these stretch reﬂexes. What is their importance in our
everyday lives? Imagine a person standing upright—is
the body perfectly still? No, it isn’t, because gravity
exerts a downward pull. However, if the body tilts to
the left, the right sides of the leg and trunk are
stretched, and these stretched muscles automatically
contract and pull the body upright again. This is the
purpose of stretch reﬂexes; they help keep us upright
without our having to think about doing so. If the
brain had to make a decision every time we swayed a
bit, all our concentration would be needed just to
remain standing. Since these are spinal cord reﬂexes,
the brain is not directly involved. The brain may
become aware that a reﬂex has taken place, but that
involves another set of neurons carrying impulses to
the brain.
Flexor reﬂexes (or withdrawal reﬂexes) are
another type of spinal cord reﬂex. The stimulus is
something painful and potentially harmful, and the
response is to pull away from it. If you inadvertently
touch a hot stove, you automatically pull your hand
away. Flexor reflexes are three-neuron reflexes,
because sensory neurons synapse with interneurons in
the spinal cord, which in turn synapse with motor
neurons. Again, however, the brain does not have to
make a decision to protect the body; the ﬂexor reﬂex
does that automatically (see Box 8–3: Spinal Cord
Injuries). The brain may know that the reﬂex has
taken place, and may even learn from the experience,
but that requires different neurons, not the reﬂex arc.
The Nervous System
175
Gray matter
Biceps
femoris
muscle
(relaxes)
(4) Motor neuron
(3) Synapse in
spinal cord
Ventral root
Stimulus
(1) Stretch receptor
(5) Quadriceps femoris muscle
(contracts)
Femoral nerve
Dorsal root
(2) Sensory neuron
Dorsal root ganglion
Figure 8–5.
Patellar reﬂex. The
reﬂex arc is shown. See text for
description.
QUESTION: Why is this reﬂex
called a stretch reﬂex?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

THE BRAIN
The brain consists of many parts that function as an
integrated whole. The major parts are the medulla,
pons, and midbrain (collectively called the brain
stem), the cerebellum, the hypothalamus, the thala-
mus, and the cerebrum. These parts are shown in Fig.
8–6. We will discuss each part separately, but keep in
mind that they are all interconnected and work
together.
VENTRICLES
The ventricles are four cavities within the brain: two
lateral ventricles, the third ventricle, and the fourth
ventricle (Fig. 8–7). Each ventricle contains a capillary
network called a choroid plexus, which forms cere-
brospinal ﬂuid (CSF) from blood plasma. Cere-
brospinal ﬂuid is the tissue ﬂuid of the central nervous
system; its circulation and functions will be discussed
in the section on meninges.
MEDULLA
The medulla extends from the spinal cord to the pons
and is anterior to the cerebellum. Its functions are
those we think of as vital (as in “vital signs”). The
medulla contains cardiac centers that regulate heart
rate, vasomotor centers that regulate the diameter of
blood vessels and, thereby, blood pressure, and respi-
ratory centers that regulate breathing. You can see
why a crushing injury to the occipital bone may be
rapidly fatal—we cannot survive without the medulla.
Also in the medulla are reﬂex centers for coughing,
sneezing, swallowing, and vomiting.
PONS
The pons bulges anteriorly from the upper part of the
medulla. Within the pons are two respiratory centers
that work with those in the medulla to produce a nor-
mal breathing rhythm. (The function of all the respi-
ratory centers is discussed in Chapter 15.) The many
other neurons in the pons (pons is from the Latin for
“bridge”) connect the medulla with other parts of the
brain.
MIDBRAIN
The midbrain extends from the pons to the hypothal-
amus and encloses the cerebral aqueduct, a tunnel
that connects the third and fourth ventricles. Several
176
The Nervous System
BOX 8–3
SPINAL CORD INJURIES
need to urinate or defecate. Nor will voluntary con-
trol of these reﬂexes be possible, because inhibiting
impulses from the brain can no longer reach the
lower segments of the spinal cord.
Potentially less serious injuries are those in which
the spinal cord is crushed rather than severed, and
treatment is aimed at preserving whatever function
remains. Minimizing inﬂammation and stimulating
the production of nerve growth factors are aspects
of such treatment.
Perhaps the most challenging research is the
attempt to stimulate severed spinal cords to regen-
erate. Partial success has been achieved in rats
and mice, with Schwann cells transplanted from
their peripheral nerves and nerve growth factors
produced by genetically engineered cells. The use
of stem cells has also been successful in rats. The
researchers caution, however, that it will take some
time before their procedures will be tested on
people.
Injuries to the spinal cord are most often caused by
auto accidents, falls, and gunshot wounds. The
most serious injury is transection, or severing, of the
spinal cord. If, for example, the spinal cord is sev-
ered at the level of the 8th thoracic segment, there
will be paralysis and loss of sensation below that
level. Another consequence is spinal shock, the at-
least-temporary loss of spinal cord reﬂexes. In this
example, the spinal cord reﬂexes of the lower trunk
and legs will not occur. The stretch reﬂexes and
ﬂexor reﬂexes of the legs will be at least temporar-
ily abolished, as will the urination and defecation
reﬂexes. Although these reﬂexes do not depend
directly on the brain, spinal cord neurons depend
on impulses from the brain to enhance their own
ability to generate impulses.
As spinal cord neurons below the injury recover
their ability to generate impulses, these reﬂexes,
such as the patellar reﬂex, often return. Urination
and defecation reﬂexes may also be reestablished,
but the person will not have an awareness of the
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

177
Frontal lobe
Corpus callosum
Parietal lobe
Occipital lobe
Midbrain
Cerebellum
Choroid plexus in
fourth ventricle
Spinal cord
Medulla
Pons
Temporal lobe
Pituitary gland
Hypothalamus
Optic nerve
Thalamus
Choroid plexus in
third ventricle
Basal
ganglia
Temporal
lobe
Longitudinal fissure
Cerebral cortex
Corpus callosum
Lateral ventricle
Thalamus
Third ventricle
Hypothalamus
Optic tracts
A
B
Hippocampus
Figure 8–6.
(A) Midsagittal section of the brain as seen from the left side. This medial
plane shows internal anatomy as well as the lobes of the cerebrum. (B) Frontal section of
the brain in anterior view.
QUESTION: Find the corpus callosum in parts A and B, and describe its shape. What is its
function?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

different kinds of reﬂexes are integrated in the mid-
brain, including visual and auditory reﬂexes. If you see
a wasp ﬂying toward you, you automatically duck or
twist away; this is a visual reﬂex, as is the coordinated
movement of the eyeballs. Turning your head (ear) to
a sound is an example of an auditory reﬂex. The mid-
brain is also concerned with what are called righting
reﬂexes, those that keep the head upright and main-
tain balance or equilibrium.
CEREBELLUM
The cerebellum is separated from the medulla and
pons by the fourth ventricle and is inferior to the
occipital lobes of the cerebrum. As you already know,
many of the functions of the cerebellum are concerned
with movement. These include coordination, regula-
tion of muscle tone, the appropriate trajectory and
endpoint of movements, and the maintenance of pos-
ture and equilibrium. Notice that these are all invol-
untary; that is, the cerebellum functions below the
level of conscious thought. This is important to permit
the conscious brain to work without being overbur-
dened. If you decide to pick up a pencil, for example,
the impulses for arm movement come from the cere-
brum. The cerebellum then modiﬁes these impulses so
that your arm and ﬁnger movements are coordinated,
and you don’t reach past the pencil.
The cerebellum seems also to be involved in certain
sensory functions. For example, if you close your eyes
and someone places a tennis ball in one hand and a
baseball in the other, could you tell which was which?
Certainly you could, by the “feel” of each: the texture
and the weight or heft. If you pick up a plastic con-
tainer of coffee (with a lid on it) could you tell if the
cup is full, half-full, or empty? Again, you certainly
could. Do you have to think about it? No. The cere-
bellum is, in part, responsible for this ability.
To regulate equilibrium, the cerebellum (and mid-
brain) uses information about gravity and movement
provided by receptors in the inner ears. These recep-
tors are discussed further in Chapter 9.
HYPOTHALAMUS
Located superior to the pituitary gland and inferior to
the thalamus, the hypothalamus is a small area of the
brain with many diverse functions:
178
The Nervous System
Lateral ventricles
Parietal lobe
Occipital lobe
Cerebral aqueduct
Fourth ventricle
Cerebellum
Central canal of spinal cord
Medulla
Pons
Temporal lobe
Third ventricle
Figure 8–7.
Ventricles of the brain as projected into the interior of the brain, which is
seen from the left side.
QUESTION: Describe the extent of each lateral ventricle.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

1. Production of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) and
oxytocin; these hormones are then stored in the
posterior pituitary gland. ADH enables the kidneys
to reabsorb water back into the blood and thus
helps maintain blood volume. Oxytocin causes con-
tractions of the uterus to bring about labor and
delivery.
2. Production of releasing hormones (also called
releasing factors) that stimulate the secretion of
hormones by the anterior pituitary gland. Because
these hormones are covered in Chapter 10, a single
example will be given here: The hypothalamus pro-
duces growth hormone releasing hormone
(GHRH), which stimulates the anterior pituitary
gland to secrete growth hormone (GH).
3. Regulation of body temperature by promoting
responses such as sweating in a warm environment
or shivering in a cold environment (see Chapter
17).
4. Regulation of food intake; the hypothalamus is
believed to respond to changes in blood nutrient
levels, to chemicals secreted by fat cells, and to hor-
mones secreted by the gastrointestinal tract. For
example, during a meal, after a certain duration of
digestion, the small intestine produces a hormone
that circulates to the hypothalamus and brings
about a sensation of satiety, or fullness, and we tend
to stop eating.
5. Integration of the functioning of the autonomic
nervous system, which in turn regulates the activity
of organs such as the heart, blood vessels, and
intestines. This will be discussed in more detail
later in this chapter.
6. Stimulation of visceral responses during emotional
situations. When we are angry, heart rate usually
increases. Most of us, when embarrassed, will blush,
which is vasodilation in the skin of the face. These
responses are brought about by the autonomic
nervous system when the hypothalamus perceives a
change in emotional state. The neurologic basis of
our emotions is not well understood, and the vis-
ceral responses to emotions are not something most
of us can control.
7. Regulation of body rhythms such as secretion of
hormones, sleep cycles, changes in mood, or men-
tal alertness. This is often referred to as our bio-
logical clock, the rhythms as circadian rhythms,
meaning “about a day.” If you have ever had to stay
awake for 24 hours, you know how disorienting it
can be, until the hypothalamic biological clock has
been reset.
THALAMUS
The thalamus is superior to the hypothalamus and
inferior to the cerebrum. The third ventricle is a nar-
row cavity that passes through both the thalamus and
hypothalamus. Many of the functions of the thalamus
are concerned with sensation. Sensory impulses to the
brain (except those for the sense of smell) follow neu-
ron pathways that ﬁrst enter the thalamus, which
groups the impulses before relaying them to the cere-
brum, where sensations are felt. For example, holding
a cup of hot coffee generates impulses for heat, touch
and texture, and the shape of the cup (muscle sense),
but we do not experience these as separate sensations.
The thalamus integrates the impulses from the cuta-
neous receptors and from the cerebellum, that is, puts
them together in a sort of electrochemical package, so
that the cerebrum feels the whole and is able to inter-
pret the sensation quickly.
Some sensations, especially unpleasant ones such as
pain, are believed to be felt by the thalamus. However,
the thalamus cannot localize the sensation; that is, it
does not know where the painful sensation is. The
sensory areas of the cerebrum are required for local-
ization and precise awareness.
The thalamus may also suppress unimportant
sensations. If you are reading an enjoyable book, you
may not notice someone coming into the room. By
temporarily blocking minor sensations, the thalamus
permits the cerebrum to concentrate on important
tasks.
Parts of the thalamus are also involved in alertness
and awareness (being awake and knowing we are), and
others contribute to memory. For these functions, as
for others, the thalamus works very closely with the
cerebrum.
CEREBRUM
The largest part of the human brain is the cerebrum,
which consists of two hemispheres separated by the
longitudinal ﬁssure. At the base of this deep groove is
the corpus callosum, a band of 200 million neurons
that connects the right and left hemispheres. Within
each hemisphere is a lateral ventricle.
The surface of the cerebrum is gray matter called
the cerebral cortex. Gray matter consists of cell bod-
ies of neurons, which carry out the many functions of
the cerebrum. Internal to the gray matter is white
matter, made of myelinated axons and dendrites that
connect the lobes of the cerebrum to one another and
to all other parts of the brain.
The Nervous System
179
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

In the human brain the cerebral cortex is folded
extensively. The folds are called convolutions or
gyri and the grooves between them are ﬁssures or
sulci (you can see the folding of the cortex in the
frontal section of the brain in Fig. 8–6). This fold-
ing permits the presence of millions more neurons in
the cerebral cortex. The cerebral cortex of an animal
such as a dog or cat does not have this extensive
folding. This difference enables us to read, speak,
do long division, write poetry and songs, and do
so many other “human” things that dogs and cats can-
not do.
The cerebral cortex is divided into lobes that have
the same names as the cranial bones external to them.
Therefore, each hemisphere has a frontal lobe, pari-
etal lobe, temporal lobe, and occipital lobe (Fig. 8–8).
These lobes have been mapped; that is, certain areas
are known to be associated with speciﬁc functions. We
will discuss the functions of the cerebrum according to
these mapped areas.
Frontal Lobes
Within the frontal lobes are the motor areas that
generate the impulses for voluntary movement. The
largest portions are for movement of the hands and
face, those areas with many muscles capable of very
ﬁne or precise movements. It is the large size of the
motor area devoted to them that gives these muscles
their precision. The left motor area controls move-
ment on the right side of the body, and the right
motor area controls the left side of the body. This is
why a patient who has had a cerebrovascular accident,
or stroke, in the right frontal lobe will have paralysis
of muscles on the left side (see Box 8–4: Cerebrovas-
cular Accidents).
Anterior to the motor areas are the premotor
areas, which are concerned with learned motor skills
that require a sequence of movements. Tying shoe-
laces, for example, seems almost automatic to us; we
forget having learned it. It is not a reﬂex, however;
180
The Nervous System
Frontal lobe
Premotor area
Motor area
General sensory area
Sensory association
                         area
Parietal lobe
Occipital lobe
Visual area
Auditory area
Temporal lobe
Auditory
association
area
Visual association
                      area
Motor speech area
Orbitofrontal
cortex
Figure 8–8.
Left cerebral hemisphere showing some of the functional areas that have
been mapped.
QUESTION: What sensations are felt in the general sensory area?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

rather the premotor cortex has learned the sequence
so well that we are able to repeat it without con-
sciously thinking about it.
The parts of the frontal lobes just behind the eyes
are the prefrontal or orbitofrontal cortex. This area
is concerned with things such as keeping emotional
responses appropriate to the situation, realizing that
there are standards of behavior (laws or rules of a
game or simple courtesy) and following them, and
anticipating and planning for the future. An example
may be helpful to put all this together: Someone with
damage to the prefrontal area might become enraged
if his pen ran out of ink during class, might throw the
pen at someone, and might not think that a pen will be
needed tomorrow and that it is time to go buy one. As
you can see, the prefrontal cortex is very important for
social behavior, and greatly contributes to what makes
us human.
Also in the frontal lobe, usually only the left lobe
for most right-handed people, is Broca’s motor
speech area, which controls the movements of the
mouth involved in speaking.
Parietal Lobes
The general sensory areas in the parietal lobes
receive impulses from receptors in the skin and feel
and interpret the cutaneous sensations. The left area is
for the right side of the body and vice versa. These
areas also receive impulses from stretch receptors in
muscles for conscious muscle sense. The largest por-
tions of these areas are for sensation in the hands and
face, those parts of the body with the most cutaneous
receptors and the most muscle receptors. The taste
areas, which overlap the parietal and temporal lobes,
receive impulses from taste buds on the tongue and
elsewhere in the oral cavity.
Temporal Lobes
The olfactory areas in the temporal lobes receive
impulses from receptors in the nasal cavities for the
sense of smell. The olfactory association area learns
the meaning of odors such as the smell of sour milk, or
ﬁre, or brownies baking in the oven, and enables the
thinking cerebrum to use that information effectively.
The Nervous System
181
BOX 8–4
CEREBROVASCULAR ACCIDENTS
they cause is very widespread or affects vital centers
in the medulla or pons.
For CVAs of the thrombus type, a clot-dissolving
drug may help reestablish blood ﬂow. To be effec-
tive, however, the drug must be administered
within 3 hours of symptom onset (see also Box
11–7).
Recovery from a CVA depends on its location
and the extent of damage, as well as other factors.
One of these is the redundancy of the brain.
Redundancy means repetition or exceeding what
is necessary; the cerebral cortex has many more
neurons than we actually use in daily activities.
The characteristic of plasticity means that these
neurons are available for use, especially in younger
people (less than 50 years of age). When a patient
recovers from a disabling stroke, what has often
happened is that the brain has established new
pathways, with previously little-used neurons now
carrying impulses “full time.” Such recovery is
highly individual and may take months. Yet another
important factor is that CVA patients be started on
rehabilitation therapy as soon as their condition
permits.
A cerebrovascular accident (CVA), or stroke, is
damage to a blood vessel in the brain, resulting in
lack of oxygen to that part of the brain. Possible
types of vessel damage are thrombosis or hemor-
rhage.
A thrombus is a blood clot, which most often is
a consequence of atherosclerosis, abnormal lipid
deposits in cerebral arteries. The rough surface
stimulates clot formation, which obstructs the
blood ﬂow to the part of the brain supplied by
the artery. The symptoms depend on the part of the
brain affected and may be gradual in onset if clot
formation is slow. Approximately 80% of CVAs are
of this type.
A hemorrhage, the result of arteriosclerosis or
aneurysm of a cerebral artery, allows blood out
into brain tissue, which destroys brain neurons by
putting excessive pressure on them as well as
depriving them of oxygen. Onset of symptoms in
this type of CVA is usually rapid.
If, for example, the CVA is in the left frontal lobe,
paralysis of the right side of the body will occur.
Speech may also be affected if the speech areas are
involved. Some CVAs are fatal because the damage
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The auditory areas, as their name suggests, receive
impulses from receptors in the inner ear for hearing.
The auditory association area is quite large. Part of it
is concerned with the meanings of words we hear, that
is, with speech. Other parts are for the interpretation
of sounds such as thunder during a storm, an ambu-
lance siren, or a baby crying. Without proper interpre-
tation, we would hear the sound but would not know
what it meant, and could not respond appropriately.
Also in the temporal and parietal lobes in the left
hemisphere (for most of us) are other speech areas
concerned with the thought that precedes speech.
Each of us can probably recall (and regret) times when
we have “spoken without thinking,” but in actuality
that is not possible. The thinking takes place very rap-
idly and is essential in order to be able to speak (see
Box 8–5: Aphasia).
Occipital Lobes
Impulses from the retinas of the eyes travel along the
optic nerves to the visual areas in the occipital lobes.
These areas “see.” The visual association areas inter-
pret what is seen, and enable the thinking cerebrum to
use the information. Imagine looking at a clock.
Seeing the clock is far different from being able to
interpret it. At one time we learned to interpret the
clock face and hands, and now we do not have to con-
sciously decide what time the clock is reading. We can
simply use that information, such as hurrying a bit so
as not to be late to class. Other parts of the occipital
lobes are concerned with spatial relationships; things
such as judging distance and seeing in three dimen-
sions, or the ability to read a map and relate it to the
physical world.
The cerebral cortex has the characteristic of neural
plasticity, the ability to adapt to changing needs, to
recruit different neurons for certain functions, as may
occur during childhood or recovery from a stroke.
Another example is the visual cortex of a person who
is born blind. The neurons in the occipital lobes that
would have been used for vision will often be used for
another function; some may become part of an audi-
tory area that is used to localize sounds and estimate
their distance. Those of us who can see may not rely
on hearing for localization; we simply look at where
we think the sound came from. A blind person cannot
do this, and may have an extensive mental catalogue of
sounds, meanings of sounds, distances of sounds, and
so on, some of these in the part of the cortex that nor-
mally is for vision.
The younger the person, the more plastic the brain.
The brains of children are extraordinarily adaptable.
As we get older, this ability diminishes, but is still
present.
Association Areas
As you can see in Fig. 8–8, many parts of the cerebral
cortex are not concerned with movement or a particu-
182
The Nervous System
BOX 8–5
APHASIA
Auditory aphasia is “word deafness,” caused
by damage to an interpretation area. The person
can still hear but cannot comprehend what the
words mean. Visual aphasia is “word blindness”;
the person can still see perfectly well, but can-
not make sense of written words (the person retains
the ability to understand spoken words). Imagine
how you would feel if wms qsbbcljw jmqr rfc
yzgjgrw rm pcyb. Frustrating isn’t it? You know
that those symbols are letters, but you cannot
“decode” them right away. Those “words”
were formed by shifting the alphabet two letters
(A  C, B  D, C  E, etc.), and would normally
be read as: “you suddenly lost the ability to read.”
That may give you a small idea of what word blind-
ness is like.
Our use of language sets us apart from other
animals and involves speech, reading, and writing.
Language is the use of symbols (words) to desig-
nate objects and to express ideas. Damage to
the speech areas or interpretation areas of the
cerebrum may impair one or more aspects of a per-
son’s ability to use language; this is called aphasia.
Aphasia may be a consequence of a cerebrovas-
cular accident, or of physical trauma to the skull
and brain such as a head injury sustained in an
automobile accident. If the motor speech (Broca’s)
area is damaged, the person is still able to under-
stand written and spoken words and knows what
he wants to say, but he cannot say it. Without coor-
dination and impulses from the motor speech area,
the muscles used for speech cannot contract to
form words properly.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

lar sensation. These may be called association areas
and perhaps are what truly make us individuals. It is
probably these areas that give each of us a personality,
a sense of humor, and the ability to reason and use
logic. Learning and memory are also functions of
these areas.
Although much has been learned about the forma-
tion of memories, the processes are still incompletely
understood and mostly beyond the scope of this book.
Brieﬂy, however, we can say that memories of things
such as people or books or what you did last summer
involve the hippocampus (from the Greek for
“seahorse,” because of its shape), part of the temporal
lobe on the ﬂoor of the lateral ventricle. The two hip-
pocampi seem to collect information from many areas
of the cerebral cortex. When you meet a friend, for
example, the memory emerges as a whole: “Here’s
Fred,” not in pieces. People whose hippocampi are
damaged cannot form new memories that last more
than a few seconds.
The right hippocampus is also believed to be
involved in spatial cognition (literally: “space think-
ing”). For example, if you are in school and a friend
asks you the shortest way to your home, you will prob-
ably quickly form a mental map. You can see how
much memory that involves (streets, landmarks, and
so on), but the hippocampus can take it a step further
and make your memories three-dimensional and men-
tally visible. You can see your way home. That is spa-
tial cognition.
It is believed that most, if not all, of what we have
experienced or learned is stored somewhere in the
brain. Sometimes a trigger may bring back memories;
a certain scent or a song could act as possible triggers.
Then we ﬁnd ourselves recalling something from the
past and wondering where it came from.
The loss of personality due to destruction of
brain neurons is perhaps most dramatically seen in
Alzheimer’s disease (see Box 8–6: Alzheimer’s Disease).
Basal Ganglia
The basal ganglia are paired masses of gray matter
within the white matter of the cerebral hemispheres
(see Fig. 8–6). Their functions are certain subcon-
scious aspects of voluntary movement, and they work
with the cerebellum. The basal ganglia help regulate
muscle tone, and they coordinate accessory move-
ments such as swinging the arms when walking or ges-
turing while speaking. The most common disorder of
the basal ganglia is Parkinson’s disease (see Box 8–7:
Parkinson’s Disease).
Corpus Callosum
As mentioned previously, the corpus callosum is a
band of nerve ﬁbers that connects the left and right
cerebral hemispheres. This enables each hemisphere
to know of the activity of the other. This is especially
important for people because for most of us, the left
hemisphere contains speech areas and the right hemi-
sphere does not. The corpus callosum, therefore, lets
The Nervous System
183
BOX 8–6
ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE
of another protein called beta-amyloid that are
damaging to neurons.
A defective gene has been found in some
patients who have late-onset Alzheimer’s disease,
the most common type. Yet another gene seems to
trigger increased synthesis of beta-amyloid. Some
research is focused on the interaction of these
genes and on inﬂammation as a contributing factor
to this type of brain damage.
It is likely that the treatment of Alzheimer’s dis-
ease will one day mean delaying its onset with a
variety of medications, each targeted at a different
aspect of this complex disease. Early diagnosis will
be very important, and this is yet another avenue of
research.
In the United States, Alzheimer’s disease, a pro-
gressive, incurable form of mental deterioration,
affects approximately 5 million people and is the
cause of 100,000 deaths each year. The ﬁrst symp-
toms, which usually begin after age 65, are mem-
ory lapses and slight personality changes. As the
disease progresses, there is total loss of memory,
reasoning ability, and personality, and those with
advanced disease are unable to perform even the
simplest tasks or self-care.
Structural changes in the brains of Alzheimer’s
patients may be seen at autopsy. Neuroﬁbrillary
tangles are abnormal ﬁbrous proteins found in cells
of the cerebral cortex in areas important for mem-
ory and reasoning. Also present are plaques made
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

the left hemisphere know what the right hemisphere is
thinking about, and the right hemisphere know what
the left hemisphere is thinking and talking about. A
brief example may be helpful. If you put your left hand
behind your back and someone places a pencil in your
hand (you are not looking at it) and asks you what it is,
would you be able to say? Yes, you would. You would
feel the shape and weight of the pencil, ﬁnd the point
and the eraser. The sensory impulses from your left
hand are interpreted as “pencil” by the general sensory
area in your right parietal lobe. Your right hemisphere
probably cannot speak, but its thoughts can be con-
veyed by way of the corpus callosum to the left hemi-
sphere, which does have speech areas. Your left
hemisphere can say that you are holding a pencil.
Other aspects of the “division of labor” of our cerebral
hemispheres are beyond the scope of this book, but it
is a fascinating subject that you may wish to explore
further.
MENINGES AND
CEREBROSPINAL FLUID
The connective tissue membranes that cover the brain
and spinal cord are called meninges; the three layers
are illustrated in Fig. 8–9. The thick outermost layer,
made of ﬁbrous connective tissue, is the dura mater
(Latin for “tough mother”), which lines the skull and
vertebral canal. The middle arachnoid membrane
(arachnids are spiders) is made of web-like strands of
connective tissue. The innermost pia mater (Latin for
“gentle mother”) is a very thin membrane on the sur-
face of the spinal cord and brain. Between the arach-
noid and the pia mater is the subarachnoid space,
which contains cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF), the tissue
ﬂuid of the central nervous system.
Recall the ventricles (cavities) of the brain: two lat-
eral ventricles, the third ventricle, and the fourth ven-
tricle. Each contains a choroid plexus, a capillary
network that forms cerebrospinal ﬂuid from blood
plasma. This is a continuous process, and the cere-
brospinal ﬂuid then circulates in and around the cen-
tral nervous system (Fig. 8–10).
From the lateral and third ventricles, cerebrospinal
ﬂuid ﬂows through the fourth ventricle, then to the
central canal of the spinal cord, and to the cranial and
spinal subarachnoid spaces. As more cerebrospinal
ﬂuid is formed, you might expect that some must be
reabsorbed, and that is just what happens. From the
cranial subarachnoid space, cerebrospinal ﬂuid is reab-
sorbed through arachnoid villi into the blood in
cranial venous sinuses (large veins within the
double-layered cranial dura mater). The cerebrospinal
ﬂuid becomes blood plasma again, and the rate of
reabsorption normally equals the rate of production.
Since cerebrospinal ﬂuid is tissue ﬂuid, one of its
functions is to bring nutrients to CNS neurons and to
remove waste products to the blood as the ﬂuid is
reabsorbed. The other function of cerebrospinal ﬂuid
is to act as a cushion for the central nervous system.
The brain and spinal cord are enclosed in ﬂuid-ﬁlled
membranes that absorb shock. You can, for example,
shake your head vigorously without harming your
brain. Naturally, this protection has limits; very sharp
or heavy blows to the skull will indeed cause damage
to the brain.
Examination of cerebrospinal ﬂuid may be used in
the diagnosis of certain diseases (see Box 8–8: Lumbar
Puncture).
184
The Nervous System
BOX 8–7
PARKINSON’S DISEASE
Parkinson’s disease is a disorder of the basal
ganglia whose cause is unknown, and though
there is a genetic component in some families, it
is probably not the only factor. The disease usu-
ally begins after the age of 60. Neurons in the
basal ganglia that produce the neurotransmitter
dopamine begin to degenerate and die, and the
deﬁciency of dopamine causes speciﬁc kinds
of muscular symptoms. Tremor, or involuntary
shaking, of the hands is probably the most com-
mon symptom. The accessory movements regu-
lated by the basal ganglia gradually diminish,
and the affected person walks slowly without
swinging the arms. A mask-like face is character-
istic of this disease, as the facial muscles become
rigid. Eventually all voluntary movements be-
come slower and much more difficult, and bal-
ance is seriously impaired.
Dopamine itself cannot be used to treat
Parkinson’s disease because it does not cross the
blood–brain barrier. A substance called L-dopa
does cross and can be converted to dopamine by
brain neurons. Unfortunately, L-dopa begins to
lose its therapeutic effectiveness within a few
years.
Other medications in use do not provide a
cure. Some researchers suggest that implants of
stem cells may offer the best hope of meaningful
therapy.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

185
Central canal
Pia mater
Arachnoid
membrane
Dura
mater
Gray matter
White matter
Spinal nerve roots
Dorsal root ganglion
Subarachnoid
space
Spinal nerve
Skin
Dura mater
Superior sagittal sinus
Cerebral cortex
Cerebrum
(white matter)
Arachnoid membrane
Subarachnoid space
Pia mater
A
B
Arachnoid villi
Skull
Figure 8–9.
Structure of the meninges. (A) Meninges of the spinal cord. (B) Frontal sec-
tion through the top of the skull showing the double-layered cranial dura mater and one
of the cranial venous sinuses.
QUESTION: Describe the structural difference between the spinal dura mater and the cra-
nial dura mater.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CRANIAL NERVES
The 12 pairs of cranial nerves emerge from the brain
stem or other parts of the brain—they are shown in
Fig. 8–11. The name cranial indicates their origin, and
many of them do carry impulses for functions involv-
ing the head. Some, however, have more far-reaching
destinations.
The impulses for the senses of smell, taste, sight,
hearing, and equilibrium are all carried by cranial
nerves to their respective sensory areas in the brain.
Some cranial nerves carry motor impulses to muscles
of the face and eyes or to the salivary glands. The
186
The Nervous System
Subarachnoid space
Cranial
meninges
Dura mater
Arachnoid
Fourth ventricle
Arachnoid villus
Choroid plexus of
fourth ventricle
Corpus
callosum
Cerebellum
Cerebral aqueduct
Pia mater
Cranial venous sinus
Cerebrum
Subarachnoid space
Central canal
Pons
Medulla
Spinal cord
Spinal meninges
Pia mater
Arachnoid
Dura mater
Subarachnoid space
Hypothalamus
Third ventricle
Choroid plexus of 
third ventricle
Choroid plexus of 
lateral ventricle
Lateral
ventricle
Figure 8–10.
Formation, circulation, and reabsorption of cerebrospinal ﬂuid. See text for
description.
QUESTION: In this pathway, where is the CSF reabsorbed, and into what?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

vagus nerves (vagus means “wanderer”) branch exten-
sively to the larynx, heart, stomach and intestines, and
bronchial tubes.
The functions of the cranial nerves are summarized
in Table 8–4.
THE AUTONOMIC
NERVOUS SYSTEM
The autonomic nervous system (ANS) is actually
part of the peripheral nervous system in that it consists
of motor portions of some cranial and spinal nerves.
Because its functioning is so specialized, however, the
autonomic nervous system is usually discussed as a
separate entity, as we will do here.
Making up the autonomic nervous system are vis-
ceral motor neurons to smooth muscle, cardiac mus-
cle, and glands. These are the visceral effectors;
muscle will either contract or relax, and glands will
either increase or decrease their secretions.
The ANS has two divisions: sympathetic and
parasympathetic. Often, they function in opposition
to each other, as you will see. The activity of both divi-
sions is integrated by the hypothalamus, which
ensures that the visceral effectors will respond appro-
priately to the situation.
AUTONOMIC PATHWAYS
An autonomic nerve pathway from the central nervous
system to a visceral effector consists of two motor
neurons that synapse in a ganglion outside the CNS
(Fig. 8–12). The ﬁrst neuron is called the pregan-
glionic neuron, from the CNS to the ganglion. The
second neuron is called the postganglionic neuron,
from the ganglion to the visceral effector. The ganglia
are actually the cell bodies of the postganglionic
neurons.
SYMPATHETIC DIVISION
Another name for the sympathetic division is thora-
columbar division, which tells us where the sympa-
thetic preganglionic neurons originate. Their cell
The Nervous System
187
BOX 8–8
LUMBAR PUNCTURE
Box Figure 8–B
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid from a patient with
meningitis. The bacteria are streptococci, found in pairs. The
large cells are WBCs. (500) (From Sacher, RA, and
McPherson, RA: Widmann’s Clinical Interpretation of
Laboratory Tests, ed. 11. FA Davis, Philadelphia, 2000, Plate
52, with permission.)
A lumbar puncture (spinal tap) is a diagnostic
procedure that involves the removal of cere-
brospinal ﬂuid to determine its pressure and con-
stituents. As the name tells us, the removal, using a
syringe, is made in the lumbar area. Because the
spinal cord ends between the 1st and 2nd lumbar
vertebrae, the needle is usually inserted between
the 4th and 5th lumbar vertebrae. The meningeal
sac containing cerebrospinal ﬂuid extends to the
end of the lumbar vertebrae, permitting access to
the cerebrospinal ﬂuid with little chance of damag-
ing the spinal cord.
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid is a circulating ﬂuid and has
a normal pressure of 70 to 200 mmH2O. An abnor-
mal pressure usually indicates an obstruction in cir-
culation, which may be caused by infection, a
tumor, or mechanical injury. Other diagnostic
tests would be needed to determine the precise
cause.
Perhaps the most common reason for a lumbar
puncture is suspected meningitis, which may be
caused by several kinds of bacteria. If the patient
does have meningitis, the cerebrospinal ﬂuid will be
cloudy rather than clear and will be examined for
the presence of bacteria and many white blood
cells. A few WBCs in CSF is normal, because WBCs
are found in all tissue ﬂuid.
Another abnormal constituent of cerebrospinal
ﬂuid is red blood cells. Their presence indicates
bleeding somewhere in the central nervous system.
There may be many causes, and again, further test-
ing would be necessary.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

188
The Nervous System
Optic
chiasma
Figure 
8–11.
Cranial
nerves and their distributions.
The brain is shown in an infe-
rior view. See Table 8–4 for
descriptions.
QUESTION:
Which cranial
nerves bring about secretion
of saliva? Which nerve brings
about gastric and intestinal
secretion?
bodies are in the thoracic segments and some of the
lumbar segments of the spinal cord. Their axons
extend to the sympathetic ganglia, most of which are
located in two chains just outside the spinal column
(see Fig. 8–12). Within the ganglia are the synapses
between preganglionic and postganglionic neurons;
the postganglionic axons then go to the visceral effec-
tors. One preganglionic neuron often synapses with
many postganglionic neurons to many effectors. This
anatomic arrangement has physiological importance:
The sympathetic division brings about widespread
responses in many organs.
The sympathetic division is dominant in stressful
situations, which include anger, fear, or anxiety, as
well as exercise. For our prehistoric ancestors, stress-
ful situations often involved the need for intense phys-
ical activity—the “ﬁght or ﬂight response.” Our
nervous systems haven’t changed very much in 50,000
years, and if you look at Table 8–5, you will see the
kinds of responses the sympathetic division stimulates.
The heart rate increases, vasodilation in skeletal mus-
cles supplies them with more oxygen, the bronchioles
dilate to take in more air, and the liver changes glyco-
gen to glucose to supply energy. At the same time,
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

digestive secretions decrease and peristalsis slows;
these are not important in a stress situation.
Vasoconstriction in the skin and viscera shunts blood
to more vital organs such as the heart, muscles, and
brain. All of these responses enabled our ancestors to
stay and ﬁght or to get away from potential danger.
Even though we may not always be in life-threatening
situations during stress (such as ﬁguring out our
income taxes), our bodies are prepared for just that.
PARASYMPATHETIC DIVISION
The other name for the parasympathetic division is
the craniosacral division. The cell bodies of parasym-
pathetic preganglionic neurons are in the brain stem
and the sacral segments of the spinal cord. Their axons
are in cranial nerve pairs 3, 7, 9, and 10 and in some
sacral nerves and extend to the parasympathetic gan-
glia. These ganglia are very close to or actually in the
visceral effector (see Fig. 8–12), and contain the post-
ganglionic cell bodies, with very short axons to the
cells of the effector.
In the parasympathetic division, one preganglionic
neuron synapses with just a few postganglionic neurons
to only one effector. With this anatomic arrangement,
very localized (one organ) responses are possible.
The parasympathetic division dominates in relaxed
(non-stress) situations to promote normal functioning
of several organ systems. Digestion will be efficient,
with increased secretions and peristalsis; defecation
and urination may occur; and the heart will beat at a
normal resting rate. Other functions of this division
are listed in Table 8–5.
Notice that when an organ receives both sympa-
thetic and parasympathetic impulses, the responses are
opposites. Such an arrangement makes maintaining an
appropriate level of activity quite simple, as in chang-
ing the heart rate to meet the needs of a situation.
Notice also that some visceral effectors receive only
sympathetic impulses. In such cases, the opposite
response is brought about by a decrease in sympathetic
impulses. Secretion by the sweat glands is an example.
NEUROTRANSMITTERS
Recall that neurotransmitters enable nerve impulses to
cross synapses. In autonomic pathways there are two
synapses: one between preganglionic and postgan-
glionic neurons, and the second between postgan-
glionic neurons and visceral effectors.
Acetylcholine is the transmitter released by all
preganglionic neurons, both sympathetic and para-
The Nervous System
189
Table 8–4
CRANIAL NERVES
Number and Name
Function(s)
I Olfactory
II Optic
III Oculomotor
IV Trochlear
V Trigeminal
VI Abducens
VII Facial
VIII Acoustic (vestibulocochlear)
IX Glossopharyngeal
X Vagus
XI Accessory
XII Hypoglossal
• Sense of smell
• Sense of sight
• Movement of the eyeball; constriction of pupil in bright light or for near vision
• Movement of eyeball
• Sensation in face, scalp, and teeth; contraction of chewing muscles
• Movement of the eyeball
• Sense of taste; contraction of facial muscles; secretion of saliva
• Sense of hearing; sense of equilibrium
• Sense of taste; sensory for cardiac, respiratory, and blood pressure reﬂexes;
contraction of pharynx; secretion of saliva
• Sensory in cardiac, respiratory, and blood pressure reﬂexes; sensory and motor
to larynx (speaking); decreases heart rate; contraction of alimentary tube
(peristalsis); increases digestive secretions
• Contraction of neck and shoulder muscles; motor to larynx (speaking)
• Movement of the tongue
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Sympathetic
Eye Ciliary ganglion
Parasympathetic
Salivary
glands
Pons
Otic
ganglion
Vagus nerve
Pterygopalatine
ganglion
Submandibular
ganglion
Midbrain
III
Medulla
VII
IX
Trachea
Preganglionic
neuron
Preganglionic neurons
Postganglionic
neuron
Postganglionic
neurons
Celiac ganglion
Adrenal gland
Chain of
sympathetic
ganglia
Inferior
mesenteric
ganglion
Kidney
Pancreas
Superior
mesenteric
ganglion
Large
intestine
Bronchioles
Heart
Stomach
Small
intestine
Colon
Rectum
Reproductive
organs
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
S2
S3
S4
X
Bladder
Figure 8–12.
The autonomic nervous system. The sympathetic division is shown on the
left, and the parasympathetic division is shown on the right (both divisions are bilateral).
QUESTION: Do both or just one division of the ANS supply the heart? What is the purpose
of this arrangement?
190
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

sympathetic; it is inactivated by cholinesterase in
postganglionic neurons. Parasympathetic postgan-
glionic neurons all release acetylcholine at the
synapses with their visceral effectors. Most sympa-
thetic postganglionic neurons release the transmitter
norepinephrine at the synapses with the effector cells.
Norepinephrine is inactivated by either catechol-O-
methyl transferase (COMT) or monoamine oxidase
(MAO), or it may be removed from the synapse by
reuptake.
AGING AND THE
NERVOUS SYSTEM
The aging brain does lose neurons, but this is only a
small percentage of the total and not the usual cause of
mental impairment in elderly people. (Far more com-
mon causes are depression, malnutrition, hypotension,
and the side effects of medications.) Some forgetful-
ness is to be expected, however, as is a decreased abil-
ity for rapid problem solving, but most memory
should remain intact. Voluntary movements become
slower, as do reﬂexes and reaction time. Think of driv-
ing a car, an ability most of us take for granted. For
elderly people, with their slower perceptions and reac-
tion times, greater consciousness of driving is necessary.
As the autonomic nervous system ages, dry eyes and
constipation may become problems. Transient hypo-
tension may be the result of decreased sympathetic
stimulation of vasoconstriction. In most cases, how-
ever, elderly people who are aware of these aspects of
aging will be able to work with their physicians or
nurses to adapt to them.
SUMMARY
The nervous system regulates many of our simplest
and our most complex activities. The impulses gener-
ated and carried by the nervous system are an example
of the chemical level of organization of the body.
These nerve impulses then regulate the functioning of
tissues, organs, and organ systems, which permits us to
perceive and respond to the world around us and the
changes within us. The detection of such changes is
the function of the sense organs, and they are the sub-
ject of our next chapter.
The Nervous System
191
Table 8–5
FUNCTIONS OF THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
Organ
Sympathetic Response
Parasympathetic Response
Heart (cardiac muscle)
Bronchioles (smooth muscle)
Iris (smooth muscle)
Salivary glands
Stomach and intestines (smooth muscle)
Stomach and intestines (glands)
Internal anal sphincter
Urinary bladder (smooth muscle)
Internal urethral sphincter
Liver
Pancreas
Sweat glands
Blood vessels in skin and viscera
(smooth muscle)
Blood vessels in skeletal muscle
(smooth muscle)
Adrenal glands
• Increase rate
• Dilate
• Pupil dilates
• Decrease secretion
• Decrease peristalsis
• Decrease secretion
• Contracts to prevent defecation
• Relaxes to prevent urination
• Contracts to prevent urination
• Changes glycogen to glucose
• Secretes glucagon
• Increase secretion
• Constrict
• Dilate
• Increase secretion of epineph-
rine and norepinephrine
• Decrease rate (to normal)
• Constrict (to normal)
• Pupil constricts (to normal)
• Increase secretion (to normal)
• Increase peristalsis for normal digestion
• Increase secretion for normal digestion
• Relaxes to permit defecation
• Contracts for normal urination
• Relaxes to permit urination
• None
• Secretes insulin and digestive enzymes
• None
• None
• None
• None
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

192
The Nervous System
STUDY OUTLINE
Functions of the Nervous System
1. Detect changes and feel sensations.
2. Initiate responses to changes.
3. Organize and store information.
Nervous System Divisions
1. Central nervous system (CNS)—brain and spinal
cord.
2. Peripheral nervous system (PNS)—cranial nerves
and spinal nerves.
Nerve Tissue—neurons (nerve ﬁbers) and
specialized cells (Schwann, neuroglia)
1. Neuron cell body contains the nucleus; cell bodies
are in the CNS or in the trunk and are protected by
bone.
2. Axon carries impulses away from the cell body;
dendrites carry impulses toward the cell body.
3. Schwann cells in PNS: Layers of cell membrane
form the myelin sheath to electrically insulate neu-
rons; nodes of Ranvier are spaces between adjacent
Schwann cells. Nuclei and cytoplasm of Schwann
cells form the neurolemma, which is essential for
regeneration of damaged axons or dendrites.
4. Oligodendrocytes in CNS form the myelin
sheaths; microglia phagocytize pathogens and
damaged cells; astrocytes contribute to the
blood–brain barrier (see Table 8–1).
5. Synapse—the space between the axon of one neu-
ron and the dendrites or cell body of the next neu-
ron. A neurotransmitter carries the impulse across
a synapse and is then destroyed by a chemical inac-
tivator. Synapses make impulse transmission one
way in the living person.
Types of Neurons—nerve ﬁbers
1. Sensory—carry impulses from receptors to the
CNS; may be somatic (from skin, skeletal muscles,
joints) or visceral (from internal organs).
2. Motor—carry impulses from the CNS to effectors;
may be somatic (to skeletal muscle) or visceral (to
smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, or glands). Visceral
motor neurons make up the autonomic nervous
system.
3. Interneurons—entirely within the CNS.
Nerves and Nerve Tracts
1. Sensory nerve—made only of sensory neurons.
2. Motor nerve—made only of motor neurons.
3. Mixed nerve—made of both sensory and motor
neurons.
4. Nerve tract—a nerve within the CNS; also called
white matter.
The Nerve Impulse—see Table 8–2
1. Polarization—neuron membrane has a () charge
outside and a () charge inside.
2. Depolarization—entry of Na ions and reversal of
charges on either side of the membrane.
3. Impulse transmission is rapid, often several meters
per second.
• Saltatory conduction—in a myelinated neuron
only the nodes of Ranvier depolarize; increases
speed of impulses.
The Spinal Cord
1. Functions: transmits impulses to and from the
brain, and integrates the spinal cord reﬂexes.
2. Location: within the vertebral canal; extends from
the foramen magnum to the disc between the 1st
and 2nd lumbar vertebrae.
3. Cross-section: internal H-shaped gray matter con-
tains cell bodies of motor neurons and interneu-
rons; external white matter is the myelinated axons
and dendrites of interneurons.
4. Ascending tracts carry sensory impulses to the
brain; descending tracts carry motor impulses away
from the brain.
5. Central canal contains cerebrospinal ﬂuid and is
continuous with the ventricles of the brain.
Spinal Nerves—see Table 8–3 for major
peripheral nerves
1. Eight cervical pairs to head, neck, shoulder, arm,
and diaphragm; 12 thoracic pairs to trunk; 5 lum-
bar pairs and 5 sacral pairs to hip, pelvic cavity, and
leg; 1 very small coccygeal pair.
2. Cauda equina—the lumbar and sacral nerves that
extend below the end of the spinal cord.
3. Each spinal nerve has two roots: dorsal or sensory
root; dorsal root ganglion contains cell bodies of
sensory neurons; ventral or motor root; the two
roots unite to form a mixed spinal nerve.
Spinal Cord Reﬂexes—do not depend directly
on the brain
1. A reﬂex is an involuntary response to a stimulus.
2. Reﬂex arc—the pathway of nerve impulses during a
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

reﬂex: (1) receptors, (2) sensory neurons, (3) CNS
with one or more synapses, (4) motor neurons,
(5) effector that responds.
3. Stretch reﬂex—a muscle that is stretched will con-
tract; these reﬂexes help keep us upright against
gravity. The patellar reﬂex is also used clinically to
assess neurologic functioning, as are many other
reﬂexes (Fig. 8–5).
4. Flexor reﬂex—a painful stimulus will cause with-
drawal of the body part; these reﬂexes are protec-
tive.
The Brain—many parts that function as an
integrated whole; see Figs. 8–6 and 8–8 for
locations
1. Ventricles—four cavities: two lateral, 3rd, 4th; each
contains a choroid plexus that forms cerebrospinal
ﬂuid (Figs. 8–6 and 8–7).
2. Medulla—regulates the vital functions of heart
rate, breathing, and blood pressure; regulates
reﬂexes of coughing, sneezing, swallowing, and
vomiting.
3. Pons—contains respiratory centers that work with
those in the medulla.
4. Midbrain—contains centers for visual reﬂexes,
auditory reflexes, and righting (equilibrium)
reﬂexes.
5. Cerebellum—regulates coordination of voluntary
movement, muscle tone, stopping movements, and
equilibrium; contributes to sensations involving
texture and weight.
6. Hypothalamus—produces antidiuretic hormone
(ADH), which increases water reabsorption by the
kidneys; produces oxytocin, which promotes uter-
ine contractions for labor and delivery; produces
releasing hormones that regulate the secretions of
the anterior pituitary gland; regulates body tem-
perature; regulates food intake; integrates the func-
tioning of the autonomic nervous system (ANS);
promotes visceral responses to emotional situa-
tions; acts as a biological clock that regulates body
rhythms.
7. Thalamus—groups sensory impulses as to body
part before relaying them to the cerebrum; aware-
ness of pain but inability to localize; suppresses
unimportant sensations to permit concentration;
contributes to alertness and awareness, and to
memory.
8. Cerebrum—two hemispheres connected by the
corpus callosum, which permits communication
between the hemispheres. The cerebral cortex is
the surface gray matter, which consists of cell bod-
ies of neurons and is folded extensively into convo-
lutions. The internal white matter consists of nerve
tracts that connect the lobes of the cerebrum to one
another and to other parts of the brain.
• Frontal lobes—motor areas initiate voluntary
movement; premotor area regulates sequences of
movements for learned skills; prefrontal area for
aspects of social behavior; Broca’s motor speech
area (left hemisphere) regulates the movements
involved in speech.
• Parietal lobes—general sensory area feels and
interprets the cutaneous senses and conscious
muscle sense; taste area extends into temporal
lobe, for sense of taste; speech areas (left hemi-
sphere) for thought before speech.
• Temporal lobes—auditory areas for hearing and
interpretation; olfactory areas for sense of smell
and interpretation; speech areas for thought
before speech.
• Occipital lobes—visual areas for vision; interpre-
tation areas for spatial relationships.
• Association areas—in all lobes, for abstract
thinking, reasoning, learning, memory, and
personality. The hippocampi are essential for
the formation of memories. Neural plasticity is
the ability of the brain to adapt to changing
needs.
• Basal ganglia—gray matter within the cerebral
hemispheres; regulate accessory movements and
muscle tone.
Meninges and Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) (see
Figs. 8–9 and 8–10)
1. Three meningeal layers made of connective tissue:
outer—dura mater; middle—arachnoid membrane;
inner—pia mater; all three enclose the brain and
spinal cord.
2. Subarachnoid space contains CSF, the tissue ﬂuid
of the CNS.
3. CSF is formed continuously in the ventricles
of the brain by choroid plexuses, from blood
plasma.
4. CSF circulates from the ventricles to the central
canal of the spinal cord and to the cranial and
spinal subarachnoid spaces.
5. CSF is reabsorbed from the cranial subarachnoid
space through arachnoid villi into the blood in the
cranial venous sinuses. The rate of reabsorption
equals the rate of production.
The Nervous System
193
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

6. As tissue ﬂuid, CSF brings nutrients to CNS neu-
rons and removes waste products. CSF also acts as
a shock absorber to cushion the CNS.
Cranial Nerves—12 pairs of nerves that
emerge from the brain (see Fig. 8–11)
1. Concerned with vision, hearing and equilibrium,
taste and smell, and many other functions.
2. See Table 8–4 for the functions of each pair.
The Autonomic Nervous System (ANS) (see
Fig. 8–12 and Table 8–5)
1. Has two divisions: sympathetic and parasympa-
thetic; their functioning is integrated by the hypo-
thalamus.
2. Consists of motor neurons to visceral effectors:
smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, and glands.
3. An ANS pathway consists of two neurons that
synapse in a ganglion:
• Preganglionic neurons—from the CNS to the
ganglia
• Postganglionic neurons—from the ganglia to the
effectors
• Most sympathetic ganglia are in two chains
just outside the vertebral column; parasympa-
thetic ganglia are very near or in the visceral
effectors.
4. Neurotransmitters: acetylcholine is released by
all preganglionic neurons and by parasympa-
thetic postganglionic neurons; the inactivator is
cholinesterase. Norepinephrine is released by most
sympathetic postganglionic neurons; the inactiva-
tor is COMT or MAO.
5. Sympathetic division—dominates during stress sit-
uations; responses prepare the body to meet physi-
cal demands.
6. Parasympathetic division—dominates in relaxed
situations to permit normal functioning.
194
The Nervous System
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Name the divisions of the nervous system and state
the parts of each. (p. 166)
2. State the function of the following parts of nerve
tissue: (pp. 166–167)
a. Axon
b. Dendrites
c. Myelin sheath
d. Neurolemma
e. Microglia
f. Astrocytes
3. Explain the difference between: (pp. 170–171)
a. Sensory neurons and motor neurons
b. Interneurons and nerve tracts
4. Describe an electrical nerve impulse in terms of
charges on either side of the neuron membrane.
Describe how a nerve impulse crosses a synapse.
(pp. 168–169, 171)
5. With respect to the spinal cord: (p. 172)
a. Describe its location
b. State what gray matter and white matter are
made of
c. State the function of the dorsal root, ventral
root, and dorsal root ganglion
6. State the names and number of pairs of spinal
nerves. State the part of the body supplied by
the phrenic nerves, radial nerves, and sciatic nerves.
(pp. 172, 174)
7. Deﬁne reﬂex, and name the ﬁve parts of a reﬂex
arc. (pp. 172, 174)
8. Deﬁne stretch reﬂexes, and explain their practical
importance. Deﬁne ﬂexor reﬂexes, and explain
their practical importance. (p. 175)
9. Name the part of the brain concerned with each of
the following: (pp. 176–179)
a. Regulates body temperature
b. Regulates heart rate
c. Suppresses unimportant sensations
d. Regulates respiration (two parts)
e. Regulates food intake
f. Regulates coordination of voluntary movement
g. Regulates secretions of the anterior pituitary
gland
h. Regulates coughing and sneezing
i. Regulates muscle tone
j. Regulates visual and auditory reﬂexes
k. Regulates blood pressure
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

10. Name the part of the cerebrum concerned with
each of the following: (pp. 179–183)
a. Feels the cutaneous sensations
b. Contains the auditory areas
c. Contains the visual areas
d. Connects the cerebral hemispheres
e. Regulates accessory movements
f. Contains the olfactory areas
g. Initiates voluntary movement
h. Contains the speech areas (for most people)
11. Name the three layers of the meninges, beginning
with the outermost. (p. 184)
12. State all the locations of cerebrospinal ﬂuid. What
is CSF made from? Into what is CSF reabsorbed?
State the functions of CSF. (p. 184)
13. State a function of each of the following cranial
nerves: (p. 189)
a. Glossopharyngeal
b. Olfactory
c. Trigeminal
d. Facial
e. Vagus (three functions)
14. Explain how the sympathetic division of the ANS
helps the body adapt to a stress situation; give
three speciﬁc examples. (pp. 188–189)
15. Explain how the parasympathetic division of the
ANS promotes normal body functioning; give
three speciﬁc examples. (pp. 189, 191)
The Nervous System
195
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
1. Your friend Fred was telling a story, with eloquent
gestures, while making a salad. He missed the
tomato with the knife, cut his hand badly, and
needed quite a few stitches. A local anesthetic was
used. How might a local anesthetic stop nerve
impulses? (Remember that a nerve impulse is very
simple.) What part of Fred’s brain got him into
trouble?
2. Some pesticides kill insects by interfering with
cholinesterase. We have cholinesterase too, and
may be adversely affected. What would be the
symptoms of such pesticide poisoning?
3. We cannot live without a central nervous system.
Describe all the ways in which the central nervous
system is protected.
4. Older drivers are sometimes said to have “lost their
reﬂexes.” Is this really true? Explain.
5. Look at Question Figure 8–A. Starting at the top
of column A, read the words down as fast as you
can. For column B, start at the top and name the
colors as fast as you can. Did you have any trouble?
Now column C: Start at the top and name the col-
ors—do not read the words—as fast as you can.
Was there any difference? Explain why.
Question Figure 8–A
A
B
C
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

196
CHAPTER 9
Chapter Outline
Sensory Pathway
Characteristics of Sensations
Cutaneous Senses
Referred Pain
Muscle Sense
Sense of Taste
Sense of Smell
Hunger and Thirst
The Eye
Eyelids and the Lacrimal Apparatus
Eyeball
Layers of the eyeball
Cavities of the eyeball
Physiology of Vision
The Ear
Outer Ear
Middle Ear
Inner Ear
Cochlea
Utricle and saccule
Semicircular canals
Arterial Receptors
Aging and the Senses
BOX 9–1
CATARACTS
BOX 9–2
GLAUCOMA
BOX 9–3
ERRORS OF REFRACTION
BOX 9–4
NIGHT BLINDNESS AND COLOR BLINDNESS
BOX 9–5
DEAFNESS
BOX 9–6
MOTION SICKNESS
Student Objectives
• Explain the general purpose of sensations.
• Name the parts of a sensory pathway, and state the
function of each.
• Describe the characteristics of sensations.
• Name the cutaneous senses, and explain their
purpose.
• Explain referred pain and its importance.
• Explain the importance of muscle sense.
• Describe the pathways for the senses of taste and
smell, and explain how these senses are inter-
related.
• Name the parts of the eye and their functions.
• Describe the physiology of vision.
• Name the parts of the ear and their functions.
• Describe the physiology of hearing.
• Describe the physiology of equilibrium.
• Explain the importance of the arterial presso-
receptors and chemoreceptors.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Senses
197
New Terminology
Adaptation (A-dap-TAY-shun)
After-image (AFF-ter-im-ije)
Aqueous humor (AY-kwee-us HYOO-mer)
Cochlea (KOK-lee-ah)
Cones (KOHNES)
Conjunctiva (KON-junk-TIGH-vah)
Contrast (KON-trast)
Cornea (KOR-nee-ah)
Eustachian tube (yoo-STAY-shee-un TOOB)
Iris (EYE-ris)
Lacrimal glands (LAK-ri-muhl)
Olfactory receptors (ohl-FAK-toh-ree)
Organ of Corti (KOR-tee)
Projection (proh-JEK-shun)
Referred pain (ree-FURRD PAYNE)
Retina (RET-i-nah)
Rhodopsin (roh-DOP-sin)
Rods (RAHDS)
Sclera (SKLER-ah)
Semicircular canals (SEM-ee-SIR-kyoo-lur)
Tympanic membrane (tim-PAN-ik)
Vitreous humor (VIT-ree-us HYOO-mer)
Related Clinical Terminology
Age-related macular degeneration (MAK-yoo-lar
de-gen-er-AY-shun)
Amblyopia (am-blee-OH-pee-uh)
Astigmatism (uh-STIG-mah-TIZM)
Cataract (KAT-uh-rakt)
Color blindness (KUHL-or BLIND-ness)
Conjunctivitis (kon-JUNK-ti-VIGH-tis)
Deafness (DEFF-ness)
Detached retina (dee-TACHD)
Glaucoma (glaw-KOH-mah)
Hyperopia (HIGH-per-OH-pee-ah)
Motion sickness (MOH-shun)
Myopia (my-OH-pee-ah)
Night blindness (NITE BLIND-ness)
Otitis media (oh-TIGH-tis MEE-dee-ah)
Phantom pain (FAN-tum)
Presbyopia (PREZ-bee-OH-pee-ah)
Strabismus (strah-BIZ-miss)
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Our senses constantly provide us with information
about our surroundings: We see, hear, and touch. The
senses of taste and smell enable us to enjoy the ﬂavor
of our food or warn us that food has spoiled and may
be dangerous to eat. Our sense of equilibrium keeps us
upright. We also get information from our senses
about what is happening inside the body. The pain of
a headache, for example, prompts us to do something
about it, such as take aspirin. In general, this is the
purpose of sensations: to enable the body to respond
appropriately to ever-changing situations and main-
tain homeostasis.
SENSORY PATHWAY
The impulses involved in sensations follow very pre-
cise pathways, which all have the following parts:
1. Receptors—detect changes (stimuli) and generate
impulses. Receptors are usually very speciﬁc with
respect to the kinds of changes they respond to.
Those in the retina detect light rays, those in the
nasal cavities detect vapors, and so on. Once a spe-
ciﬁc stimulus has affected receptors, however, they
all respond in the same way by generating electri-
cal nerve impulses.
2. Sensory neurons—transmit impulses from recep-
tors to the central nervous system. These sensory
neurons are found in both spinal nerves and cranial
nerves, but each carries impulses from only one
type of receptor.
3. Sensory tracts—white matter in the spinal cord or
brain that transmits the impulses to a speciﬁc part
of the brain.
4. Sensory areas—most are in the cerebral cortex.
These areas feel and interpret the sensations.
Learning to interpret sensations begins in infancy,
without our awareness of it, and continues through-
out life.
CHARACTERISTICS OF SENSATIONS
Certain characteristics of sensations will help you
understand how the sensory areas work with informa-
tion from the receptors.
1. Projection—the sensation seems to come from the
area where the receptors were stimulated. If you
touch this book, the sensation of touch seems to be
in your hand but is actually being felt by your cere-
bral cortex. That it is indeed the brain that feels
sensations is demonstrated by patients who feel
phantom pain after amputation of a limb. After
loss of a hand, for example, the person may still feel
that the hand is really there. Why does this hap-
pen? The receptors in the hand are no longer pres-
ent, but the severed nerve endings continue to
generate impulses. These impulses arrive in the
parietal lobe area for the hand, and the brain does
what it has always done and creates the projection,
the feeling that the hand is still there. For most
amputees, phantom pain diminishes as the severed
nerves heal, but the person often experiences a
phantom “presence” of the missing part. This may
be helpful when learning to use an artiﬁcial limb.
2. Intensity—some sensations are felt more distinctly
and to a greater degree than are others. A weak
stimulus such as dim light will affect a small num-
ber of receptors, but a stronger stimulus, such as
bright sunlight, will stimulate many more recep-
tors. When more receptors are stimulated, more
impulses will arrive in the sensory area of the brain.
The brain “counts” the impulses and projects a
more intense sensation.
3. Contrast—the effect of a previous or simultaneous
sensation on a current sensation, which may then
be exaggerated or diminished. Again, this is a func-
tion of the brain, which constantly compares sensa-
tions. If, on a very hot day, you jump into a
swimming pool, the water may feel quite cold at
ﬁrst. The brain compares the new sensation to the
previous one, and since there is a signiﬁcant differ-
ence between the two, the water will seem colder
than it actually is.
4. Adaptation—becoming unaware of a continuing
stimulus. Receptors detect changes, but if the stim-
ulus continues it may not be much of a change, and
the receptors will generate fewer impulses. The
water in the swimming pool that seemed cold at
ﬁrst seems to “warm up” after a few minutes. The
water has not changed temperature, and the recep-
tors for cold have no changes to detect, therefore
they generate fewer impulses. The sensation of
cold lessens, and we interpret or feel that as
increasing warmth. For another example, look at
your left wrist (or perhaps the right one). Many of
us wear a watch and are probably unaware of its
198
The Senses
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

presence on the arm most of the time. The cuta-
neous receptors for touch or pressure adapt very
quickly to a continuing stimulus, and if there is no
change, there is nothing for the receptors to detect.
5. After-image—the sensation remains in the con-
sciousness even after the stimulus has stopped. A
familiar example is the bright after-image seen after
watching a ﬂashbulb go off. The very bright light
strongly stimulates receptors in the retina, which
generate many impulses that are perceived as an
intense sensation that lasts longer than the actual
stimulus.
CUTANEOUS SENSES
The dermis of the skin and the subcutaneous tissue
contain receptors for the sensations of touch, pressure,
heat, cold, and pain. The receptors for pain, heat, and
cold are free nerve endings, which also respond to
any intense stimulus. Intense pressure, for example,
may be felt as pain. The receptors for touch and pres-
sure are encapsulated nerve endings, meaning that
there is a cellular structure around the nerve ending
(Fig. 9–1).
The cutaneous senses provide us with informa-
tion about the external environment and also about
the skin itself. Much of the information about the
environment is not of great importance and is
processed at a subconscious level (suppressed by the
thalamus), though we can choose to be aware of it. For
example, could you distinguish a cotton T-shirt from
denim jeans by touch alone? Probably, but you might
not realize that you can do that until you try it by, say,
sorting laundry in the dark. If you were walking bare-
foot, could you tell if you were walking on a carpet, a
The Senses
199
Free nerve
endings
(temperature
receptor)
Merkel disc
(touch receptor)
Ruffini corpuscle
(pressure receptor)
Meissner corpuscle
(touch receptor)
Pacinian corpuscle
(pressure receptor)
Subcutaneous
tissue
Dermis
Epidermis
Free nerve endings
(pain receptor)
Figure 9–1.
Cutaneous receptors in a section of the skin. Free nerve endings and encap-
sulated nerve endings are shown.
QUESTION: In which layers are most of the cutaneous receptors located?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

wood ﬂoor, concrete, or beach sand? Yes, you could.
But are we usually aware of the sensation from the
soles of our feet? If all is going well, probably not.
Some people with diabetes develop diabetic neuropa-
thy, damage to nerves that impairs sensation, and they
may say that a wood ﬂoor feels like walking on cotton
balls or that the buttons of a shirt feel too large or too
small. They are aware of such odd sensations simply
because the feelings are odd. For most of us, the touch
of the wood ﬂoor is not brought to awareness because
it is what the brain expects from past experience,
but if the ﬂoor has splinters or if the beach sand is hot,
we are certainly aware. This is information we can
bring to our conscious minds if necessary, but usually
do not.
As for the skin itself, if you have ever had poison ivy
or chickenpox, you may remember the itching sensa-
tion of the rash. An itch is actually a mild pain sensa-
tion, which may become real pain if not scratched.
Why does scratching help relieve some itches, besides
by removing an external irritant? One proposed
mechanism is that scratching is a bit more painful than
the itch, and the impulses it generates can distract the
brain from the impulses from the itch. Scratching will
not help relieve the itch of poison ivy, chickenpox, or
a mosquito bite, however, because the irritating chem-
icals are in the skin, not on it. In such cases, scratch-
ing may do more damage and worsen inﬂammation at
the site.
The sensory areas for the skin are in the parietal
lobes. You may recall from Chapter 5 that the sensi-
tivity of an area of skin is determined by the number
of receptors present. The number of receptors corre-
sponds to the size of the sensory area in the cerebral
cortex. The largest parts of this sensory cortex are for
the parts of the skin with the most receptors, that is,
the hands and face.
As mentioned previously, sensory areas are not
merely passive recipients of impulses. Consider the
sensation of wetness. It is a distinct sensation, but
there are no receptors for “wet” in the skin. Where
does the sensation come from? Where all sensation
comes from: the brain. The parietal lobes have learned
to associate the simultaneous reception of temperature
and pressure impulses with “wet.” You can demon-
strate this for yourself by putting on a plastic glove
and dunking your ﬁngers in a cup of water. Your ﬁn-
gers will feel wet, though they are perfectly dry inside
the glove. Wetness is a learned sensation, created by
the brain.
REFERRED PAIN
Free nerve endings are also found in internal organs.
The smooth muscle of the small intestine, for exam-
ple, has free nerve endings that are stimulated by
excessive stretching or contraction; the resulting pain
is called visceral pain. Sometimes pain that originates
in an internal organ may be felt in a cutaneous area;
this is called referred pain. The pain of a heart attack
(myocardial infarction) may be felt in the left arm and
shoulder, or the pain of gallstones may be felt in the
right shoulder.
This referred pain is actually a creation of the
brain. Within the spinal cord are sensory tracts
that are shared by cutaneous impulses and visceral
impulses. Cutaneous impulses are much more fre-
quent, and the brain correctly projects the sensation to
the skin. When the impulses come from an organ such
as the heart, however, the brain may still project the
sensation to the “usual” cutaneous area. The brain
projects sensation based on past experience, and cuta-
neous pain is far more common than visceral pain.
Knowledge of referred pain, as in the examples men-
tioned earlier, may often be helpful in diagnosis.
MUSCLE SENSE
Muscle sense (also called proprioception or kines-
thetic sense) was discussed in Chapter 7 and will be
reviewed only brieﬂy here. Stretch receptors (also
called proprioceptors or muscle spindles) detect
stretching of muscles and generate impulses, which
enable the brain to create a mental picture to know
where the muscles are and how they are positioned.
Conscious muscle sense is felt by the parietal lobes.
Unconscious muscle sense is used by the cerebellum
to coordinate voluntary movements. We do not have
to see our muscles to be sure that they are performing
their intended actions. Muscle sense also contributes
to our ability to distinguish the shape of objects.
SENSE OF TASTE
The receptors for taste are found in taste buds, most
of which are in papillae on the tongue (Fig. 9–2).
These chemoreceptors detect chemicals in solution
in the mouth. The chemicals are foods and the solvent
is saliva (if the mouth is very dry, taste is very
200
The Senses
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

201
Figure 9–2.
Structures concerned with the senses of smell and taste, shown in a mid-
sagittal section of the head.
QUESTION: If we sniff something pungent, why can we often taste it as well? (Follow the
inhaled air.)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

indistinct). There are ﬁve (perhaps more) general
types of taste receptors: sweet, sour, salty, bitter, and
savory. Savory (also called umami or glutamate) is a
taste like grilled meat. We experience many more dif-
ferent tastes, however, because foods are often com-
plex chemicals that stimulate different combinations
of receptors, and the sense of smell also contributes to
our perception of food.
Some taste preferences have been found to be
genetic. People with more than the average number of
taste buds ﬁnd broccoli very bitter, whereas people
with fewer taste buds may like the taste.
The impulses from taste buds are transmitted by
the facial and glossopharyngeal (7th and 9th cranial)
nerves to the taste areas in the parietal-temporal cor-
tex. The sense of taste is important because it makes
eating enjoyable. Some medications may interfere
with the sense of taste, and this sense becomes less
acute as we get older. These may be contributing fac-
tors to poor nutrition in certain patients and in the
elderly.
SENSE OF SMELL
The receptors for smell (olfaction) are chemorecep-
tors that detect vaporized chemicals that have been
sniffed into the upper nasal cavities (see Fig. 9–2). Just
as there are speciﬁc taste receptors, there are also
speciﬁc scent receptors, and research indicates that
humans have several hundred different receptors.
When stimulated by vapor molecules, olfactory re-
ceptors generate impulses carried by the olfactory
nerves (1st cranial) through the ethmoid bone to the
olfactory bulbs. The pathway for these impulses ends
in the olfactory areas of the temporal lobes. Vapors
may stimulate many combinations of receptors, and it
has been estimated that the human brain is capable of
distinguishing among 10,000 different scents.
That may seem impressive, but the human sense of
smell is very poorly developed compared to those
of other animals. Dogs, for example, have a sense of
smell about 2000 times more acute than that of peo-
ple. (It has been said that most people live in a world
of sights, whereas dogs live in a world of smells.) As
mentioned earlier, however, much of what we call taste
is actually the smell of food. If you have a cold and
your nasal cavities are stuffed up, food just doesn’t
taste as good as it usually does. Adaptation occurs rel-
atively quickly with odors. Pleasant scents may be
sharply distinct at ﬁrst but rapidly seem to dissipate or
fade, and even unpleasant scents may fade with long
exposure.
HUNGER AND THIRST
Hunger and thirst may be called visceral sensations,
in that they are triggered by internal changes. Hunger
is a sensation that seems to be far more complex than
was ﬁrst thought, but thirst seems to be somewhat
simpler. The receptors for both senses are specialized
cells in the hypothalamus. Receptors for hunger are
believed to detect changes in blood nutrient levels, the
blood levels of hormones from the stomach and small
intestine, and a hormone released by adipose tissue; all
of these chemical signals are collected by the hypo-
thalamus. The receptors for thirst detect changes in
the body water content, which is actually the water-to-
salt proportion.
Naturally we do not feel these sensations in the
hypothalamus: They are projected. Hunger is pro-
jected to the stomach, which contracts. Thirst is pro-
jected to the mouth and pharynx, and less saliva is
produced.
If not satisﬁed by eating, the sensation of hunger
gradually diminishes, that is, adaptation occurs. The
reason is that after blood nutrient levels decrease, they
become stable as fat in adipose tissue is used for
energy. With little or no digestive activity in the gas-
trointestinal tract, secretion of hormones diminishes.
With no sharp ﬂuctuations of the chemical signals, the
receptors in the hypothalamus have few changes to
detect, and hunger becomes much less intense.
In contrast, the sensation of thirst, if not satisﬁed by
drinking, continues to worsen. There is no adaptation.
As body water is lost, the amount keeps decreasing
and does not stabilize. Therefore, there are constant
changes for the receptors to detect, and prolonged
thirst may be painful.
THE EYE
The eye contains the receptors for vision and a
refracting system that focuses light rays on the recep-
tors in the retina. We will begin our discussion, how-
ever, with the accessory structures of the eye, then
later return to the eye itself and the physiology of
vision.
202
The Senses
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

EYELIDS AND THE
LACRIMAL APPARATUS
The eyelids contain skeletal muscle that enables the
eyelids to close and cover the front of the eyeball.
Eyelashes along the border of each eyelid help keep
dust out of the eyes. The eyelids are lined with a thin
membrane called the conjunctiva, which is also
folded over the white of the eye and merges with the
corneal epithelium. Inﬂammation of this membrane,
called conjunctivitis, may be caused by allergies or by
certain bacteria or viruses, and makes the eyes red,
itchy, and watery.
Tears are produced by the lacrimal glands,
located at the upper, outer corner of the eyeball,
within the orbit (Fig. 9–3). Secretion of tears occurs
constantly, but is increased by the presence of irri-
tating chemicals (onion vapors, for example) or dust,
and in certain emotional situations (sad or happy).
Small ducts take tears to the anterior of the eyeball,
and blinking spreads the tears and washes the surface
of the eye. Tears are mostly water, with about 1%
sodium chloride, similar to other body ﬂuids. Tears
also contain lysozyme, an enzyme that inhibits the
growth of most bacteria on the wet, warm surface
of the eye. At the medial corner of the eyelids are
two small openings into the superior and inferior
lacrimal canals. These ducts take tears to the lacrimal
sac (in the lacrimal bone), which leads to the
nasolacrimal duct, which empties tears into the
nasal cavity. This is why crying often makes the nose
run.
EYEBALL
Most of the eyeball is within and protected by the
orbit, formed by the lacrimal, maxilla, zygomatic,
frontal, sphenoid, and ethmoid bones. The six extrin-
sic muscles of the eye (Fig. 9–4) are attached to this
bony socket and to the surface of the eyeball. There
are four rectus (straight) muscles that move the eyeball
up and down or side to side; the name tells you which
direction. The medial rectus muscle, for example,
pulls the eyeball medially, as if to look at the nose. The
two oblique (slanted) muscles rotate the eye. The cra-
nial nerves that innervate these muscles are the oculo-
motor, trochlear, and abducens (3rd, 4th, and 6th
cranial nerves, respectively). The very rapid and com-
plex coordination of these muscles in both eyes is, for-
tunately, not something we have to think about. The
convergence of both eyes on an object is very impor-
tant to ensure a single image (that is, to prevent dou-
ble vision) and to give us depth perception and a
three-dimensional world.
The Senses
203
Lacrimal ducts
Lacrimal gland
Conjunctiva
Lacrimal canals
Lacrimal sac
Nasolacrimal duct
Nasal cavity
Figure 9–3.
Lacrimal appa-
ratus shown in an anterior
view of the right eye.
QUESTION: Where do tears
usually end up?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Layers of the Eyeball
In its wall, the eyeball has three layers: the outer
sclera, middle choroid layer, and inner retina (Fig.
9–5). The sclera is the thickest layer and is made of
ﬁbrous connective tissue that is visible as the white of
the eye. The most anterior portion is the cornea,
which differs from the rest of the sclera in that it is
transparent. The cornea has no capillaries, covers the
iris and pupil inside the eye, and is the ﬁrst part of the
eye that refracts, or bends, light rays.
The choroid layer contains blood vessels and a
dark blue pigment (derived from melanin) that
absorbs light within the eyeball and thereby prevents
glare (just as does the black interior of a camera). The
anterior portion of the choroid is modiﬁed into more
specialized structures: the ciliary body and the iris.
The ciliary body (muscle) is a circular muscle that
surrounds the edge of the lens and is connected to the
lens by suspensory ligaments. The lens is made of a
transparent, elastic protein, and, like the cornea, has
no capillaries (see Box 9–1: Cataracts). The shape of
the lens is changed by the ciliary muscle, which
enables the eye to focus light from objects at varying
distances from the eye.
Just in front of the lens is the circular iris, the col-
ored part of the eye; its pigment is a form of melanin.
What we call “eye color” is the color of the iris and is
a genetic characteristic, just as skin color is. Two sets
of smooth muscle ﬁbers in the iris change the diame-
ter of the pupil, the central opening. Contraction of
the radial ﬁbers dilates the pupil; this is a sympathetic
response. Contraction of the circular ﬁbers constricts
the pupil; this is a parasympathetic response (oculo-
motor nerves). Pupillary constriction is a reﬂex that
protects the retina from intense light or that permits
more acute near vision, as when reading.
The retina lines the posterior two-thirds of the
eyeball and contains the visual receptors, the rods and
cones (Fig. 9–6). Rods detect only the presence of
light, whereas cones detect colors, which, as you may
know from physics, are the different wavelengths of
visible light. Rods are proportionally more abundant
toward the periphery, or edge, of the retina. Our best
vision in dim light or at night, for which we depend
on the rods, is at the sides of our visual ﬁelds. Cones
are most abundant in the center of the retina, espe-
cially an area called the macula lutea directly behind
the center of the lens on what is called the visual axis.
The fovea, which contains only cones, is a small
depression in the macula and is the area for best color
vision.
An important cause of vision loss for people over
65 years of age is age-related macular degeneration
204
The Senses
Eyelid
Eyelashes
Cornea
Eyeball
Inferior rectus muscle
Superior rectus muscle
Optic nerve
Lateral rectus muscle
Inferior oblique muscle
Levator palpebrae
superioris muscle
Figure 9–4.
Extrinsic mus-
cles of the eye. Lateral view of
left eye (the medial rectus
and superior oblique are not
shown).
QUESTION: Contraction of
the inferior rectus muscle will
have what effect on the eye-
ball?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

(AMD), that is, loss of central vision, and some cases
seem to have a genetic component. In the dry form of
AMD, small fatty deposits impair circulation to the
macula, and cells die from lack of oxygen. In the wet
form of AMD, abnormal blood vessels begin leaking
into the retina, and cells in the macula die from the
damaging effects of blood outside its vessels. The
macula, the center of the visual ﬁeld, is the part of
The Senses
205
Lens
Cornea
Conjunctiva
Pupil
Inferior rectus muscle 
Canal of Schlemm
Suspensory ligament
Iris
Anterior cavity
Sclera
Vitreous humor in
posterior cavity
Choroid
Retina
Optic nerve
Optic disc
Retinal artery and vein
Fovea in macula lutea
Ciliary body (muscle)
Corneal
epithelium
Figure 9–5.
Internal anatomy of the eyeball.
QUESTION: What is the function of the iris?
BOX 9–1 CATARACTS
and blurry vision throughout the visual ﬁeld is
the result. Small cataracts may be destroyed
by laser surgery. Artiﬁcial lenses are available, and
may be surgically implanted to replace an exten-
sively cloudy lens. The artificial lens is not
adjustable, however, and the person may require
glasses or contact lenses for vision at certain
distances.
The lens of the eye is normally transparent but may
become opaque; this cloudiness or opacity is called
a cataract. Cataract formation is most common
among elderly people. With age, the proteins of the
lens break down and lose their transparency. Long-
term exposure to ultraviolet light (sunlight) seems to
be a contributing factor, as is smoking.
The cloudy lens does not refract light properly,
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

the retina we use most: for reading, for driving, for
recognizing people, and for any kind of close work.
People of all ages should be aware of this condition
and that smoking and exposure to ultraviolet rays are
risk factors.
When light strikes the retina, the rods and cones
generate impulses. These impulses are carried by gan-
glion neurons, which all converge at the optic disc
(see Figs. 9–5 and 9–6) and pass through the wall of
the eyeball as the optic nerve. There are no rods or
cones in the optic disc, so this part of the retina is
sometimes called the “blind spot.” We are not aware
of a blind spot in our ﬁeld of vision, however, in part
because the eyes are constantly moving, and in part
because the brain “ﬁlls in” the blank spot to create a
“complete” picture.
206
The Senses
Sclera
Choroid
Pigment cells
Bipolar
neurons
Ganglion
neurons
Light waves
Cone
Rod
Optic nerve
Optic nerve
fibers
Figure 9–6.
Microscopic structure of the retina in the area of the optic disc. See text for
description.
QUESTION: Which type of neuron forms the optic nerve? Which cells are the photo-
receptors?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Cavities of the Eyeball
There are two cavities within the eye: the posterior
cavity and the anterior cavity. The larger, posterior
cavity is found between the lens and retina and con-
tains vitreous humor (or vitreous body). This semi-
solid substance keeps the retina in place. If the eyeball
is punctured and vitreous humor is lost, the retina may
fall away from the choroid; this is one possible cause
of a detached retina.
The anterior cavity is found between the back of
the cornea and the front of the lens, and contains
aqueous humor, the tissue ﬂuid of the eyeball.
Aqueous humor is formed by capillaries in the ciliary
body, ﬂows anteriorly through the pupil, and is reab-
sorbed by the canal of Schlemm (small veins also
called the scleral venous sinus) at the junction of the
iris and cornea. Because aqueous humor is tissue ﬂuid,
you would expect it to have a nourishing function, and
it does. Recall that the lens and cornea have no capil-
laries; they are nourished by the continuous ﬂow of
aqueous humor (see Box 9–2: Glaucoma).
PHYSIOLOGY OF VISION
For us to see, light rays must be focused on the retina,
and the resulting nerve impulses must be trans-
mitted to the visual areas of the cerebral cortex in the
brain.
Refraction of light rays is the deﬂection or bend-
ing of a ray of light as it passes through one object and
into another object of greater or lesser density. The
refraction of light within the eye takes place in the fol-
lowing pathway of structures: the cornea, aqueous
humor, lens, and vitreous humor. The lens is the only
adjustable part of the refraction system. When looking
at distant objects, the ciliary muscle is relaxed and the
lens is elongated and thin. When looking at near
objects, the ciliary muscle contracts to form a smaller
circle, the elastic lens recoils and bulges in the middle,
and has greater refractive power (see Box 9–3: Errors
of Refraction).
When light rays strike the retina, they stimulate
chemical reactions in the rods and cones. In rods, the
chemical rhodopsin breaks down to form scotopsin
and retinal (a derivative of vitamin A). This chem-
ical reaction generates an electrical impulse, and
rhodopsin is then resynthesized in a slower reaction.
Adaptation to darkness, such as going outside at night,
takes a little while because being in a well-lit area has
broken down most of the rhodopsin in the rods, and
resynthesis of rhodopsin is slow. The opposite situa-
tion, perhaps being suddenly awakened by a bright
light, can seem almost painful. What happens is this:
In darkness the rods have resynthesized a full supply of
rhodopsin, and the sudden bright light breaks down
all the rhodopsin at the same time. The barrage of
The Senses
207
BOX 9–2
GLAUCOMA
cannot easily integrate with the normal image of
the other eye. When both eyes are affected, the
person may not become aware of the gradual loss
of peripheral vision, because close work such as
reading does not require the edges of the visual
ﬁelds.
Glaucoma may often be controlled with medica-
tions that constrict the pupil and ﬂatten the iris,
thus opening up access to the canal of Schlemm. If
these or other medications are not effective, laser
surgery may be used to create a larger drainage
canal.
Anyone over the age of 40 should have a test for
glaucoma; anyone with a family history of glau-
coma should have this test annually, as should those
with diabetes or high blood pressure. If diagnosed
early, glaucoma is treatable, and blindness can usu-
ally be prevented.
The presence of aqueous humor in the anterior cav-
ity of the eye creates a pressure called intraocular
pressure. An increase in this pressure is an impor-
tant risk factor for glaucoma, which is now deﬁned
as a group of disorders that damage the optic nerve
and cause loss of vision. Other risk factors include
high blood pressure and diabetes. In the most
common form of glaucoma, aqueous humor is not
reabsorbed properly into the canal of Schlemm.
Increased pressure in the anterior cavity is transmit-
ted to the lens, the vitreous humor, and the retina
and optic nerve. As pressure on the retina increases,
halos may be seen around bright lights, and periph-
eral vision is lost. Frequently, however, there are no
symptoms. A person with glaucoma may not notice
the shrinking visual ﬁeld in one eye before vision
loss is far advanced. This happens because the brain
will suppress a faulty image from one eye that it
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

208
BOX 9–3
ERRORS OF REFRACTION
Normal visual acuity is referred to as 20/20; that is,
the eye should and does clearly see an object 20
feet away. Nearsightedness (myopia) means
that the eye sees near objects well but not distant
ones. If an eye has 20/80 vision, this means that
what the normal eye can see at 80 feet, the near-
sighted eye can see only if the object is brought to
20 feet away. The nearsighted eye focuses images
from distant objects in front of the retina, because
the eyeball is too long or the lens too thick. These
structural characteristics of the eye are hereditary.
Correction requires a concave lens to spread out
light rays before they strike the eye.
Farsightedness (hyperopia) means that the
eye sees distant objects well. Such an eye may have
an acuity of 20/10, that is, it sees at 20 feet what the
normal eye can see only at 10 feet. The farsighted
eye focuses light from near objects “behind” the
retina, because the eyeball is too short or the lens
too thin. Correction requires a convex lens to con-
verge light rays before they strike the eye.
As we get older, most of us will become more far-
sighted (presbyopia). As the aging lens loses its
elasticity, it is not as able to recoil and thicken for near
vision, and glasses for reading are often necessary.
Astigmatism is another error of refraction,
caused by an irregular curvature of the cornea or
lens that scatters light rays and blurs the image on
the retina. Correction requires a lens ground specif-
ically for the curvature of the individual eye.
Normal eye
Nearsighted
Farsighted
Astigmatic
Corrected
Corrected
Box Figure 9–A
Errors of refraction compared to normal eye. Corrective lenses are shown for near-
sightedness and farsightedness.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

impulses generated is very intense, and the brain may
interpret any intense sensation as pain. A few minutes
later the bright light seems ﬁne because the rods are
recycling their rhodopsin slowly, and it is not breaking
down all at once.
Chemical reactions in the cones, also involving
retinal, are brought about by different wavelengths of
light. It is believed that there are three types of cones:
red-absorbing, blue-absorbing, and green-absorbing
cones. Each type absorbs wavelengths over about a
third of the visible light spectrum, so red cones,
for example, absorb light of the red, orange, and
yellow wavelengths. The chemical reactions in cones
also generate electrical impulses (see Box 9–4: Night
Blindness and Color Blindness).
The impulses from the rods and cones are trans-
mitted to ganglion neurons (see Fig. 9–6); these con-
verge at the optic disc and become the optic nerve,
which passes posteriorly through the wall of the eye-
ball. Ganglion neurons also seem to have a photo-
receptor chemical (called melanopsin) that may
contribute to the daily resetting of our biological
clocks.
The optic nerves from both eyes come together at
the optic chiasma (or chiasm), just in front of the
pituitary gland (see Fig. 8–11). Here, the medial ﬁbers
of each optic nerve cross to the other side. This cross-
ing permits each visual area to receive impulses from
both eyes, which is important for binocular vision.
The visual areas are in the occipital lobes of the
cerebral cortex. Although each eye transmits a slightly
different picture (look straight ahead and close one
eye at a time to see the difference between the two pic-
tures), the visual areas put them together, or integrate
them, to make a single image that has depth and three
dimensions. This is called binocular vision. The
visual areas also right the image, because the image on
the retina is upside down. The image on ﬁlm in a cam-
era is also upside down, but we don’t even realize that
because we look at the pictures right side up. The
brain just as automatically ensures that we see our
world right side up.
Also for near vision, the pupils constrict to block
out peripheral light rays that would otherwise blur the
image, and the eyes converge even further to keep the
images on the corresponding parts of both retinas.
The Senses
209
BOX 9–4
NIGHT BLINDNESS AND COLOR BLINDNESS
color blindness on his X chromosome has no gene
at all for color vision on his Y chromosome and will
be color blind.
Night blindness, the inability to see well in dim
light or at night, is usually caused by a deﬁciency of
vitamin A, although some night blindness may
occur with aging. Vitamin A is necessary for the syn-
thesis of rhodopsin in the rods. Without sufficient
vitamin A, there is not enough rhodopsin present to
respond to low levels of light.
Color blindness is a genetic disorder in which
one of the three sets of cones is lacking or non-
functional. Total color blindness, the inability to see
any colors at all, is very rare. The most common
form is red-green color blindness, which is the
inability to distinguish between these colors. If
either the red cones or green cones are nonfunc-
tional, the person will still see most colors, but will
not have the contrast that the non-working set of
cones would provide. So red and green shades will
look somewhat similar, without the deﬁnite differ-
ence most of us see. This is a sex-linked trait; the
recessive gene is on the X chromosome. A woman
with one gene for color blindness and a gene for
normal color vision on her other X chromosome will
not be color blind but may pass the gene for color
blindness to her children. A man with a gene for
Box Figure 9–B
Example of color patterns used to
detect color blindness.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The importance of pupil constriction can be demon-
strated by looking at this page through a pinhole in a
piece of paper. You will be able to read with the page
much closer to your eye because the paper blocks out
light from the sides.
The importance of convergence can be demon-
strated by looking at your ﬁnger placed on the tip of
your nose. You can feel your eyes move medially
(“cross”) in maximum convergence. If the eyes don’t
converge, the result is double vision; the brain cannot
make the very different images into one, and settles
for two. This is temporary, however, because the brain
does not like seeing double and will eventually sup-
press one image.
You have probably heard of the condition called
“lazy eye” (the formal name is strabismus), in which
a person’s eyes (the visual axis of each) cannot be
directed at precisely the same point. True convergence
is not possible and, if untreated, the brain simply will
not use the lazy eye image. That eye may stop focus-
ing and become functionally blind because the brain is
ignoring the nerve impulses from it. Such loss of
vision is called amblyopia. Correction of a lazy eye
may involve eye exercises (to make the lazy eye
straighten out), a patch over the good eye (to make the
lazy eye straighten out and take over), or surgery to
correct an imbalance of the extrinsic muscles. You can
show yourself the beneﬁts of converging eyes the next
time you are a passenger in a car (not the driver). As
the car is moving, close one eye. Does the oncoming
landscape seem to ﬂatten out, lose dimension? This is
loss of depth perception and some of the three dimen-
sionality that our brains provide.
THE EAR
The ear consists of three areas: the outer ear, the mid-
dle ear, and the inner ear (Fig. 9–7). The ear contains
the receptors for two senses: hearing and equilib-
rium. These receptors are all found in the inner ear.
OUTER EAR
The outer ear consists of the auricle and the ear
canal. The auricle, or pinna, is made of cartilage cov-
ered with skin. For animals such as dogs, whose ears
are movable, the auricle may act as a funnel for sound
waves. For people, however, the ﬂat and stationary
auricle is not important. Hearing would not be nega-
tively affected without it, although those of us who
wear glasses would have our vision impaired without
our auricles. The ear canal is lined with skin that con-
tains ceruminous glands. It may also be called the
external auditory meatus, and is a tunnel into the
temporal bone, curving slightly forward and down.
MIDDLE EAR
The middle ear is an air-ﬁlled cavity in the temporal
bone. The eardrum, or tympanic membrane, is
stretched across the end of the ear canal and vibrates
when sound waves strike it. These vibrations are
transmitted to the three auditory bones: the malleus,
incus, and stapes (see Fig. 9–7). The stapes then
transmits vibrations to the ﬂuid-ﬁlled inner ear at the
oval window.
The eustachian tube (auditory tube) extends from
the middle ear to the nasopharynx and permits air to
enter or leave the middle ear cavity. The air pressure
in the middle ear must be the same as the external
atmospheric pressure in order for the eardrum to
vibrate properly. You may have noticed your ears
“popping” when in an airplane or when driving to a
higher or lower altitude. Swallowing or yawning cre-
ates the “pop” by opening the eustachian tubes and
equalizing the air pressures.
The eustachian tubes of children are short and
nearly horizontal and may permit bacteria to spread
from the pharynx to the middle ear. This is why otitis
media may be a complication of a strep throat.
INNER EAR
Within the temporal bone, the inner ear is a cavity
called the bony labyrinth (a labyrinth is a series of
interconnecting paths or tunnels, somewhat like a
maze but without dead ends; see Fig. 9–7), which is
lined with membrane called the membranous
labyrinth. Perilymph is the ﬂuid found between bone
and membrane, and endolymph is the ﬂuid within the
membranous structures of the inner ear. These struc-
tures are the cochlea, concerned with hearing, and the
utricle, saccule, and semicircular canals, all concerned
with equilibrium (Fig. 9–8).
Cochlea
The cochlea is shaped like a snail shell with two-and-
a-half structural turns. Internally, the cochlea is parti-
tioned into three ﬂuid-ﬁlled canals. The medial canal
210
The Senses
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

211
Auricle
Malleus
Incus
Stapes
Vestibular branch
Semicircular canals
Temporal bone
External auditory meatus
Cochlear branch
Cochlea
Eustachian tube
Tympanic
 membrane
Vestibule
Acoustic or
8th
cranial nerve
B
A
Semicircular
canals
Cochlea
Malleus
Stapes
Incus
Eardrum
Mastoid
sinus
C
Figure 9–7.
(A) Outer, middle, and inner ear structures as shown in a frontal section
through the right temporal bone. (B) Section of temporal bone with the auditory bones.
(C) Section of temporal bone showing bony labyrinth of inner ear. The colors on the bone
are artiﬁcial. (Photographs by Dan Kaufman.)
QUESTION: What structure is ﬁrst to vibrate when sound waves enter the ear canal? What
is second?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

is the cochlear duct, the ﬂoor of which is the basilar
membrane that supports the receptors for hearing in
the organ of Corti (spiral organ). The receptors are
called hair cells (their projections are not “hair,” of
course, but rather are specialized microvilli called
stereocilia), which contain endings of the cochlear
branch of the 8th cranial nerve. Overhanging the hair
cells is the tectorial membrane (Fig. 9–9).
Very simply, the process of hearing involves the
transmission of vibrations and the generation of nerve
impulses. When sound waves enter the ear canal,
vibrations are transmitted by the following sequence
of structures: eardrum, malleus, incus, stapes, oval
window of the inner ear, and perilymph and
endolymph within the cochlea. Imagine the vibrations
in the ﬂuids as ripples or waves. The basilar mem-
brane ripples and pushes the hair cells of the organ of
Corti against the tectorial membrane. When the hair
cells bend, they generate impulses that are carried by
the 8th cranial nerve to the brain. As you may recall,
the auditory areas are in the temporal lobes of the
cerebral cortex. It is here that sounds are heard and
interpreted (see Box 9–5: Deafness).
The auditory areas also enable us to determine
from which direction a sound is coming. Simply
stated, the auditory areas count and compare the num-
ber of impulses coming from each inner ear. For
example, if more impulses arrive from the left cochlea
than from the right one, the sound will be projected to
the left. If the source of a sound is directly above your
head, the sound may seem to come from all directions,
because each auditory area is receiving approximately
the same number of impulses and cannot project the
sensation to one side or the other.
The ﬁnal structure in the hearing pathway is the
round window (see Fig. 9–8). The membrane-covered
212
The Senses
Semicircular canals
Endolymph
Crista
Saccule
Vestibular nerve
Cochlear nerve
Vestibulocochlear
nerve
Scala tympani 
Cochlear duct
Scala vestibuli
Cochlea
Round window
Oval window
Utricle
Ampulla
Figure 9–8.
Inner ear structures. The arrows show the transmission of vibrations during
hearing.
QUESTION: What is the function of the round window?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Senses
213
Cochlear duct filled with endolymph
Vestibular membrane
Vestibular canal (from the oval window)
Supporting cells
Hair cells
Basilar membrane
Tympanic canal
(to the round window)
Semicircular canals
Oval window
Round window
Cochlea
Nerve fibers of
8th cranial nerve
Tectorial membrane
A
B
Figure 9–9.
Organ of Corti. (A) Inner ear structures. (B) Magniﬁcation of organ of Corti
within the cochlea.
QUESTION: What do the canals and cochlear duct contain (air or ﬂuid)? What are the
receptors for hearing?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

round window, just below the oval window, is impor-
tant to relieve pressure. When the stapes pushes in the
ﬂuid at the oval window, the round window bulges
out, which prevents damage to the hair cells.
Utricle and Saccule
The utricle and saccule are membranous sacs in an
area called the vestibule, between the cochlea and
semicircular canals. Within the utricle and saccule are
hair cells embedded in a gelatinous membrane with
tiny crystals of calcium carbonate called otoliths.
Gravity pulls on the otoliths and bends the hair cells
as the position of the head changes (Fig. 9–10). The
impulses generated by these hair cells are carried by
the vestibular portion of the 8th cranial nerve to the
cerebellum, the midbrain, and the temporal lobes of
the cerebrum.
The cerebellum and midbrain use this information
to maintain equilibrium at a subconscious level. We
can, of course, be aware of the position of the head,
and it is the cerebrum that provides awareness.
214
The Senses
BOX 9–5
DEAFNESS
measles). Deterioration of the hair cells in the
cochlea is a natural consequence of aging, and the
acuity of hearing diminishes as we get older. For
example, it may be more difficult for an elderly per-
son to distinguish conversation from background
noise. Chronic exposure to loud noise accelerates
degeneration of the hair cells and onset of this type
of deafness. Listening to music by way of earphones
is also believed to increase the risk of this type of
damage.
Central deafness—damage to the auditory areas
in the temporal lobes. This type of deafness is rare
but may be caused by a brain tumor, meningitis, or
a cerebrovascular accident in the temporal lobe.
Deafness is the inability to hear properly; the types
are classiﬁed according to the part of the hearing
process that is not functioning normally:
Conduction deafness—impairment of one of the
structures that transmits vibrations. Examples of this
type are a punctured eardrum, arthritis of the audi-
tory bones, or a middle ear infection in which ﬂuid
ﬁlls the middle ear cavity.
Nerve deafness—impairment of the 8th cranial
nerve or the receptors for hearing in the cochlea.
The 8th cranial nerve may be damaged by some
antibiotics used to treat bacterial infections. Nerve
deafness is a rare complication of some viral infec-
tions such as mumps or congenital rubella (German
Central deafness
Nerve deafness
Conduction deafness
Box Figure 9–C
Types of deafness.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Semicircular Canals
The three semicircular canals are ﬂuid-ﬁlled mem-
branous ovals oriented in three different planes. At the
base of each is an enlarged portion called the ampulla
(see Fig. 9–8), which contains hair cells (the crista) that
are affected by movement. As the body moves for-
ward, for example, the hair cells are bent backward
at ﬁrst and then straighten (see Fig. 9–10). The bend-
ing of the hair cells generates impulses carried by the
vestibular branch of the 8th cranial nerve to the
cerebellum, midbrain, and temporal lobes of the cere-
brum. These impulses are interpreted as starting or
stopping, and accelerating or decelerating, or chang-
ing direction, and this information is used to maintain
equilibrium while we are moving (see Box 9–6: Motion
Sickness).
In summary then, the utricle and saccule provide
information about the position of the body at rest,
while the semicircular canals provide information
about the body in motion. Of course, there is some
overlap, and the brain puts all the information together
to create a single sense of body position.
The Senses
215
Utricle
Saccule
Otoliths
Hair cells
Gravity
Head tilted
8th cranial
nerve
Head upright
Ampulla
Crista
Ampulla
Hair
cells
8th cranial
nerve
1.
At rest
2.
Starting
3.
Moving
4.
Stopping
5.
At rest
A
B
Figure 9–10.
Physiology of
equilibrium. (A) Utricle and
saccule. (B) Semicircular canals.
See text for description.
QUESTION: In part A, what
causes the hair cells to bend? In
part B, what causes the hair
cells to sway?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

ARTERIAL RECEPTORS
The aorta and carotid arteries contain receptors that
detect changes in the blood. The aortic arch, which
receives blood pumped by the left ventricle of the
heart, curves over the top of the heart. The left and
right carotid arteries are branches of the aortic arch
that take blood through the neck on the way to the
brain. In each of these vessels are pressoreceptors and
chemoreceptors (see Fig. 12–7).
Pressoreceptors in the carotid sinuses and aortic
sinus detect changes in blood pressure. Chemorecep-
tors in the carotid bodies and the aortic body detect
changes in the oxygen and carbon dioxide content and
the pH of blood. The impulses generated by these
receptors do not give rise to sensations that we feel but
rather are information used to make any necessary
changes in respiration or circulation. We will return
to this in later chapters, so one example will suffice
for now.
If the blood level of oxygen decreases signiﬁcantly,
this change (hypoxia) is detected by carotid and aortic
chemoreceptors. The sensory impulses are carried by
the glossopharyngeal (9th cranial) and vagus (10th
cranial) nerves to the medulla. Centers in the medulla
may then increase the respiratory rate and the heart
rate to obtain and circulate more oxygen. These are
the respiratory and cardiac reﬂexes that were men-
tioned in Chapter 8 as functions of the glossopha-
ryngeal and vagus nerves. The importance of these
reﬂexes is readily apparent: to maintain normal blood
levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide and to maintain
normal blood pressure.
AGING AND THE SENSES
All of the senses may be diminished in old age. In the
eye, cataracts may make the lens opaque. The lens
also loses its elasticity and the eye becomes more
farsighted, a condition called presbyopia. The risk
of glaucoma increases, and elderly people should be
tested for it because treatment is available that can
prevent blindness. Macular degeneration, in which
central vision becomes impaired ﬁrst, is a major cause
of vision loss for people over 65. Reading and close
work of any kind become difficult.
In the ear, cumulative damage to the hair cells in
the organ of Corti usually becomes apparent some
time after the age of 60. Hair cells that have been
damaged in a lifetime of noise cannot be replaced
(regrowth of cochlear hair cells has been stimulated in
guinea pigs, but not yet in people). The deafness of
old age ranges from slight to profound; very often
high-pitched sounds are lost ﬁrst, while hearing
may still be adequate for low-pitched sounds. The
sense of equilibrium may be diminished; the body is
slower to react to tilting, and falls may become more
frequent.
Both taste and smell become less acute with age,
which may contribute to poor nutrition in elderly
people.
SUMMARY
Changes take place all around us as well as within
us. If the body could not respond appropriately to
environmental and internal changes, homeostasis
would soon be disrupted, resulting in injury, illness, or
even death. To respond appropriately to changes, the
brain must know what they are. Conveying this infor-
mation to our brains is the function of our senses.
Although we may sometimes take our senses for
granted, we could not survive for very long without
them.
You have just read about the great variety of inter-
nal and external changes that are detected by the sense
organs. You are also familiar with the role of the nerv-
ous system in the regulation of the body’s responses.
In the next chapter we will discuss the other regula-
tory system, the endocrine system. The hormones
of the endocrine glands are produced in response to
changes, and their regulatory effects all contribute to
homeostasis.
216
The Senses
BOX 9–6
MOTION SICKNESS
Motion sickness is characterized by cold sweats,
hyperventilation, nausea, and vomiting when the
person is exposed to repetitive motion that is
unexpected or unfamiliar, or that cannot be con-
trolled. Seasickness is a type of motion sickness,
as is carsickness (why children are carsick more
often than adults is not known).
Some people are simply not affected by the
rolling of a ship or train; for others, the constant
stimulation of the receptors for position ﬁrst
becomes uncomfortable, then nauseating. For
those who know they are susceptible to motion
sickness, medications are available for use before
traveling by plane, train, boat, or car.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Purpose of Sensations—to detect changes in
the external or internal environment to
enable the body to respond appropriately
to maintain homeostasis
Sensory Pathway—pathway of impulses for a
sensation
1. Receptors—detect a change (usually very speciﬁc)
and generate impulses.
2. Sensory neurons—transmit impulses from recep-
tors to the CNS.
3. Sensory tracts—white matter in the CNS.
4. Sensory area—most are in the cerebral cortex; feels
and interprets the sensation.
Characteristics of Sensations
1. Projection—the sensation seems to come from the
area where the receptors were stimulated, even
though it is the brain that truly feels the sensation.
2. Intensity—the degree to which a sensation is felt; a
strong stimulus affects more receptors, more
impulses are sent to the brain and are interpreted as
a more intense sensation.
3. Contrast—the effect of a previous or simultaneous
sensation on a current sensation as the brain com-
pares them.
4. Adaptation—becoming unaware of a continuing
stimulus; if the stimulus remains constant, there is
no change for receptors to detect.
5. After-image—the sensation remains in the con-
sciousness after the stimulus has stopped.
Cutaneous Senses—provide information
about the external environment and the
skin itself
1. The dermis has free nerve endings that are recep-
tors for pain, heat, and cold, and encapsulated nerve
endings that are receptors for touch and pressure
(see Fig. 9–1).
2. Sensory areas are in parietal lobes.
3. Referred pain is visceral pain that is felt as cuta-
neous pain. Common pathways in the CNS carry
both cutaneous and visceral impulses; the brain
usually projects sensation to the cutaneous area.
Muscle Sense—knowing where our muscles
are without looking at them
1. Stretch receptors in muscles detect stretching.
2. Sensory areas for conscious muscle sense are in
parietal lobes.
3. Cerebellum uses unconscious muscle sense to
coordinate voluntary movement.
Sense of Taste (see Fig. 9–2)
1. Chemoreceptors are in taste buds on the tongue;
detect chemicals (foods) in solution (saliva) in the
mouth.
2. Five basic tastes: sweet, sour, salty, bitter, and
savory; foods stimulate combinations of receptors.
3. Pathway: facial and glossopharyngeal nerves to
taste areas in parietal-temporal lobes.
Sense of Smell (see Fig. 9–2)
1. Chemoreceptors are in upper nasal cavities; several
hundred different ones; detect vaporized chemicals
(many combinations possible).
2. Pathway: olfactory nerves to olfactory bulbs to
olfactory areas in the temporal lobes.
3. Smell contributes greatly to what we call taste.
Hunger and Thirst—visceral (internal)
sensations
1. Receptors for hunger: in hypothalamus, detect
changes in GI hormones and nutrient levels in the
blood; hunger is projected to the stomach; adapta-
tion does occur.
2. Receptors for thirst: in hypothalamus, osmorecep-
tors detect changes in body water (water–salt pro-
portions); thirst is projected to the mouth and
pharynx; adaptation does not occur.
The Eye (see Figs. 9–3 through 9–6)
1. Eyelids and eyelashes keep dust out of eyes; con-
junctivae line the eyelids and cover white of eye.
2. Lacrimal glands produce tears, which ﬂow across
the eyeball to two lacrimal ducts, to lacrimal sac to
nasolacrimal duct to nasal cavity. Tears wash the
anterior eyeball and contain lysozyme to inhibit
bacterial growth.
3. The eyeball is protected by the bony orbit (socket).
4. The six extrinsic muscles move the eyeball; inner-
vated by the 3rd, 4th, and 6th cranial nerves.
5. Sclera—outermost layer of the eyeball, made of
ﬁbrous connective tissue; anterior portion is the
transparent cornea, the ﬁrst light-refracting struc-
ture.
6. Choroid layer—middle layer of eyeball; dark blue
pigment absorbs light to prevent glare within the
eyeball.
The Senses
217
STUDY OUTLINE
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

7. Ciliary body (muscle) and suspensory ligaments—
change shape of lens, which is made of a transpar-
ent, elastic protein and which refracts light.
8. Iris—two sets of smooth muscle ﬁbers regulate
diameter of pupil, that is, how much light strikes
the retina.
9. Retina—innermost layer of eyeball; contains rods
and cones.
• Rods—detect light; abundant toward periphery
of retina.
• Cones—detect color; abundant in center of
retina.
• Fovea—in the center of the macula lutea; con-
tains only cones; area of best color vision.
• Optic disc—no rods or cones; optic nerve
passes through eyeball.
10. Posterior cavity contains vitreous humor (semi-
solid) that keeps the retina in place.
11. Anterior cavity contains aqueous humor that
nourishes the lens and cornea; made by capillaries
of the ciliary body, ﬂows through pupil, is reab-
sorbed to blood at the canal of Schlemm.
Physiology of Vision
1. Refraction (bending and focusing) pathway of
light: cornea, aqueous humor, lens, vitreous
humor.
2. Lens is adjustable; ciliary muscle relaxes for distant
vision, and lens is thin. Ciliary muscle contracts for
near vision, and elastic lens thickens and has
greater refractive power.
3. Light strikes retina and stimulates chemical reac-
tions in the rods and cones.
4. In rods: rhodopsin breaks down to scotopsin and
retinal (from vitamin A), and an electrical impulse
is generated. In cones: speciﬁc wavelengths of light
are absorbed (red, blue, green); chemical reactions
generate nerve impulses.
5. Ganglion neurons from the rods and cones form
the optic nerve, which passes through the eyeball at
the optic disc.
6. Optic chiasma—site of the crossover of medial
ﬁbers of both optic nerves, permitting binocular
vision.
7. Visual areas in occipital lobes—each area receives
impulses from both eyes; both areas create one
image from the two slightly different images of
each eye; both areas right the upside-down retinal
image.
The Ear (see Figs. 9–7 through 9–10)
1. Outer ear—auricle or pinna has no real function
for people; ear canal curves forward and down into
temporal bone.
2. Middle ear—eardrum at end of ear canal vibrates
when sound waves strike it. Auditory bones:
malleus, incus, stapes; transmit vibrations to inner
ear at oval window.
• Eustachian tube—extends from middle ear to
nasopharynx; allows air in and out of middle
ear to permit eardrum to vibrate; air pressure
in middle ear should equal atmospheric pres-
sure.
3. Inner ear—bony labyrinth in temporal bone, lined
with membranous labyrinth. Perilymph is ﬂuid
between bone and membrane; endolymph is ﬂuid
within membrane. Membranous structures are the
cochlea, utricle and saccule, and semicircular
canals.
4. Cochlea—snail-shell shaped; three internal canals;
cochlear duct contains receptors for hearing: hair
cells in the organ of Corti; these cells contain
endings of the cochlear branch of the 8th cranial
nerve.
5. Physiology of hearing—sound waves stimulate
vibration of eardrum, malleus, incus, stapes, oval
window of inner ear, perilymph and endolymph of
cochlea, and hair cells of organ of Corti. When hair
cells bend, impulses are generated and carried by
the 8th cranial nerve to the auditory areas in the
temporal lobes. Round window prevents pressure
damage to the hair cells.
6. Utricle and saccule—membranous sacs in the
vestibule; each contains hair cells that are affected
by gravity. When position of the head changes,
otoliths bend the hair cells, which generate
impulses along the vestibular branch of the 8th cra-
nial nerve to the cerebellum, midbrain, and cere-
brum. Impulses are interpreted as position of the
head at rest.
7. Semicircular canals—three membranous ovals in
three planes; enlarged base is the ampulla, which
contains hair cells (crista) that are affected by
movement. As body moves, hair cells bend in oppo-
site direction, generate impulses along vestibular
branch of 8th cranial nerve to cerebellum, mid-
brain, and cerebrum. Impulses are interpreted as
movement of the body, changing speed, stopping
or starting.
218
The Senses
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Arterial Receptors—in large arteries; detect
changes in blood
1. Aortic arch—curves over top of heart. Aortic sinus
contains pressoreceptors; aortic body contains
chemoreceptors; sensory nerve is vagus (10th
cranial).
2. Right and left carotid arteries in the neck; carotid
sinus contains pressoreceptors; carotid body con-
tains chemoreceptors; sensory nerve is the glos-
sopharyngeal (9th cranial).
3. Pressoreceptors detect changes in blood pressure;
chemoreceptors detect changes in pH or oxygen
and CO2 levels in the blood. This information is
used by the vital centers in the medulla to change
respiration or circulation to maintain normal blood
oxygen and CO2 and normal blood pressure.
The Senses
219
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. State the two general functions of receptors.
Explain the purpose of sensory neurons and sen-
sory tracts. (p. 198)
2. Name the receptors for the cutaneous senses, and
explain the importance of this information.
(p. 199)
3. Name the receptors for muscle sense and the parts
of the brain concerned with muscle sense.
(p. 200)
4. State what the chemoreceptors for taste and smell
detect. Name the cranial nerve(s) for each of these
senses and the lobe of the cerebrum where each is
felt. (pp. 200, 202)
5. Name the part of the eye with each of the follow-
ing functions: (pp. 203–206)
a. Change the shape of the lens
b. Contains the rods and cones
c. Forms the white of the eye
d. Form the optic nerve
e. Keep dust out of eye
f. Changes the size of the pupil
g. Produce tears
h. Absorbs light within the eyeball to prevent glare
6. With respect to vision: (pp. 207, 209)
a. Name the structures and substances that refract
light rays (in order)
b. State what cones detect and what rods detect.
What happens within these receptors when light
strikes them?
c. Name the cranial nerve for vision and the lobe
of the cerebrum that contains the visual area
7. With respect to the ear: (pp. 210–215)
a. Name the parts of the ear that transmit the
vibrations of sound waves (in order)
b. State the location of the receptors for hearing
c. State the location of the receptors that respond
to gravity
d. State the location of the receptors that respond
to motion
e. State the two functions of the 8th cranial nerve
f. Name the lobe of the cerebrum concerned with
hearing
g. Name the two parts of the brain concerned with
maintaining balance and equilibrium
8. Name the following: (p. 216)
a. The locations of arterial chemoreceptors, and
state what they detect
b. The locations of arterial pressoreceptors, and
state what they detect
c. The cranial nerves involved in respiratory and
cardiac reﬂexes, and state the part of the brain
that regulates these vital functions
9. Explain each of the following: adaptation, after-
image, projection, contrast. (pp. 198–199)
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
1. Why are the inner ear labyrinths ﬁlled with ﬂuid
rather than air? One reason is directly concerned
with hearing, the other with survival.
2. Michael’s summer job in his town was collecting
garbage. At ﬁrst he thought the garbage and the
truck smelled awful, but by the time he went home
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

for lunch he decided that he didn’t mind it at all.
Explain what happened, and why his mother did
mind.
3. When we are out in very cold weather, why don’t
our eyes freeze shut? Try to think of two reasons.
4. You probably have at one time hit your “funny
bone,” which is really the ulnar nerve where it
crosses the elbow. Such a whack is very painful, and
not just in the elbow but all the way down the fore-
arm to the ring and little ﬁngers of the hand. This
is referred pain. Explain why it happens, and name
the characteristic of sensations that it illustrates.
5. Albinism is a genetic characteristic in which
melanin is not produced; it may occur in just
about any type of animal. As you probably know,
an albino person will have white skin and hair.
Describe the consequences for the person’s
eyes.
6. We sometimes hear that blind people have a better
sense of hearing than do sighted people. Do you
think this is really true? Explain. Name two other
senses a blind person may especially depend upon.
Explain.
7. Look at Question Figure 9–A. In part A, which rec-
tangle seems wider, the upper one or the lower
one? Measure them, and explain your answer. Part
B shows a Necker cube. Look at the cube and let
your eyes relax. What seems to happen? Why do
you think this happens? Part C has some lines and
some shaded blocks. But what do we see? Explain.
8. Look at Question Figure 9–B. Part A shows a nor-
mal visual ﬁeld. Parts B, C, and D are the visual
ﬁelds of eye disorders you have read about in this
chapter. Try to name each, with a reason for your
answer.
220
The Senses
A   Normal
B
C
D
Question Figure 9–B
A
B
C
Question Figure 9–A
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CHAPTER 10
The Endocrine System
221
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

222
CHAPTER 10
Chapter Outline
Chemistry of Hormones
Regulation of Hormone Secretion
The Pituitary Gland
Posterior Pituitary Gland
Antidiuretic hormone
Oxytocin
Anterior Pituitary Gland
Growth hormone
Thyroid-stimulating hormone
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
Prolactin
Follicle-stimulating hormone
Luteinizing hormone
Thyroid Gland
Thyroxine and T3
Calcitonin
Parathyroid Glands
Parathyroid Hormone
Pancreas
Glucagon
Insulin
Adrenal Glands
Adrenal Medulla
Epinephrine and norepinephrine
Adrenal Cortex
Aldosterone
Cortisol
Ovaries
Estrogen
Progesterone
Inhibin
Testes
Testosterone
Inhibin
Other Hormones
Prostaglandins
Mechanisms of Hormone Action
The Two-Messenger Mechanism—Protein
Hormones
Action of Steroid Hormones
Aging and the Endocrine System
BOX 10–1
DISORDERS OF GROWTH HORMONE
BOX 10–2
DISORDERS OF THYROXINE
BOX 10–3
DIABETES MELLITUS
BOX 10–4
DISORDERS OF THE ADRENAL CORTEX
Student Objectives
• Name the endocrine glands and the hormones
secreted by each.
• Explain how a negative feedback mechanism
works.
• Explain how the hypothalamus is involved
in the secretion of hormones from the pos-
terior pituitary gland and anterior pituitary
gland.
• State the functions of oxytocin and antidiuretic
hormone, and explain the stimulus for secretion
of each.
• State the functions of the hormones of the ante-
rior pituitary gland, and state the stimulus for
secretion of each.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Endocrine System
223
Student Objectives (Continued)
• State the functions of thyroxine and T3, and
describe the stimulus for their secretion.
• Explain how parathyroid hormone and calcitonin
work as antagonists.
• Explain how insulin and glucagon work as antago-
nists.
• State the functions of epinephrine and norepineph-
rine, and explain their relationship to the sympa-
thetic division of the autonomic nervous system.
• State the functions of aldosterone and cortisol, and
describe the stimulus for secretion of each.
• State the functions of estrogen, progesterone,
testosterone, and inhibin and state the stimulus for
secretion of each.
• Explain what prostaglandins are made of, and state
some of their functions.
• Explain how the protein hormones are believed to
exert their effects.
• Explain how the steroid hormones are believed to
exert their effects.
New Terminology
Alpha cells (AL-fah SELLS)
Beta cells (BAY-tah SELLS)
Catecholamines (KAT-e-kohl-ah-MEENZ)
Corpus luteum (KOR-pus LOO-tee-um)
Gluconeogenesis (GLOO-koh-nee-oh-JEN-i-sis)
Glycogenesis (GLIGH-koh-JEN-i-sis)
Glycogenolysis (GLIGH-ko-jen-OL-i-sis)
Hypercalcemia (HIGH-per-kal-SEE-mee-ah)
Hyperglycemia (HIGH-per-gligh-SEE-mee-ah)
Hypocalcemia (HIGH-poh-kal-SEE-mee-ah)
Hypoglycemia (HIGH-poh-gligh-SEE-mee-ah)
Hypophysis (high-POFF-e-sis)
Islets of Langerhans (EYE-lets of LAHNG-er-hanz)
Prostaglandins (PRAHS-tah-GLAND-ins)
Renin-angiotensin mechanism (REE-nin AN-jee-
oh-TEN-sin)
Sympathomimetic (SIM-pah-tho-mi-MET-ik)
Target organ (TAR-get OR-gan)
Related Clinical Terminology
Acromegaly (AK-roh-MEG-ah-lee)
Addison’s disease (ADD-i-sonz)
Cretinism (KREE-tin-izm)
Cushing’s syndrome (KOOSH-ingz SIN-drohm)
Diabetes mellitus (DYE-ah-BEE-tis mel-LYE-tus)
Giantism (JIGH-an-tizm)
Goiter (GOY-ter)
Graves’ disease (GRAYVES)
Ketoacidosis (KEY-toh-ass-i-DOH-sis)
Myxedema (MIK-suh-DEE-mah)
Pituitary dwarﬁsm (pi-TOO-i-TER-ee DWORF-
izm)
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

We have already seen how the nervous system
regulates body functions by means of nerve impulses
and integration of information by the spinal cord and
brain. The other regulating system of the body is
the endocrine system, which consists of endocrine
glands that secrete chemicals called hormones. These
glands, and the names of the hormones they secrete,
are shown in Fig. 10–1.
Endocrine glands are ductless; that is, they do not
have ducts to take their secretions to speciﬁc sites.
224
The Endocrine System
Anterior: GH, TSH, ACTH
 
FSH, LH, Prolactin
Posterior: ADH, Oxytocin
Melatonin
PTH
Releasing hormones
for anterior pituitary
Thyroxine and T3
Calcitonin
THYMUS GLAND
Immune hormones              
Insulin
Glucagon
Cortex: Aldosterone
            Cortisol
            Sex hormones
Medulla: Epinephrine
               Norepinephrine
Testosterone
Inhibin
THYROID GLAND
HYPOTHALAMUS
PITUITARY (HYPOPHYSIS) GLAND
PINEAL GLAND
PARATHYROID GLANDS
ADRENAL (SUPRARENAL) GLANDS
PANCREAS
OVARIES
Estrogen
Progesterone
Inhibin
TESTES
Figure 10–1.
The endocrine system. Locations of many endocrine glands. Both male
and female gonads (testes and ovaries) are shown.
QUESTION: Why is the location of the thyroid gland not really important for its function?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Instead, hormones are secreted directly into capillaries
and circulate in the blood throughout the body. Each
hormone then exerts very speciﬁc effects on certain
organs, called target organs or target tissues. Some
hormones, such as insulin and thyroxine, have many
target organs. Other hormones, such as calcitonin and
some pituitary gland hormones, have only one or a
few target organs.
In general, the endocrine system and its hormones
help regulate growth, the use of foods to produce
energy, resistance to stress, the pH of body ﬂuids and
ﬂuid balance, and reproduction. In this chapter we will
discuss the speciﬁc functions of the hormones and
how each contributes to homeostasis.
CHEMISTRY OF HORMONES
With respect to their chemical structure, hormones
may be classiﬁed into three groups: amines, proteins,
and steroids.
1. Amines—these simple hormones are structural
variations of the amino acid tyrosine. This group
includes thyroxine from the thyroid gland and epi-
nephrine and norepinephrine from the adrenal
medulla.
2. Proteins—these hormones are chains of amino
acids. Insulin from the pancreas, growth hormone
from the anterior pituitary gland, and calcitonin
from the thyroid gland are all proteins. Short
chains of amino acids may be called peptides.
Antidiuretic hormone and oxytocin, synthesized by
the hypothalamus, are peptide hormones.
3. Steroids—cholesterol is the precursor for the
steroid hormones, which include cortisol and aldos-
terone from the adrenal cortex, estrogen and pro-
gesterone from the ovaries, and testosterone from
the testes.
REGULATION OF
HORMONE SECRETION
Hormones are secreted by endocrine glands when
there is a need for them, that is, for their effects on
their target organs. The cells of endocrine glands
respond to changes in the blood or perhaps to other
hormones in the blood. These stimuli are the infor-
mation they use to increase or decrease secretion of
their own hormones. When a hormone brings about
its effects, the stimulus is reversed, and secretion of
the hormone decreases until the stimulus reoccurs.
You may recall from Chapter 1 that this is a negative
feedback mechanism, and the mechanism for thyrox-
ine was depicted in Fig. 1–3. Let us use insulin as a dif-
ferent example here.
Insulin is secreted by the pancreas when the blood
glucose level is high; that is, hyperglycemia is the
stimulus for secretion of insulin. Once circulating
in the blood, insulin enables cells to remove glucose
from the blood so that it can be used for energy
production and enables the liver to store glucose
as glycogen. As a result of these actions of insulin,
the blood glucose level decreases, reversing the stim-
ulus for secretion of insulin. Insulin secretion then
decreases until the blood glucose level increases
again.
In any hormonal negative feedback mechanism,
information about the effects of the hormone is “fed
back” to the gland, which then decreases its secretion
of the hormone. This is why the mechanism is called
“negative”: The effects of the hormone reverse the
stimulus and decrease the secretion of the hormone.
The secretion of many other hormones is regulated in
a similar way.
The hormones of the anterior pituitary gland are
secreted in response to releasing hormones (also
called releasing factors) secreted by the hypothalamus.
You may recall this from Chapter 8. Growth hormone,
for example, is secreted in response to growth hor-
mone–releasing hormone (GHRH) from the hypo-
thalamus. As growth hormone exerts its effects, the
secretion of GHRH decreases, which in turn decreases
the secretion of growth hormone. This is another type
of negative feedback mechanism.
For each of the hormones to be discussed in this
chapter, the stimulus for its secretion will also be men-
tioned. Some hormones function as an antagonistic
pair to regulate a particular aspect of blood chemistry;
these mechanisms will also be covered.
THE PITUITARY GLAND
The pituitary gland (or hypophysis) hangs by a short
stalk (infundibulum) from the hypothalamus and is
enclosed by the sella turcica of the sphenoid bone.
The Endocrine System
225
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

226
The Endocrine System
Figure 10–2.
Hormones of the pituitary gland and their target organs.
QUESTION: Which pituitary hormones have other endocrine glands as their target organs?
Despite its small size, the pituitary gland regulates
many body functions. Its two major portions are the
posterior pituitary gland (neurohypophysis), which is
an extension of the nerve tissue of the hypothalamus,
and the anterior pituitary gland (adenohypophysis),
which is separate glandular tissue. All of the hormones
of the pituitary gland and their target organs are
shown in Fig. 10–2. It may be helpful for you to look
at this summary picture before you begin reading the
following sections.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

POSTERIOR PITUITARY GLAND
The two hormones of the posterior pituitary gland
are actually produced by the hypothalamus and simply
stored in the posterior pituitary until needed. Their
release is stimulated by nerve impulses from the hypo-
thalamus (Fig. 10–3).
Antidiuretic Hormone
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH, also called vaso-
pressin) increases the reabsorption of water by kidney
tubules, which decreases the amount of urine formed.
The water is reabsorbed into the blood, so as urinary
output is decreased, blood volume is increased, which
helps maintain normal blood pressure. ADH also
decreases sweating, but the amount of water con-
served is much less than that conserved by the kidneys.
The stimulus for secretion of ADH is decreased
water content of the body. If too much water is lost
through sweating or diarrhea, for example, osmore-
ceptors in the hypothalamus detect the increased
“saltiness” of body ﬂuids. The hypothalamus then
transmits impulses to the posterior pituitary to
increase the secretion of ADH and decrease the loss of
more water in urine.
Any type of dehydration stimulates the secretion of
ADH to conserve body water. In the case of severe
hemorrhage, ADH is released in large amounts and
will also cause vasoconstriction, especially in arteri-
oles, which will help to raise or at least maintain blood
pressure. This function gives ADH its other name,
vasopressin.
Ingestion of alcohol inhibits the secretion of ADH
and increases urinary output. If alcohol intake is exces-
sive and ﬂuid is not replaced, a person will feel thirsty
and dizzy the next morning. The thirst is due to the
loss of body water, and the dizziness is the result of
low blood pressure.
The Endocrine System
227
Hypothalamus
Releasing hormones
Capillaries in hypothalamus
Hypophyseal portal veins
Capillaries in
anterior pituitary
Hormones of
anterior pituitary
Lateral hypophyseal vein
Superior hypophyseal
arteries
Optic chiasma
B
Hypothalamus
Hypothalamic-hypophyseal tract
Posterior pituitary
Inferior hypophyseal
artery
Hormones of
posterior
pituitary
Posterior lobe vein
Optic chiasma
A
Figure 10–3.
Structural relationships of hypothalamus and pituitary gland. (A) Posterior
pituitary stores hormones produced in the hypothalamus. (B) Releasing hormones of the
hypothalamus circulate directly to the anterior pituitary and inﬂuence its secretions. Notice
the two networks of capillaries.
QUESTION: In part A, name the hormones of the posterior pituitary. In part B, what stim-
ulates secretion of anterior pituitary hormones?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Oxytocin
Oxytocin stimulates contraction of the uterus at the
end of pregnancy and stimulates release of milk from
the mammary glands.
As labor begins, the cervix of the uterus is
stretched, which generates sensory impulses to the
hypothalamus, which in turn stimulates the posterior
pituitary to release oxytocin. Oxytocin then causes
strong contractions of the smooth muscle (myo-
metrium) of the uterus to bring about delivery of the
baby and the placenta. The secretion of oxytocin is
one of the few positive feedback mechanisms within
the body, and the external brake or shutoff of the
feedback cycle is delivery of the baby and the placenta.
It has been discovered that the placenta itself
secretes oxytocin at the end of gestation and in an
amount far higher than that from the posterior pitu-
itary gland. Research is continuing to determine the
exact mechanism and precise role of the placenta in
labor.
When a baby is breast-fed, the sucking of the baby
stimulates sensory impulses from the mother’s nipple
to the hypothalamus. Nerve impulses from the hypo-
thalamus to the posterior pituitary cause the release of
oxytocin, which stimulates contraction of the smooth
muscle cells around the mammary ducts. This release
of milk is sometimes called the “milk let-down” reﬂex.
The hormones of the posterior pituitary are summa-
rized in Table 10–1.
Both ADH and oxytocin are peptide hormones
with similar structure, having nine amino acids each.
And both have been found to inﬂuence aspects of
behavior such as nurturing and trustfulness. Certain
brain cells have receptors for vasopressin, and they
seem to be involved in creating the bonds that sustain
family life. Trust is part of many social encounters
such as friendship, school, sports and games, and buy-
ing and selling, as well as family life. These two small
hormones seem to have some inﬂuence on us mentally
as well as physically.
ANTERIOR PITUITARY GLAND
The hormones of the anterior pituitary gland regu-
late many body functions. They are in turn regulated
by releasing hormones from the hypothalamus.
These releasing hormones are secreted into capillaries
in the hypothalamus and pass through the hypophy-
seal portal veins to another capillary network in the
anterior pituitary gland. Here, the releasing hormones
are absorbed and stimulate secretion of the anterior
pituitary hormones. This small but specialized path-
way of circulation is shown in Fig. 10–3. This pathway
permits the releasing hormones to rapidly stimulate
the anterior pituitary, without having to pass through
general circulation.
Growth Hormone
Growth hormone (GH) is also called somatotropin,
and it does indeed promote growth (see Fig. 10–4).
GH stimulates cells to produce insulin-like growth fac-
tors (IGFs), intermediary molecules that bring about
the functions of GH. Growth hormone increases the
transport of amino acids into cells, and increases the
rate of protein synthesis. Amino acids cannot be stored
in the body, so when they are available, they must be
228
The Endocrine System
Table 10–1 HORMONES OF THE POSTERIOR PITUITARY GLAND
Hormone
Function(s)
Regulation of Secretion
Antidiuretic hormone
(ADH or vasopressin)
Oxytocin
• Increases water reabsorption
by the kidney tubules (water
returns to the blood)
• Decreases sweating
• Causes vasoconstriction
(in large amounts)
• Promotes contraction of
myometrium of uterus (labor) 
• Promotes release of milk from
mammary glands
Decreased water content in the body (alcohol
inhibits secretion)
Nerve impulses from hypothalamus, the result of
stretching of cervix or stimulation of nipple
Secretion from placenta at end of gestation—
stimulus unknown
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

used in protein synthesis. Excess amino acids are
changed to carbohydrates or fat, for energy storage.
Growth hormone ensures that amino acids will be used
for whatever protein synthesis is necessary, before the
amino acids can be changed to carbohydrates. Growth
hormone also stimulates cell division in those tissues
capable of mitosis. These functions contribute to the
growth of the body during childhood, especially
growth of bones and muscles.
You may now be wondering if GH is secreted in
adults, and the answer is yes. The use of amino acids
for the synthesis of proteins is still necessary. Even if
the body is not growing in height, some tissues will
require new proteins for repair or replacement. GH
also stimulates the release of fat from adipose tissue
and the use of fats for energy production. This is
important any time we go for extended periods with-
out eating, no matter what our ages.
The secretion of GH is regulated by two releasing
hormones from the hypothalamus. Growth hormone–
releasing hormone (GHRH), which increases the
secretion of GH, is produced during hypoglycemia
and during exercise. Another stimulus for GHRH is a
high blood level of amino acids; the GH then secreted
will ensure the conversion of these amino acids into
protein. Somatostatin may also be called growth hor-
mone inhibiting hormone (GHIH), and, as its name
tells us, it decreases the secretion of GH. Somatostatin
is produced during hyperglycemia. Disorders of GH
secretion are discussed in Box 10–1.
The Endocrine System
229
Increases use of
fats for energy
Increases protein
synthesis
Increases
mitosis
Bone and
muscle
Liver and
other viscera
ATP
GH
Anterior
pituitary
Figure 10–4.
Functions of growth hormone.
QUESTION: Which functions of growth hormone directly help bones and muscles to
grow?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) is also called
thyrotropin, and its target organ is the thyroid gland.
TSH stimulates the normal growth of the thyroid and
the secretion of thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine
(T3). The functions of these thyroid hormones will be
covered later in this chapter.
The secretion of TSH is stimulated by thyrotropin-
releasing hormone (TRH) from the hypothalamus.
When metabolic rate (energy production) decreases,
TRH is produced.
Adrenocorticotropic Hormone
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulates
the secretion of cortisol and other hormones by the
adrenal cortex. Secretion of ACTH is increased by
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) from the
hypothalamus. CRH is produced in any type of phys-
iological stress situation such as injury, disease, exer-
cise, or hypoglycemia (being hungry is stressful).
Prolactin
Prolactin, as its name suggests, is responsible for lac-
tation. More precisely, prolactin initiates and main-
tains milk production by the mammary glands. The
regulation of secretion of prolactin is complex, involv-
ing both prolactin-releasing hormone (PRH) and
prolactin-inhibiting hormone (PIH) from the hypo-
thalamus. The mammary glands must ﬁrst be acted
upon by other hormones such as estrogen and proges-
terone, which are secreted in large amounts by the
placenta during pregnancy. Then, after delivery of the
baby, prolactin secretion increases and milk is pro-
duced. If the mother continues to breast-feed, pro-
lactin levels remain high.
Follicle-Stimulating Hormone
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) is one of the
gonadotropic hormones; that is, it has its effects on
the gonads: the ovaries or testes. FSH is named for
one of its functions in women. Within the ovaries are
ovarian follicles that contain potential ova (egg cells).
FSH stimulates the growth of ovarian follicles; that is,
it initiates egg development in cycles of approximately
28 days. FSH also stimulates secretion of estrogen by
the follicle cells. In men, FSH initiates sperm produc-
tion within the testes.
The secretion of FSH is stimulated by the hypo-
thalamus, which produces gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (GnRH). FSH secretion is decreased by
inhibin, a hormone produced by the ovaries or testes.
Luteinizing Hormone
Luteinizing hormone (LH) is another gonadotropic
hormone. In women, LH is responsible for ovulation,
the release of a mature ovum from an ovarian follicle.
LH then stimulates that follicle to develop into the
corpus luteum, which secretes progesterone, also
under the inﬂuence of LH. In men, LH stimulates the
interstitial cells of the testes to secrete testosterone.
230
The Endocrine System
BOX 10–1
DISORDERS OF GROWTH HORMONE
not have this condition; they are tall as a result of
their genetic makeup and good nutrition.
In an adult, hypersecretion of GH is caused by a
pituitary tumor, and results in acromegaly. The
long bones cannot grow because the epiphyseal
discs are closed, but the growth of other bones is
stimulated. The jaw and other facial bones become
disproportionately large, as do the bones of the
hands and feet. The skin becomes thicker, and the
tongue also grows and may protrude. Other conse-
quences include compression of nerves by abnor-
mally growing bones and growth of the articular
cartilages, which then erode and bring on arthritis.
Treatment of acromegaly requires surgical removal
of the tumor or its destruction by radiation.
A deﬁciency or excess of growth hormone (GH)
during childhood will have marked effects on the
growth of a child. Hyposecretion of GH results in
pituitary dwarﬁsm, in which the person may
attain a ﬁnal height of only 3 to 4 feet but will have
normal body proportions. GH can now be pro-
duced using genetic engineering and may be used
to stimulate growth in children with this disorder.
GH will not increase growth of children with the
genetic potential for short stature. Reports that GH
will reverse the effects of aging are simply not true.
Hypersecretion of GH results in giantism (or
gigantism), in which the long bones grow exces-
sively and the person may attain a height of 8 feet.
Most very tall people, such as basketball players, do
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

(LH is also called ICSH, interstitial cell stimulating
hormone.)
Secretion of LH is also regulated by GnRH from
the hypothalamus. We will return to FSH and LH, as
well as a discussion of the sex hormones, in Chapter
20.
The hormones of the anterior pituitary are summa-
rized in Table 10–2.
THYROID GLAND
The thyroid gland is located on the front and sides of
the trachea just below the larynx. Its two lobes are
connected by a middle piece called the isthmus. The
structural units of the thyroid gland are thyroid folli-
cles, which produce thyroxine (T4) and triiodothy-
ronine (T3). Iodine is necessary for the synthesis of
these hormones; thyroxine contains four atoms of
iodine, and T3 contains three atoms of iodine.
The third hormone produced by the thyroid
gland is calcitonin, which is secreted by parafol-
licular cells. Its function is very different from those
of thyroxine and T3, which you may recall from
Chapter 6.
THYROXINE AND T3
Thyroxine (T4) and T3 have the same functions: regu-
lation of energy production and protein synthesis,
which contribute to growth of the body and to normal
body functioning throughout life (Fig. 10–5). Thyrox-
ine and T3 increase cell respiration of all food types
(carbohydrates, fats, and excess amino acids) and
thereby increase energy and heat production. They
also increase the rate of protein synthesis within cells.
Normal production of thyroxine and T3 is essential for
physical growth, normal mental development, and
maturation of the reproductive system. These hor-
mones are the most important day-to-day regulators
of metabolic rate; their activity is reﬂected in the func-
The Endocrine System
231
Table 10–2
HORMONES OF THE ANTERIOR PITUITARY GLAND
Hormone
Function(s)
Regulation of Secretion
Growth hormone (GH)
Thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH)
Adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH)
Prolactin
Follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH)
Luteinizing hormone
(LH) (ICSH)
• Increases rate of mitosis
• Increases amino acid transport into cells
• Increases rate of protein synthesis
• Increases use of fats for energy
• Increases secretion of thyroxine and T3
by thyroid gland
• Increases secretion of cortisol by the
adrenal cortex
• Stimulates milk production by the mam-
mary glands
In women:
• Initiates growth of ova in ovarian follicles
• Increases secretion of estrogen by follicle
cells
In men:
• Initiates sperm production in the testes
In women:
• Causes ovulation
• Causes the ruptured ovarian follicle to
become the corpus luteum
• Increases secretion of progesterone by
the corpus luteum
In men:
• Increases secretion of testosterone by
the interstitial cells of the testes
GHRH (hypothalamus) stimulates secretion
GHIH—somatostatin (hypothalamus)
inhibits secretion
TRH (hypothalamus)
CRH (hypothalamus)
PRH (hypothalamus) stimulates secretion
PIH (hypothalamus) inhibits secretion
GnRH (hypothalamus) stimulates secretion
Inhibin (ovaries or testes) inhibits secretion
GnRH (hypothalamus)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

tioning of the brain, muscles, heart, and virtually all
other organs. Although thyroxine and T3 are not vital
hormones, in that they are not crucial to survival, their
absence greatly diminishes physical and mental
growth and abilities (see Box 10–2: Disorders of
Thyroxine).
Secretion of thyroxine and T3 is stimulated by
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) from the ante-
rior pituitary gland (see also Fig. 1–3). When the
metabolic rate (energy production) decreases, this
change is detected by the hypothalamus, which
secretes thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH). TRH
stimulates the anterior pituitary to secrete TSH,
which stimulates the thyroid to release thyroxine and
T3, which raise the metabolic rate by increasing
energy production. This negative feedback mecha-
nism then shuts off TRH from the hypothalamus until
the metabolic rate decreases again.
232
The Endocrine System
Thyroid gland
T  and T
4
3
Increase
cell respiration of
all foods
Increase
protein synthesis
Glucose
Fats
Excess
amino acids
ATP
Bone and muscle
Liver and viscera
Brain
Reproductive
organs
Figure 10–5.
Functions of thyroxine and T3.
QUESTION: Which functions of thyroxine help bones and muscles to grow and maintain
their own functions?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CALCITONIN
Calcitonin decreases the reabsorption of calcium
and phosphate from the bones to the blood, thereby
lowering blood levels of these minerals. This function
of calcitonin helps maintain normal blood levels
of calcium and phosphate and also helps maintain
a stable, strong bone matrix. It is believed that
calcitonin exerts its most important effects during
childhood, when bones are growing. A form of calci-
tonin obtained from salmon is used to help treat
osteoporosis.
The stimulus for secretion of calcitonin is hyper-
calcemia, that is, a high blood calcium level. When
blood calcium is high, calcitonin ensures that no more
calcium will be removed from bones until there is a
real need for more calcium in the blood (Fig. 10–6).
The hormones of the thyroid gland are summarized in
Table 10–3.
PARATHYROID GLANDS
There are four parathyroid glands: two on the back
of each lobe of the thyroid gland (Fig. 10–7). The hor-
mone they produce is called parathyroid hormone.
PARATHYROID HORMONE
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is an antagonist to cal-
citonin and is important for the maintenance of nor-
mal blood levels of calcium and phosphate. The target
organs of PTH are the bones, small intestine, and kid-
neys.
PTH increases the reabsorption of calcium and
phosphate from bones to the blood, thereby raising
their blood levels. Absorption of calcium and phos-
phate from food in the small intestine, which also
requires vitamin D, is increased by PTH. This too
raises the blood levels of these minerals. In the kid-
neys, PTH stimulates the activation of vitamin D and
increases the reabsorption of calcium and the excre-
tion of phosphate (more than is obtained from bones).
Therefore, the overall effect of PTH is to raise the
blood calcium level and lower the blood phosphate
level. The functions of PTH are summarized in Table
10–4.
Secretion of PTH is stimulated by hypocalcemia,
a low blood calcium level, and inhibited by hypercal-
cemia. The antagonistic effects of PTH and calcitonin
are shown in Fig. 10–6. Together, these hormones
maintain blood calcium within a normal range.
Calcium in the blood is essential for the process of
blood clotting and for normal activity of neurons and
muscle cells.
As you might expect, a sustained hypersecretion of
PTH, such as is caused by a parathyroid tumor, would
remove calcium from bones and weaken them. It has
been found, however, that an intermittent, brief excess
of PTH, such as can occur by injection, will stimulate
the formation of more bone matrix, rather than matrix
reabsorption. This may seem very strange—the oppo-
site of what we would expect—but it shows how much
we have yet to learn about the body. PTH is being
investigated as a possible way to help prevent osteo-
porosis.
PANCREAS
The pancreas is located in the upper left quadrant of
the abdominal cavity, extending from the curve of the
duodenum to the spleen. Although the pancreas is
both an exocrine (digestive) gland as well as an
endocrine gland, only its endocrine function will
be discussed here. The hormone-producing cells of
the pancreas are called islets of Langerhans (pancre-
The Endocrine System
233
Table 10–3
HORMONES OF THE THYROID GLAND
Regulation
Hormone
Function(s)
of Secretion
Thyroxine (T4) and
triiodothyronine (T3)
Calcitonin
• Increase energy production from all food types
• Increase rate of protein synthesis
• Decreases the reabsorption of calcium and phos-
phate from bones to blood
TSH (anterior pituitary)
Hypercalcemia
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

234
The Endocrine System
Bones
Ca+2 is retained in bone matrix
Accelerates calcium
absorption by bones
Hypercalcemia (high blood calcium)
Thyroid
Inhibits
Calcitonin
Bones
Small intestine
Reabsorb Ca+2 to the blood
Hypocalcemia (low blood calcium)
Parathyroids
PTH
Kidneys
(vitamin D activated)
Figure 10–6.
Calcitonin and parathyroid hormone (PTH) and their functions related to
the maintenance of the blood calcium level.
QUESTION: Which hormone helps keep calcium in bones? What vitamin does PTH help
activate, and where?
Table 10–4
HORMONE OF THE PARATHYROID GLANDS
Regulation
Hormone
Functions
of Secretion
Parathyroid hormone
(PTH)
• Increases the reabsorption of calcium and phosphate
from bone to blood
• Increases absorption of calcium and phosphate by
the small intestine
• Increases the reabsorption of calcium and the excre-
tion of phosphate by the kidneys; activates vitamin D
Hypocalcemia stimulates secre-
tion. Hypercalcemia inhibits
secretion.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

atic islets; see Fig. 16–7); they contain alpha cells
that produce glucagon and beta cells that produce
insulin.
GLUCAGON
Glucagon stimulates the liver to change glycogen to
glucose (this process is called glycogenolysis, which
literally means “glycogen breakdown”) and to increase
the use of fats and excess amino acids for energy pro-
duction. The process of gluconeogenesis (literally,
“making new glucose”) is the conversion of excess
amino acids into simple carbohydrates that may enter
the reactions of cell respiration. The overall effect of
glucagon, therefore, is to raise the blood glucose level
and to make all types of food available for energy
production.
The secretion of glucagon is stimulated by hypo-
glycemia, a low blood glucose level. Such a state may
occur between meals or during physiological stress sit-
uations such as exercise (Fig. 10–8).
INSULIN
Insulin increases the transport of glucose from the
blood into cells by increasing the permeability of
cell membranes to glucose. (Brain, liver, and kidney
cells, however, are not dependent on insulin for
glucose intake.) Once inside cells, glucose is used in
The Endocrine System
235
Larynx
Thyroid
Parathyroid
glands
Trachea
Figure 10–7.
Parathyroid glands in posterior view, on
lobes of the thyroid gland.
QUESTION: Which of the target organs of PTH may be
called a reservoir, and what do they store?
BOX 10–2
DISORDERS OF THYROXINE
(energy production) decreases, resulting in lethargy,
muscular weakness, slow heart rate, a feeling of
cold, weight gain, and a characteristic puffiness of
the face. The administration of thyroid hormones
will return the metabolic rate to normal.
Graves’ disease is an autoimmune disorder
that causes hypersecretion of thyroxine. The
autoantibodies seem to bind to TSH receptors on
the thyroid cells and stimulate secretion of excess
thyroxine. The symptoms are those that would be
expected when the metabolic rate is abnormally
elevated: weight loss accompanied by increased
appetite, increased sweating, fast heart rate, feeling
of warmth, and fatigue. Also present may be goiter
and exophthalmos, which is protrusion of the eyes.
Treatment is aimed at decreasing the secretion of
thyroxine by the thyroid, and medications or
radioactive iodine may be used to accomplish this.
Iodine is an essential component of thyroxine (and
T3), and a dietary deﬁciency of iodine causes goi-
ter. In an attempt to produce more thyroxine, the
thyroid cells become enlarged, and hence the thy-
roid gland enlarges and becomes visible on the
front of the neck. The use of iodized salt has made
goiter a rare condition in many parts of the world.
Hyposecretion of thyroxine in a newborn has
devastating effects on the growth of the child.
Without thyroxine, physical growth is diminished,
as is mental development. This condition is called
cretinism, characterized by severe physical and
mental retardation. If the thyroxine deﬁciency is
detected shortly after birth, the child may be
treated with thyroid hormones to promote normal
development.
Hyposecretion of thyroxine in an adult is called
myxedema. Without thyroxine, the metabolic rate
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

cell respiration to produce energy. The liver and skele-
tal muscles also change glucose to glycogen (glycoge-
nesis, which means “glycogen production”) to be
stored for later use. Insulin is also important in the
metabolism of other food types; it enables cells to take
in fatty acids and amino acids to use in the synthesis of
lipids and proteins (not energy production). Without
insulin, blood levels of lipids tend to rise and cells accu-
mulate excess fatty acids. With respect to blood glu-
cose, insulin decreases its level by promoting the use of
glucose for energy production. The antagonistic func-
tions of insulin and glucagon are shown in Fig. 10–8.
Insulin is a vital hormone; we cannot survive for
very long without it. A deﬁciency of insulin or in its
functioning is called diabetes mellitus, which is dis-
cussed in Box 10–3: Diabetes Mellitus.
Secretion of insulin is stimulated by hyper-
glycemia, a high blood glucose level. This state
occurs after eating, especially of meals high in carbo-
hydrates. As glucose is absorbed from the small intes-
tine into the blood, insulin is secreted to enable cells
to use the glucose for immediate energy. At the same
time, any excess glucose will be stored in the liver and
muscles as glycogen.
You will also notice in Fig. 16–7 the cells called
delta cells. These produce the hormone somatostatin,
which is identical to growth hormone–inhibiting hor-
mone from the hypothalamus. Pancreatic somato-
statin acts locally to inhibit the secretion of insulin and
glucagon, and it seems to slow the absorption of the
end products of digestion in the small intestine. The
hormones of the pancreas are summarized in Table
10–5.
ADRENAL GLANDS
The two adrenal glands are located one on top of
each kidney, which gives them their other name of
suprarenal glands. Each adrenal gland consists of two
parts: an inner adrenal medulla and an outer adrenal
cortex. The hormones produced by each part have
very different functions.
ADRENAL MEDULLA
The cells of the adrenal medulla secrete epinephrine
and norepinephrine, which collectively are called cat-
echolamines and are sympathomimetic. The secre-
236
The Endocrine System
Hyperglycemia
(High blood glucose)
Glucagon
Liver
Liver changes
glycogen to
glucose and
converts amino
acids to
carbohydrates
Pancreas
Hypoglycemia
(Low blood glucose)
Cells use glucose
for energy production
Insulin
Cells
Liver
Skeletal
muscles
Liver and skeletal
muscles change
glucose to glycogen
Figure 10–8.
Insulin and
glucagon and their functions
related to the maintenance of
the blood glucose level.
QUESTION: Which hormone
enables cells to use glucose
for energy production? What
is the stimulus for secretion of
this hormone?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Endocrine System
237
tion of both hormones is stimulated by sympathetic
impulses from the hypothalamus, and their functions
duplicate and prolong those of the sympathetic divi-
sion of the autonomic nervous system (mimetic means
“to mimic”).
Epinephrine and Norepinephrine
Epinephrine (Adrenalin) and norepinephrine (nor-
adrenalin) are both secreted in stress situations and
help prepare the body for “ﬁght or ﬂight.” Norepi-
nephrine is secreted in small amounts, and its most
signiﬁcant function is to cause vasoconstriction in the
skin, viscera, and skeletal muscles (that is, throughout
the body), which raises blood pressure.
Epinephrine, secreted in larger amounts, increases
the heart rate and force of contraction and stimulates
vasoconstriction in skin and viscera and vasodilation in
skeletal muscles. It also dilates the bronchioles,
decreases peristalsis, stimulates the liver to change
glycogen to glucose, increases the use of fats for
energy, and increases the rate of cell respiration. Many
of these effects do indeed seem to be an echo of sym-
pathetic responses, don’t they? Responding to stress is
so important that the body acts redundantly (that is,
exceeds what is necessary, or repeats itself) and has
both a nervous mechanism and a hormonal mecha-
nism. Epinephrine is actually more effective than sym-
pathetic stimulation, however, because the hormone
increases energy production and cardiac output to a
greater extent. The hormones of the adrenal medulla
are summarized in Table 10–6, and their functions are
shown in Fig. 10–9.
ADRENAL CORTEX
The adrenal cortex secretes three types of steroid
hormones: mineralocorticoids, glucocorticoids, and
Table 10–5
HORMONES OF THE PANCREAS
Regulation
Hormone
Functions
of Secretion
Glucagon
(alpha cells)
Insulin (beta cells)
Somatostatin
(delta cells)
• Increases conversion of glycogen to glucose in the liver
• Increases the use of excess amino acids and of fats for energy
• Increases glucose transport into cells and the use of glucose for
energy production
• Increases the conversion of excess glucose to glycogen in the liver
and muscles
• Increases amino acid and fatty acid transport into cells, and their
use in synthesis reactions
• Decreases secretion of insulin and glucagon
• Slows absorption of nutrients
Hypoglycemia
Hyperglycemia
Rising levels of insulin
and glucagon
Table 10–6
HORMONES OF THE ADRENAL MEDULLA
Regulation
Hormone
Function(s)
of Secretion
Norepinephrine
Epinephrine
• Causes vasoconstriction in skin, viscera, and skeletal muscles
• Increases heart rate and force of contraction
• Dilates bronchioles
• Decreases peristalsis
• Increases conversion of glycogen to glucose in the liver
• Causes vasodilation in skeletal muscles
• Causes vasoconstriction in skin and viscera
• Increases use of fats for energy
• Increases the rate of cell respiration
Sympathetic impulses
from the hypo-
thalamus in stress
situations
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

238
The Endocrine System
BOX 10–3
DIABETES MELLITUS
more water is lost as well, symptoms include
greater urinary output (polyuria) and thirst (poly-
dipsia).
The long-term effects of hyperglycemia produce
distinctive vascular changes. The capillary walls
thicken, and exchange of gases and nutrients
diminishes. The most damaging effects are seen in
the skin (especially of the feet), the retina (diabetic
retinopathy), and the kidneys. Poorly controlled
diabetes may lead to dry gangrene, blindness, and
severe kidney damage. Atherosclerosis is common,
because faulty triglyceride metabolism is linked to
faulty glucose metabolism. Neuropathy (damage to
nerves) leads to impaired cutaneous sensation and
difficulty with ﬁne movements, such as buttoning a
shirt. It is now possible for diabetics to prevent
much of this tissue damage by precise monitoring
of the blood glucose level and more frequent
administration of insulin. Insulin pumps are able to
more closely mimic the natural secretion of insulin.
A very serious potential problem for the type 1
diabetic is ketoacidosis. When glucose cannot be
used for energy, the body turns to fats and proteins,
which are converted by the liver to ketones.
Ketones are organic acids (acetone, acetoacetic
acid) that can be used in cell respiration, but cells
are not able to utilize them rapidly so ketones
accumulate in the blood. Ketones are acids, and
lower the pH of the blood as they accumulate. The
kidneys excrete excess ketones, but in doing so
excrete more water as well, which leads to dehy-
dration and worsens the acidosis. Without adminis-
tration of insulin to permit the use of glucose, and
IV ﬂuids to restore blood volume to normal, ketoaci-
dosis will progress to coma and death.
There are two types of diabetes mellitus: Type 1
is called insulin-dependent diabetes and its onset is
usually in childhood (juvenile onset). Type 2
is called non–insulin-dependent diabetes, and its
onset is usually later in life (maturity onset).
Type 1 diabetes is characterized by destruction
of the beta cells of the islets of Langerhans and a
complete lack of insulin (see Box Figure 10–A);
onset is usually abrupt. Destruction of the beta cells
is an autoimmune response, perhaps triggered by a
virus. There may be a genetic predisposition,
because certain HLA types are found more fre-
quently in type 1 diabetics than in other children
(see Box 11–5: HLA). Insulin by injection (inhaled
insulin is undergoing clinical trials) is essential to
control type 1 diabetes. Research is continuing on
the use of immunosuppressant medications to try
to preserve some beta cells (if diagnosis is early),
and also on the transplantation of stem cells to
replace lost beta cells.
In type 2 diabetes, insulin is produced but can-
not exert its effects on cells because of a loss of
insulin receptors on cell membranes (see Box Figure
10–A). Onset of type 2 diabetes is usually gradual,
and risk factors include a family history of diabetes
and being overweight. Control may not require
insulin, but rather medications that enable insulin
to react with the remaining membrane receptors.
For those with a family history of diabetes, a low-fat
diet and regular exercise reduce the risk of devel-
oping the disease. The commitment to exercise
must be lifelong but is well worth the effort,
because diabetes is very destructive.
Without insulin (or its effects) blood glucose level
remains high, and glucose is lost in urine. Since
A  Normal
B  Type 1
C  Type 2
Glucose
Insulin
Insulin Receptor
Box Figure 10–A
(A) Cell membrane in normal state, with insulin receptors and
insulin to regulate glucose intake. (B) Cell membrane in type 1 diabetes: insulin not
present, glucose remains outside cell. (C) Cell membrane in type 2 diabetes: without
insulin receptors, glucose remains outside cell.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Endocrine System
239
Norepinephrine
Epinephrine
Dilates bronchioles
Increases conversion
of
glycogen to glucose
Increases use of
fats for energy
Increases cell
respiration
Increases rate and
force of contraction
Vasoconstriction
in skin
Vasoconstriction
in viscera
Decreases
peristalsis
Vasodilation
in
skeletal muscle
Vasoconstriction in
skeletal muscle
Adrenal medulla
Figure 10–9.
Functions of epinephrine and norepinephrine.
QUESTION: Do epinephrine and norepinephrine have the same effect on skeletal muscle?
Explain your answer.
sex hormones. The sex hormones, “female” estrogens
and “male” androgens (similar to testosterone), are
produced in very small amounts, and their importance
is not known with certainty. They may contribute to
rapid body growth during early puberty. They may
also be important in supplying estrogen to women
after menopause and to men throughout life (see the
“Estrogen” section later in this chapter).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The functions of the other adrenal cortical hor-
mones are well known, however, and these are consid-
ered vital hormones.
Aldosterone
Aldosterone is the most abundant of the mineralo-
corticoids, and we will use it as a representative of this
group of hormones. The target organs of aldosterone
are the kidneys, but there are important secondary
effects as well. Aldosterone increases the reabsorption
of sodium and the excretion of potassium by the kid-
ney tubules. Sodium ions (Na) are returned to the
blood, and potassium ions (K) are excreted in urine.
Look at Fig. 10–10 as you read the following.
As Na ions are reabsorbed, hydrogen ions (H)
may be excreted in exchange. This is one mechanism
to prevent the accumulation of excess H ions, which
would cause acidosis of body ﬂuids. Also, as Na ions
are reabsorbed, negative ions such as chloride (Cl)
and bicarbonate (HCO3
–) follow the Na ions back to
the blood, and water follows by osmosis. This indirect
effect of aldosterone, the reabsorption of water by the
kidneys, is very important to maintain normal blood
volume and blood pressure. In summary, then, aldos-
terone maintains normal blood levels of sodium and
potassium, and contributes to the maintenance of nor-
mal blood pH, blood volume, and blood pressure.
A number of factors stimulate the secretion of
aldosterone. These are a deﬁciency of sodium, loss of
blood or dehydration that lowers blood pressure, or an
elevated blood level of potassium. Low blood pressure
or blood volume activates the renin-angiotensin
mechanism of the kidneys. This mechanism is dis-
cussed in Chapters 13 and 18, so we will say for now
that the process culminates in the formation of a
chemical called angiotensin II. Angiotensin II causes
vasoconstriction and stimulates the secretion of aldos-
terone by the adrenal cortex. Aldosterone then
increases sodium and water retention by the kidneys
to help restore blood volume and blood pressure to
normal.
Cortisol
We will use cortisol as a representative of the group
of hormones called glucocorticoids, because it is
responsible for most of the actions of this group
(Fig. 10–11). Cortisol increases the use of fats and
excess amino acids (gluconeogenesis) for energy and
decreases the use of glucose. This is called the glucose-
sparing effect, and it is important because it conserves
240
The Endocrine System
Adrenal cortex
Aldosterone
K+ ions
excreted
Na+ ions
reabsorbed
HCO3
– ions reabsorbed
H2O reabsorbed
H+ ions excreted
Blood volume,
blood pressure,
and pH are
maintained
Figure 10–10.
Functions of aldosterone. Direct and indirect functions are shown.
QUESTION: What ions does aldosterone have a direct effect on, and what is the effect?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

glucose for use by the brain. Cortisol is secreted in any
type of physiological stress situation: disease, physical
injury, hemorrhage, fear or anger, exercise, and
hunger. Although most body cells easily use fatty acids
and excess amino acids in cell respiration, brain cells
do not, so they must have glucose. By enabling other
cells to use the alternative energy sources, cortisol
ensures that whatever glucose is present will be avail-
able to the brain.
Cortisol also has an anti-inﬂammatory effect.
During inﬂammation, histamine from damaged tis-
sues makes capillaries more permeable, and the lyso-
somes of damaged cells release their enzymes, which
help break down damaged tissue but may also cause
destruction of nearby healthy tissue. Cortisol blocks
the effects of histamine and stabilizes lysosomal mem-
branes, preventing excessive tissue destruction.
Inﬂammation is a beneﬁcial process up to a point, and
is an essential ﬁrst step if tissue repair is to take place.
It may, however, become a vicious cycle of damage,
inﬂammation, more damage, more inﬂammation,
and so on—a positive feedback mechanism. Normal
cortisol secretion seems to be the brake, to limit
the inﬂammation process to what is useful for tissue
repair, and to prevent excessive tissue destruction.
Too much cortisol, however, decreases the immune
response, leaving the body susceptible to infection
and signiﬁcantly slowing the healing of damaged
tissue (see Box 10–4: Disorders of the Adrenal
Cortex).
The Endocrine System
241
Adrenal cortex
Cortisol
Conserves
glucose
Limits
inflammation
Increases use of
excess
amino acids
Increases use
of fats
ATP
ATP
Adipose tissue
Amino acids
Glucose
Brain
Glycogen
Liver
Most tissues
Figure 10–11.
Functions of cortisol.
QUESTION: Which food types will be used for energy by most tissues? Which food type
may be stored?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The direct stimulus for cortisol secretion is ACTH
from the anterior pituitary gland, which in turn is
stimulated by corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH)
from the hypothalamus. CRH is produced in the
physiological stress situations mentioned earlier.
Although we often think of epinephrine as a hormone
important in stress, cortisol is also important. The
hormones of the adrenal cortex are summarized in
Table 10–7.
OVARIES
The ovaries are located in the pelvic cavity, one on
each side of the uterus. The hormones produced by
the ovaries are the steroids estrogen and progesterone,
and the protein inhibin. Although their functions are
an integral part of Chapters 20 and 21, we will brieﬂy
discuss some of them here.
242
The Endocrine System
Table 10–7
HORMONES OF THE ADRENAL CORTEX
Hormone
Functions
Regulation of Secretion
Aldosterone
Cortisol
• Increases reabsorption of Na ions by
the kidneys to the blood
• Increases excretion of K ions by the
kidneys in urine
• Increases use of fats and excess amino
acids for energy
• Decreases use of glucose for energy
(except for the brain)
• Increases conversion of glucose to
glycogen in the liver
• Anti-inﬂammatory effect: stabilizes lyso-
somes and blocks the effects of histamine
Low blood Na level
Low blood volume or blood pressure
High blood K level
ACTH (anterior pituitary) during
physiological stress
BOX 10–4
DISORDERS OF THE ADRENAL CORTEX
The cause may be a pituitary tumor that increases
ACTH secretion or a tumor of the adrenal cortex
itself.
Excessive cortisol promotes fat deposition in the
trunk of the body, while the extremities remain
thin. The skin becomes thin and fragile, and healing
after injury is slow. The bones also become fragile
because osteoporosis is accelerated. Also character-
istic of this syndrome is the rounded appearance of
the face. Treatment is aimed at removal of the cause
of the hypersecretion, whether it be a pituitary or
adrenal tumor.
Cushing’s syndrome may also be seen in people
who receive corticosteroids for medical reasons.
Transplant recipients or people with rheumatoid
arthritis or severe asthma who must take cortico-
steroids may exhibit any of the above symptoms. In
such cases, the disadvantages of this medication
must be weighed against the beneﬁts provided.
Addison’s disease is the result of hyposecretion of
the adrenol cortical hormones. Most cases are idio-
pathic, that is, of unknown cause; atrophy of the
adrenal cortex decreases both cortisol and aldos-
terone secretion.
Deﬁciency of cortisol is characterized by hypo-
glycemia, decreased gluconeogenesis, and deple-
tion of glycogen in the liver. Consequences are
muscle weakness and the inability to resist physio-
logical stress. Aldosterone deﬁciency leads to reten-
tion of potassium and excretion of sodium and
water in urine. The result is severe dehydration, low
blood volume, and low blood pressure. Without
treatment, circulatory shock and death will follow.
Treatment involves administration of hydrocorti-
sone; in high doses this will also compensate for the
aldosterone deﬁciency.
Cushing’s syndrome is the result of hyper-
secretion of the adrenal cortex, primarily cortisol.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Endocrine System
243
ESTROGEN
Estrogen is secreted by the follicle cells of the ovary;
secretion is stimulated by FSH from the anterior pitu-
itary gland. Estrogen promotes the maturation of the
ovum in the ovarian follicle and stimulates the growth
of blood vessels in the endometrium (lining) of the
uterus in preparation for a possible fertilized egg.
The secondary sex characteristics in women also
develop in response to estrogen. These include
growth of the duct system of the mammary glands,
growth of the uterus, and the deposition of fat subcu-
taneously in the hips and thighs. The closure of the
epiphyseal discs in long bones is brought about by
estrogen, and growth in height stops. Estrogen is also
believed to lower blood levels of cholesterol and tri-
glycerides. For women before the age of menopause
this is beneﬁcial in that it decreases the risk of athero-
sclerosis and coronary artery disease.
Research suggests that estrogen no longer be con-
sidered only a “female” hormone. Estrogen seems to
have effects on many organs, including the brain, the
heart, and blood vessels. In the brain, testosterone
from the testes or the adrenal cortex can be converted
to estrogen, which may be important for memory,
especially for older people. Estrogen seems to have
non-reproductive functions in both men and women,
although we cannot yet be as speciﬁc as we can be
with the reproductive functions in women, mentioned
previously.
PROGESTERONE
When a mature ovarian follicle releases an ovum, the
follicle becomes the corpus luteum and begins to
secrete progesterone in addition to estrogen. This is
stimulated by LH from the anterior pituitary gland.
Progesterone promotes the storage of glycogen
and the further growth of blood vessels in the endo-
metrium, which thus becomes a potential placenta.
The secretory cells of the mammary glands also
develop under the inﬂuence of progesterone.
Both progesterone and estrogen are secreted by the
placenta during pregnancy; these functions are cov-
ered in Chapter 21.
INHIBIN
The corpus luteum secretes another hormone, called
inhibin. Inhibin helps decrease the secretion of FSH
by the anterior pituitary gland, and GnRH by the
hypothalamus.
TESTES
The testes are located in the scrotum, a sac of skin
between the upper thighs. Two hormones, testos-
terone and inhibin, are secreted by the testes.
TESTOSTERONE
Testosterone is a steroid hormone secreted by the
interstitial cells of the testes; the stimulus for secretion
is LH from the anterior pituitary gland.
Testosterone promotes maturation of sperm in the
seminiferous tubules of the testes; this process begins
at puberty and continues throughout life. At puberty,
testosterone stimulates development of the male sec-
ondary sex characteristics. These include growth of
all the reproductive organs, growth of facial and body
hair, growth of the larynx and deepening of the voice,
and growth (protein synthesis) of the skeletal muscles.
Testosterone also brings about closure of the epiphy-
ses of the long bones.
INHIBIN
The hormone inhibin is secreted by the sustentacular
cells of the testes; the stimulus for secretion is
increased testosterone. The function of inhibin is to
decrease the secretion of FSH by the anterior pituitary
gland. The interaction of inhibin, testosterone, and
the anterior pituitary hormones maintains spermato-
genesis at a constant rate.
OTHER HORMONES
Melatonin is a hormone produced by the pineal
gland, which is located at the back of the third ventri-
cle of the brain. The secretion of melatonin is greatest
during darkness and decreases when light enters the
eye and the retina signals the hypothalamus. A recent
discovery is that the retina also produces melatonin,
which seems to indicate that the eyes and pineal gland
work with the biological clock of the hypothalamus. In
other mammals, melatonin helps regulate seasonal
reproductive cycles. For people, melatonin deﬁnitely
stimulates the onset of sleep and increases its duration.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

244
The Endocrine System
Other claims, such as that melatonin strengthens the
immune system or prevents cellular damage and
aging, are without evidence as yet.
There are other organs that produce hormones that
have only one or a few target organs. For example, the
stomach and duodenum produce hormones that regu-
late aspects of digestion and appetite. Adipose tissue
produces the appetite-suppressing hormone leptin.
The thymus gland produces hormones necessary for
the normal functioning of the immune system, and the
kidneys produce a hormone that stimulates red blood
cell production. All of these will be discussed in later
chapters.
PROSTAGLANDINS
Prostaglandins (PGs) are made by virtually all cells
from the phospholipids of their cell membranes. They
differ from other hormones in that they do not circu-
late in the blood to target organs, but rather exert
their effects locally, where they are produced.
There are many types of prostaglandins, designated
by the letters A through I, as in PGA, PGB, and so on.
Prostaglandins have many functions, and we will list
only a few of them here. Prostaglandins are known to
be involved in inﬂammation, pain mechanisms, blood
clotting, vasoconstriction and vasodilation, contrac-
tion of the uterus, reproduction, secretion of digestive
glands, and nutrient metabolism. Current research
is directed at determining the normal functioning of
prostaglandins in the hope that many of them may
eventually be used clinically.
One familiar example may illustrate the widespread
activity of prostaglandins. For minor pain such as a
headache, many people take aspirin. Aspirin inhibits
the synthesis of prostaglandins involved in pain mech-
anisms and usually relieves the pain. Some people,
however, such as those with rheumatoid arthritis, may
take large amounts of aspirin to diminish pain and
inﬂammation. These people may bruise easily because
blood clotting has been impaired. This too is an effect
of aspirin, which blocks the synthesis of prostaglan-
dins necessary for blood clotting.
MECHANISMS OF
HORMONE ACTION
Exactly how hormones exert their effects on their tar-
get organs involves a number of complex processes,
which will be presented simply here.
A hormone must ﬁrst bond to a receptor for it on
or in the target cell. Cells respond to certain hor-
mones and not to others because of the presence of
speciﬁc receptors, which are proteins. These receptor
proteins may be part of the cell membrane or within
the cytoplasm or nucleus of the target cells. A hor-
mone will affect only those cells that have its speciﬁc
receptors. Liver cells, for example, have cell mem-
brane receptors for insulin, glucagon, growth hor-
mone, and epinephrine; bone cells have receptors for
growth hormone, PTH, and calcitonin. Cells of the
ovaries and testes do not have receptors for PTH and
calcitonin, but do have receptors for FSH and LH,
which bone cells and liver cells do not have. Once a
hormone has bonded to a receptor on or in its target
cell, other reactions will take place.
THE TWO-MESSENGER MECHANISM—
PROTEIN HORMONES
The two-messenger mechanism of hormone action
involves “messengers” that make something happen,
that is, stimulate speciﬁc reactions. Protein hor-
mones usually bond to receptors of the cell mem-
brane, and the hormone is called the ﬁrst messenger.
The hormone–receptor bonding activates the enzyme
adenyl cyclase on the inner surface of the cell mem-
brane. Adenyl cyclase synthesizes a substance called
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cyclic AMP or
cAMP) from ATP, and cyclic AMP is the second mes-
senger.
Cyclic AMP activates speciﬁc enzymes within the
cell, which bring about the cell’s characteristic
response to the hormone. These responses include a
change in the permeability of the cell membrane to a
speciﬁc substance, an increase in protein synthesis,
activation of other enzymes, or the secretion of a cel-
lular product.
In summary, a cell’s response to a hormone is deter-
mined by the enzymes within the cell, that is, the reac-
tions of which the cell is capable. These reactions are
brought about by the ﬁrst messenger, the hormone,
which stimulates the formation of the second messen-
ger, cyclic AMP. Cyclic AMP then activates the cell’s
enzymes to elicit a response to the hormone (Fig.
10–12).
ACTION OF STEROID HORMONES
Steroid hormones are soluble in the lipids of the cell
membrane and diffuse easily into a target cell. Once
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Endocrine System
245
inside the cell, the steroid hormone combines with a
protein receptor in the cytoplasm, and this steroid-
protein complex enters the nucleus of the cell. Within
the nucleus, the steroid-protein complex activates spe-
ciﬁc genes, which begin the process of protein syn-
thesis. The enzymes produced bring about the cell’s
characteristic response to the hormone (see Fig.
10–12).
AGING AND THE
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
Most of the endocrine glands decrease their secretions
with age, but normal aging usually does not lead to
serious hormone deﬁciencies. There are decreases in
adrenol cortical hormones, for example, but the levels
are usually sufficient to maintain homeostasis of water,
electrolytes, and nutrients. The decreased secretion of
growth hormone leads to a decrease in muscle mass
and an increase in fat storage. A lower basal metabolic
rate is common in elderly people as the thyroid slows
its secretion of thyroxine. Unless speciﬁc pathologies
develop, however, the endocrine system usually con-
tinues to function adequately in old age.
SUMMARY
The hormones of endocrine glands are involved in vir-
tually all aspects of normal body functioning. The
growth and repair of tissues, the utilization of food to
produce energy, responses to stress, the maintenance
of the proper levels and pH of body ﬂuids, and the
continuance of the human species all depend on hor-
mones. Some of these topics will be discussed in later
chapters. As you might expect, you will be reading
about the functions of many of these hormones again
and reviewing their important contributions to the
maintenance of homeostasis.
A
B
Figure 10–12.
Mechanisms
of hormone action. (A) Two-
messenger mechanism of the
action of protein hormones.
(B) Action of steroid hormones.
See text for description.
QUESTION: What must a cell
have in order to be a target cell
for a particular hormone?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

246
The Endocrine System
Endocrine glands are ductless glands that
secrete hormones into the blood. Hormones
exert their effects on target organs or tis-
sues.
Chemistry of Hormones
1. Amines—structural variations of the amino acid
tyrosine; thyroxine, epinephrine.
2. Proteins—chains of amino acids; peptides are short
chains. Insulin, GH, glucagon are proteins; ADH
and oxytocin are peptides.
3. Steroids—made from cholesterol; cortisol, aldos-
terone, estrogen, testosterone.
Regulation of Hormone Secretion
1. Hormones are secreted when there is a need for
their effects. Each hormone has a speciﬁc stimulus
for secretion.
2. The secretion of most hormones is regulated by
negative feedback mechanisms: As the hormone
exerts its effects, the stimulus for secretion is
reversed, and secretion of the hormone decreases.
Pituitary Gland (Hypophysis)—hangs from
hypothalamus by the infundibulum; enclosed
by sella turcica of sphenoid bone (see Figs.
10–1 and 10–2)
1. Posterior Pituitary (Neurohypophysis)—stores
hormones produced by the hypothalamus (Figs.
10–2 and 10–3 and Table 10–1).
• ADH—increases water reabsorption by the kid-
neys, decreases sweating, in large amounts causes
vasoconstriction. Result: decreases urinary out-
put and increases blood volume; increases BP.
Stimulus: nerve impulses from hypothalamus
when body water decreases.
• Oxytocin—stimulates contraction of myomet-
rium of uterus during labor and release of milk
from mammary glands. Stimulus: nerve impulses
from hypothalamus as cervix is stretched or as
infant sucks on nipple.
2. Anterior Pituitary (Adenohypophysis)—secretions
are regulated by releasing hormones from the
hypothalamus (Fig. 10–3 and Table 10–2).
• GH—through intermediary molecules, IGFs,
GH increases amino acid transport into cells
and increases protein synthesis; increases rate
of mitosis; increases use of fats for energy
(Fig. 10–4). Stimulus: GHRH from the hypo-
thalamus.
• TSH—increases secretion of thyroxine and T3
by the thyroid. Stimulus: TRH from the hypo-
thalamus.
• ACTH—increases secretion of cortisol by the
adrenal cortex. Stimulus: CRH from the hypo-
thalamus.
• Prolactin—initiates and maintains milk produc-
tion by the mammary glands. Stimulus: PRH
from the hypothalamus.
• FSH—In women: initiates development of ova in
ovarian follicles and secretion of estrogen by fol-
licle cells.
In men: initiates sperm development in the testes.
Stimulus: GnRH from the hypothalamus.
• LH—In women: stimulates ovulation, transforms
mature follicle into corpus luteum and stimulates
secretion of progesterone.
In men: stimulates secretion of testosterone by
the testes. Stimulus: GnRH from the hypothala-
mus.
Thyroid Gland—on front and sides of tra-
chea below the larynx (see Fig. 10–1 and
Table 10–3)
• Thyroxine (T4) and T3—(Fig. 10–5) produced by
thyroid follicles. Increase use of all food types for
energy and increase protein synthesis. Necessary
for normal physical, mental, and sexual develop-
ment. Stimulus: TSH from the anterior pituitary.
• Calcitonin—produced by parafollicular cells.
Decreases reabsorption of calcium from bones
and lowers blood calcium level. Stimulus: hyper-
calcemia.
Parathyroid Glands—four; two on posterior
of each lobe of thyroid (see Figs. 10–6 and
10–7 and Table 10–4)
• PTH—increases reabsorption of calcium and
phosphate from bones to the blood; increases
absorption of calcium and phosphate by the
small intestine; increases reabsorption of calcium
and excretion of phosphate by the kidneys, and
activates vitamin D. Result: raises blood calcium
and lowers blood phosphate levels. Stimulus:
hypocalcemia. Inhibitor: hypercalcemia.
STUDY OUTLINE
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Pancreas—extends from curve of duodenum
to the spleen. Islets of Langerhans contain
alpha cells and beta cells (see Figs. 10–1 and
10–8 and Table 10–5)
• Glucagon—secreted by alpha cells. Stimulates
liver to change glycogen to glucose; increases use
of fats and amino acids for energy. Result: raises
blood glucose level. Stimulus: hypoglycemia.
• Insulin—secreted by beta cells. Increases use of
glucose by cells to produce energy; stimulates
liver and muscles to change glucose to glycogen;
increases cellular intake of fatty acids and amino
acids to use for synthesis of lipids and proteins.
Result: lowers blood glucose level. Stimulus: hy-
perglycemia.
• Somatostatin—inhibits secretion of insulin and
glucagon.
Adrenal Glands—one on top of each kidney;
each has an inner adrenal medulla and an
outer adrenal cortex (see Fig. 10–1)
1. Adrenal Medulla—produces catecholamines in
stress situations (Table 10–6 and Fig. 10–9).
• Norepinephrine—stimulates 
vasoconstriction
and raises blood pressure.
• Epinephrine—increases heart rate and force,
causes vasoconstriction in skin and viscera and
vasodilation in skeletal muscles; dilates bronchi-
oles; slows peristalsis; causes liver to change
glycogen to glucose; increases use of fats for
energy; increases rate of cell respiration. Stimu-
lus: sympathetic impulses from the hypothala-
mus.
2. Adrenal Cortex—produces mineralocorticoids,
glucocorticoids, and very small amounts of sex hor-
mones (function not known with certainty) (Table
10–7).
• Aldosterone—(Fig. 10–10) increases reabsorp-
tion of sodium and excretion of potassium by
the kidneys. Results: hydrogen ions are excreted
in exchange for sodium; chloride and bicarbon-
ate ions and water follow sodium back to the
blood; maintains normal blood pH, blood vol-
ume, and blood pressure. Stimulus: decreased
blood sodium or elevated blood potassium;
decreased blood volume or blood pressure (acti-
vates the renin-angiotensin mechanism of the
kidneys).
• Cortisol—(Fig. 10–11) increases use of fats and
amino acids for energy; decreases use of glucose
to conserve glucose for the brain; anti-inﬂamma-
tory effect: blocks effects of histamine and stabi-
lizes lysosomes to prevent excessive tissue
damage. Stimulus: ACTH from hypothalamus
during physiological stress.
Ovaries—in pelvic cavity on either side of
uterus (see Fig. 10–1)
• Estrogen—produced by follicle cells. Promotes
maturation of ovum; stimulates growth of blood
vessels in endometrium; stimulates development
of secondary sex characteristics: growth of duct
system of mammary glands, growth of uterus, fat
deposition. Promotes closure of epiphyses of
long bones; lowers blood levels of cholesterol
and triglycerides. Stimulus: FSH from anterior
pituitary.
• Progesterone—produced by the corpus luteum.
Promotes storage of glycogen and further
growth of blood vessels in the endometrium;
promotes growth of secretory cells of mammary
glands. Stimulus: LH from anterior pituitary.
• Inhibin—inhibits secretion of FSH.
Testes—in scrotum between the upper
thighs (see Fig. 10–1)
• Testosterone—produced by interstitial cells.
Promotes maturation of sperm in testes; stimu-
lates development of secondary sex characteris-
tics: growth of reproductive organs, facial and
body hair, larynx, skeletal muscles; promotes clo-
sure of epiphyses of long bones. Stimulus: LH
from anterior pituitary.
• Inhibin—produced by sustentacular cells.
Inhibits secretion of FSH to maintain a constant
rate of sperm production. Stimulus: increased
testosterone.
Other Hormones
• Melatonin—secreted by the pineal gland during
darkness; brings on sleep.
• Prostaglandins—synthesized by cells from the
phospholipids of their cell membranes; exert
their effects locally. Are involved in inﬂammation
and pain, reproduction, nutrient metabolism,
changes in blood vessels, blood clotting.
Mechanisms of Hormone Action (see Fig.
10–12)
1. A hormone affects cells that have receptors for it.
Receptors are proteins that may be part of the cell
The Endocrine System
247
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

248
The Endocrine System
membrane, or within the cytoplasm or nucleus of
the target cell.
• The two-messenger mechanism: a protein hor-
mone (1st messenger) bonds to a membrane
receptor; stimulates formation of cyclic AMP
(2nd messenger), which activates the cell’s
enzymes to bring about the cell’s characteristic
response to the hormone.
• Steroid hormones diffuse easily through cell
membranes and bond to cytoplasmic receptors.
Steroid-protein complex enters the nucleus and
activates certain genes, which initiate protein
synthesis.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Use the following to describe a negative feedback
mechanism: TSH, TRH, decreased metabolic rate,
thyroxine and T3. (p. 232)
2. Name the two hormones stored in the posterior
pituitary gland. Where are these hormones pro-
duced? State the functions of each of these hor-
mones. (pp. 227–228)
3. Name the two hormones of the anterior pituitary
gland that affect the ovaries or testes, and state
their functions. (p. 230)
4. Describe the antagonistic effects of PTH and calci-
tonin on bones and on blood calcium level. State
the other functions of PTH. (p. 233)
5. Describe the antagonistic effects of insulin and
glucagon on the liver and on blood glucose level.
(pp. 235–236)
6. Describe how cortisol affects the use of foods for
energy. Explain the anti-inﬂammatory effects of
cortisol. (pp. 240–241)
7. State the effect of aldosterone on the kidneys.
Describe the results of this effect on the composi-
tion of the blood. (p. 240)
8. When are epinephrine and norepinephrine
secreted? Describe the effects of these hormones.
(p. 237)
9. Name the hormones necessary for development
of egg cells in the ovaries. Name the hormones
necessary for development of sperm in the testes.
(p. 243)
10. State what prostaglandins are made from. State
three functions of prostaglandins. (p. 244)
11. Name the hormones that promote the growth of
the endometrium of the uterus in preparation for
a fertilized egg, and state precisely where each
hormone is produced. (p. 243)
12. State the functions of thyroxine and T3. For what
aspects of growth are these hormones necessary?
(pp. 231–232)
13. Explain the functions of GH as they are related to
normal growth. (pp. 228–229)
14. State the direct stimulus for secretion of each of
these hormones: (pp. 227, 229, 232, 233, 235, 240,
241, 243)
a. Thyroxine
b. Insulin
c. Cortisol
d. PTH
e. Aldosterone
f. Calcitonin
g. GH
h. Glucagon
i. Progesterone
j. ADH
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
1. During a soccer game, 12-year-old Alicia got in a
tangle with another player, fell hard on her hand,
and fractured her radius. She is going to be ﬁne,
though she will be wearing a cast for a few weeks.
What hormones were secreted immediately after
the injury? What functions do they have? What
hormones will contribute to the healing of the
fracture, and how?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Endocrine System
249
2. Darren is 15 years old, tall for his age, but he wants
to build more muscle. He decides that he will eat
only protein foods, because, he says, “Muscle is
protein, so protein will make protein, and the more
protein, the more muscle.” In part he is correct,
and in part incorrect. Explain, and name the hor-
mones involved in protein metabolism; state how
each affects protein metabolism.
3. Many people love pasta, others love potatoes, and
still others love rice. Name the hormones involved
in carbohydrate metabolism, and, for each, explain
its speciﬁc function.
4. Unfortunately, many fast-food meals are well
over 50% fat. Name the hormones involved in
fat metabolism, and, for each, explain its speciﬁc
function.
5. You have read about the liver several times in this
chapter, and often seen its picture as a target organ.
Many functions of the liver are stimulated by hor-
mones. Name as many hormones as you can think
of with effects on the liver, and state the function of
each.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

250
CHAPTER 11
Chapter Outline
Characteristics of Blood
Plasma
Blood Cells
Red Blood Cells
Function
Production and maturation
Life span
Blood types
White Blood Cells
Classiﬁcation
Functions
Platelets
Function
Prevention of abnormal clotting
BOX 11–1
ANEMIA
BOX 11–2
JAUNDICE
BOX 11–3
RH DISEASE OF THE NEWBORN
BOX 11–4
LEUKEMIA
BOX 11–5
WHITE BLOOD CELL TYPES: HLA
BOX 11–6
HEMOPHILIA
BOX 11–7
DISSOLVING CLOTS
Student Objectives
• Describe the composition and explain the func-
tions of blood plasma.
• Name the primary hemopoietic tissue and the
kinds of blood cells produced.
• State the function of red blood cells, including the
protein and the mineral involved.
• Name the nutrients necessary for red blood cell
production, and state the function of each.
• Explain how hypoxia may change the rate of red
blood cell production.
• Describe what happens to red blood cells that have
reached the end of their life span; what happens to
the hemoglobin?
• Explain the ABO and Rh blood types.
• Name the ﬁve kinds of white blood cells and
describe the function of each.
• State what platelets are, and explain how they are
involved in hemostasis.
• Describe the three stages of chemical blood clot-
ting.
• Explain how abnormal clotting is prevented in the
vascular system.
• State the normal values in a complete blood count.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Blood
251
New Terminology
ABO group (A-B-O GROOP)
Albumin (al-BYOO-min)
Bilirubin (BILL-ee-roo-bin)
Chemical clotting (KEM-i-kuhl KLAH-ting)
Embolism (EM-boh-lizm)
Erythrocyte (e-RITH-roh-sight)
Hemoglobin (HEE-moh-GLOW-bin)
Hemostasis (HEE-moh-STAY-sis)
Heparin (HEP-ar-in)
Immunity (im-YOO-ni-tee)
Leukocyte (LOO-koh-sight)
Macrophage (MAK-roh-fahj)
Normoblast (NOR-moh-blast)
Reticulocyte (re-TIK-yoo-loh-sight)
Rh factor (R-H FAK-ter)
Thrombocyte (THROM-boh-sight)
Thrombus (THROM-bus)
Related Clinical Terminology
Anemia (uh-NEE-mee-yah)
Differential count (DIFF-er-EN-shul KOWNT)
Erythroblastosis fetalis (e-RITH-roh-blass-TOH-sis
fee-TAL-is)
Hematocrit (hee-MAT-oh-krit)
Hemophilia (HEE-moh-FILL-ee-ah)
Jaundice (JAWN-diss)
Leukemia (loo-KEE-mee-ah)
Leukocytosis (LOO-koh-sigh-TOH-sis)
RhoGAM (ROH-gam)
Tissue typing (TISH-yoo-TIGH-ping)
Typing and cross-matching (TIGH-ping and
KROSS-match-ing)
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

One of the simplest and most familiar life-saving
medical procedures is a blood transfusion. As you
know, however, the blood of one individual is not
always compatible with that of another person. The
ABO blood types were discovered in the early 1900s
by Karl Landsteiner, an Austrian-American. He
also contributed to the discovery of the Rh factor in
1940. In the early 1940s, Charles Drew, an African-
American, developed techniques for processing and
storing blood plasma, which could then be used in
transfusions for people with any blood type. When we
donate blood today, our blood may be given to a recip-
ient as whole blood, or it may be separated into its
component parts, and recipients will then receive only
those parts they need, such as red cells, plasma, factor
8, or platelets. Each of these parts has a speciﬁc func-
tion, and all of the functions of blood are essential to
our survival.
The general functions of blood are transportation,
regulation, and protection. Materials transported by
the blood include nutrients, waste products, gases, and
hormones. The blood helps regulate ﬂuid–electrolyte
balance, acid–base balance, and the body temperature.
Protection against pathogens is provided by white
blood cells, and the blood clotting mechanism prevents
excessive loss of blood after injuries. Each of these
functions is covered in more detail in this chapter.
CHARACTERISTICS OF BLOOD
Blood has distinctive physical characteristics:
Amount—a person has 4 to 6 liters of blood, depend-
ing on his or her size. Of the total blood volume in
the human body, 38% to 48% is composed of the
various blood cells, also called formed elements. The
remaining 52% to 62% of the blood volume is
plasma, the liquid portion of blood (Fig. 11–1).
Color—you’re probably saying to yourself, “Of
course, it’s red!” Mention is made of this obvious
fact, however, because the color does vary. Arterial
blood is bright red because it contains high levels of
oxygen. Venous blood has given up much of its oxy-
gen in tissues, and has a darker, dull red color. This
may be important in the assessment of the source of
bleeding. If blood is bright red, it is probably from
a severed artery, and dark red blood is probably
venous blood.
pH—the normal pH range of blood is 7.35 to 7.45,
which is slightly alkaline. Venous blood normally
has a lower pH than does arterial blood because of
the presence of more carbon dioxide.
Viscosity—this means thickness or resistance to ﬂow.
Blood is about three to ﬁve times thicker than
water. Viscosity is increased by the presence of
blood cells and the plasma proteins, and this thick-
ness contributes to normal blood pressure.
PLASMA
Plasma is the liquid part of blood and is approxi-
mately 91% water. The solvent ability of water
enables the plasma to transport many types of sub-
stances. Nutrients absorbed in the digestive tract, such
as glucose, amino acids, and minerals, are circulated to
all body tissues. Waste products of the tissues, such as
urea and creatinine, circulate through the kidneys and
are excreted in urine. Hormones produced by
endocrine glands are carried in the plasma to their tar-
get organs, and antibodies are also transported in
plasma. Most of the carbon dioxide produced by cells
is carried in the plasma in the form of bicarbonate ions
(HCO3
–). When the blood reaches the lungs, the CO2
is re-formed, diffuses into the alveoli, and is exhaled.
Also in the plasma are the plasma proteins. The
clotting factors prothrombin, ﬁbrinogen, and others
are synthesized by the liver and circulate until acti-
vated to form a clot in a ruptured or damaged blood
vessel. Albumin is the most abundant plasma protein.
It too is synthesized by the liver. Albumin contributes
to the colloid osmotic pressure of blood, which pulls
tissue ﬂuid into capillaries. This is important to main-
tain normal blood volume and blood pressure. Other
plasma proteins are called globulins. Alpha and beta
globulins are synthesized by the liver and act as carri-
ers for molecules such as fats. The gamma globulins
are antibodies produced by lymphocytes. Antibodies
initiate the destruction of pathogens and provide us
with immunity.
Plasma also carries body heat. Heat is one of the
by-products of cell respiration (the production of ATP
in cells). Blood is warmed by ﬂowing through active
organs such as the liver and muscles. This heat is dis-
tributed to cooler parts of the body as blood continues
to circulate.
252
Blood
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

253
Other body tissues and fluids 92%
Blood
  8% 
Total body weight
Blood plasma 52–62%
Blood cells 38–48%
Blood volume
Erythrocytes 4.5–6.0 million
Water 91.5%
Blood cells
(per microliter) 
Other substances
Other substances
7%
1.5%
Thrombocytes   150,000 – 300,000 
Nutrients
Hormones
Nitrogenous
wastes
Respiratory
gases
Electrolytes
Fibrinogen 7%
Globulins
38%
Albumins
55%
Proteins
Basophils 0.5–1.0%
Eosinophils 1–3%
Monocytes 3–8%
Lymphocytes
20–35%
Neutrophils
55–70%
Leukocytes  5,000–10,000
 Proteins
Leukocytes
Figure 11–1.
Components of blood and the relationship of blood to other body tissues.
QUESTION: Blood plasma is mostly what substance? Which blood cells are the most
numerous?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

BLOOD CELLS
There are three kinds of blood cells: red blood cells,
white blood cells, and platelets. Blood cells are pro-
duced from stem cells in hemopoietic tissue. After
birth this is primarily the red bone marrow, found
in ﬂat and irregular bones such as the sternum,
hip bone, and vertebrae. Lymphocytes mature and
divide in lymphatic tissue, found in the spleen,
lymph nodes, and thymus gland. The thymus contains
stem cells that produce T lymphocytes, and the stem
cells in other lymphatic tissue also produce lympho-
cytes.
RED BLOOD CELLS
Also called erythrocytes, red blood cells (RBCs)
are biconcave discs, which means their centers are
thinner than their edges. You may recall from Chapter
3 that red blood cells are the only human cells with-
out nuclei. Their nuclei disintegrate as the red blood
cells mature and are not needed for normal func-
tioning.
A normal RBC count ranges from 4.5 to 6.0 million
cells per microliter (L) of blood (1 microliter  1
mm3  one millionth of a liter, a very small volume).
RBC counts for men are often toward the high end of
this range; those for women are often toward the low
end. Another way to measure the amount of RBCs is
the hematocrit. This test involves drawing blood into
a thin glass tube called a capillary tube, and centrifug-
ing the tube to force all the cells to one end. The per-
centages of cells and plasma can then be determined.
Because RBCs are by far the most abundant of the
blood cells, a normal hematocrit range is just like that
of the total blood cells: 38% to 48%. Both RBC count
and hematocrit (Hct) are part of a complete blood
count (CBC).
Function
Red blood cells contain the protein hemoglobin
(Hb), which gives them the ability to carry oxygen.
Each red blood cell contains approximately 300 mil-
lion hemoglobin molecules, each of which can bond to
four oxygen molecules (see Box Fig. 3–B). In the pul-
monary capillaries, RBCs pick up oxygen and oxyhe-
moglobin is formed. In the systemic capillaries,
hemoglobin gives up much of its oxygen and becomes
reduced hemoglobin. A determination of hemoglobin
level is also part of a CBC; the normal range is 12 to
18 grams per 100 mL of blood. Essential to the for-
mation of hemoglobin is the mineral iron; there are
four atoms of iron in each molecule of hemoglobin. It
is the iron that actually bonds to the oxygen and also
makes RBCs red.
Hemoglobin is also able to bond to carbon dioxide
(CO2), and does transport some CO2 from the tissues
to the lungs. But hemoglobin accounts for only about
10% of total CO2 transport (most is carried in the
plasma as bicarbonate ions).
Production and Maturation
Red blood cells are formed in red bone marrow (RBM)
in ﬂat and irregular bones. Within red bone marrow
are precursor cells called stem cells. Recall from
Chapter 3 that stem cells are unspecialized cells that
may develop, or differentiate, in several ways. The
stem cells of the red bone marrow may also be called
hemocytoblasts (hemo  “blood,” cyto  “cell,” blast
 “producing”), and they constantly undergo mitosis
to produce all the kinds of blood cells, many of which
are RBCs (Figs. 11–2 and 11–3). The rate of produc-
tion is very rapid (estimated at several million new
RBCs per second), and a major regulating factor is
oxygen. If the body is in a state of hypoxia, or lack of
oxygen, the kidneys produce a hormone called ery-
thropoietin, which stimulates the red bone marrow to
increase the rate of RBC production (that is, the rate
of stem cell mitosis). This will occur following hemor-
rhage or if a person stays for a time at a higher altitude.
As a result of the action of erythropoietin, more RBCs
will be available to carry oxygen and correct the
hypoxic state.
The stem cells that will become RBCs go through
a number of developmental stages, only the last two of
which we will mention (see Fig. 11–2). The nor-
moblast is the last stage with a nucleus, which then
disintegrates. The reticulocyte has fragments of the
endoplasmic reticulum, which are visible when blood
smears are stained for microscopic evaluation. These
immature cells are usually found in the red bone mar-
row, although a small number of reticulocytes in the
peripheral circulation is considered normal (up to
1.5% of the total RBCs). Large numbers of reticulo-
cytes or normoblasts in the circulating blood mean
that the number of mature RBCs is not sufficient to
254
Blood
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

255
Macrophage
Plasma cell
T cell
Monocyte
Thrombocytes
(platelets)
Stem cell
Lymphoblast
B cell
Natural
killer
cell
Eosinophil
Megakaryocyte
Normoblasts
Reticulocytes
Erythrocytes
Basophil
Neutrophil
Band cell
Figure 11–2.
Production of blood cells. Stem cells are found primarily in red bone mar-
row and are the precursor cells for all the types of blood cells.
QUESTION: Where are normoblasts and reticulocytes usually found, and why?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

carry the oxygen needed by the body. Such situations
include hemorrhage, or when mature RBCs have
been destroyed, as in Rh disease of the newborn, and
malaria.
The maturation of red blood cells requires many
nutrients. Protein and iron are necessary for the syn-
thesis of hemoglobin and become part of hemoglobin
molecules. Copper is part of some enzymes involved
in hemoglobin synthesis. The vitamins folic acid and
B12 are required for DNA synthesis in the stem cells of
the red bone marrow. As these cells undergo mitosis,
they must continually produce new sets of chromo-
somes. Vitamin B12 is also called the extrinsic factor
because its source is external, our food. Parietal cells
of the stomach lining produce the intrinsic factor, a
chemical that combines with the vitamin B12 in food to
prevent its digestion and promote its absorption in the
small intestine. A deﬁciency of either vitamin B12 or
the intrinsic factor results in pernicious anemia
(see Box 11–1: Anemia).
Life Span
Red blood cells live for approximately 120 days.
As they reach this age they become fragile and are
removed from circulation by cells of the tissue
macrophage system (formerly called the reticuloen-
dothelial or RE system). The organs that contain
macrophages (literally, “big eaters”) are the liver,
spleen, and red bone marrow. Look at Fig. 11–4 as you
read the following. The old RBCs are phagocytized
and digested by macrophages, and the iron they con-
tained is put into the blood to be returned to the red
bone marrow to be used for the synthesis of new
hemoglobin. If not needed immediately for this pur-
pose, excess iron is stored in the liver. The iron of
256
Blood
Figure 
11–3.
Blood 
cells.
(A) Red blood cells, platelets, and a
basophil. (B) Lymphocyte (left) and
neutrophil (right). (C) Eosinophil.
(D) Monocytes. (E) Megakaryocyte
with 
platelets. 
(A–E 
600)
(F) Normal bone marrow (200).
(From Harmening, DM: Clinical
Hematology and Fundamentals
of Hemostasis, ed. 3. FA Davis,
Philadelphia, 1997, pp 14, 17, 19,
26, 48, with permission.)
QUESTION: Look at the RBCs in
picture B. Why do they have pale
centers?
A
B
D
F
E
C
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Blood
257
BOX 11–1
ANEMIA
Aplastic anemia is suppression of the red bone
marrow, with decreased production of RBCs, WBCs,
and platelets. This is a very serious disorder that
may be caused by exposure to radiation, certain
chemicals such as benzene, or some medications.
There are several antibiotics that must be used with
caution since they may have this potentially fatal
side effect.
Hemolytic anemia is any disorder that causes
rupture of RBCs before the end of their normal life
span. Sickle-cell anemia and Rh disease of the new-
born are examples. Another example is malaria, in
which a protozoan parasite reproduces in RBCs and
destroys them. Hemolytic anemias are often char-
acterized by jaundice because of the increased pro-
duction of bilirubin.
Anemia is a deﬁciency of red blood cells, or insuf-
ﬁcient hemoglobin within the red blood cells. There
are many different types of anemia.
Iron-deﬁciency anemia is caused by a lack of
dietary iron, and there is not enough of this mineral
to form sufficient hemoglobin. A person with this
type of anemia may have a normal RBC count and
a normal hematocrit, but the hemoglobin level will
be below normal.
A deﬁciency of vitamin B12, which is found only
in animal foods, leads to pernicious anemia, in
which the RBCs are large, misshapen, and fragile.
Another cause of this form of anemia is lack of the
intrinsic factor due to autoimmune destruction of
the parietal cells of the stomach lining.
Sickle-cell anemia has already been discussed
in Chapter 3. It is a genetic disorder of hemoglobin,
which causes RBCs to sickle, clog capillaries, and
rupture.
A
B
D
C
Box Figure 11–A
Anemia. (A) Iron-deﬁciency anemia; notice the pale, oval RBCs (400).
(B) Pernicious anemia, with large, misshapen RBCs (400). (C) Sickle-cell anemia (400).
(D) Aplastic anemia, bone marrow (200). (A, B, and C from Listen, Look, and Learn, Vol
3; Coagulation, Hematology. The American Society of Clinical Pathologists Press, Chicago,
1973, with permission. D from Harmening, DM: Clinical Hematology and Fundamentals of
Hemostasis, ed 3. FA Davis, Philadelphia, 1997, p 49, with permission.)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

RBCs is actually recycled over and over again. The
globin or protein portion of the hemoglobin molecule
is also recycled. It is digested to its amino acids, which
may then be used for the synthesis of new proteins.
Another part of the hemoglobin molecule is the
heme portion, which cannot be recycled and is a waste
product. The heme is converted to bilirubin by
macrophages. The liver removes bilirubin from circu-
lation and excretes it into bile; bilirubin is a bile pig-
ment. Bile is secreted by the liver into the duodenum
and passes through the small intestine and colon, so
bilirubin is eliminated in feces, and gives feces their
characteristic brown color. In the colon some bilirubin
is changed to urobilinogen by the colon bacteria.
258
Blood
New RBCs
formed in
red bone marrow
Used to make
new RBCs
Iron
Heme
Globin
Stored in
liver
Bilirubin
Small
intestine
Large intestine
Bilirubin
Colon
bacteria
Urobilin
Urobilin
Urine
Amino acids
Protein synthesis
Macrophages in
liver, spleen, and
red bone marrow
phagocytize old RBCs
Kidney
RBCs
Circulate
120 days
Figure 11–4.
Life cycle of red blood cells. See text for description.
QUESTION: Which components of old RBCs are recycled? Which is excreted? (Go to the
macrophage and follow the arrows.)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Some urobilinogen may be absorbed into the blood,
but it is changed to urobilin and excreted by the kid-
neys in urine. If bilirubin is not excreted properly, per-
haps because of liver disease such as hepatitis, it
remains in the blood. This may cause jaundice, a con-
dition in which the whites of the eyes appear yellow.
This yellow color may also be seen in the skin of light-
skinned people (see Box 11–2: Jaundice).
Blood Types
Our blood types are genetic; that is, we inherit genes
from our parents that determine our own types. There
are many red blood cell factors or types; we will dis-
cuss the two most important ones: the ABO group
and the Rh factor. (The genetics of blood types is dis-
cussed in Chapter 21.)
The ABO group contains four blood types: A, B,
AB, and O. The letters A and B represent antigens
(protein-oligosaccharides) on the red blood cell mem-
brane. A person with type A blood has the A antigen
on the RBCs, and someone with type B blood has the
B antigen. Type AB means that both A and B antigens
are present, and type O means that neither the A nor
the B antigen is present.
Circulating in the plasma of each person are natu-
ral antibodies for those antigens not present on the
RBCs. Therefore, a type A person has anti-B antibod-
ies in the plasma; a type B person has anti-A antibod-
ies; a type AB person has neither anti-A nor anti-B
antibodies; and a type O person has both anti-A and
anti-B antibodies (see Table 11–1 and Fig. 11–5).
These natural antibodies are of great importance
for transfusions. If possible, a person should receive
Blood
259
BOX 11–2
JAUNDICE
born; these are hemolytic anemias. As excessive
numbers of RBCs are destroyed, bilirubin is formed
at a faster rate than the liver can excrete it. The
bilirubin that the liver cannot excrete remains in the
blood and causes jaundice. Another name for this
type is hemolytic jaundice.
Posthepatic jaundice means that the problem
is “after” the liver. The liver excretes bilirubin into
bile, which is stored in the gallbladder and then
moved to the small intestine. If the bile ducts are
obstructed, perhaps by gallstones or inﬂammation
of the gallbladder, bile cannot pass to the small
intestine and backs up in the liver. Bilirubin may
then be reabsorbed back into the blood and cause
jaundice. Another name for this type is obstruc-
tive jaundice.
Jaundice is not a disease, but rather a sign caused
by excessive accumulation of bilirubin in the blood.
Because one of the liver’s many functions is the
excretion of bilirubin, jaundice may be a sign of
liver disease such as hepatitis or cirrhosis. This may
be called hepatic jaundice, because the problem
is with the liver.
Other types of jaundice are prehepatic jaundice
and posthepatic jaundice: The name of each tells us
where the problem is. Recall that bilirubin is the
waste product formed from the heme portion of
the hemoglobin of old RBCs. Prehepatic jaun-
dice means that the problem is “before” the liver;
that is, hemolysis of RBCs is taking place at a more
rapid rate. Rapid hemolysis is characteristic of sickle-
cell anemia, malaria, and Rh disease of the new-
Table 11–1
ABO BLOOD TYPES
Antigens Present
Antibodies Present 
Percentage in U.S. Population*
Type
on RBCs
in Plasma
White
Black
Asian
A
A
anti-B
40
27
31
B
B
anti-A
11
20
26
AB
both A and B
neither anti-A nor anti-B
4
4
8
O
neither A nor B
both anti-A and anti-B
45
49
35
*Average.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

260
Type A
Type
AB
Red blood cells
Plasma
Anti-A serum
Anti-B serum
Typing and cross-matching
ABO blood types
Type A
Type B
Type B
Type AB
Type AB
Type O
Type O
A antigens
B antibodies
B antigens
A antibodies
A and B antigens
Neither A nor B antibodies
Neither A
nor B antigens
A and B antibodies
Type
O
Type
A
Type
A
Type
O
Type
B
Type
B
Universal donor
Type
AB
Universal recipient
A
B
C
Figure 11–5.
(A) The ABO blood types. Schematic representation of antigens on the
RBCs and antibodies in the plasma. (B) Typing and cross-matching. The A or B antiserum
causes agglutination of RBCs with the matching antigen. (C) Acceptable transfusions are
diagrammed and presuppose compatible Rh factors.
QUESTION: In part C, ﬁnd your blood type. To whom (that is, to which blood types) can
you donate blood?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

blood of his or her own type; only if this type is not
available should another type be given. For example,
let us say that a type A person needs a transfusion to
replace blood lost in hemorrhage. If this person were
to receive type B blood, what would happen? The type
A recipient has anti-B antibodies that would bind to
the type B antigens of the RBCs of the donated blood.
The type B RBCs would ﬁrst clump (agglutination)
then rupture (hemolysis), thus defeating the purpose
of the transfusion. An even more serious consequence
is that the hemoglobin of the ruptured RBCs, now
called free hemoglobin, may clog the capillaries of the
kidneys and lead to renal damage or renal failure. You
can see why typing and cross-matching of donor and
recipient blood in the hospital laboratory is so impor-
tant before any transfusion is given (see Fig. 11–5).
This procedure helps ensure that donated blood will
not bring about a hemolytic transfusion reaction in
the recipient.
You may have heard of the concept that a person
with type O blood is a “universal donor.” Usually, a
unit of type O negative blood may be given to people
with any other blood type. This is so because type O
RBCs have neither the A nor the B antigens and will
not react with whatever antibodies the recipient may
have. If only one unit (1 pint) of blood is given, the
anti-A and anti-B antibodies in the type O blood
plasma will be diluted in the recipient’s blood plasma
and will not have a harmful effect on the recipient’s
RBCs. The term negative, in O negative, the universal
donor, refers to the Rh factor, which we will now
consider.
The Rh factor is another antigen (often called D)
that may be present on RBCs. People whose RBCs
have the Rh antigen are Rh positive; those without
the antigen are Rh negative. Rh-negative people do
not have natural antibodies to the Rh antigen, and
for them this antigen is foreign. If an Rh-negative
person receives Rh-positive blood by mistake,
antibodies will be formed just as they would be
to bacteria or viruses. A ﬁrst mistaken transfusion
often does not cause problems, because antibody pro-
duction is slow upon the ﬁrst exposure to Rh-positive
RBCs. A second transfusion, however, when anti-Rh
antibodies are already present, will bring about a
transfusion reaction, with hemolysis and possible kid-
ney damage (see also Box 11–3: Rh Disease of the
Newborn).
WHITE BLOOD CELLS
White blood cells (WBCs) are also called leukocytes.
There are ﬁve kinds of WBCs; all are larger than
RBCs and have nuclei when mature. The nucleus may
be in one piece or appear as several lobes or segments.
Special staining for microscopic examination gives
each kind of WBC a distinctive appearance (see Figs.
11–2 and 11–3).
Blood
261
BOX 11–3
Rh DISEASE OF THE NEWBORN
baby will be born anemic and jaundiced from the
loss of RBCs. Such an infant may require a gradual
exchange transfusion to remove the blood with the
maternal antibodies and replace it with Rh-negative
blood. The baby will continue to produce its own
Rh-positive RBCs, which will not be destroyed once
the maternal antibodies have been removed.
Much better than treatment, however, is pre-
vention. If an Rh-negative woman delivers an Rh-
positive baby, she should be given RhoGAM within
72 hours after delivery. RhoGAM is an anti-Rh anti-
body that will destroy any fetal RBCs that have
entered the mother’s circulation before her immune
system can respond and produce antibodies. The
RhoGAM antibodies themselves break down within
a few months. The woman’s next pregnancy will be
like the ﬁrst, as if she had never been exposed to
Rh-positive RBCs.
Rh disease of the newborn may also be called
erythroblastosis fetalis and is the result of an Rh
incompatibility between mother and fetus. During
a normal pregnancy, maternal blood and fetal
blood do not mix in the placenta. However, during
delivery of the placenta (the “afterbirth” that fol-
lows the birth of the baby), some fetal blood may
enter maternal circulation.
If the woman is Rh negative and her baby is Rh
positive, this exposes the woman to Rh-positive
RBCs. In response, her immune system will now
produce anti-Rh antibodies following this ﬁrst deliv-
ery. In a subsequent pregnancy, these maternal
antibodies will cross the placenta and enter fetal cir-
culation. If this next fetus is also Rh positive, the
maternal antibodies will cause destruction (hemoly-
sis) of the fetal RBCs. In severe cases this may result
in the death of the fetus. In less severe cases, the
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

A normal WBC count (part of a CBC) is 5,000 to
10,000 per L. Notice that this number is quite small
compared to a normal RBC count. Many of our
WBCs are not circulating within blood vessels but are
carrying out their functions in tissue ﬂuid or in lym-
phatic tissue.
Classiﬁcation
The ﬁve kinds of white blood cells, all produced in the
red bone marrow (and some lymphocytes in lymphatic
tissue), may be classiﬁed in two groups: granular and
agranular. The granular leukocytes are the neu-
trophils, eosinophils, and basophils, which usually
have nuclei in two or more lobes or segments, and
have distinctly colored granules when stained.
Neutrophils have light blue granules, eosinophils have
red granules, and basophils have dark blue granules.
The agranular leukocytes are lymphocytes and
monocytes, which have nuclei in one piece.
Monocytes are usually quite a bit larger than lympho-
cytes. A differential WBC count (part of a CBC) is
the percentage of each kind of leukocyte. Normal
ranges are listed in Table 11–2, along with other nor-
mal values of a CBC.
Functions
White blood cells all contribute to the same general
function, which is to protect the body from infectious
disease and to provide immunity to certain diseases.
Each kind of leukocyte makes a contribution to this
very important aspect of homeostasis.
Neutrophils and monocytes are capable of the
phagocytosis of pathogens. Neutrophils are the more
abundant phagocytes, but the monocytes are the more
efficient phagocytes, because they differentiate into
macrophages, which also phagocytize dead or dam-
aged tissue at the site of any injury, helping to make
tissue repair possible. During an infection, neutrophils
are produced more rapidly, and the immature forms,
called band cells (see Fig. 11–2), may appear in
greater numbers in peripheral circulation (band cells
are usually less than 10% of the total neutrophils).
The term “band” refers to the nucleus that has not yet
become segmented, and may look somewhat like a
dumbbell.
Eosinophils are believed to detoxify foreign
proteins and will phagocytize anything labeled with
antibodies. This is especially important in allergic
reactions and parasitic infections such as trichinosis (a
worm parasite). Basophils contain granules of heparin
and histamine. Heparin is an anticoagulant that helps
prevent abnormal clotting within blood vessels.
Histamine, you may recall, is released as part of the
inﬂammation process, and it makes capillaries more
permeable, allowing tissue ﬂuid, proteins, and white
blood cells to accumulate in the damaged area.
There are two major kinds of lymphocytes, T cells
and B cells, and a less numerous third kind called nat-
ural killer cells. For now we will say that T cells (or T
lymphocytes) help recognize foreign antigens and may
directly destroy some foreign antigens. B cells (or B
lymphocytes) become plasma cells that produce anti-
bodies to foreign antigens. Both T cells and B cells
provide memory for immunity. Natural killer cells
(NK cells) destroy foreign cells by chemically ruptur-
ing their membranes. These functions of lymphocytes
are discussed in the context of the mechanisms of
immunity in Chapter 14.
As mentioned earlier, leukocytes function in tissue
ﬂuid as well as in the blood. Many WBCs are capable
of self-locomotion (ameboid movement) and are able
to squeeze between the cells of capillary walls and out
into tissue spaces. Macrophages provide a good exam-
ple of the dual locations of leukocytes. Some
macrophages are “ﬁxed,” that is, stationary in organs
such as the liver, spleen, and red bone marrow (part of
the tissue macrophage or RE system—the same
262
Blood
Table 11–2
COMPLETE BLOOD COUNT
Measurement
Normal Range*
Red blood cells
Hemoglobin
Hematocrit
Reticulocytes
White blood cells (total)
Neutrophils
Eosinophils
Basophils
Lymphocytes
Monocytes
Platelets
*The values on hospital lab slips may vary somewhat but
will be very similar to the normal ranges given here.
• 4.5–6.0 million/L
• 12–18 grams/100 mL
• 38%–48%
• 0%–1.5%
• 5000–10,000/L
• 55%–70%
• 1%–3%
• 0.5%–1%
• 20%–35%
• 3%–8%
• 150,000–300,000/L
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

macrophages that phagocytize old RBCs) and in the
lymph nodes. They phagocytize pathogens that circu-
late in blood or lymph through these organs. Other
“wandering” macrophages move about in tissue ﬂuid,
especially in the areolar connective tissue of mucous
membranes and below the skin. Pathogens that gain
entry into the body through natural openings or
through breaks in the skin are usually destroyed by the
macrophages and other leukocytes in connective tissue
before they can cause serious disease. The alveoli
of the lungs, for example, have macrophages that
very efficiently destroy pathogens that enter with
inhaled air.
A high WBC count, called leukocytosis, is often
an indication of infection. Leukopenia is a low WBC
count, which may be present in the early stages of dis-
eases such as tuberculosis. Exposure to radiation or to
chemicals such as benzene may destroy WBCs and
lower the total count. Such a person is then very sus-
ceptible to infection. Leukemia, or malignancy of
leukocyte-forming tissues, is discussed in Box 11–4:
Leukemia.
The white blood cell types (analogous to RBC types
such as the ABO group) are called human leukocyte
antigens (HLA) and are discussed in Box 11–5: White
Blood Cell Types: HLA.
PLATELETS
The more formal name for platelets is thrombocytes,
which are not whole cells but rather fragments or
pieces of cells. Some of the stem cells in the red bone
marrow differentiate into large cells called megakary-
ocytes (see Figs. 11–2 and 11–3), which break up into
small pieces that enter circulation. These small, oval,
circulating pieces are platelets, which may last for 5 to
9 days, if not utilized before that. Thrombopoietin is
a hormone produced by the liver that increases the
rate of platelet production.
A normal platelet count (part of a CBC) is 150,000
to 300,000/L (the high end of the range may be
extended to 500,000). Thrombocytopenia is the term
for a low platelet count.
Function
Platelets are necessary for hemostasis, which means
prevention of blood loss. There are three mechanisms,
Blood
263
BOX 11–4
LEUKEMIA
Chemotherapy may bring about cure or remis-
sion for some forms of leukemia, but other forms
remain resistant to treatment and may be fatal
within a few months of diagnosis. In such cases, the
cause of death is often pneumonia or some other
serious infection, because the abnormal white
blood cells cannot prevent the growth and spread
of pathogens within the body.
Leukemia is the term for malignancy of the blood-
forming tissue. There are many types of leukemia,
which are classiﬁed as acute or chronic, by the
types of abnormal cells produced, and by either
childhood or adult onset.
In general, leukemia is characterized by an over-
production of immature white blood cells. These
immature cells cannot perform their normal func-
tions, and the person becomes very susceptible to
infection. As a greater proportion of the body’s
nutrients are used by malignant cells, the produc-
tion of other blood cells decreases. Severe anemia is
a consequence of decreased red blood cell produc-
tion, and the tendency to hemorrhage is the result
of decreased platelets.
Box Figure 11–B
Leukemia. Notice the many
darkly staining WBCs (300). (From Sacher, RA, and
McPherson, RA: Widmann’s Clinical Interpretation
of Laboratory Tests, ed 11. FA Davis, Philadelphia,
2000, with permission.)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

and platelets are involved in each. Two of these mech-
anisms are shown in Fig. 11–6.
1. Vascular spasm—when a large vessel such as an
artery or vein is severed, the smooth muscle in its
wall contracts in response to the damage (called the
myogenic response). Platelets in the area of the
rupture release serotonin, which also brings about
vasoconstriction. The diameter of the vessel is
thereby made smaller, and the smaller opening may
then be blocked by a blood clot. If the vessel did
not constrict ﬁrst, the clot that forms would quickly
be washed out by the force of the blood pressure.
2. Platelet plugs—when capillaries rupture, the
damage is too slight to initiate the formation of a
blood clot. The rough surface, however, causes
platelets to change shape (become spiky) and
become sticky. These activated platelets stick to the
edges of the break and to each other. The platelets
form a mechanical barrier or wall to close off the
break in the capillary. Capillary ruptures are quite
frequent, and platelet plugs, although small, are all
that is needed to seal them.
Would platelet plugs be effective for breaks in
larger vessels? No, they are too small, and though
they do form, they are washed away (until a clot
begins to form that can contain them). Would vas-
cular spasm be effective for capillaries? Again, the
answer is no, because capillaries have no smooth
muscle and cannot constrict at all.
264
Blood
BOX 11–5
WHITE BLOOD CELL TYPES: HLA
the HLA types of a donated organ to see if one or
several will match the HLA types of the potential
recipient. If even one HLA type matches, the chance
of rejection is lessened. Although all transplant
recipients (except corneal) must receive immuno-
suppressive medications to prevent rejection, such
medications make them more susceptible to infec-
tion. The closer the HLA match of the donated
organ, the lower the dosage of such medications,
and the less chance of serious infections. (The
chance of ﬁnding a perfect HLA match in the gen-
eral population is estimated at 1 in 20,000.)
There is yet another aspect of the importance of
HLA: People with certain HLA types seem to be
more likely to develop certain non-infectious dis-
eases. For example, type 1 (insulin-dependent) dia-
betes mellitus is often found in people with HLA
DR3 or DR4, and a form of arthritis of the spine
called ankylosing spondylitis is often found in those
with HLA B27. These are not genes for these dis-
eases, but may be predisposing factors. What may
happen is this: A virus enters the body and stimu-
lates the immune system to produce antibodies.
The virus is destroyed, but one of the person’s own
antigens is so similar to the viral antigen that the
immune system continues its activity and begins to
destroy this similar part of the body. Another possi-
bility is that a virus damages a self-antigen to the
extent that it is now so different that it will be per-
ceived as foreign. These are two theories of how
autoimmune diseases are triggered, which is the
focus of much research in the ﬁeld of immunology.
Human leukocyte antigens (HLA) are antigens
on WBCs that are representative of the antigens
present on all the cells of an individual. These are
our “self” antigens that identify cells that belong in
the body.
Recall that in the ABO blood group of RBCs,
there are only two antigens, A and B, and four
possible types: A, B, AB, and O. HLA antigens are
also given letter names. HLA A, B, and C are called
class I proteins, with from 100 to more than 400
possibilities for the speciﬁc protein each can be. The
several class II proteins are given various D designa-
tions and, again, there are many possibilities for
each. Each person has two genes for each HLA type,
because these types are inherited, just as RBC types
are inherited. Members of the same family may
have some of the same HLA types, and identical
twins have exactly the same HLA types.
The purpose of the HLA types is to provide a
“self” comparison for the immune system to use
when pathogens enter the body. The T lympho-
cytes compare the “self” antigens on macrophages
to the antigens on bacteria and viruses. Because
these antigens do not match ours, they are recog-
nized as foreign; this is the ﬁrst step in the destruc-
tion of a pathogen.
The surgical transplantation of organs has also
focused on the HLA. The most serious problem for
the recipient of a transplanted heart or kidney is
rejection of the organ and its destruction by the
immune system. You may be familiar with the term
tissue typing. This process involves determining
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

3. Chemical clotting—The stimulus for clotting is a
rough surface within a vessel, or a break in the ves-
sel, which also creates a rough surface. The more
damage there is, the faster clotting begins, usually
within 15 to 120 seconds.
The clotting mechanism is a series of reactions
involving chemicals that normally circulate in the
blood and others that are released when a vessel is
damaged.
The chemicals involved in clotting include platelet
factors, chemicals released by damaged tissues, cal-
cium ions, and the plasma proteins prothrombin, ﬁ-
brinogen, Factor 8, and others synthesized by the liver.
(These clotting factors are also designated by Roman
numerals; Factor 8 would be Factor VIII.) Vitamin K
is necessary for the liver to synthesize prothrombin
and several other clotting factors (Factors 7, 9, and 10).
Most of our vitamin K is produced by the bacteria that
live in the colon; the vitamin is absorbed as the colon
absorbs water and may be stored in the liver.
Chemical clotting is usually described in three
stages, which are listed in Table 11–3 and illustrated in
Fig. 11–7. Stage 1 begins when a vessel is cut or dam-
aged internally, and includes all of the factors shown.
As you follow the pathway, notice that the product of
stage 1 is prothrombin activator, which may also be
called prothrombinase. Each name tells us something.
The ﬁrst name suggests that this chemical activates
prothrombin, and that is true. The second name ends
in “ase,” which indicates that this is an enzyme. The
traditional names for enzymes use the substrate of the
enzyme as the ﬁrst part of the name, and add “ase.” So
this chemical must be an enzyme whose substrate is
Blood
265
Skin is cut and
blood escapes from a
capillary and an
arteriole.
Capillary
Arteriole
Platelets
Fibrin
In the capillary, platelets
stick to the ruptured wall
and form a platelet plug.
In the arteriole, chemical
clotting forms a fibrin clot.
Clot retraction pulls the
edges of the break together.
Figure 11–6.
Hemostasis. Platelet
plug formation in a capillary and
chemical clotting and clot retraction
in an arteriole.
QUESTION: Look at the diameter of
the arteriole (compared to that of
the capillary) and explain why
platelet plugs would not be suffi-
cient to stop the bleeding.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

prothrombin, and that is also true. The stages of clot-
ting may be called a cascade, where one leads to the
next, as inevitable as water ﬂowing downhill. Pro-
thrombin activator, the product of stage 1, brings
about the stage 2 reaction: converting prothrombin to
thrombin. The product of stage 2, thrombin, brings
about the stage 3 reaction: converting ﬁbrinogen to
ﬁbrin (see Box 11–6: Hemophilia).
The clot itself is made of ﬁbrin, the product of
stage 3. Fibrin is a thread-like protein. Many strands
of ﬁbrin form a mesh that traps RBCs and platelets,
and creates a wall across the break in the vessel.
Once the clot has formed and bleeding has stopped,
clot retraction and ﬁbrinolysis occur. Clot retraction
requires platelets, ATP, and Factor 13 and involves
folding of the ﬁbrin threads to pull the edges of the
rupture in the vessel wall closer together. This will
make the area to be repaired smaller. The platelets
contribute in yet another way, because as they disinte-
grate they release platelet-derived growth factor
(PDGF), which stimulates the repair of blood vessels
(growth of their tissues). As repair begins, the clot is
dissolved, a process called ﬁbrinolysis. It is important
that the clot be dissolved, because it is a rough surface,
266
Blood
Table 11–3
CHEMICAL CLOTTING
Clotting Stage
Factors Needed
Reaction
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
• Platelet factors
• Chemicals from damaged tissue
(tissue thromboplastin)
• Factors 5,7,8,9,10,11,12
• Calcium ions
• Prothrombin activator from stage 1
• Prothrombin
• Calcium ions
• Thrombin from stage 2
• Fibrinogen
• Calcium ions
• Factor 13 (ﬁbrin stabilizing factor)
Platelet factors  tissue thromboplastin 
other clotting factors  calcium ions
form prothrombin activator
Prothrombin activator converts prothrombin
to thrombin
Thrombin converts ﬁbrinogen to ﬁbrin
BOX 11–6
HEMOPHILIA
cure) has become possible with factor 8 obtained
from blood donors. The Factor 8 is extracted from
the plasma of donated blood and administered in
concentrated form to hemophiliacs, enabling them
to live normal lives.
In what is perhaps the most tragic irony of med-
ical progress, many hemophiliacs were inadver-
tently infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.
Before 1985, there was no test to detect HIV in
donated blood, and the virus was passed to hemo-
philiacs in the very blood product that was meant
to control their disease and prolong their lives.
Today, all donated blood and blood products are
tested for HIV, and the risk of AIDS transmission to
hemophiliacs, or anyone receiving donated blood,
is now very small.
There are several forms of hemophilia; all are
genetic and are characterized by the inability of
the blood to clot properly. Hemophilia A is the
most common form and involves a deﬁciency of
clotting Factor 8. The gene for hemophilia A is
located on the X chromosome, so this is a sex-
linked trait, with the same pattern of inheritance
as red-green color blindness and Duchenne’s mus-
cular dystrophy.
Without factor 8, the ﬁrst stage of chemical
clotting cannot be completed, and prothrombin
activator is not formed. Without treatment, a
hemophiliac experiences prolonged bleeding after
even minor injuries and extensive internal bleeding,
especially in joints subjected to the stresses of
weight-bearing. In recent years, treatment (but not
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Blood
267
Factors 5, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12
Platelet factors
Chemicals from
damaged tissue
Calcium
ions
Prothrombin
activator
Prothrombin
Calcium
ions
Thrombin
Fibrinogen
Calcium ions
Factor 13
Fibrin
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Liver
Figure 11–7.
Stages of chemical blood clotting.
QUESTION: Based only on this picture, explain why the liver is a vital organ.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

and if it were inside a vessel it would stimulate more
and unnecessary clotting, which might eventually
obstruct blood ﬂow.
Prevention of Abnormal Clotting
Clotting should take place to stop bleeding, but too
much clotting would obstruct vessels and interfere
with normal circulation of blood. Clots do not usually
form in intact vessels because the endothelium (sim-
ple squamous epithelial lining) is very smooth and
repels the platelets and clotting factors. If the lining
becomes roughened, as happens with the lipid depo-
sits of atherosclerosis, a clot will form.
Heparin, produced by basophils, is a natural antico-
agulant that inhibits the clotting process (although
heparin is called a “blood thinner,” it does not “thin”
or dilute the blood in any way; rather it prevents a
chemical reaction from taking place). The liver pro-
duces a globulin called antithrombin, which combines
with and inactivates excess thrombin. Excess thrombin
would exert a positive feedback effect on the clotting
cascade, and result in the splitting of more prothrom-
bin to thrombin, more clotting, more thrombin
formed, and so on. Antithrombin helps to prevent this,
as does the ﬁbrin of the clot, which adsorbs excess
thrombin and renders it inactive. All of these factors
are the external brake for this positive feedback mech-
anism. Together they usually limit the ﬁbrin formed to
what is needed to create a useful clot but not an
obstructive one.
Thrombosis refers to clotting in an intact vessel;
the clot itself is called a thrombus. Coronary throm-
bosis, for example, is abnormal clotting in a coronary
artery, which will decrease the blood (oxygen) supply
to part of the heart muscle. An embolism is a clot
or other tissue transported from elsewhere that lodges
in and obstructs a vessel (see Box 11–7: Dissolving
Clots).
SUMMARY
All of the functions of blood described in this chap-
ter—transport, regulation, and protection—contri-
bute to the homeostasis of the body as a whole.
However, these functions could not be carried out if
the blood did not circulate properly. The circulation
of blood throughout the blood vessels depends upon
the proper functioning of the heart, the pump of the
circulatory system, which is the subject of our next
chapter.
268
Blood
BOX 11–7
DISSOLVING CLOTS
Abnormal clots may cause serious problems in
coronary arteries, pulmonary arteries, cerebral
vessels, and even veins in the legs. However, if
clots can be dissolved before they cause death of
tissue, normal circulation and tissue functioning
may be restored.
One of the ﬁrst substances used to dissolve
clots in coronary arteries was streptokinase,
which is actually a bacterial toxin produced
by some members of the genus Streptococcus.
Streptokinase did indeed dissolve clots, but its
use created the possibility of clot destruction
throughout the body, with serious hemorrhage a
potential consequence.
Safer chemicals called third-generation
thrombolytics are now used (thrombo  “clot”
and lytic  “to lyse” or “split”). In a case of coro-
nary thrombosis, if a thrombolytic can be admin-
istered within a few hours, the clot may be
dissolved and permanent heart damage pre-
vented. The same procedure is also used to pre-
vent permanent brain damage after strokes
(CVAs) caused by blood clots.
STUDY OUTLINE
The general functions of blood are trans-
portation, regulation, and protection.
Characteristics of Blood
1. Amount—4 to 6 liters; 38% to 48% is cells; 52% to
62% is plasma (Fig. 11–1).
2. Color—arterial blood has a high oxygen content
and is bright red; venous blood has less oxygen and
is dark red.
3. pH—7.35 to 7.45; venous blood has more CO2 and
a lower pH than arterial blood.
4. Viscosity—thickness or resistance to ﬂow; due to
the presence of cells and plasma proteins; con-
tributes to normal blood pressure.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Plasma—the liquid portion of blood
1. 91% water.
2. Plasma transports nutrients, wastes, hormones,
antibodies, and CO2 as HCO3
–.
3. Plasma proteins: clotting factors are synthesized by
the liver; albumin is synthesized by the liver and
provides colloid osmotic pressure that pulls tissue
ﬂuid into capillaries to maintain normal blood vol-
ume and blood pressure; alpha and beta globulins
are synthesized by the liver and are carriers for fats
and other substances in the blood; gamma globu-
lins are antibodies produced by lymphocytes.
Blood Cells
1. Formed elements are RBCs, WBCs, and platelets
(Figs. 11–2 and 11–3).
2. After birth the primary hemopoietic tissue is the
red bone marrow, which contains stem cells.
Lymphocytes mature and divide in the lymphatic
tissue of the spleen, lymph nodes, and thymus,
which also have stem cells for lymphocytes.
Red Blood Cells—erythrocytes (see Table
11–2 for normal values)
1. Biconcave discs; no nuclei when mature.
2. RBCs carry O2 bonded to the iron in hemoglobin.
3. RBCs are formed in the RBM from hemocytoblasts
(stem cells, the precursor cells).
4. Hypoxia stimulates the kidneys to produce the hor-
mone erythropoietin, which increases the rate of
RBC production in the RBM.
5. Immature RBCs: normoblasts (have nuclei) and
reticulocytes; large numbers in peripheral cir-
culation indicate a need for more RBCs to carry
oxygen.
6. Vitamin B12 is the extrinsic factor, needed for DNA
synthesis (mitosis) in stem cells in the RBM.
Intrinsic factor is produced by the parietal cells of
the stomach lining; it combines with B12 to prevent
its digestion and promote its absorption.
7. RBCs live for 120 days and are then phagocytized
by macrophages in the liver, spleen, and RBM. The
iron is returned to the RBM or stored in the liver.
The heme of the hemoglobin is converted to biliru-
bin, which the liver excretes into bile to be elimi-
nated in feces. Colon bacteria change bilirubin to
urobilinogen. Any urobilinogen absorbed is con-
verted to urobilin and excreted by the kidneys in
urine (Fig. 11–4). Jaundice is the accumulation of
bilirubin in the blood, perhaps due to liver disease.
8. ABO blood types are hereditary. The type indicates
the antigen(s) on the RBCs (see Table 11–1 and
Fig. 11–5); antibodies in plasma are for those anti-
gens not present on the RBCs and are important
for transfusions.
9. The Rh type is also hereditary. Rh positive means
that the D antigen is present on the RBCs; Rh neg-
ative means that the D antigen is not present on the
RBCs. Rh-negative people do not have natural
antibodies but will produce them if given Rh-
positive blood.
White Blood Cells—leukocytes (see Table
11–2 for normal values)
1. Larger than RBCs; have nuclei when mature; pro-
duced in the red bone marrow, except some lym-
phocytes produced in the thymus (Figs. 11–2 and
11–3).
2. Granular WBCs are the neutrophils, eosinophils,
and basophils.
3. Agranular WBCs are the lymphocytes and mono-
cytes.
4. Neutrophils and monocytes phagocytize patho-
gens; monocytes become macrophages, which also
phagocytize dead tissue.
5. Eosinophils detoxify foreign proteins during aller-
gic reactions and parasitic infections; they phago-
cytize anything labeled with antibodies.
6. Basophils contain the anticoagulant heparin and
histamine, which contributes to inﬂammation.
7. Lymphocytes: T cells, B cells, and natural killer
cells. T cells recognize foreign antigens and des-
troy them. B cells become plasma cells, which pro-
duce antibodies to foreign antigens. NK cells
destroy foreign cell membranes.
8. WBCs carry out their functions in tissue ﬂuid and
lymphatic tissue, as well as in the blood.
Platelets—thrombocytes (see Table 11–2 for
normal values)
1. Platelets are formed in the RBM and are fragments
of megakaryocytes; the hormone thrombopoietin
from the liver increases platelet production.
2. Platelets are involved in all mechanisms of hemo-
stasis (prevention of blood loss) (Fig. 11–6).
3. Vascular spasm—large vessels constrict when
damaged, the myogenic response. Platelets release
serotonin, which also causes vasoconstriction. The
break in the vessel is made smaller and may be
closed with a blood clot.
Blood
269
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

4. Platelet plugs—rupture of a capillary creates a
rough surface to which platelets stick and form a
barrier over the break.
5. Chemical clotting involves platelet factors, chemi-
cals from damaged tissue, prothrombin, ﬁbrinogen
and other clotting factors synthesized by the liver,
and calcium ions. See Table 11–3 and Fig. 11–7 for
the three stages of chemical clotting. The clot is
formed of ﬁbrin threads that form a mesh over the
break in the vessel.
6. Clot retraction is the folding of the ﬁbrin threads
to pull the cut edges of the vessel closer together to
facilitate repair. Fibrinolysis is the dissolving of the
clot once it has served its purpose.
7. Abnormal clotting (thrombosis) is prevented by the
very smooth endothelium (simple squamous
epithelium) that lines blood vessels; heparin, which
inhibits the clotting process; and antithrombin
(synthesized by the liver), which inactivates excess
thrombin.
270
Blood
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Name four different kinds of substances trans-
ported in blood plasma. (p. 252)
2. Name the precursor cell of all blood cells. Name
the primary hemopoietic tissue and state its loca-
tions. (pp. 254)
3. State the normal values (CBC) for RBCs,
WBCs, platelets, hemoglobin, and hematocrit.
(p. 262)
4. State the function of RBCs; include the protein and
mineral needed. (p. 254)
5. Explain why iron, protein, folic acid, vitamin B12,
and the intrinsic factor are needed for RBC pro-
duction. (pp. 256)
6. Explain how bilirubin is formed and excreted.
(pp. 258–259)
7. Explain what will happen if a person with type O
positive blood receives a transfusion of type A neg-
ative blood. (p. 261)
8. Name the WBC with each of the following func-
tions: (p. 262)
a. Become macrophages and phagocytize dead
tissue
b. Produce antibodies
c. Detoxify foreign proteins
d. Phagocytize pathogens
e. Contain the anticoagulant heparin
f. Recognize antigens as foreign
g. Secrete histamine during inﬂammation
9. Explain how and why platelet plugs form in rup-
tured capillaries. (p. 264)
10. Explain how vascular spasm prevents excessive
blood loss when a large vessel is severed.
(p. 264)
11. With respect to chemical blood clotting:
(pp. 265–266)
a. Name the mineral necessary
b. Name the organ that produces many of the
clotting factors
c. Name the vitamin necessary for prothrombin
synthesis
d. State what the clot itself is made of
12. Explain what is meant by clot retraction and ﬁbri-
nolysis. (p. 266)
13. State two ways abnormal clotting is prevented in
the vascular system. (p. 268)
14. Explain what is meant by blood viscosity, the fac-
tors that contribute, and why viscosity is impor-
tant. (p. 252)
15. State the normal pH range of blood. What gas has
an effect on blood pH? (p. 252)
16. Deﬁne anemia, leukocytosis, and thrombocytope-
nia. (pp. 257, 263)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

1. Explain why type AB blood may be called the
“universal recipient” for blood transfusions.
Explain why this would not be true if the transfu-
sion required 6 units (about 3 liters) of blood.
2. The liver has many functions that are directly
related to the composition and functions of blood.
Name as many as you can.
3. Constructing a brick wall requires bricks and brick-
layers. List all the nutrients that are needed for
RBC production, and indicate which are bricks and
which are bricklayers.
4. Anthony moved from New Jersey to a mountain
cabin in Colorado, 8000 feet above sea level. When
he ﬁrst arrived, his hematocrit was 44%. After 6
months in his new home, what would you expect
his hematocrit to be? Explain your answer, and
what brought about the change.
5. The lab results for a particular patient show these
CBC values:
RBCs—4.2 million/L
Hct—40%
Hb—13 g/100 mL
WBCs—8,500/L
Platelets—30,000/L
Is this patient healthy, or would you expect any
symptoms of a disorder? Explain your answer.
6. Using the model in Question 5, make a list of pos-
sible CBC values for a patient with iron-deﬁciency
anemia. Then make a list of possible CBC values
for a person with aplastic anemia.
7. An artiﬁcial blood may someday be available; many
are being tested. What speciﬁc function of blood
will it deﬁnitely have? Are there any advantages to
an artiﬁcial blood compared with blood from a
human donor?
8. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is a
serious condition that may follow certain kinds of
infections or traumas. First, explain what the name
means. This is best done one word at a time. In
DIC, clotting becomes a vicious cycle, and the
blood is depleted of clotting factors. What do
you think will be the consequence for the affected
person?
Blood
271
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

272
CHAPTER 12
Chapter Outline
Location and Pericardial Membranes
Chambers—Vessels and Valves
Right Atrium
Left Atrium
Right Ventricle
Left Ventricle
Coronary Vessels
Cardiac Cycle and Heart Sounds
Cardiac Conduction Pathway
Heart Rate
Cardiac Output
Regulation of Heart Rate
Aging and the Heart
BOX 12–1
CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE
BOX 12–2
HEART MURMUR
BOX 12–3
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
BOX 12–4
ARRHYTHMIAS
Student Objectives
• Describe the location of the heart, the pericardial
membranes, and the endocardium.
• Name the chambers of the heart and the vessels
that enter or leave each.
• Name the valves of the heart, and explain their
functions.
• Describe coronary circulation, and explain its pur-
pose.
• Describe the cardiac cycle.
• Explain how heart sounds are created.
• Name the parts of the cardiac conduction pathway,
and explain why it is the sinoatrial node that initi-
ates each beat.
• Explain stroke volume, cardiac output, and
Starling’s law of the heart.
• Explain how the nervous system regulates heart
rate and force of contraction.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Heart
273
New Terminology
Aorta (ay-OR-tah)
Atrium (AY-tree-um)
Cardiac cycle (KAR-dee-yak SIGH-kuhl)
Cardiac output (KAR-dee-yak OUT-put)
Coronary arteries (KOR-uh-na-ree AR-tuh-rees)
Diastole (dye-AS-tuh-lee)
Endocardium (EN-doh-KAR-dee-um)
Epicardium (EP-ee-KAR-dee-um)
Mediastinum (ME-dee-ah-STYE-num)
Mitral valve (MY-truhl VALV)
Myocardium (MY-oh-KAR-dee-um)
Sinoatrial (SA) node (SIGH-noh-AY-tree-al NOHD)
Stroke volume (STROHK VAHL-yoom)
Systole (SIS-tuh-lee)
Tricuspid valve (try-KUSS-pid VALV)
Venous return (VEE-nus ree-TURN)
Ventricle (VEN-tri-kuhl)
Related Clinical Terminology
Arrhythmia (uh-RITH-me-yah)
Ectopic focus (ek-TOP-ik FOH-kus)
Electrocardiogram (ECG) (ee-LEK-troh-KAR-
dee-oh-GRAM)
Fibrillation (ﬁ-bri-LAY-shun)
Heart murmur (HART MUR-mur)
Ischemic (iss-KEY-mik)
Myocardial infarction (MY-oh-KAR-dee-yuhl
in-FARK-shun)
Pulse (PULS)
Stenosis (ste-NOH-sis)
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

In the embryo, the heart begins to beat at 4 weeks of
age, even before its nerve supply has been established.
If a person lives to be 80 years old, his or her heart
continues to beat an average of 100,000 times a day,
every day for each of those 80 years. Imagine trying to
squeeze a tennis ball 70 times a minute. After a few
minutes, your arm muscles would begin to tire. Then
imagine increasing your squeezing rate to 120 times a
minute. Most of us could not keep that up very long,
but that is what the heart does during exercise. A
healthy heart can increase its rate and force of con-
traction to meet the body’s need for more oxygen,
then return to its resting rate and keep on beating as if
nothing very extraordinary had happened. In fact, it
isn’t extraordinary at all; this is the job the heart is
meant to do.
The primary function of the heart is to pump blood
through the arteries, capillaries, and veins. As you
learned in the previous chapter, blood transports oxy-
gen and nutrients and has other important functions
as well. The heart is the pump that keeps blood circu-
lating properly.
LOCATION AND
PERICARDIAL MEMBRANES
The heart is located in the thoracic cavity between the
lungs. This area is called the mediastinum. The base
of the cone-shaped heart is uppermost, behind the
sternum, and the great vessels enter or leave here. The
apex (tip) of the heart points downward and is just
above the diaphragm to the left of the midline. This is
why we may think of the heart as being on the left
side, because the strongest beat can be heard or felt
here.
The heart is enclosed in the pericardial mem-
branes, of which there are three layers (Fig. 12–1).
The outermost is the ﬁbrous pericardium, a loose-
ﬁtting sac of strong ﬁbrous connective tissue that
extends inferiorly over the diaphragm and superiorly
over the bases of the large vessels that enter and leave
the heart. The serous pericardium is a folded mem-
brane; the fold gives it two layers, parietal and visceral.
Lining the ﬁbrous pericardium is the parietal peri-
cardium. On the surface of the heart muscle is the
visceral pericardium, often called the epicardium.
Between the parietal and visceral pericardial mem-
branes is serous ﬂuid, which prevents friction as the
heart beats.
CHAMBERS—VESSELS AND VALVES
The walls of the four chambers of the heart are made
of cardiac muscle called the myocardium. The cham-
bers are lined with endocardium, simple squamous
epithelium that also covers the valves of the heart and
continues into the vessels as their lining (endothe-
lium). The important physical characteristic of the
endocardium is not its thinness, but rather its smooth-
ness. This very smooth tissue prevents abnormal
blood clotting, because clotting would be initiated by
contact of blood with a rough surface.
274
The Heart
Endocardium
Parietal
pericardium
Myocardium
(heart muscle)
Epicardium
(visceral pericardium)
Fibrous pericardium
(pericardial sac)
Pericardial cavity
Figure 12–1.
Layers of the wall of the heart and the
pericardial membranes. The endocardium is the lining of
the chambers of the heart. The ﬁbrous pericardium is the
outermost layer.
QUESTION: What is found between the parietal and vis-
ceral pericardial layers, and what is its function?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The upper chambers of the heart are the right and
left atria (singular: atrium), which have relatively thin
walls and are separated by a common wall of myocar-
dium called the interatrial septum. The lower cham-
bers are the right and left ventricles, which have
thicker walls and are separated by the interventricu-
lar septum (Fig. 12–2). As you will see, the atria
receive blood, either from the body or the lungs, and
the ventricles pump blood to either the lungs or the
body.
RIGHT ATRIUM
The two large caval veins return blood from the body
to the right atrium (see Fig. 12–2). The superior vena
cava carries blood from the upper body, and the infe-
rior vena cava carries blood from the lower body.
From the right atrium, blood will ﬂow through the
right atrioventricular (AV) valve, or tricuspid valve,
into the right ventricle.
The tricuspid valve is made of three ﬂaps (or cusps)
of endocardium reinforced with connective tissue. The
general purpose of all valves in the circulatory system
is to prevent backﬂow of blood. The speciﬁc purpose
of the tricuspid valve is to prevent backﬂow of blood
from the right ventricle to the right atrium when the
right ventricle contracts. As the ventricle contracts,
blood is forced behind the three valve ﬂaps, forcing
them upward and together to close the valve.
LEFT ATRIUM
The left atrium receives blood from the lungs, by way
of four pulmonary veins. This blood will then ﬂow
into the left ventricle through the left atrioventricular
(AV) valve, also called the mitral valve or bicuspid
(two ﬂaps) valve. The mitral valve prevents backﬂow
of blood from the left ventricle to the left atrium when
the left ventricle contracts.
Another function of the atria is the production of a
hormone involved in blood pressure maintenance.
When the walls of the atria are stretched by increased
blood volume or blood pressure, the cells produce
atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), also called atrial
natriuretic hormone (ANH). (The ventricles of the
heart produce a similar hormone called B-type natri-
uretic peptide, or BNP, but we will use ANP as the
representative cardiac hormone.) ANP decreases the
reabsorption of sodium ions by the kidneys, so that
more sodium ions are excreted in urine, which in turn
increases the elimination of water. The loss of water
lowers blood volume and blood pressure. You may
have noticed that ANP is an antagonist to the hor-
mone aldosterone, which raises blood pressure.
RIGHT VENTRICLE
When the right ventricle contracts, the tricuspid valve
closes and the blood is pumped to the lungs through
the pulmonary artery (or trunk). At the junction of this
large artery and the right ventricle is the pulmonary
semilunar valve (or more simply, pulmonary valve).
Its three ﬂaps are forced open when the right ventri-
cle contracts and pumps blood into the pulmonary
artery. When the right ventricle relaxes, blood tends
to come back, but this ﬁlls the valve ﬂaps and closes
the pulmonary valve to prevent backﬂow of blood into
the right ventricle.
Projecting into the lower part of the right ventricle
are columns of myocardium called papillary muscles
(see Fig. 12–2). Strands of ﬁbrous connective tissue,
the chordae tendineae, extend from the papillary
muscles to the ﬂaps of the tricuspid valve. When the
right ventricle contracts, the papillary muscles also
contract and pull on the chordae tendineae to prevent
inversion of the tricuspid valve. If you have ever had
your umbrella blown inside out by a strong wind, you
can see what would happen if the ﬂaps of the tricuspid
valve were not anchored by the chordae tendineae and
papillary muscles.
LEFT VENTRICLE
The walls of the left ventricle are thicker than those of
the right ventricle, which enables the left ventricle to
contract more forcefully. The left ventricle pumps
blood to the body through the aorta, the largest artery
of the body. At the junction of the aorta and the left
ventricle is the aortic semilunar valve (or aortic
valve) (see Fig. 12–2). This valve is opened by the
force of contraction of the left ventricle, which also
closes the mitral valve. The aortic valve closes when
the left ventricle relaxes, to prevent backﬂow of blood
from the aorta to the left ventricle. When the mitral
(left AV) valve closes, it prevents backﬂow of blood to
the left atrium; the ﬂaps of the mitral valve are also
anchored by chordae tendineae and papillary muscles.
All of the valves are shown in Fig. 12–3, which also
depicts the ﬁbrous skeleton of the heart. This is
ﬁbrous connective tissue that anchors the outer edges
The Heart
275
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

276
The Heart
Brachiocephalic (trunk) artery
Superior vena cava
Right pulmonary artery
Right atrium
Right coronary artery
Inferior vena cava
A
Left subclavian artery
Left internal jugular vein
Left common carotid artery
Aortic arch
Left pulmonary artery
(to lungs)
Left atrium
Left pulmonary veins
(from lungs)
Circumflex artery
Left coronary artery
Left coronary vein
Left anterior descending
artery
Left ventricle
Right ventricle
Aorta
Brachiocephalic artery
Superior vena cava
Left common carotid artery
Left subclavian artery
Aortic arch
Right pulmonary artery
Right pulmonary veins
Right pulmonary veins
Right atrium
Inferior vena cava
Tricuspid
valve
Pulmonary
semilunar valve
Left pulmonary artery
Left atrium
Left pulmonary veins
Mitral valve
Left ventricle
Aortic semilunar valve
Interventricular septum
Apex
Chordae
tendineae
Right ventricle
Papillary
muscles
B
Figure 12–2.
(A) Anterior view of the heart and major blood vessels. (B) Frontal section
of the heart in anterior view, showing internal structures.
QUESTION: In part B, in the right atrium, what do the blue arrows represent?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

of the valve ﬂaps and keeps the valve openings from
stretching. It also separates the myocardium of the
atria and ventricles and prevents the contraction of
the atria from reaching the ventricles except by way of
the normal conduction pathway.
As you can see from this description of the cham-
bers and their vessels, the heart is really a double, or
two-sided, pump. The right side of the heart receives
deoxygenated blood from the body and pumps it to
the lungs to pick up oxygen and release carbon diox-
ide. The left side of the heart receives oxygenated
blood from the lungs and pumps it to the body. Both
pumps work simultaneously; that is, both atria con-
tract together, followed by the contraction of both
ventricles. Aspects of the anatomy of the heart are
summarized in Table 12–1.
CORONARY VESSELS
The right and left coronary arteries are the ﬁrst
branches of the ascending aorta, just beyond the aortic
semilunar valve (Fig. 12–4). The two arteries branch
into smaller arteries and arterioles, then to capillaries.
The coronary capillaries merge to form coronary
The Heart
277
Pulmonary semilunar
valve
Aortic semilunar
valve
Tricuspid
valve
Fibrous
skeleton
Bicuspid (mitral) valve
Posterior
Coronary artery
Figure 12–3.
Heart valves in superior view. The atria
have been removed. The ﬁbrous skeleton of the heart is
also shown.
QUESTION: When do the mitral and tricuspid valves
close, and why is this important?
Table 12–1
ANATOMY OF THE HEART
Structure
Description
Epicardium
Myocardium
Endocardium
Right atrium (RA)
Tricuspid valve
Right ventricle (RV)
Pulmonary semilunar valve
Left atrium (LA)
Mitral valve
Left ventricle (LV)
Aortic semilunar valve
Papillary muscles and
chordae tendineae
Fibrous skeleton of the heart
Serous membrane on the surface of the myocardium
Heart muscle; forms the walls of the four chambers
Endothelium that lines the chambers and covers the valves; smooth to prevent abnor-
mal clotting
Receives deoxygenated blood from the body by way of the superior and inferior caval
veins
Right AV valve; prevents backﬂow of blood from the RV to the RA when the RV
contracts
Pumps blood to the lungs by way of the pulmonary artery
Prevents backﬂow of blood from the pulmonary artery to the RV when the RV relaxes
Receives oxygenated blood from the lungs by way of the four pulmonary veins
Left AV valve; prevents backﬂow of blood from the LV to the LA when the LV contracts
Pumps blood to the body by way of the aorta
Prevents backﬂow of blood from the aorta to the LV when the LV relaxes
In both the RV and LV; prevent inversion of the AV valves when the ventricles contract
Fibrous connective tissue that anchors the four heart valves, prevents enlargement of
the valve openings, and electrically insulates the ventricles from the atria
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

veins, which empty blood into a large coronary sinus
that returns blood to the right atrium.
The purpose of the coronary vessels is to supply
blood to the myocardium itself, because oxygen is
essential for normal myocardial contraction. If a coro-
nary artery becomes obstructed, by a blood clot for
example, part of the myocardium becomes ischemic,
that is, deprived of its blood supply. Prolonged
ischemia will create an infarct, an area of necrotic
(dead) tissue. This is a myocardial infarction, com-
monly called a heart attack (see also Box 12–1: Coro-
nary Artery Disease).
CARDIAC CYCLE
AND HEART SOUNDS
The cardiac cycle is the sequence of events in one
heartbeat. In its simplest form, the cardiac cycle is the
simultaneous contraction of the two atria, followed a
fraction of a second later by the simultaneous contrac-
tion of the two ventricles. Systole is another term for
contraction. The term for relaxation is diastole. You
are probably familiar with these terms as they apply to
blood pressure readings. If we apply them to the car-
diac cycle, we can say that atrial systole is followed by
ventricular systole. There is, however, a signiﬁcant
difference between the movement of blood from the
atria to the ventricles and the movement of blood
from the ventricles to the arteries. The events of the
cardiac cycle are shown in Fig. 12–5. In this traditional
representation, the cardiac cycle is depicted in a circle,
because one heartbeat follows another, and the begin-
ning of atrial systole is at the top (12 o’clock). The size
of the segment or arc of the circle indicates how long
it takes. Find the segment for atrial systole and the one
for ventricular systole, and notice how much larger
(meaning “longer”) ventricular systole is. Do you
think this might mean that ventricular contraction is
more important than atrial contraction? It does, as you
will see. Refer to Fig. 12–5 as you read the following.
We will begin at the bottom (6 o’clock) where the atria
are in the midst of diastole and the ventricles have just
completed their systole. The entire heart is relaxed
and the atria are ﬁlling with blood.
Blood is constantly ﬂowing from the veins into
both atria. As more blood accumulates, its pressure
forces open the right and left AV valves. Two-thirds
of the atrial blood ﬂows passively into the ventri-
cles (which brings us to 12 o’clock); the atria then
contract to pump the remaining blood into the ven-
tricles.
Following their contraction, the atria relax and the
ventricles begin to contract. Ventricular contraction
forces blood against the ﬂaps of the right and left AV
valves and closes them; the force of blood also opens
the aortic and pulmonary semilunar valves. As the
ventricles continue to contract, they pump blood into
the arteries. Notice that blood that enters the arteries
must all be pumped. The ventricles then relax, and at
the same time blood continues to ﬂow into the atria,
and the cycle begins again.
278
The Heart
Aorta
Left coronary artery
Anterior
interventricular branch
Great cardiac
vein
Coronary sinus
Posterior
artery and
vein
Small
cardiac vein
Right coronary artery
and vein
A
B
Figure 12–4.
(A) Coronary vessels
in anterior view. The pulmonary
artery has been cut to show the left
coronary artery emerging from the
ascending aorta. (B) Coronary vessels
in posterior view. The coronary sinus
empties blood into the right atrium.
QUESTION: What is the function of
the coronary vessels?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Heart
279
Ventricular diastole 0.5 sec
Atrial systole
0.1 sec
Most atrial blood
flows passively
into ventricles
Remainder
of atrial blood
is pumped into
ventricles
AV valves open
AV valves close
Semilunar valves open
Semilunar valves close
Ventricular systole 0.3 sec
Atrial diastole 0.7 sec
Ventricular blood
is pumped into
arteries
Figure 
12–5.
The 
cardiac 
cycle
depicted in one heartbeat (pulse: 75). The
outer circle represents the ventricles, the
middle circle the atria, and the inner circle
the movement of blood and its effect on
the heart valves. See text for description.
QUESTION: What makes the AV valves
close and the semilunar valves open?
The important distinction here is that most blood
ﬂows passively from atria to ventricles, but all blood
to the arteries is actively pumped by the ventricles.
For this reason, the proper functioning of the ventri-
cles is much more crucial to survival than is atrial
functioning.
You may be asking “All this in one heartbeat?” The
answer is yes. The cardiac cycle is this precise
sequence of events that keeps blood moving from the
veins, through the heart, and into the arteries.
The cardiac cycle also creates the heart sounds:
Each heartbeat produces two sounds, often called lub-
dup, that can be heard with a stethoscope. The ﬁrst
sound, the loudest and longest, is caused by ventricu-
lar systole closing the AV valves. The second sound is
caused by the closure of the aortic and pulmonary
semilunar valves. If any of the valves do not close
properly, an extra sound called a heart murmur may
be heard (see Box 12–2: Heart Murmur).
CARDIAC CONDUCTION PATHWAY
The cardiac cycle is a sequence of mechanical events
that is regulated by the electrical activity of the
myocardium. Cardiac muscle cells have the ability
to contract spontaneously; that is, nerve impulses are
not required to cause contraction. The heart generates
its own beat, and the electrical impulses follow a
very speciﬁc route throughout the myocardium. You
may ﬁnd it helpful to refer to Fig. 12–6 as you read the
following.
The natural pacemaker of the heart is the sinoatrial
(SA) node, a specialized group of cardiac muscle cells
located in the wall of the right atrium just below the
opening of the superior vena cava. The SA node is
considered specialized because it has the most rapid
rate of contraction, that is, it depolarizes more rapidly
than any other part of the myocardium (60 to 80 times
per minute). As you may recall, depolarization is the
rapid entry of Na ions and the reversal of charges on
either side of the cell membrane. The cells of the SA
node are more permeable to Na ions than are other
cardiac muscle cells. Therefore, they depolarize more
rapidly, then contract and initiate each heartbeat.
From the SA node, impulses for contraction travel
to the atrioventricular (AV) node, located in the
lower interatrial septum. The transmission of impulses
from the SA node to the AV node and to the rest of the
atrial myocardium brings about atrial systole.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

280
The Heart
BOX 12–1
CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE
Other predisposing factors for atherosclerosis
include cigarette smoking, diabetes mellitus, and
high blood pressure. Any one of these may cause
damage to the lining of coronary arteries, which is
the ﬁrst step in the abnormal deposition of choles-
terol. A diet high in cholesterol and saturated fats
and high blood levels of these lipids will increase
the rate of cholesterol deposition.
A possible chemical marker of risk is a high blood
level of homocysteine. Homocysteine is a metabolic
product of the essential amino acid methionine,
and may be converted back to methionine or fur-
ther changed and excreted by the kidneys. A high
blood level of homocysteine may indicate inﬂam-
mation of the walls of arteries. Yet another chemical
marker of inﬂammation is C-reactive protein (CRP).
There is still much to learn about the role of inﬂam-
mation in atherosclerosis, but simple blood tests for
chemical markers may someday provide a diagnosis
before heart damage occurs.
When coronary artery disease becomes life-
threatening, coronary artery bypass surgery may be
performed. In this procedure, a synthetic vessel or a
vein (such as the saphenous vein of the leg) is
grafted around the obstructed coronary vessel to
restore blood ﬂow to the myocardium. This is not a
cure, for atherosclerosis may occur in a grafted vein
or at other sites in the coronary arteries.
Coronary artery disease results in decreased blood
ﬂow to the myocardium. If blood ﬂow is diminished
but not completely obstructed, the person may
experience difficulty breathing and angina, which is
chest pain caused by lack of oxygen to part of the
heart muscle. If blood ﬂow is completely blocked,
however, the result is a myocardial infarction
(necrosis of cardiac muscle).
The most common cause of coronary artery dis-
ease is atherosclerosis. Plaques of cholesterol form
in the walls of a coronary artery; this narrows the
lumen (cavity) and creates a rough surface where a
clot (thrombus) may form (see Box Fig. 12–A). A
predisposing factor for such clot formation, one that
cannot be changed, is a family history of coronary
artery disease. There is no “gene for heart attacks,”
but we do have genes for the enzymes involved in
cholesterol metabolism. Many of these are liver
enzymes that regulate the transport of cholesterol in
the blood in the form of lipoproteins and regulate
the liver’s excretion of excess cholesterol in bile.
Some people, therefore, have a greater tendency
than others to have higher blood levels of choles-
terol and certain lipoproteins. In women before
menopause, estrogen is believed to exert a protec-
tive effect by lowering blood lipid levels. This is why
heart attacks in the 30- to 50-year-old age range are
less frequent in women than in men.
Normal artery
Atherosclerotic artery
A
B
Box Figure 12–A
(A) Cross-section of normal coronary artery. (B) Coronary artery with
atherosclerosis narrowing the lumen.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Recall that the ﬁbrous skeleton of the heart sepa-
rates the atrial myocardium from the ventricular
myocardium; the ﬁbrous connective tissue acts as elec-
trical insulation between the two sets of chambers.
The only pathway for impulses from the atria to the
ventricles, therefore, is the atrioventricular bundle
(AV bundle), also called the bundle of His. The AV
bundle is within the upper interventricular septum; it
receives impulses from the AV node and transmits
them to the right and left bundle branches. From the
The Heart
281
SA node
Left atrium
Right
atrium
AV node
Right
ventricle
AV bundle
(Bundle of His)
Purkinje
fibers
Left ventricle
Left bundle branch
Right bundle branch
R
P wave
Q
S
T wave
P-R Interval
QRS
Complex
ST Segment
S-T Interval
Figure 12–6.
Conduction pathway of the heart. Anterior view of the interior of the
heart. The electrocardiogram tracing is of one normal heartbeat. See text and Box 12–3 for
description.
QUESTION: What structure is the pacemaker of the heart, and what is its usual rate of
depolarization?
BOX 12–2
HEART MURMUR
close and prevent backﬂow during ventricular sys-
tole.
Some valve defects involve a narrowing (steno-
sis) and are congenital; that is, the child is born with
an abnormally narrow valve. In aortic stenosis, for
example, blood cannot easily pass from the left ven-
tricle to the aorta. The ventricle must then work
harder to pump blood through the narrow valve to
the arteries, and the turbulence created is also heard
as a systolic murmur.
Children sometimes have heart murmurs that
are called “functional” because no structural cause
can be found. These murmurs usually disappear
with no adverse effects on the child.
A heart murmur is an abnormal or extra heart sound
caused by a malfunctioning heart valve. The func-
tion of heart valves is to prevent backﬂow of blood,
and when a valve does not close properly, blood will
regurgitate (go backward), creating turbulence that
may be heard with a stethoscope.
Rheumatic heart disease is a now uncommon
complication of a streptococcal infection. In rheu-
matic fever, the heart valves are damaged by an
abnormal response by the immune system. Erosion
of the valves makes them “leaky” and inefficient,
and a murmur of backﬂowing blood will be heard.
Mitral valve regurgitation, for example, will be heard
as a systolic murmur, because this valve is meant to
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

bundle branches, impulses travel along Purkinje
ﬁbers to the rest of the ventricular myocardium and
bring about ventricular systole. The electrical activity
of the atria and ventricles is depicted by an electrocar-
diogram (ECG); this is discussed in Box 12–3:
Electrocardiogram.
If the SA node does not function properly, the AV
node will initiate the heartbeat, but at a slower rate (50
to 60 beats per minute). The AV bundle is also capa-
ble of generating the beat of the ventricles, but at a
much slower rate (15 to 40 beats per minute). This
may occur in certain kinds of heart disease in which
transmission of impulses from the atria to the ventri-
cles is blocked.
Arrhythmias are irregular heartbeats; their effects
range from harmless to life-threatening. Nearly
everyone experiences heart palpitations (becoming
aware of an irregular beat) from time to time. These
are usually not serious and may be the result of
too much caffeine, nicotine, or alcohol. Much more
serious is ventricular ﬁbrillation, a very rapid and
uncoordinated ventricular beat that is totally inef-
282
The Heart
BOX 12–3
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
throughout the ventricular myocardium. The T
wave represents repolarization of the ventricles
(atrial repolarization does not appear as a separate
wave because it is masked by the QRS complex).
Detailed interpretation of abnormal ECGs is
beyond the scope of this book, but in general, the
length of each wave and the time intervals between
waves are noted. An ECG may be helpful in the
diagnosis of coronary atherosclerosis, which de-
prives the myocardium of oxygen, or of rheumatic
fever or other valve disorders that result in enlarge-
ment of a chamber of the heart and prolong a spe-
ciﬁc wave of an ECG. For example, the enlargement
of the left ventricle that is often a consequence of
hypertension may be indicated by an abnormal
QRS complex.
A heartbeat is a series of electrical events, and the
electrical changes generated by the myocardium
can be recorded by placing electrodes on the body
surface. Such a recording is called an electrocar-
diogram (ECG) (see Fig. 12–6).
A typical ECG consists of three distinguishable
waves or deﬂections: the P wave, the QRS complex,
and the T wave. Each represents a speciﬁc electrical
event; all are shown in Fig. 12–6 in a normal ECG
tracing.
The P wave represents depolarization of the
atria, that is, the transmission of electrical impulses
from the SA node throughout the atrial myocar-
dium.
The QRS complex represents depolarization of
the ventricles as the electrical impulses spread
BOX 12–4
ARRHYTHMIAS
rillating ventricles are not pumping, and cardiac
output decreases sharply.
Ventricular ﬁbrillation may follow a non-fatal
heart attack (myocardial infarction). Damaged car-
diac muscle cells may not be able to maintain a nor-
mal state of polarization, and they depolarize
spontaneously and rapidly. From this ectopic focus,
impulses spread to other parts of the ventricular
myocardium in a rapid and haphazard pattern, and
the ventricles quiver rather than contract as a unit.
It is often possible to correct ventricular ﬁbrilla-
tion with the use of an electrical deﬁbrillator. This
instrument delivers an electric shock to the heart,
which causes the entire myocardium to depolarize
and contract, then relax. If the ﬁrst part of the heart
to recover is the SA node (which usually has the
most rapid rate of contraction), a normal heartbeat
may be restored.
Arrhythmias (also called dysrhythmias) are irreg-
ular heartbeats caused by damage to part of the
conduction pathway, or by an ectopic focus,
which is a beat generated in part of the
myocardium other than the SA node.
Flutter is a very rapid but fairly regular heart-
beat. In atrial ﬂutter, the atria may contract up to
300 times per minute. Because atrial pumping is
not crucial, however, blood ﬂow to the ventricles
may be maintained for a time, and ﬂutter may not
be immediately life-threatening. Ventricular ﬂutter
is usually only a brief transition between ventricular
tachycardia and ﬁbrillation.
Fibrillation is very rapid and uncoordinated
contractions. Ventricular ﬁbrillation is a medical
emergency that must be quickly corrected to pre-
vent death. Normal contraction of the ventricles is
necessary to pump blood into the arteries, but ﬁb-
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

fective for pumping blood (see Box 12–4: Arrhyth-
mias).
HEART RATE
A healthy adult has a resting heart rate (pulse) of 60 to
80 beats per minute, which is the rate of depolariza-
tion of the SA node. (The SA node actually has a
slightly faster rate, closer to 100 beats per minute, but
is slowed by parasympathetic nerve impulses to what
we consider a normal resting rate.) A rate less than 60
(except for athletes) is called bradycardia; a prolonged
or consistent rate greater than 100 beats per minute is
called tachycardia.
A child’s normal heart rate may be as high as 100
beats per minute, that of an infant as high as 120, and
that of a near-term fetus as high as 140 beats per
minute. These higher rates are not related to age, but
rather to size: the smaller the individual, the higher the
metabolic rate and the faster the heart rate. Parallels
may be found among animals of different sizes; the
heart rate of a mouse is about 200 beats per minute
and that of an elephant about 30 beats per minute.
Let us return to the adult heart rate and consider
the person who is in excellent physical condition. As
you may know, well-conditioned athletes have low
resting pulse rates. Those of basketball players are
often around 50 beats per minute, and the pulse of a
marathon runner often ranges from 35 to 40 beats per
minute. To understand why this is so, remember that
the heart is a muscle. When our skeletal muscles are
exercised, they become stronger and more efficient.
The same is true for the heart; consistent exercise
makes it a more efficient pump, as you will see in the
next section.
CARDIAC OUTPUT
Cardiac output is the amount of blood pumped by a
ventricle in 1 minute. A certain level of cardiac output
is needed at all times to transport oxygen to tissues and
to remove waste products. During exercise, cardiac
output must increase to meet the body’s need for more
oxygen. We will return to exercise after ﬁrst consider-
ing resting cardiac output.
To calculate cardiac output, we must know the
pulse rate and how much blood is pumped per beat.
Stroke volume is the term for the amount of blood
pumped by a ventricle per beat; an average resting
stroke volume is 60 to 80 mL per beat. A simple for-
mula then enables us to determine cardiac output:
Cardiac output  stroke volume  pulse (heart rate)
Let us put into this formula an average resting
stroke volume, 70 mL, and an average resting pulse,
70 beats per minute (bpm):
Cardiac output  70 mL  70 bpm
Cardiac output  4900 mL per minute
(approximately 5 liters)
Naturally, cardiac output varies with the size of the
person, but the average resting cardiac output is 5 to 6
liters per minute. Notice that this amount is just about
the same as a person’s average volume of blood. At
rest, the heart pumps all of the blood in the body
within about a minute. Changes are possible, depend-
ing on circumstances and extent of physical activity.
If we now reconsider the athlete, you will be able to
see precisely why the athlete has a low resting pulse. In
our formula, we will use an average resting cardiac
output (5 liters) and an athlete’s pulse rate (50):
Cardiac output  stroke volume  pulse
5000 mL  stroke volume  50 bpm
5000/50  stroke volume
100 mL  stroke volume
Notice that the athlete’s resting stroke volume is
signiﬁcantly higher than the average. The athlete’s
more efficient heart pumps more blood with each beat
and so can maintain a normal resting cardiac output
with fewer beats.
Now let us see how the heart responds to exercise.
Heart rate (pulse) increases during exercise, and so
does stroke volume. The increase in stroke volume is
the result of Starling’s law of the heart, which states
that the more the cardiac muscle ﬁbers are stretched,
the more forcefully they contract. During exercise,
more blood returns to the heart; this is called venous
return. Increased venous return stretches the myocar-
dium of the ventricles, which contract more forcefully
and pump more blood, thereby increasing stroke vol-
ume. Therefore, during exercise, our formula might
be the following:
Cardiac output  stroke volume  pulse
Cardiac output  100 mL  100 bpm
Cardiac output  10,000 mL (10 liters)
The Heart
283
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

This exercise cardiac output is twice the resting
cardiac output we ﬁrst calculated, which should not be
considered unusual. The cardiac output of a healthy
young person may increase up to four times the rest-
ing level during strenuous exercise. This difference is
the cardiac reserve, the extra volume the heart can
pump when necessary. If resting cardiac output is 5
liters and exercise cardiac output is 20 liters, the car-
diac reserve is 15 liters. The marathon runner’s cardiac
output may increase six times or more compared to
the resting level, and cardiac reserve is even greater
than for the average young person; this is the result of
the marathoner’s extremely efficient heart. Because of
Starling’s law, it is almost impossible to overwork a
healthy heart. No matter how much the volume of
venous return increases, the ventricles simply pump
more forcefully and increase the stroke volume and
cardiac output.
Also related to cardiac output, and another measure
of the health of the heart, is the ejection fraction.
This is the percent of the blood in a ventricle that is
pumped during systole. A ventricle does not empty
completely when it contracts, but should pump out
60% to 70% of the blood within it. A lower percent-
age would indicate that the ventricle is weakening.
These aspects of physiology are summarized in Table
12–2.
REGULATION OF HEART RATE
Although the heart generates and maintains its own
beat, the rate of contraction can be changed to adapt
to different situations. The nervous system can and
does bring about necessary changes in heart rate as
well as in force of contraction.
The medulla of the brain contains the two cardiac
centers, the accelerator center and the inhibitory
center. These centers send impulses to the heart
along autonomic nerves. Recall from Chapter 8 that
the autonomic nervous system has two divisions: sym-
pathetic and parasympathetic. Sympathetic impulses
from the accelerator center along sympathetic nerves
increase heart rate and force of contraction during
exercise and stressful situations. Parasympathetic
impulses from the inhibitory center along the vagus
nerves decrease the heart rate. At rest these impulses
slow down the depolarization of the SA node to what
we consider a normal resting rate, and they also slow
the heart after exercise is over.
Our next question might be: What information is
received by the medulla to initiate changes? Because
the heart pumps blood, it is essential to maintain nor-
mal blood pressure. Blood contains oxygen, which all
tissues must receive continuously. Therefore, changes
in blood pressure and oxygen level of the blood are
stimuli for changes in heart rate.
You may also recall from Chapter 9 that presso-
receptors and chemoreceptors are located in the
carotid arteries and aortic arch. Pressoreceptors in
the carotid sinuses and aortic sinus detect changes in
blood pressure. Chemoreceptors in the carotid
bodies and aortic body detect changes in the oxygen
content of the blood. The sensory nerves for the
carotid receptors are the glossopharyngeal (9th cra-
nial) nerves; the sensory nerves for the aortic arch
284
The Heart
Table 12–2
PHYSIOLOGY OF THE HEART
Aspect and
Normal Range
Description
Heart rate (pulse): 
60–80 bpm
Stroke volume:
60–80 mL/beat
Cardiac output:
5–6 L/min
Ejection fraction:
60%–70%
Cardiac reserve:
15 liters or more
Generated by the SA node, propagated through the conduction pathway; parasympathetic
impulses (vagus nerves) decrease the rate; sympathetic impulses increase the rate
The amount of blood pumped by a ventricle in one beat
The volume of blood pumped by a ventricle in 1 minute; stroke volume x pulse
The percentage of blood within a ventricle that is pumped out per beat
The difference between resting cardiac output and maximum cardiac output during exercise
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

receptors are the vagus (10th cranial) nerves. If we
now put all of these facts together in a speciﬁc exam-
ple, you will see that the regulation of heart rate is a
reﬂex. Figure 12–7 depicts all of the structures just
mentioned.
A person who stands up suddenly from a lying posi-
tion may feel light-headed or dizzy for a few moments,
because blood pressure to the brain has decreased
abruptly. The drop in blood pressure is detected by
pressoreceptors in the carotid sinuses—notice that
they are “on the way” to the brain, a very strategic
location. The drop in blood pressure causes fewer
impulses to be generated by the pressoreceptors.
These impulses travel along the glossopharyngeal
nerves to the medulla, and the decrease in the fre-
quency of impulses stimulates the accelerator center.
The accelerator center generates impulses that are car-
ried by sympathetic nerves to the SA node, AV node,
and ventricular myocardium. As heart rate and force
increase, blood pressure to the brain is raised to nor-
mal, and the sensation of light-headedness passes.
When blood pressure to the brain is restored to nor-
mal, the heart receives more parasympathetic impulses
from the inhibitory center along the vagus nerves to
the SA node and AV node. These parasympathetic
impulses slow the heart rate to a normal resting pace.
The heart will also be the effector in a reﬂex stim-
ulated by a decrease in the oxygen content of the
blood. The aortic receptors are strategically located so
as to detect such an important change as soon as blood
leaves the heart. The reﬂex arc in this situation would
be (1) aortic chemoreceptors, (2) vagus nerves (sen-
sory), (3) accelerator center in the medulla, (4) sympa-
thetic nerves, and (5) the heart muscle, which will
increase its rate and force of contraction to circulate
more oxygen to correct the hypoxia.
Recall also from Chapter 10 that the hormone
epinephrine is secreted by the adrenal medulla in
stressful situations. One of the many functions of epi-
nephrine is to increase heart rate and force of contrac-
tion. This will help supply more blood to tissues in
need of more oxygen.
The Heart
285
Accelerator center
Inhibitory center
Medulla
Thoracic spinal cord
Sympathetic nerves
Right ventricle
Vagus (motor) nerves
Vagus (sensory)
nerve
Glossopharyngeal
nerves
Carotid sinus and
carotid body
Common
carotid
arteries
Aortic arch
Aortic sinus
      and aortic body
SA node
Bundle of His
AV node  
Figure 12–7.
Nervous regulation of the heart. The brain and spinal cord are shown on
the left. The heart and major blood vessels are shown on the right.
QUESTION: Sympathetic impulses to the ventricles will have what effect?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The heart pumps blood, which creates blood
pressure, and circulates oxygen, nutrients,
and other substances. The heart is located in
the mediastinum, the area between the
lungs in the thoracic cavity.
Pericardial Membranes—three layers that
enclose the heart (see Fig. 12–1)
1. The outer, ﬁbrous pericardium, made of ﬁbrous
connective tissue, is a loose-ﬁtting sac that sur-
rounds the heart and extends over the diaphragm
and the bases of the great vessels.
2. The parietal pericardium is a serous membrane
that lines the ﬁbrous pericardium.
3. The visceral pericardium, or epicardium, is a serous
membrane on the surface of the myocardium.
4. Serous ﬂuid between the parietal and visceral peri-
cardial membranes prevents friction as the heart
beats.
Chambers of the Heart (see Fig. 12–2 and
Table 12–1)
1. Cardiac muscle tissue, the myocardium, forms the
walls of the four chambers of the heart.
2. Endocardium lines the chambers and covers the
valves of the heart; is simple squamous epithelium
that is very smooth and prevents abnormal clotting.
3. The right and left atria are the upper chambers,
separated by the interatrial septum. The atria
receive blood from veins.
4. The right and left ventricles are the lower cham-
bers, separated by the interventricular septum. The
ventricles pump blood into arteries.
Right Atrium
1. Receives blood from the upper body by way of the
superior vena cava and receives blood from the
lower body by way of the inferior vena cava.
2. The tricuspid (right AV) valve prevents backﬂow of
blood from the right ventricle to the right atrium
when the right ventricle contracts.
Left Atrium
1. Receives blood from the lungs by way of four pul-
monary veins.
2. The mitral (left AV or bicuspid) valve prevents
backﬂow of blood from the left ventricle to the left
atrium when the left ventricle contracts.
3. The walls of the atria produce atrial natriuretic
peptide when stretched by increased blood volume
or BP. ANP increases the loss of Na ions and
water in urine, which decreases blood volume and
BP to normal.
286
The Heart
STUDY OUTLINE
AGING AND THE HEART
The heart muscle becomes less efficient with age, and
there is a decrease in both maximum cardiac output
and heart rate, although resting levels may be more
than adequate. The health of the myocardium
depends on its blood supply, and with age there is
greater likelihood that atherosclerosis will narrow the
coronary arteries. Atherosclerosis is the deposition of
cholesterol on and in the walls of the arteries, which
decreases blood ﬂow and forms rough surfaces that
may cause intravascular clot formation.
High blood pressure (hypertension) causes the left
ventricle to work harder; it may enlarge and outgrow
its blood supply, thus becoming weaker. A weak ven-
tricle is not an efficient pump, and such weakness may
progress to congestive heart failure; such a progres-
sion may be slow, or may be rapid. The heart valves
may become thickened by ﬁbrosis, leading to heart
murmurs and less efficient pumping. Arrhythmias are
also more common with age, as the cells of the con-
duction pathway become less efficient.
SUMMARY
As you can see, the nervous system regulates the func-
tioning of the heart based on what the heart is sup-
posed to do. The pumping of the heart maintains
normal blood pressure and proper oxygenation of tis-
sues, and the nervous system ensures that the heart
will be able to meet these demands in different situa-
tions. Blood pressure and the blood vessels are the
subjects of the next chapter.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Right Ventricle—has relatively thin walls
1. Pumps blood to the lungs through the pulmonary
artery.
2. The pulmonary semilunar valve prevents backﬂow
of blood from the pulmonary artery to the right
ventricle when the right ventricle relaxes.
3. Papillary muscles and chordae tendineae prevent
inversion of the right AV valve when the right ven-
tricle contracts.
Left Ventricle—has thicker walls than does
the right ventricle
1. Pumps blood to the body through the aorta.
2. The aortic semilunar valve prevents backﬂow of
blood from the aorta to the left ventricle when the
left ventricle relaxes.
3. Papillary muscles and chordae tendineae prevent
inversion of the left AV valve when the left ventri-
cle contracts.
4. The heart is a double pump: The right side of the
heart receives deoxygenated blood from the body
and pumps it to the lungs; the left side of the heart
receives oxygenated blood from the lungs and
pumps it to the body. Both sides of the heart work
simultaneously.
Coronary Vessels (see Fig. 12–4)
1. Pathway: ascending aorta to right and left coronary
arteries, to smaller arteries, to capillaries, to coro-
nary veins, to the coronary sinus, to the right
atrium.
2. Coronary circulation supplies oxygenated blood to
the myocardium.
3. Obstruction of a coronary artery causes a myocar-
dial infarction: death of an area of myocardium due
to lack of oxygen.
Cardiac Cycle—the sequence of events in one
heartbeat (see Fig. 12–5)
1. The atria continually receive blood from the veins;
as pressure within the atria increases, the AV valves
are opened.
2. Two-thirds of the atrial blood ﬂows passively
into the ventricles; atrial contraction pumps the
remaining blood into the ventricles; the atria then
relax.
3. The ventricles contract, which closes the AV valves
and opens the aortic and pulmonary semilunar
valves.
4. Ventricular contraction pumps all blood into the
arteries. The ventricles then relax. Meanwhile,
blood is ﬁlling the atria, and the cycle begins again.
5. Systole means contraction; diastole means relax-
ation. In the cardiac cycle, atrial systole is followed
by ventricular systole. When the ventricles are in
systole, the atria are in diastole.
6. The mechanical events of the cardiac cycle keep
blood moving from the veins through the heart and
into the arteries.
Heart Sounds—two sounds per heartbeat:
lub-dup
1. The ﬁrst sound is created by closure of the AV
valves during ventricular systole.
2. The second sound is created by closure of the aor-
tic and pulmonary semilunar valves.
3. Improper closing of a valve results in a heart mur-
mur.
Cardiac Conduction Pathway—the pathway
of impulses during the cardiac cycle (see Fig.
12–6)
1. The SA node in the wall of the right atrium initi-
ates each heartbeat; the cells of the SA node are
more permeable to Na ions and depolarize more
rapidly than any other part of the myocardium.
2. The AV node is in the lower interatrial septum.
Depolarization of the SA node spreads to the AV
node and to the atrial myocardium and brings
about atrial systole.
3. The AV bundle (bundle of His) is in the upper
interventricular septum; the ﬁrst part of the ventri-
cles to depolarize.
4. The right and left bundle branches in the interven-
tricular septum transmit impulses to the Purkinje
ﬁbers in the ventricular myocardium, which com-
plete ventricular systole.
5. An electrocardiogram (ECG) depicts the electrical
activity of the heart (see Fig. 12–6).
6. If part of the conduction pathway does not function
properly, the next part will initiate contraction, but
at a slower rate.
7. Arrhythmias are irregular heartbeats; their effects
range from harmless to life-threatening.
Heart Rate
1. Healthy adult: 60 to 80 beats per minute (heart rate
equals pulse); children and infants have faster
The Heart
287
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

pulses because of their smaller size and higher
metabolic rate.
2. A person in excellent physical condition has a slow
resting pulse because the heart is a more efficient
pump and pumps more blood per beat.
Cardiac Output (see Table 12–2)
1. Cardiac output is the amount of blood pumped by
a ventricle in 1 minute.
2. Stroke volume is the amount of blood pumped by a
ventricle in one beat; average is 60 to 80 mL.
3. Cardiac output equals stroke volume  pulse; aver-
age resting cardiac output is 5 to 6 liters.
4. Starling’s law of the heart—the more cardiac mus-
cle ﬁbers are stretched, the more forcefully they
contract.
5. During exercise, stroke volume increases as venous
return increases and stretches the myocardium of
the ventricles (Starling’s law).
6. During exercise, the increase in stroke volume and
the increase in pulse result in an increase in cardiac
output: two to four times the resting level.
7. Cardiac reserve is the difference between resting
cardiac output and the maximum cardiac output;
may be 15 liters or more.
8. The ejection fraction is the percent of its total
blood that a ventricle pumps per beat; average is
60% to 70%.
Regulation of Heart Rate (see Fig. 12–7)
1. The heart generates its own beat, but the nervous
system brings about changes to adapt to different
situations.
2. The medulla contains the cardiac centers: the
accelerator center and the inhibitory center.
3. Sympathetic impulses to the heart increase rate and
force of contraction; parasympathetic impulses
(vagus nerves) to the heart decrease heart rate.
4. Pressoreceptors in the carotid and aortic sinuses
detect changes in blood pressure.
5. Chemoreceptors in the carotid and aortic bodies
detect changes in the oxygen content of the blood.
6. The glossopharyngeal nerves are sensory for the
carotid receptors. The vagus nerves are sensory for
the aortic receptors.
7. If blood pressure to the brain decreases, presso-
receptors in the carotid sinuses detect this decrease
and send fewer sensory impulses along the glos-
sopharyngeal nerves to the medulla. The accelera-
tor center dominates and sends motor impulses
along sympathetic nerves to increase heart rate and
force of contraction to restore blood pressure to
normal.
8. A similar reﬂex is activated by hypoxia.
9. Epinephrine from the adrenal medulla increases
heart rate and force of contraction during stressful
situations.
288
The Heart
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Describe the location of the heart with respect to
the lungs and to the diaphragm. (p. 274)
2. Name the three pericardial membranes. Where
is serous ﬂuid found and what is its function?
(p. 274)
3. Describe the location and explain the function of
endocardium. (p. 274)
4. Name the veins that enter the right atrium; name
those that enter the left atrium. For each, where
does the blood come from? (p. 275)
5. Name the artery that leaves the right ventricle;
name the artery that leaves the left ventricle. For
each, where is the blood going? (p. 275)
6. Explain the purpose of the right and left AV valves
and the purpose of the aortic and pulmonary semi-
lunar valves. (p. 275)
7. Describe the coronary system of vessels and
explain the purpose of coronary circulation. (p.
278)
8. Define systole, diastole, and cardiac cycle.
(p. 278)
9. Explain how movement of blood from atria to
ventricles differs from movement of blood from
ventricles to arteries. (p. 279)
10. Explain why the heart is considered a double
pump. Trace the path of blood from the right
atrium back to the right atrium, naming the
chambers of the heart and their vessels through
which the blood passes. (pp. 275, 277)
11. Name the parts, in order, of the cardiac conduc-
tion pathway. Explain why it is the SA node that
generates each heartbeat. State a normal range of
heart rate for a healthy adult. (pp. 279–283)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

12. Calculate cardiac output if stroke volume is 75
mL and pulse is 75 bpm. Using the cardiac output
you just calculated as a resting normal, what is the
stroke volume of a marathoner whose resting
pulse is 40 bpm? (p. 283)
13. Name the two cardiac centers and state their loca-
tion. Sympathetic impulses to the heart have what
effect? Parasympathetic impulses to the heart
have what effect? Name the parasympathetic
nerves to the heart. (p. 284)
14. State the locations of arterial pressoreceptors and
chemoreceptors, what they detect, and their sen-
sory nerves. (p. 284)
15. Describe the reﬂex arc to increase heart rate and
force when blood pressure to the brain decreases.
(p. 285)
The Heart
289
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
1. Endocarditis may be caused by bacteria or fungi
that erode, or wear away, the heart valves, or in
some cases make the valves bumpy (these bumps
are called vegetations—think cauliﬂower). Explain
the possible consequences of this.
2. Bob, a college freshman, is telling his new friends
that he has been running seriously for 6 years,
and can run a marathon in a little over 3 hours. His
friends aren’t sure they should believe him, but
don’t want to spend 3 hours waiting while Bob
runs 26 miles. Bob says that he can prove he is
telling the truth in 1 minute. Can he? Explain why
or why not.
3. A neighbor, Mrs. G., age 62, tells you that she
“doesn’t feel right” and is suddenly tired for no
apparent reason. She denies having chest pain,
though she admits to a “full” feeling she calls indi-
gestion. You suspect that she may be having a heart
attack. What question can you ask to help you be
more sure? Explain the physiological basis for your
question.
4. Several types of artiﬁcial hearts are being devel-
oped and tested. What are the three essential
characteristics a truly useful artiﬁcial heart must
have? One is obvious, the others, perhaps not as
much so.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

290
CHAPTER 13
C
Chapter Outline
Arteries
Veins
Anastomoses
Capillaries
Exchanges in Capillaries
Pathways of Circulation
Pulmonary Circulation
Systemic Circulation
Hepatic Portal Circulation
Fetal Circulation
Velocity of Blood Flow
Blood Pressure
Maintenance of Systemic Blood Pressure
Distribution of Blood Flow
Regulation of Blood Pressure
Intrinsic Mechanisms
Nervous Mechanisms
Aging and the Vascular System
BOX 13–1
DISORDERS OF ARTERIES
BOX 13–2
DISORDERS OF VEINS
BOX 13–3
PULSE SITES
BOX 13–4
HYPERTENSION
BOX 13–5
CIRCULATORY SHOCK
Student Objectives
• Describe the structure of arteries and veins, and
relate their structure to function.
• Explain the purpose of arterial and venous anasto-
moses.
• Describe the structure of capillaries, and explain
the exchange processes that take place in capillar-
ies.
• Describe the pathway and purpose of pulmonary
circulation.
• Name the branches of the aorta and their distribu-
tions.
• Name the major systemic veins, and the parts of
the body they drain of blood.
• Describe the pathway and purpose of hepatic por-
tal circulation.
• Describe the modiﬁcations of fetal circulation, and
explain the purpose of each.
• Explain the importance of slow blood ﬂow in cap-
illaries.
• Deﬁne blood pressure, and state the normal
ranges for systemic and pulmonary blood pressure.
• Explain the factors that maintain systemic blood
pressure.
• Explain how the heart and kidneys are involved in
the regulation of blood pressure.
• Explain how the medulla and the autonomic nerv-
ous system regulate the diameter of blood vessels.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Vascular System
291
New Terminology
Anastomosis (a-NAS-ti-MOH-sis)
Arteriole (ar-TIR-ee-ohl)
Circle of Willis (SIR-kuhl of WILL-iss)
Ductus arteriosus (DUK-tus ar-TIR-ee-OH-sis)
Foramen ovale (for-RAY-men oh-VAHL-ee)
Hepatic portal (hep-PAT-ik POOR-tuhl)
Peripheral resistance (puh-RIFF-uh-ruhl ree-ZIS-
tense)
Placenta (pluh-SEN-tah)
Precapillary sphincter (pre-KAP-i-lar-ee SFINK-ter)
Sinusoid (SIGH-nuh-soyd)
Umbilical arteries (uhm-BILL-i-kull AR-tuh-rees)
Umbilical vein (uhm-BILL-i-kull VAIN)
Venule (VEN-yool)
Related Clinical Terminology
Anaphylactic (AN-uh-ﬁ-LAK-tik)
Aneurysm (AN-yur-izm)
Arteriosclerosis (ar-TIR-ee-oh-skle-ROH-sis)
Hypertension (HIGH-per-TEN-shun)
Hypovolemic (HIGH-poh-voh-LEEM-ik)
Phlebitis (ﬂe-BY-tis)
Pulse deﬁcit (PULS DEF-i-sit)
Septic shock (SEP-tik SHAHK)
Varicose veins (VAR-i-kohs VAINS).
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The role of blood vessels in the circulation of blood
has been known since 1628, when William Harvey, an
English anatomist, demonstrated that blood in veins
always ﬂowed toward the heart. Before that time, it
was believed that blood was static or stationary, some
of it within the vessels but the rest sort of in puddles
throughout the body. Harvey showed that blood
indeed does move, and only in the blood vessels
(though he did not know of the existence of capillar-
ies). In the centuries that followed, the active (rather
than merely passive) roles of the vascular system were
discovered, and all contribute to homeostasis.
The vascular system consists of the arteries, capil-
laries, and veins through which the heart pumps blood
throughout the body. As you will see, the major “busi-
ness” of the vascular system, which is the exchange of
materials between the blood and tissues, takes place in
the capillaries. The arteries and veins, however, are
just as important, transporting blood between the cap-
illaries and the heart.
Another important topic of this chapter will be
blood pressure (BP), which is the force the blood
exerts against the walls of the vessels. Normal blood
pressure is essential for circulation and for some of the
material exchanges that take place in capillaries.
ARTERIES
Arteries carry blood from the heart to capillaries;
smaller arteries are called arterioles. If we look at an
artery in cross-section, we ﬁnd three layers (or tunics)
of tissues, each with different functions (Fig. 13–1).
The innermost layer, the tunica intima, is the only
part of a vessel that is in contact with blood. It is made
of simple squamous epithelium called endothelium.
This lining is the same type of tissue that forms the
endocardium, the lining of the chambers of the heart.
As you might guess, its function is also the same: Its
extreme smoothness prevents abnormal blood clot-
ting. The endothelium of vessels, however, also pro-
duces nitric oxide (NO), which is a vasodilator. The
tunica media, or middle layer, is made of smooth
muscle and elastic connective tissue. Both of these tis-
sues are involved in the maintenance of normal blood
pressure, especially diastolic blood pressure when the
heart is relaxed. The smooth muscle is the tissue
affected by the vasodilator NO; relaxation of this mus-
cle tissue brings about dilation of the vessel. Smooth
muscle also has a nerve supply; sympathetic nerve
impulses bring about vasoconstriction. Fibrous con-
nective tissue forms the outer layer, the tunica
externa. This tissue is very strong, which is important
to prevent the rupture or bursting of the larger arter-
ies that carry blood under high pressure (see Box 13–1:
Disorders of Arteries).
The outer and middle layers of large arteries are
quite thick. In the smallest arterioles, only individual
smooth muscle cells encircle the tunica intima. As
mentioned, the smooth muscle layer enables arteries
to constrict or dilate. Such changes in diameter are
regulated by the medulla and autonomic nervous sys-
tem, and will be discussed in a later section on blood
pressure.
VEINS
Veins carry blood from capillaries back to the heart;
the smaller veins are called venules. The same three
tissue layers are present in veins as in the walls of
arteries, but there are some differences when com-
pared to the arterial layers. The inner layer of veins is
smooth endothelium, but at intervals this lining is
folded to form valves (see Fig. 13–1). Valves prevent
backﬂow of blood and are most numerous in veins of
the legs, where blood must often return to the heart
against the force of gravity.
The middle layer of veins is a thin layer of smooth
muscle. It is thin because veins do not regulate blood
pressure and blood ﬂow into capillaries as arteries do.
Veins can constrict extensively, however, and this
function becomes very important in certain situations
such as severe hemorrhage. The outer layer of veins is
also thin; not as much ﬁbrous connective tissue is nec-
essary because blood pressure in veins is very low.
ANASTOMOSES
An anastomosis is a connection, or joining, of vessels,
that is, artery to artery or vein to vein. The general
purpose of these connections is to provide alternate
pathways for the ﬂow of blood if one vessel becomes
obstructed.
An arterial anastomosis helps ensure that blood
will get to the capillaries of an organ to deliver oxygen
292
The Vascular System
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

and nutrients and to remove waste products. There
are arterial anastomoses, for example, between some
of the coronary arteries that supply blood to the
myocardium.
A venous anastomosis helps ensure that blood will
be able to return to the heart in order to be pumped
again. Venous anastomoses are most numerous among
the veins of the legs, where the possibility of obstruc-
tion increases as a person gets older (see Box 13–2:
Disorders of Veins).
CAPILLARIES
Capillaries carry blood from arterioles to venules.
Their walls are only one cell in thickness; capillaries
are actually the extension of the endothelium, the sim-
ple squamous lining, of arteries and veins (see Fig.
13–1). Some tissues do not have capillaries; these are
the epidermis, cartilage, and the lens and cornea of the
eye.
Most tissues, however, have extensive capillary net-
works. The quantity or volume of capillary networks
in an organ reﬂects the metabolic activity of the organ.
The functioning of the kidneys, for example, depends
upon a good blood supply. Fig. 18–2 shows a vascular
cast of a kidney; you can see how dense the vessels are,
most of which are capillaries. In contrast, a tendon
such as the Achilles tendon at the heel or the patellar
tendon at the knee would have far fewer vessels,
because ﬁbrous connective tissue is far less metaboli-
cally active.
The Vascular System
293
Tunica externa
External elastic
lamina
Tunica
media
Internal elastic
lamina
Endothelium (lining)
Artery
Arteriole
Endothelial
cells
Smooth muscle
Precapillary
sphincter
Capillary
Blood flow
Venule
Vein
Valve
Tunica
intima
Tunica
externa
Tunica
media
Figure 13–1.
Structure of
an artery, arteriole, capillary
network, venule, and vein.
See text for description.
QUESTION: What tissue is the
tunica media made of, and
how is this layer different in an
artery and in a vein?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Blood ﬂow into capillary networks is regulated by
smooth muscle cells called precapillary sphincters,
found at the beginning of each network (see Fig. 13–1).
Precapillary sphincters are not regulated by the nerv-
ous system but rather constrict or dilate depending on
the needs of the tissues. Because there is not enough
blood in the body to ﬁll all of the capillaries at once,
precapillary sphincters are usually slightly constricted.
In an active tissue that requires more oxygen, such as
exercising muscle, the precapillary sphincters dilate to
increase blood ﬂow. These automatic responses ensure
that blood, the volume of which is constant, will circu-
late where it is needed most.
Some organs have another type of capillary called
sinusoids, which are larger and more permeable than
are other capillaries. The permeability of sinusoids
permits large substances such as proteins and blood
cells to enter or leave the blood. Sinusoids are found
in the red bone marrow and spleen, where blood cells
enter or leave the blood, and in organs such as the
294
The Vascular System
BOX 13–1
DISORDERS OF ARTERIES
The most common sites for aneurysm formation
are the cerebral arteries and the aorta, especi-
ally the abdominal aorta. Rupture of a cerebral
aneurysm is a possible cause of a cerebrovascular
accident (CVA). Rupture of an aortic aneurysm is
life-threatening and requires immediate corrective
surgery. The damaged portion of the artery is
removed and replaced with a graft. Such surgery
may also be performed when an aneurysm is found
before it ruptures.
Atherosclerosis—this condition has been men-
tioned previously; see Chapters 2 and 12.
Arteriosclerosis—although commonly called
“hardening of the arteries,” arteriosclerosis really
means that the arteries lose their elasticity, and their
walls become weakened. Arteries carry blood under
high pressure, so deterioration of their walls is part
of the aging process.
Aneurysm—a weak portion of an arterial wall
may bulge out, forming a sac or bubble called an
aneurysm. Arteriosclerosis is a possible cause, but
some aneurysms are congenital. An aneurysm may
be present for many years without any symptoms
and may only be discovered during diagnostic pro-
cedures for some other purpose.
BOX 13–2
DISORDERS OF VEINS
to pool in the leg veins, stretching their walls. If the
veins become overly stretched, the valves within
them no longer close properly. These incompetent
valves no longer prevent backﬂow of blood, leading
to further pooling and even further stretching of
the walls of the veins. Varicose veins may cause dis-
comfort and cramping in the legs, or become even
more painful. Severe varicosities may be removed
surgically.
This condition may also develop during preg-
nancy, when the enlarged uterus presses against
the iliac veins and slows blood ﬂow into the inferior
vena cava. Varicose veins of the anal canal are called
hemorrhoids, which may also be a result of preg-
nancy or of chronic constipation and straining to
defecate. Hemorrhoids that cause discomfort or
pain may also be removed surgically. Developments
in laser surgery have made this a simpler procedure
than it was in the past.
Phlebitis—inﬂammation of a vein. This condition
is most common in the veins of the legs, because
they are subjected to great pressure as the blood is
returned to the heart against the force of gravity.
Often no speciﬁc cause can be determined, but
advancing age, obesity, and blood disorders may
be predisposing factors.
If a superﬁcial vein is affected, the area may be
tender or painful, but blood ﬂow is usually main-
tained because there are so many anastomoses
among these veins. Deep vein phlebitis is potentially
more serious, with the possibility of clot formation
(thrombophlebitis) and subsequent dislodging of
the clot to form an embolism.
Varicose veins—swollen and distended veins that
occur most often in the superﬁcial veins of the legs.
This condition may develop in people who must sit
or stand in one place for long periods of time.
Without contraction of the leg muscles, blood tends
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

liver and pituitary gland, which produce and secrete
proteins into the blood.
EXCHANGES IN CAPILLARIES
Capillaries are the sites of exchanges of materials
between the blood and the tissue ﬂuid surrounding
cells. Some of these substances move from the blood
to tissue ﬂuid, and others move from tissue ﬂuid to the
blood. The processes by which these substances are
exchanged are illustrated in Fig. 13–2.
Gases move by diffusion, that is, from their area of
greater concentration to their area of lesser concen-
tration. Oxygen, therefore, diffuses from the blood in
systemic capillaries to the tissue ﬂuid, and carbon
dioxide diffuses from tissue ﬂuid to the blood to be
brought to the lungs and exhaled.
Let us now look at the blood pressure as blood
enters capillaries from the arterioles. Blood pressure
here is about 30 to 35 mmHg, and the pressure of the
surrounding tissue ﬂuid is much lower, about 2
mmHg. Because the capillary blood pressure is higher,
the process of ﬁltration occurs, which forces plasma
and dissolved nutrients out of the capillaries and into
tissue ﬂuid. This is how nutrients such as glucose,
amino acids, and vitamins are brought to cells.
Blood pressure decreases as blood reaches the
venous end of capillaries, but notice that proteins
such as albumin have remained in the blood. Albumin
contributes to the colloid osmotic pressure (COP)
of blood; this is an “attracting” pressure, a “pulling”
rather than a “pushing” pressure. At the venous end
of capillaries, the presence of albumin in the blood
pulls tissue ﬂuid into the capillaries, which also brings
into the blood the waste products produced by
cells. The tissue ﬂuid that returns to the blood
also helps maintain normal blood volume and blood
pressure.
The Vascular System
295
Precapillary sphincter
Tissue fluid
Cells
Capillary
Tissue fluid -
Hydrostatic pressure
2 mmHg
COP 4 mmHg
CO2
CO2
CO2
O2
O2
O2
Plasma, glucose,
amino acids, vitamins
B. P. 33 mmHg
Albumin - COP 25 mmHg
B. P. 15 mmHg
Albumin - COP 25 mmHg
Tissue fluid,
waste products
VENOUS END
Outward forces 19
Inward forces 27
ARTERIAL END
Outward forces 37
Inward forces 27
Figure 13–2.
Exchanges between blood in a systemic capillary and the surrounding tis-
sue ﬂuid. Arrows depict the direction of movement. Filtration takes place at the arterial end
of the capillary. Osmosis takes place at the venous end. Gases are exchanged by diffusion.
QUESTION: Of all the pressures shown here, which one is the highest, and what process
does it bring about?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The amount of tissue ﬂuid formed is slightly
greater than the amount returned to the capillaries. If
this were to continue, blood volume would be gradu-
ally depleted. The excess tissue ﬂuid, however, enters
lymph capillaries. Now called lymph, it will be
returned to the blood to be recycled again as plasma,
thus maintaining blood volume. This is discussed fur-
ther in Chapter 14.
PATHWAYS OF CIRCULATION
The two major pathways of circulation are pulmonary
and systemic. Pulmonary circulation begins at the
right ventricle, and systemic circulation begins at the
left ventricle. Hepatic portal circulation is a special
segment of systemic circulation that will be covered
separately. Fetal circulation involves pathways that are
present only before birth and will also be discussed
separately.
PULMONARY CIRCULATION
The right ventricle pumps blood into the pulmonary
artery (or trunk), which divides into the right and left
pulmonary arteries, one going to each lung. Within
the lungs each artery branches extensively into smaller
arteries and arterioles, then to capillaries. The pul-
monary capillaries surround the alveoli of the lungs; it
is here that exchanges of oxygen and carbon dioxide
take place. The capillaries unite to form venules,
which merge into veins, and ﬁnally into the two pul-
monary veins from each lung that return blood to the
left atrium. This oxygenated blood will then travel
through the systemic circulation. (Notice that the pul-
monary veins contain oxygenated blood; these are the
only veins that carry blood with a high oxygen con-
tent. The blood in systemic veins has a low oxygen
content; it is systemic arteries that carry oxygenated
blood.)
SYSTEMIC CIRCULATION
The left ventricle pumps blood into the aorta, the
largest artery of the body. We will return to the aorta
and its branches in a moment, but ﬁrst we will sum-
marize the rest of systemic circulation. The branches
of the aorta take blood into arterioles and capillary net-
works throughout the body. Capillaries merge to form
venules and veins. The veins from the lower body take
blood to the inferior vena cava; veins from the upper
body take blood to the superior vena cava. These two
caval veins return blood to the right atrium. The major
arteries and veins are shown in Figs. 13–3 to 13–5, and
their functions are listed in Tables 13–1 and 13–2.
The aorta is a continuous vessel, but for the sake of
precise description it is divided into sections that are
named anatomically: ascending aorta, aortic arch, tho-
racic aorta, and abdominal aorta. The ascending aorta
is the ﬁrst inch that emerges from the top of the left
ventricle. The arch of the aorta curves posteriorly over
the heart and turns downward. The thoracic aorta
continues down through the chest cavity and through
the diaphragm. Below the level of the diaphragm, the
abdominal aorta continues to the level of the 4th lum-
bar vertebra, where it divides into the two common
iliac arteries. Along its course, the aorta has many
branches through which blood travels to speciﬁc
organs and parts of the body.
The ascending aorta has only two branches: the
right and left coronary arteries, which supply blood to
the myocardium. This pathway of circulation was
described previously in Chapter 12.
The aortic arch has three branches that supply
blood to the head and arms: the brachiocephalic
artery, left common carotid artery, and left subclavian
artery. The brachiocephalic (literally, “arm-head”)
artery is very short and divides into the right common
carotid artery and right subclavian artery. The right
and left common carotid arteries extend into the neck,
where each divides into an internal carotid artery and
external carotid artery, which supply the head. The
right and left subclavian arteries are in the shoulders
behind the clavicles and continue into the arms. As the
artery enters another body area (it may not “branch,”
simply continue), its name changes: The subclavian
artery becomes the axillary artery, which becomes the
brachial artery. The branches of the carotid and sub-
clavian arteries are diagrammed in Figs. 13–3 and
13–5. As you look at these diagrams, keep in mind that
the name of the vessel often tells us where it is. The
facial artery, for example, is found in the face.
Some of the arteries in the head contribute to an
important arterial anastomosis, the circle of Willis
(or cerebral arterial circle), which is a “circle” of arter-
ies around the pituitary gland (Fig. 13–6). The circle
of Willis is formed by the right and left internal
carotid arteries and the basilar artery, which is the
union of the right and left vertebral arteries (branches
of the subclavian arteries). The brain is always active,
296
The Vascular System
(text continued on page 299)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Vascular System
297
Occipital
Internal carotid
Vertebral
Brachiocephalic
Aortic arch
Maxillary
Facial
External carotid
Common carotid
Subclavian
Axillary
Pulmonary
Celiac
Left gastric
Hepatic
Splenic
Superior mesenteric
Abdominal aorta
Right common iliac
Internal iliac
External iliac
Femoral
Popliteal
Anterior tibial
Posterior tibial
Intercostal
Brachial
Renal
Gonadal
Inferior mesenteric
Radial
Ulnar
Deep palmar arch
Superficial palmar arch
Deep femoral
Figure 13–3.
Systemic arteries. The aorta and its major branches are shown in anterior
view.
QUESTION: Can you ﬁnd three arteries named after bones? After organs?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

298
The Vascular System
Superior sagittal sinus
Inferior sagittal sinus
Straight sinus
Transverse sinus
Vertebral
External jugular
Internal jugular
Subclavian
Brachiocephalic
Pulmonary
Hepatic
Hepatic portal
Left gastric
Renal
Splenic
Inferior mesenteric
Internal iliac
Femoral
External iliac
Great saphenous
Popliteal
Small saphenous
Anterior tibial
Anterior facial
Superior vena cava
Axillary
Cephalic
Hemiazygos
Intercostal
Inferior vena cava
Brachial
Basilic
Gonadal
Superior mesenteric
Dorsal arch
Volar digital
Dorsal arch
Common iliac
Figure 13–4.
Systemic veins shown in anterior view.
QUESTION: Can you ﬁnd three veins with the same name as the accompanying artery?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

even during sleep, and must have a constant ﬂow of
blood to supply oxygen and remove waste products.
For this reason there are four vessels that bring blood
to the circle of Willis. From this anastomosis, several
paired arteries (the cerebral arteries) extend into the
brain itself.
The thoracic aorta and its branches supply the
chest wall and the organs within the thoracic cavity.
These vessels are listed in Table 13–1.
The abdominal aorta gives rise to arteries that sup-
ply the abdominal wall and organs and to the common
iliac arteries, which continue into the legs. Notice in
Fig. 13–3 that the common iliac artery becomes the
external iliac artery, which becomes the femoral artery,
which becomes the popliteal artery; the same vessel
has different names based on location. These vessels
are also listed in Table 13–1 (see Box 13–3: Pulse
Sites).
The systemic veins drain blood from organs or
parts of the body and often parallel their correspond-
The Vascular System
299
Figure 13–5.
Arteries and veins of the head and neck shown in right lateral view. Veins
are labeled on the left. Arteries are labeled on the right.
QUESTION: Which vein is the counterpart of the common carotid artery?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

300
The Vascular System
Table 13–1 MAJOR SYSTEMIC ARTERIES
Branches of the Ascending Aorta and Aortic Arch
Artery
Branch of
Region supplied
Coronary a.
Brachiocephalic a.
Right common carotid a.
Right subclavian a.
Left common carotid a.
Left subclavian a.
External carotid a.
Superﬁcial temporal a.
Internal carotid a.
Ophthalmic a.
Vertebral a.
Axillary a.
Brachial a.
Radial a.
Ulnar a.
Volar arch
Branches of the Thoracic Aorta
Artery
Region Supplied
Intercostal a. (9 pairs)
Superior phrenic a.
Pericardial a.
Esophageal a.
Bronchial a.
Branches of the Abdominal Aorta
Artery
Region Supplied
Inferior phrenic a.
Lumbar a.
Middle sacral a.
Celiac a.
Hepatic a.
Left gastric a.
Splenic a.
Superior mesenteric a.
Suprarenal a.
Renal a.
Inferior mesenteric a.
Ascending aorta
Aortic arch
Brachiocephalic a.
Brachiocephalic a.
Aortic arch
Aortic arch
Common carotid a.
External carotid a.
Common carotid a.
Internal carotid a.
Subclavian a.
Subclavian a.
Axillary a.
Brachial a.
Brachial a.
Radial and ulnar a.
• Myocardium
• Right arm and head
• Right side of head
• Right shoulder and arm
• Left side of head
• Left shoulder and arm
• Superﬁcial head
• Scalp
• Brain (circle of Willis)
• Eye
• Cervical vertebrae and circle of Willis
• Armpit
• Upper arm
• Forearm
• Forearm
• Hand
• Skin, muscles, bones of trunk
• Diaphragm
• Pericardium
• Esophagus
• Bronchioles and connective tissue of the lungs
• Diaphragm
• Lumbar area of back
• Sacrum, coccyx, buttocks
• (see branches)
• Liver
• Stomach
• Spleen, pancreas
• Small intestine, part of colon
• Adrenal glands
• Kidneys
• Most of colon and rectum
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

ing arteries. The most important veins are dia-
grammed in Fig. 13–4 and listed in Table 13–2.
HEPATIC PORTAL CIRCULATION
Hepatic portal circulation is a subdivision of sys-
temic circulation in which blood from the abdominal
digestive organs and spleen circulates through the
liver before returning to the heart.
Blood from the capillaries of the stomach, small
intestine, colon, pancreas, and spleen ﬂows into two
large veins, the superior mesenteric vein and the
splenic vein, which unite to form the portal vein (Fig.
13–7). The portal vein takes blood into the liver,
where it branches extensively and empties blood into
the sinusoids, the capillaries of the liver (see also Fig.
16–6). From the sinusoids, blood ﬂows into hepatic
veins, to the inferior vena cava and back to the right
atrium. Notice that in this pathway there are two sets
of capillaries, and keep in mind that it is in capillaries
that exchanges take place. Let us use some speciﬁc
examples to show the purpose and importance of por-
tal circulation.
Glucose from carbohydrate digestion is absorbed
into the capillaries of the small intestine; after a big
meal this may greatly increase the blood glucose level.
If this blood were to go directly back to the heart and
then circulate through the kidneys, some of the glu-
cose might be lost in urine. However, blood from the
small intestine passes ﬁrst through the liver sinusoids,
and the liver cells remove the excess glucose and store
it as glycogen. The blood that returns to the heart will
then have a blood glucose level in the normal range.
Another example: Alcohol is absorbed into the cap-
illaries of the stomach. If it were to circulate directly
throughout the body, the alcohol would rapidly impair
the functioning of the brain. Portal circulation, how-
ever, takes blood from the stomach to the liver, the
organ that can detoxify the alcohol and prevent its
detrimental effects on the brain. Of course, if alcohol
consumption continues, the blood alcohol level rises
faster than the liver’s capacity to detoxify, and the well-
known signs of alcohol intoxication appear.
As you can see, this portal circulation pathway
enables the liver to modify the blood from the diges-
tive organs and spleen. Some nutrients may be stored
or changed, bilirubin from the spleen is excreted into
bile, and potential poisons are detoxiﬁed before the
blood returns to the heart and the rest of the body.
FETAL CIRCULATION
The fetus depends upon the mother for oxygen and
nutrients and for the removal of carbon dioxide and
The Vascular System
301
Table 13–1 MAJOR SYSTEMIC ARTERIES (Continued)
Branches of the Abdominal Aorta
Artery
Region Supplied
Testicular or ovarian a.
Common iliac a.
Internal iliac a.
External iliac a.
Femoral a.
Popliteal a.
Anterior tibial a.
Dorsalis pedis
Plantar arches
Posterior tibial a.
Peroneal a.
Plantar arches
• Testes or ovaries
• The two large vessels that receive blood from the
abdominal aorta; each branches as follows:
• Bladder, rectum, reproductive organs
• Lower pelvis to leg
• Thigh
• Back of knee
• Front of lower leg
• Top of ankle and foot
• Foot
• Back of lower leg
• Medial lower leg
• Foot
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

302
The Vascular System
Table 13–2
MAJOR SYSTEMIC VEINS
Vein
Vein Joined
Region Drained
Head and Neck
Cranial venous sinuses
Internal jugular v.
External jugular v.
Subclavian v.
Brachiocephalic v.
Superior vena cava
Arm and Shoulder
Radial v.
Ulnar v.
Cephalic v.
Basilic v.
Brachial v.
Axillary v.
Subclavian v.
Trunk
Brachiocephalic v.
Azygos v.
Hepatic v.
Renal v.
Testicular or ovarian v.
Internal iliac v.
External iliac v.
Common iliac v.
Leg and Hip
Anterior and posterior tibial v.
Popliteal v.
Small saphenous v.
Great saphenous v.
Femoral v.
External iliac v.
Common iliac v.
Inferior vena cava
Internal jugular v.
Brachiocephalic v.
Subclavian v.
Brachiocephalic v.
Superior vena cava
Right atrium
Brachial v.
Brachial v.
Axillary v.
Axillary v.
Axillary v.
Subclavian v.
Brachiocephalic v.
Superior vena cava
Superior vena cava
Inferior vena cava
Inferior vena cava
Inferior vena cava
and left renal v.
Common iliac v.
Common iliac v.
Inferior vena cava
Popliteal v.
Femoral v.
Popliteal v.
Femoral v.
External iliac v.
Common iliac v.
Inferior vena cava
Right atrium
• Brain, including reabsorbed CSF
• Face and neck
• Superﬁcial face and neck
• Shoulder
• Upper body
• Upper body
• Forearm and hand
• Forearm and hand
• Superﬁcial arm and forearm
• Superﬁcial upper arm
• Upper arm
• Armpit
• Shoulder
• Upper body
• Deep structures of chest and abdomen; links
inferior vena cava to superior vena cava
• Liver
• Kidney
• Testes or ovaries
• Rectum, bladder, reproductive organs
• Leg and abdominal wall
• Leg and lower abdomen
• Lower leg and foot
• Knee
• Superﬁcial leg and foot
• Superﬁcial foot, leg, and thigh
• Thigh
• Leg and abdominal wall
• Leg and lower abdomen
• Lower body
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Vascular System
303
other waste products. The site of exchange between
fetus and mother is the placenta, which contains fetal
and maternal blood vessels that are very close to one
another (see Figs. 13–8 and 21–5). The blood of the
fetus does not mix with the blood of the mother; sub-
stances are exchanged by diffusion and active trans-
port mechanisms.
The fetus is connected to the placenta by the
umbilical cord, which contains two umbilical arteries
and one umbilical vein (see Fig. 13–8). The umbilical
arteries are branches of the fetal internal iliac arteries;
they carry blood from the fetus to the placenta. In the
placenta, carbon dioxide and waste products in the
fetal blood enter maternal circulation, and oxygen
Posterior communicating
Anterior cerebral
Circle of Willis
Anterior communicating
Posterior
cerebral
Middle
cerebral
Basilar
Internal
carotid
External carotid
Vertebral
Left
common carotid
Right
common carotid
ARTERIES
Anterior
 cerebral
Anterior
 communicating
Anterior
 cerebral
Middle
 cerebral
Internal
 carotid
Posterior
 cerebral
Posterior
communicating
Basilar
Vertebral
Spinal cord
Cerebellum
Medulla
Pons
Cerebrum
(temporal lobe)
Cerebrum
(frontal lobe)
Figure 13–6.
Circle of Willis. This anastomosis is formed by the following arteries: inter-
nal carotid, anterior communicating, posterior communicating, and basilar. The cerebral
arteries extend from the circle of Willis into the brain. The box shows these vessels in an
inferior view of the brain.
QUESTION: Why do so many vessels contribute to the circle of Willis?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

and nutrients from the mother’s blood enter fetal
circulation.
The umbilical vein carries this oxygenated blood
from the placenta to the fetus. Within the body of the
fetus, the umbilical vein branches: One branch takes
some blood to the fetal liver, but most of the blood
passes through the ductus venosus to the inferior
vena cava, to the right atrium. After birth, when the
umbilical cord is cut, the remnants of these fetal ves-
sels constrict and become nonfunctional.
The other modiﬁcations of fetal circulation con-
cern the fetal heart and large arteries (also shown in
304
The Vascular System
Inferior vena cava
Hepatic vein 
Liver
Portal vein
Superior
mesenteric V
Right colic V.
Ascending colon
Left gastric V.
Right gastric V.
Splenic V.
Spleen
Stomach
Pancreas
Left gastroepiploic V.
Inferior mesenteric V.
Inferior mesenteric V.
Left colic V.
Descending colon
Figure 13–7.
Hepatic por-
tal circulation. Portions of
some of the digestive organs
have been removed to show
the veins that unite to form
the portal vein. See text for
description.
QUESTION: The blood in the
portal vein is going to what
organ? Where is the blood
coming from?
BOX 13–3
PULSE SITES
Popliteal—the popliteal artery at the back of the
knee.
Dorsalis pedis—the dorsalis pedis artery on the
top of the foot (commonly called the pedal pulse).
Pulse rate is, of course, the heart rate. However,
if the heart is beating weakly, a radial pulse may be
lower than an apical pulse (listening to the heart
itself with a stethoscope). This is called a pulse
deﬁcit and indicates heart disease of some kind.
When taking a pulse, the careful observer also
notes the rhythm and force of the pulse. Abnormal
rhythms may reﬂect cardiac arrhythmias, and the
force of the pulse (strong or weak) is helpful in
assessing the general condition of the heart and
arteries.
A pulse is the heartbeat that is felt at an arterial site.
What is felt is not actually the force exerted by the
blood, but the force of ventricular contraction
transmitted through the walls of the arteries. This is
why pulses are not felt in veins; they are too far
from the heart for the force to be detectable.
The most commonly used pulse sites are:
Radial—the radial artery on the thumb side of the
wrist.
Carotid—the carotid artery lateral to the larynx in
the neck.
Temporal—the temporal artery just in front of the
ear.
Femoral—the femoral artery at the top of the
thigh.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Fig. 13–8). Because the fetal lungs are deﬂated and do
not provide for gas exchange, blood is shunted away
from the lungs and to the body. The foramen ovale is
an opening in the interatrial septum that permits some
blood to ﬂow from the right atrium to the left atrium,
not, as usual, to the right ventricle. The blood that
does enter the right ventricle is pumped into the pul-
monary artery. The ductus arteriosus is a short ves-
sel that diverts most of the blood in the pulmonary
artery to the aorta, to the body. Both the foramen
ovale and the ductus arteriosus permit blood to bypass
the fetal lungs.
Just after birth, the baby breathes and expands its
lungs, which pulls more blood into the pulmonary cir-
culation. More blood then returns to the left atrium,
and a ﬂap on the left side of the foramen ovale is
closed. The ductus arteriosus constricts, probably in
response to the higher oxygen content of the blood,
The Vascular System
305
Aortic arch
Ductus arteriosus
Pulmonary artery
Left atrium
Foramen
ovale
Right
 atrium
Inferior vena cava
Aorta
Ductus venosus
Umbilical cord
Navel of fetus
Umbilical arteries
Umbilical vein
Placenta
Internal
iliac arteries
Maternal
blood vessels
Figure 13–8.
Fetal circulation. Fetal heart and blood vessels are shown on the left.
Arrows depict the direction of blood ﬂow. The placenta and umbilical blood vessels are
shown on the right. See text for description.
QUESTION: Find the foramen ovale in the fetal heart. Which way does blood ﬂow through
it, and why?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

and pulmonary circulation becomes fully functional
within a few days.
VELOCITY OF BLOOD FLOW
The velocity, or speed, with which blood ﬂows differs
in the various parts of the vascular system. Velocity is
inversely related (meaning as one value goes up, the
other goes down) to the cross-sectional area of the
particular segment of the vascular system. Refer to
Fig. 13–9 as you read the following. The aorta receives
all the blood from the left ventricle, its cross-sectional
area is small, about 3 cm2 (1 sq. inch), and the blood
moves very rapidly, at least 30 cm per second (about 12
inches). Each time the aorta or any artery branches,
the total cross-sectional area becomes larger, and the
speed of blood ﬂow decreases. Think of a river that
306
The Vascular System
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
30
20
10
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Blood pressure
(mm Hg)
Pulse
pressure
Blood velocity
(cm/sec)
Cross-sectional
area (cm2)
Diastolic pressure
Systolic pressure
Aorta
Arteries
Arterioles
Capillaries
Venules
Veins
 Vena Cavae
A
B
C
D
Figure 13–9.
Characteristics of the vas-
cular system. (A) Schematic of the branch-
ing of vessels. (B) Cross-sectional area in
square centimeters. (C) Blood velocity in
centimeters per second. (D) Systemic
blood pressure changes. Notice that sys-
tolic and diastolic pressures become one
pressure in the capillaries.
QUESTION: Look at the cross-sectional
area and blood velocity. As area increases,
what happens to velocity? Where is veloc-
ity slowest?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

begins in a narrow bed and is ﬂowing rapidly. If the
river bed widens, the water spreads out to ﬁll it and
ﬂows more slowly. If the river were to narrow again,
the water would ﬂow faster. This is just what happens
in the vascular system.
The capillaries in total have the greatest cross-
sectional area, and blood velocity there is slowest, less
than 0.1 cm per second. When capillaries unite to
form venules, and then veins, the cross-sectional area
decreases and blood ﬂow speeds up.
Recall that it is in capillary networks that exchanges
of nutrients, wastes, and gases take place between the
blood and tissue ﬂuid. The slow rate of blood ﬂow in
capillaries permits sufficient time for these essential
exchanges. Think of a train slowing down (not actually
stopping) at stations to allow people to jump on
and off, then speeding up again to get to the next sta-
tion. The capillaries are the “stations” of the vascular
system.
The more rapid blood velocity in other vessels
makes circulation time quite short. This is the time it
takes for blood to go from the right ventricle to the
lungs, back to the heart to be pumped by the left ven-
tricle to the body, and return to the heart again.
Circulation time is about 1 minute or less, and ensures
an adequate exchange of gases.
BLOOD PRESSURE
Blood pressure is the force the blood exerts against
the walls of the blood vessels. Filtration in capillaries
depends upon blood pressure; ﬁltration brings nutri-
ents to tissues, and as you will see in Chapter 18, is the
ﬁrst step in the formation of urine. Blood pressure is
one of the “vital signs” often measured, and indeed a
normal blood pressure is essential to life.
The pumping of the ventricles creates blood pres-
sure, which is measured in mmHg (millimeters of
mercury). When a systemic blood pressure reading is
taken, two numbers are obtained: systolic and dias-
tolic, as in 110/70 mmHg. Systolic pressure is always
the higher of the two and represents the blood pres-
sure when the left ventricle is contracting. The lower
number is the diastolic pressure, when the left ventri-
cle is relaxed and does not exert force. Diastolic pres-
sure is maintained by the arteries and arterioles and is
discussed in a later section.
Systemic blood pressure is highest in the aorta,
which receives all of the blood pumped by the left ven-
tricle. As blood travels farther away from the heart,
blood pressure decreases (see Fig. 13–9). The brachial
artery is most often used to take a blood pressure read-
ing; here a normal systolic range is 90 to 120 mmHg,
and a normal diastolic range is 60 to 80 mmHg. In the
arterioles, blood pressure decreases further, and sys-
tolic and diastolic pressures merge into one pressure.
At the arterial end of capillary networks, blood pres-
sure is about 30 to 35 mmHg, decreasing to 12 to 15
mmHg at the venous end of capillaries. This is high
enough to permit ﬁltration but low enough to prevent
rupture of the capillaries. As blood ﬂows through
veins, the pressure decreases further, and in the caval
veins, blood pressure approaches zero as blood enters
the right atrium.
The upper limit of the normal blood pressure range
is now 120/80 mmHg. The levels of 125 to 139/85 to
89 mmHg, once considered high-normal, are now
called “prehypertension,” that is, with the potential to
become even higher. A systemic blood pressure con-
sistently higher than the normal range is called hyper-
tension (see also Box 13–4: Hypertension). A lower
than normal blood pressure is called hypotension.
The regulation of systemic blood pressure is discussed
in a later section.
Pulmonary blood pressure is created by the right
ventricle, which has relatively thin walls and thus exerts
about one-sixth the force of the left ventricle. The
result is that pulmonary arterial pressure is always low:
20 to 25/8 to 10 mmHg, and in pulmonary capillaries
is lower still. This is important to prevent ﬁltration in
pulmonary capillaries, which in turn prevents tissue
ﬂuid from accumulating in the alveoli of the lungs.
MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEMIC
BLOOD PRESSURE
Because blood pressure is so important, many physio-
logical factors and processes interact to keep blood
pressure within normal limits:
1. Venous return—the amount of blood that returns
to the heart by way of the veins. Venous return
is important because the heart can pump only
the blood it receives. If venous return decreases,
the cardiac muscle ﬁbers will not be stretched, the
force of ventricular systole will decrease (Starling’s
law), and blood pressure will decrease. This is what
might happen following a severe hemorrhage.
When the body is horizontal, venous return can
be maintained fairly easily, but when the body is
The Vascular System
307
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

vertical, gravity must be overcome to return blood
from the lower body to the heart. Three mecha-
nisms help promote venous return: constriction of
veins, the skeletal muscle pump, and the respira-
tory pump.
Veins contain smooth muscle, which enables
them to constrict and force blood toward the heart;
the valves prevent backﬂow of blood. The second
mechanism is the skeletal muscle pump, which is
especially effective for the deep veins of the legs.
These veins are surrounded by skeletal muscles
that contract and relax during normal activities
such as walking. Contractions of the leg muscles
squeeze the veins to force blood toward the heart.
The third mechanism is the respiratory pump,
which affects veins that pass through the chest cav-
ity. The pressure changes of inhalation and exhala-
tion alternately expand and compress the veins, and
blood is returned to the heart.
2. Heart rate and force—in general, if heart rate and
force increase, blood pressure increases; this is
what happens during exercise. However, if the
heart is beating extremely rapidly, the ventricles
may not ﬁll completely between beats, and cardiac
output and blood pressure will decrease.
3. Peripheral resistance—this term refers to the
resistance the vessels offer to the ﬂow of blood.
The arteries and veins are usually slightly con-
stricted, which maintains normal diastolic blood
pressure. It may be helpful to think of the vessels
as the “container” for the blood. If a person’s body
has 5 liters of blood, the “container” must be
smaller in order for the blood to exert a pressure
against its walls. This is what normal vasoconstric-
tion does: It makes the container (the vessels)
smaller than the volume of blood so that the blood
will exert pressure even when the left ventricle is
relaxed.
308
The Vascular System
BOX 13–4
HYPERTENSION
trophy. This abnormal growth of the myocardium,
however, is not accompanied by a corresponding
growth in coronary capillaries, and the blood supply
of the left ventricle may not be adequate for all sit-
uations. Exercise, for example, puts further
demands on the heart, and the person may experi-
ence angina due to a lack of oxygen or a myocar-
dial infarction if there is a severe oxygen deﬁciency.
Although several different kinds of medications
(diuretics, vasodilators) are used to treat hyperten-
sion, people with moderate hypertension may limit
their dependence on medications by following cer-
tain guidelines:
1. Don’t smoke, because nicotine stimulates vaso-
constriction, which raises BP. Smoking also dam-
ages arteries, contributing to arteriosclerosis.
2. Lose weight if overweight. A weight loss of as lit-
tle as 10 pounds can lower BP. A diet high in
fruits and vegetables may, for some people, con-
tribute to lower BP.
3. Cut salt intake in half. Although salt consump-
tion may not be the cause of hypertension,
reducing salt intake may help lower blood pres-
sure by decreasing blood volume.
4. Exercise on a regular basis. A moderate amount
of aerobic exercise (such as a half hour walk
every day) is beneﬁcial for the entire cardiovas-
cular system and may also contribute to weight
loss.
Hypertension is high blood pressure, that is, a rest-
ing systemic pressure consistently above the normal
range (90 to 120/60 to 80 mmHg). Clinicians now
consider 125 to 139/85 to 89 mmHg to be prehy-
pertension. A systolic reading of 140 to 159 mmHg
or a diastolic reading of 90 to 99 mmHg may be
called stage 1 hypertension, and a systolic reading
above 160 mmHg or a diastolic reading above 100
mmHg may be called stage 2 hypertension.
The term “essential hypertension” means that no
speciﬁc cause can be determined; most cases are in
this category. For some people, however, an over-
production of renin by the kidneys is the cause
of their hypertension. Excess renin increases the
production of angiotensin II, which raises blood
pressure. Although hypertension often produces no
symptoms, the long-term consequences may be
very serious. Chronic hypertension has its greatest
effects on the arteries and on the heart.
Although the walls of arteries are strong, hyper-
tension weakens them and contributes to arte-
riosclerosis. Such weakened arteries may rupture or
develop aneurysms, which may in turn lead to a
CVA or kidney damage.
Hypertension affects the heart because the left
ventricle must now pump blood against the higher
arterial pressure. The left ventricle works harder
and, like any other muscle, enlarges as more work is
demanded; this is called left ventricular hyper-
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

If more vasoconstriction occurs, blood pressure
will increase (the container has become even
smaller). This is what happens in a stress situation,
when greater vasoconstriction is brought about
by sympathetic impulses. If vasodilation occurs,
blood pressure will decrease (the container is
larger). After eating a large meal, for example, there
is extensive vasodilation in the digestive tract to
supply more oxygenated blood for digestive activi-
ties. To keep blood pressure within the normal
range, vasoconstriction must, and does, occur else-
where in the body. This is why strenuous exercise
should be avoided right after eating; there is not
enough blood to completely supply oxygen to exer-
cising muscles and an active digestive tract at the
same time.
4. Elasticity of the large arteries—when the left
ventricle contracts, the blood that enters the large
arteries stretches their walls. The arterial walls are
elastic and absorb some of the force. When the left
ventricle relaxes, the arterial walls recoil or snap
back, which helps keep diastolic pressure within
the normal range. Normal elasticity, therefore,
lowers systolic pressure, raises diastolic pressure,
and maintains a normal pulse pressure. (Pulse pres-
sure is the difference between systolic and diastolic
pressure. The usual ratio of systolic to diastolic to
pulse pressure is approximately 3:2:1. For example,
with a blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg, the pulse
pressure is 40, and the ratio is 120:80:40, or 3:2:1.)
5. Viscosity of the blood—normal blood viscosity
depends upon the presence of red blood cells and
plasma proteins, especially albumin. Having too
many red blood cells is rare but does occur in the
disorder called polycythemia vera and in people
who are heavy smokers. This will increase blood
viscosity and blood pressure.
A decreased number of red blood cells, as is seen
with severe anemia, or decreased albumin, as may
occur in liver disease or kidney disease, will
decrease blood viscosity and blood pressure. In
these situations, other mechanisms such as vaso-
constriction will maintain blood pressure as close to
normal as is possible.
6. Loss of blood—a small loss of blood, as when
donating a pint of blood, will cause a temporary
drop in blood pressure followed by rapid compen-
sation in the form of a more rapid heart rate and
greater vasoconstriction. After a severe hemor-
rhage, however, these compensating mechanisms
may not be sufficient to maintain normal blood
pressure and blood ﬂow to the brain. Although a
person may survive loss of 50% of the body’s total
blood, the possibility of brain damage increases as
more blood is lost and not rapidly replaced.
7. Hormones—several hormones have effects on
blood pressure. You may recall them from Chapters
10 and 12, but we will summarize them here and in
Fig. 13–10. The adrenal medulla secretes norepi-
nephrine and epinephrine in stress situations.
Norepinephrine stimulates vasoconstriction, which
raises blood pressure. Epinephrine also causes vaso-
constriction, and increases heart rate and force of
contraction, both of which increase blood pressure.
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) is secreted by the
posterior pituitary gland when the water content of
the body decreases. ADH increases the reabsorp-
tion of water by the kidneys to prevent further loss
of water in urine and a further decrease in blood
pressure.
Aldosterone, a hormone from the adrenal cor-
tex, has a similar effect on blood volume. When
blood pressure decreases, secretion of aldosterone
stimulates the reabsorption of Na ions by the kid-
neys. Water follows sodium back to the blood,
which maintains blood volume to prevent a further
drop in blood pressure.
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), secreted by the
atria of the heart, functions in opposition to aldos-
terone. ANP increases the excretion of Na ions
and water by the kidneys, which decreases blood
volume and lowers blood pressure.
DISTRIBUTION OF BLOOD FLOW
An individual’s blood volume remains relatively con-
stant within the normal range appropriate to the size
of the person. Active tissues, however, require more
blood, that is, more oxygen, than do less active tissues.
As active tissues and organs receive a greater propor-
tion of the total blood ﬂow, less active organs must
receive less, or blood pressure will decrease markedly.
As mentioned previously, precapillary sphincters
dilate in active tissues and constrict in less active ones.
The arterioles also constrict to reduce blood ﬂow to
less active organs. This ensures that metabolically
active organs will receive enough oxygen to function
properly and that blood pressure for the body as a
whole will be maintained within normal limits.
An example will be helpful here; let us use the
body at rest and the body during exercise. Consult
Fig. 13–11 as you read the following. Resting cardiac
The Vascular System
309
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

output is approximately 5000 mL per minute. Exercise
cardiac output is three times that, about 15,000 mL
per minute. Keep in mind that the volume of blood is
the same in both cases, but that during exercise the
blood is being circulated more rapidly.
Compare the amounts of blood ﬂowing to various
organs and tissues during exercise and at rest. During
exercise, the heart receives about three times as much
blood as it does when the body is at rest. The very
active skeletal muscles receive about ten times as much
blood. The skin, as an organ of heat loss, receives
about four times as much blood. Other organs, how-
ever, can function adequately with less blood. Blood
ﬂow is reduced to the digestive tract, to the kidneys,
and to other parts of the body such as bones.
When the exercise ceases, cardiac output will
gradually return to the resting level, as will blood ﬂow
to the various organs. These changes in the distribu-
tion of blood ensure sufficient oxygen for active tissues
and an appropriate blood pressure for the body as a
whole.
REGULATION OF BLOOD PRESSURE
The mechanisms that regulate systemic blood pressure
may be divided into two types: intrinsic mechanisms
and nervous mechanisms. The nervous mechanisms
involve the nervous system, and the intrinsic mecha-
nisms do not require nerve impulses.
INTRINSIC MECHANISMS
The term intrinsic means “within.” Intrinsic mecha-
nisms work because of the internal characteristics of
certain organs. The ﬁrst such organ is the heart. When
310
The Vascular System
Adrenal gland
Pituitary
Heart
Norepinephrine
Epinephrine
Aldosterone
ADH
ANP
Increases
excretion of
Na+,
water follows
Kidney
Increases
reabsorption
of H2O
Increases
reabsorption of
Na+,
water follows
Increases rate
and force of
contraction
Vasoconstriction
Raises
B.P.
Lowers
B.P.
Figure 13–10.
Hormones that affect blood pressure. See text for further description.
QUESTION: Which two hormones have opposite functions, and what are these functions?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

venous return increases, cardiac muscle ﬁbers are
stretched, and the ventricles pump more forcefully
(Starling’s law). Thus, cardiac output and blood pres-
sure increase. This is what happens during exercise,
when a higher blood pressure is needed. When exer-
cise ends and venous return decreases, the heart pumps
less forcefully, which helps return blood pressure to a
normal resting level.
The second intrinsic mechanism involves the kid-
neys. When blood ﬂow through the kidneys decreases,
the process of ﬁltration decreases and less urine is
formed. This decrease in urinary output preserves
blood volume so that it does not decrease further.
Following severe hemorrhage or any other type of
dehydration, this is very important to maintain blood
pressure.
The kidneys are also involved in the renin-
angiotensin mechanism. When blood pressure
decreases, the kidneys secrete the enzyme renin,
which initiates a series of reactions that result in the
formation of angiotensin II. These reactions are
described in Table 13–3 and depicted in Fig. 13–12.
Angiotensin II causes vasoconstriction and stimulates
secretion of aldosterone by the adrenal cortex, both of
which will increase blood pressure.
NERVOUS MECHANISMS
The medulla and the autonomic nervous system are
directly involved in the regulation of blood pressure.
The ﬁrst of these nervous mechanisms concerns the
heart; this was described previously, so we will not
review it here but refer you to Chapter 12 and Fig.
12–7, as well as Fig. 13–13.
The Vascular System
311
Skeletal muscle
Blood distribution (mL/min)
Resting cardiac output
5,000 mL/min
Exercise cardiac output
15,000 mL/min
Heart
Brain
Skin
GI tract
Kidneys
Rest of body
Resting
215 mL
% of
total
% of
total
Exercise
1,035 mL
645 mL
430 mL
1,205 mL
950 mL
515 mL
645 mL
    
10,710 mL
645 mL
    
1,635 mL
   
510 mL
    
510 mL
    
330 mL
4%
21%
13%
9%
24%
19%
10%
4.5%
71%
4.5%
11%
3.5%
3.5%
2%
Figure 13–11.
Blood ﬂow through various organs when the body is at rest and during
exercise. For each organ, the percentage of the total blood ﬂow is given.
QUESTION: During exercise, which organs have the greatest increase in blood ﬂow?
Which organs have the greatest decrease?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The second nervous mechanism involves periph-
eral resistance, that is, the degree of constriction of the
arteries and arterioles and, to a lesser extent, the veins
(see Fig. 13–13). The medulla contains the vasomotor
center, which consists of a vasoconstrictor area and a
vasodilator area. The vasodilator area may depress the
vasoconstrictor area to bring about vasodilation,
which will decrease blood pressure. The vasoconstric-
tor area may bring about more vasoconstriction by
way of the sympathetic division of the autonomic
nervous system.
Sympathetic vasoconstrictor ﬁbers innervate the
smooth muscle of all arteries and veins, and several
impulses per second along these ﬁbers maintain nor-
mal vasoconstriction. More impulses per second bring
about greater vasoconstriction, and fewer impulses per
second cause vasodilation. The medulla receives the
information to make such changes from the presso-
receptors in the carotid sinuses and the aortic sinus.
The inability to maintain normal blood pressure is one
aspect of circulatory shock (see Box 13–5: Circulatory
Shock).
312
The Vascular System
ANGIOTENSINOGEN
Liver
Lung and
vascular endothelium
CONVERTING ENZYME
ANGIOTENSIN I
ANGIOTENSIN II
Vasoconstriction
Systemic
arteries
Increased
B. P.
Increased Na+ and
H2O reabsorption
ALDOSTERONE
Adrenal cortex
RENIN
Decreased
B. P.
Kidney
Figure 13–12.
The renin-angiotensin mechanism. Begin at “Decreased B. P.” and see
Table 13–3 for numbered steps.
QUESTION: Where is renin produced? What are the functions of angiotensin II?
Table 13–3
THE RENIN-ANGIOTENSIN
MECHANISM
1. Decreased blood pressure stimulates the kidneys to
secrete renin.
2. Renin splits the plasma protein angiotensinogen (syn-
thesized by the liver) to angiotensin I.
3. Angiotensin I is converted to angiotensin II by an
enzyme (called converting enzyme) secreted by lung
tissue and vascular endothelium.
4. Angiotensin II:
• causes vasoconstriction
• stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete aldosterone
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

313
Inhibit
vasomotor
center
Vasodilation
decreases
peripheral
resistance
Heart rate
slows,
decreases
cardiac output
B. P.
decreases to
normal range
B. P.
decreases
further
Stimulate
cardioinhibitory
center
Pressoreceptors in
carotid and aortic 
sinuses stimulated
B. P.
increases
further
B. P.
increases to
normal
range
Vasoconstriction
increases
peripheral
resistance
Heart rate
and cardiac
output
increase
Stimulate
vasomotor
center
Stimulate
cardio-
accelerator
center
Pressoreceptors in
carotid and aortic
sinuses inhibited
Figure 13–13.
Nervous mechanisms that regulate blood pressure. See text for
description.
QUESTION: What kind of sensory information is used to make changes in BP, and
where are the receptors located?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

AGING AND THE
VASCULAR SYSTEM
It is believed that the aging of blood vessels, especially
arteries, begins in childhood, although the effects are
not apparent for decades. The cholesterol deposits
of atherosclerosis are to be expected with advancing
age, with the most serious consequences in the coro-
nary arteries. A certain degree of arteriosclerosis is to
be expected, and average resting blood pressure may
increase, which further damages arterial walls.
Consequences include stroke and left-sided heart
failure.
The veins also deteriorate with age; their thin walls
weaken and stretch, making their valves incompetent.
This is most likely to occur in the veins of the legs;
their walls are subject to great pressure as blood is
returned to the heart against the force of gravity.
Varicose veins and phlebitis are more likely to occur
among elderly people.
SUMMARY
Although the vascular system does form passageways
for the blood, you can readily see that the blood ves-
sels are not simply pipes through which the blood
ﬂows. The vessels are not passive tubes, but rather
active contributors to homeostasis. The arteries and
veins help maintain blood pressure, and the capillaries
provide sites for the exchanges of materials between
the blood and the tissues. Some very important sites of
exchange are discussed in the following chapters: the
lungs, the digestive tract, and the kidneys.
314
The Vascular System
BOX 13–5
CIRCULATORY SHOCK
Stages of Shock
Compensated shock—the responses by the body
maintain cardiac output. Following a small hemor-
rhage, for example, the heart rate increases,
the blood vessels constrict, and the kidneys
decrease urinary output to conserve water. These
responses help preserve blood volume and main-
tain blood pressure, cardiac output, and blood ﬂow
to tissues.
Progressive shock—the state of shock leads to
more shock. Following a severe hemorrhage, car-
diac output decreases and the myocardium itself is
deprived of blood. The heart weakens, which fur-
ther decreases cardiac output. Arteries that are
deprived of their blood supply cannot remain con-
stricted. As the arteries dilate, venous return
decreases, which in turn decreases cardiac output.
Progressive shock is a series of such vicious cycles,
and medical intervention is required to restore car-
diac output to normal.
Irreversible shock—no amount of medical assis-
tance can restore cardiac output to normal. The
usual cause of death is that the heart has been dam-
aged too much to recover. A severe myocardial
infarction, massive hemorrhage, or septicemia may
all be fatal despite medical treatment.
Circulatory shock is any condition in which cardiac
output decreases to the extent that tissues are
deprived of oxygen and waste products accumulate.
Causes of Shock
Cardiogenic shock occurs most often after a
severe myocardial infarction but may also be the
result of ventricular ﬁbrillation. In either case, the
heart is no longer an efficient pump, and cardiac
output decreases.
Hypovolemic shock is the result of decreased
blood volume, often due to severe hemorrhage.
Other possible causes are extreme sweating (heat
stroke) or extreme loss of water through the kid-
neys (diuresis) or intestines (diarrhea). In these
situations, the heart simply does not have enough
blood to pump, and cardiac output decreases.
Anaphylactic shock, also in this category, is a mas-
sive allergic reaction in which great amounts of
histamine increase capillary permeability and
vasodilation throughout the body. Much plasma is
then lost to tissue spaces, which decreases blood
volume, blood pressure, and cardiac output.
Septic shock is the result of septicemia, the
presence of bacteria in the blood. The bacteria and
damaged tissues release inﬂammatory chemicals
that cause vasodilation and extensive loss of plasma
into tissue spaces.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The vascular system consists of the arteries,
capillaries, and veins through which blood
travels.
Arteries (and arterioles) (see Fig. 13–1)
1. Carry blood from the heart to capillaries; three lay-
ers in their walls.
2. Inner layer (tunica intima): simple squamous
epithelial tissue (endothelium), very smooth to pre-
vent abnormal blood clotting; secretes nitric oxide
(NO), a vasodilator.
3. Middle layer (tunica media): smooth muscle and
elastic connective tissue; contributes to mainte-
nance of diastolic blood pressure (BP).
4. Outer layer (tunica externa): ﬁbrous connective tis-
sue to prevent rupture.
5. Constriction or dilation is regulated by the auto-
nomic nervous system.
Veins (and venules) (see Fig. 13–1)
1. Carry blood from capillaries to the heart; three lay-
ers in walls.
2. Inner layer: endothelium folded into valves to pre-
vent the backﬂow of blood.
3. Middle layer: thin smooth muscle, because veins
are not as important in the maintenance of BP.
4. Outer layer: thin ﬁbrous connective tissue because
veins do not carry blood under high pressure.
Anastomoses—connections between vessels
of the same type
1. Provide alternate pathways for blood ﬂow if one
vessel is blocked.
2. Arterial anastomoses provide for blood ﬂow to the
capillaries of an organ (e.g., circle of Willis to the
brain).
3. Venous anastomoses provide for return of blood to
the heart and are most numerous in veins of the
legs.
Capillaries (see Figs. 13–1 and 13–2)
1. Carry blood from arterioles to venules.
2. Walls are one cell thick (simple squamous epithelial
tissue) to permit exchanges between blood and tis-
sue ﬂuid.
3. Oxygen and carbon dioxide are exchanged by
diffusion.
4. BP in capillaries brings nutrients to tissues and
forms tissue ﬂuid in the process of ﬁltration.
5. Albumin in the blood provides colloid osmotic
pressure, which pulls waste products and tissue ﬂuid
into capillaries. The return of tissue ﬂuid maintains
blood volume and BP.
6. Precapillary sphincters regulate blood ﬂow into
capillary networks based on tissue needs; in active
tissues they dilate; in less active tissues they con-
strict.
7. Sinusoids are very permeable capillaries found in
the liver, spleen, pituitary gland, and red bone mar-
row to permit proteins and blood cells to enter or
leave the blood.
Pathways of Circulation
1. Pulmonary: Right ventricle →pulmonary artery →
pulmonary capillaries (exchange of gases) →pul-
monary veins →left atrium.
2. Systemic: left ventricle →aorta →capillaries in
body tissues →superior and inferior caval veins →
right atrium (see Table 13–1 and Fig. 13–3 for sys-
temic arteries and Table 13–2 and Fig. 13–4 for sys-
temic veins).
3. Hepatic portal circulation: blood from the diges-
tive organs and spleen ﬂows through the portal
vein to the liver before returning to the heart.
Purpose: the liver stores some nutrients or regu-
lates their blood levels and detoxiﬁes potential poi-
sons before blood enters the rest of peripheral
circulation (see Fig. 13–7).
Fetal Circulation—the fetus depends on the
mother for oxygen and nutrients and for the
removal of waste products (see Fig. 13–8)
1. The placenta is the site of exchange between fetal
blood and maternal blood.
2. Umbilical arteries (two) carry blood from the fetus
to the placenta, where CO2 and waste products
enter maternal circulation.
3. The umbilical vein carries blood with O2 and nutri-
ents from the placenta to the fetus.
4. The umbilical vein branches; some blood
ﬂows through the fetal liver; most blood ﬂows
through the ductus venosus to the fetal inferior
vena cava.
5. The foramen ovale permits blood to ﬂow from the
The Vascular System
315
STUDY OUTLINE
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

right atrium to the left atrium to bypass the fetal
lungs.
6. The ductus arteriosus permits blood to ﬂow from
the pulmonary artery to the aorta to bypass the
fetal lungs.
7. These fetal structures become nonfunctional after
birth, when the umbilical cord is cut and breathing
takes place.
Velocity of Blood Flow (see Fig. 13–9)
1. Velocity is inversely related to the cross-sectional
area of a segment of the vascular system.
2. The total capillaries have the greatest cross-
sectional area and slowest blood ﬂow.
3. Slow ﬂow in the capillaries is important to permit
sufficient time for exchange of gases, nutrients, and
wastes.
Blood Pressure (BP)—the force exerted by
the blood against the walls of the blood ves-
sels (Fig. 13–9)
1. BP is measured in mmHg: systolic/diastolic.
Systolic pressure occurs during ventricular con-
traction; diastolic pressure occurs during ventricu-
lar relaxation.
2. Normal range of systemic arterial BP: 90 to 120/60
to 80 mmHg.
3. BP in capillaries is 30 to 35 mmHg at the arterial
end and 12 to 15 mmHg at the venous end—high
enough to permit ﬁltration but low enough to pre-
vent rupture of the capillaries.
4. BP decreases in the veins and approaches zero in
the caval veins.
5. Pulmonary BP is always low (the right ventricle
pumps with less force): 20 to 25/8 to 10 mmHg.
This low BP prevents ﬁltration and accumulation
of tissue ﬂuid in the alveoli.
Maintenance of Systemic BP
1. Venous return—the amount of blood that returns
to the heart. If venous return decreases, the heart
contracts less forcefully (Starling’s law) and BP
decreases. The mechanisms that maintain venous
return when the body is vertical are:
• Constriction of veins with the valves preventing
backﬂow of blood
• Skeletal muscle pump—contraction of skeletal
muscles, especially in the legs, squeezes the deep
veins
• Respiratory pump—the pressure changes of
inhalation and exhalation expand and compress
the veins in the chest cavity
2. Heart rate and force—if heart rate and force
increase, BP increases.
3. Peripheral resistance—the resistance of the arteries
and arterioles to the ﬂow of blood. These vessels
are usually slightly constricted to maintain normal
diastolic BP. Greater vasoconstriction will increase
BP; vasodilation will decrease BP. In the body,
vasodilation in one area requires vasoconstriction
in another area to maintain normal BP.
4. Elasticity of the large arteries—ventricular systole
stretches the walls of large arteries, which recoil
during ventricular diastole. Normal elasticity low-
ers systolic BP, raises diastolic BP, and maintains
normal pulse pressure.
5. Viscosity of blood—depends on RBCs and plasma
proteins, especially albumin. Severe anemia tends
to decrease BP. Deﬁciency of albumin as in liver or
kidney disease tends to decrease BP. In these cases,
compensation such as greater vasoconstriction will
keep BP close to normal.
6. Loss of blood—a small loss will be rapidly com-
pensated for by faster heart rate and greater vaso-
constriction. After severe hemorrhage, these
mechanisms may not be sufficient to maintain nor-
mal BP.
7. Hormones—(see Fig. 13–10) (a) Norepinephrine
stimulates vasoconstriction, which raises BP; (b)
epinephrine increases cardiac output and raises BP;
(c) ADH increases water reabsorption by the kid-
neys, which increases blood volume and BP; (d)
aldosterone increases reabsorption of Na ions by
the kidneys; water follows Na and increases blood
volume and BP; (e) ANP increases excretion of
Na ions and water by the kidneys, which de-
creases blood volume and BP.
Distribution of Blood Flow
1. Metabolically active tissues require more oxygen,
and receive a greater proportion of the blood vol-
ume as it circulates (see Fig. 13–11).
2. Blood ﬂow is increased by the dilation of arterioles
and precapillary sphincters.
3. In less active tissues, arterioles and precapillary
sphincters constrict.
4. Organs receive sufficient oxygen, and BP for the
body is maintained within the normal range.
316
The Vascular System
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Regulation of Blood Pressure—intrinsic
mechanisms and nervous mechanisms
Intrinsic Mechanisms
1. The heart—responds to increased venous return by
pumping more forcefully (Starling’s law), which
increases cardiac output and BP.
2. The kidneys—decreased blood flow decreases
ﬁltration, which decreases urinary output to pre-
serve blood volume. Decreased BP stimulates the
kidneys to secrete renin, which initiates the renin-
angiotensin mechanism (Table 13–3 and Fig.
13–12) that results in the formation of angiotensin
II, which causes vasoconstriction and stimulates
secretion of aldosterone.
Nervous Mechanisms (see Fig. 13–13)
1. Heart rate and force—see also Chapter 12.
2. Peripheral resistance—the medulla contains the
vasomotor center, which consists of a vasoconstric-
tor area and a vasodilator area. The vasodilator area
brings about vasodilation by suppressing the vaso-
constrictor area. The vasoconstrictor area main-
tains normal vasoconstriction by generating several
impulses per second along sympathetic vaso-
constrictor ﬁbers to all arteries and veins. More
impulses per second increase vasoconstriction and
raise BP; fewer impulses per second bring about
vasodilation and a drop in BP.
The Vascular System
317
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Describe the structure of the three layers of the
walls of arteries, and state the function of each
layer. Describe the structural differences in these
layers in veins, and explain the reason for each dif-
ference. (p. 292)
2. Describe the structure and purpose of anasto-
moses, and give a speciﬁc example. (pp. 292–293)
3. Describe the structure of capillaries. State the
process by which each of the following is
exchanged between capillaries and tissue ﬂuid:
nutrients, oxygen, waste products, and carbon
dioxide. (pp. 293–295)
4. State the part of the body supplied by each of the
following arteries: (pp. 297, 300)
a. Bronchial
b. Femoral
c. Hepatic
d. Brachial
e. Inferior mesenteric
f. Internal carotid
g. Subclavian
h. Intercostal
5. Describe the pathway of blood ﬂow in hepatic por-
tal circulation. Use a speciﬁc example to explain the
purpose of portal circulation. (pp. 301, 304)
6. Begin at the right ventricle and describe the path-
way of pulmonary circulation. Explain the purpose
of this pathway. (p. 296)
7. Name the fetal structure with each of the follow-
ing functions: (pp. 303–305)
a. Permits blood to ﬂow from the right atrium to
the left atrium
b. Carries blood from the placenta to the fetus
c. Permits blood to ﬂow from the pulmonary
artery to the aorta
d. Carry blood from the fetus to the placenta
e. Carries blood from the umbilical vein to the
inferior vena cava
8. Describe the three mechanisms that promote
venous return when the body is vertical.
(pp. 307–308)
9. Explain how the normal elasticity of the large
arteries affects both systolic and diastolic blood
pressure. (p. 309)
10. Explain how Starling’s law of the heart is involved
in the maintenance of blood pressure. (p. 307)
11. Name two hormones involved in the maintenance
of blood pressure, and state the function of each.
(p. 309)
12. Describe two different ways the kidneys respond
to decreased blood ﬂow and blood pressure.
(p. 311)
13. State two compensations that will maintain blood
pressure after a small loss of blood. (p. 309)
14. State the location of the vasomotor center and
name its two parts. Name the division of the
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

autonomic nervous system that carries impulses
to blood vessels. Which blood vessels? Which
tissue in these vessels? Explain why normal
vasoconstriction is important. Explain how
greater vasoconstriction is brought about. Explain
how vasodilation is brought about. How will
each of these changes affect blood pressure?
(pp. 312–313)
318
The Vascular System
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
1. Some old textbooks used the term descending aorta.
Explain what is meant by that, and why it is not a
very good term. Explain why an aneurysm of the
aorta is quite likely to rupture sooner or later.
2. Renee, a nurse, is ﬁrst on the scene of a car acci-
dent. The driver has been thrown from the car, and
even from 15 feet away, Renee knows that a large
artery in the man’s leg has been severed. How does
she know this? What two things does she see?
Renee stops the bleeding, but the ambulance has
not arrived. She wants to assess the man’s condition
after he has lost so much blood. She cannot take a
blood pressure, but what other vital sign can be
helpful? Explain. If Renee could take a blood pres-
sure reading, what might it be? Might it be within
the normal range? Explain.
3. A friend tells you that her grandmother has a ten-
dency to develop blood clots in the veins of her
legs. Your friend fears that her grandmother will
have a stroke as a result. How would you explain
that a stroke from a clot there is not likely? Because
you are a good friend, you want to explain the seri-
ous result that may occur. How would you do that?
4. Some people with hypertension take prescribed
diuretics. Some call these “water pills.” Is this an
accurate name? How can a diuretic help lower
blood pressure? What disadvantage does the use of
diuretics have?
5. Sinusoids are found in the liver and pituitary gland.
For each of these organs, name four speciﬁc large
molecules that enter the blood by way of sinusoids.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CHAPTER 14
The Lymphatic System
and Immunity
319
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

320
CHAPTER 14
Chapter Outline
Lymph
Lymph Vessels
Lymphatic Tissue
Lymph Nodes and Nodules
Spleen
Thymus
Immunity
Innate Immunity
Barriers
Defensive cells
Chemical defenses
Adaptive Immunity
Cell-Mediated Immunity
Antibody-Mediated Immunity
Antibody Responses
Types of Immunity
Aging and the Lymphatic System
BOX 14–1
HODGKIN’S DISEASE
BOX 14–2
AIDS
BOX 14–3
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
BOX 14–4
VACCINES
BOX 14–5
ALLERGIES
BOX 14–6
VACCINES THAT HAVE CHANGED OUR
LIVES
Student Objectives
• Describe the functions of the lymphatic system.
• Describe how lymph is formed.
• Describe the system of lymph vessels, and explain
how lymph is returned to the blood.
• State the locations and functions of the lymph
nodes and nodules.
• State the location and functions of the spleen and
thymus.
• Explain what is meant by immunity.
• Describe the aspects of innate immunity.
• Describe adaptive immunity: cell-mediated and
antibody-mediated.
• Describe the responses to a ﬁrst and second expo-
sure to a pathogen.
• Explain the difference between genetic immunity
and acquired immunity.
• Explain the difference between passive acquired
immunity and active acquired immunity.
• Explain how vaccines work.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Lymphatic System
and Immunity
321
New Terminology
Acquired immunity (uh-KWHY-erd)
Active immunity (AK-tiv)
Antibody-mediated immunity (AN-ti-BAH-dee
ME-dee-ay-ted)
Antigen (AN-ti-jen)
B cells (B SELLS)
Cell-mediated immunity (SELL ME-dee-ay-ted)
Complement (KOM-ple-ment)
Cytokines (SIGH-toh-kines)
Genetic immunity (je-NET-ik)
Humoral immunity (HYOO-mohr-uhl)
Interferon (in-ter-FEER-on)
Lymph (LIMF)
Lymph nodes (LIMF NOHDS)
Lymph nodules (LIMF NAHD-yools)
Opsonization (OP-sah-ni-ZAY-shun)
Passive immunity (PASS-iv)
Plasma cell (PLAZ-mah SELL)
Spleen (SPLEEN)
T cells (T SELLS)
Thymus (THIGH-mus)
Tonsils (TAHN-sills)
Related Clinical Terminology
AIDS (AYDS)
Allergy (AL-er-jee)
Antibody titer (AN-ti-BAH-dee TIGH-ter)
Attenuated (uh-TEN-yoo-AY-ted)
Complement ﬁxation test (KOM-ple-ment 
ﬁk-SAY-shun)
Fluorescent antibody test (ﬂoor-ESS-ent)
Hodgkin’s disease (HODJ-kinz)
Tonsillectomy (TAHN-si-LEK-toh-mee)
Toxoid (TOK-soyd)
Vaccine (vak-SEEN)
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

A child falls and scrapes her knee. Is this likely to
be a life-threatening injury? Probably not, even
though the breaks in the skin have permitted the entry
of thousands or even millions of bacteria. Those bac-
teria, however, will be quickly destroyed by the cells
and organs of the lymphatic system.
Although the lymphatic system may be considered
part of the circulatory system, we will consider it sep-
arately because its functions are so different from
those of the heart and blood vessels. Keep in mind,
however, that all of these functions are interdepend-
ent. The lymphatic system is responsible for returning
tissue ﬂuid to the blood and for protecting the body
against foreign material. The parts of the lymphatic
system are the lymph, the system of lymph vessels, and
lymphatic tissue, which includes lymph nodes and
nodules, the spleen, and the thymus gland.
LYMPH
Lymph is the name for tissue ﬂuid that enters lymph
capillaries. As you may recall from Chapter 13, ﬁltra-
tion in capillaries creates tissue ﬂuid from blood
plasma, most of which returns almost immediately to
the blood in the capillaries by osmosis. Some tissue
ﬂuid, however, remains in interstitial spaces and must
be returned to the blood by way of the lymphatic ves-
sels. Without this return, blood volume and blood
pressure would very soon decrease. The relationship
of the lymphatic vessels to the cardiovascular system is
depicted in Fig. 14–1.
LYMPH VESSELS
The system of lymph vessels begins as dead-end
lymph capillaries found in most tissue spaces (Fig.
14–2). Lymph capillaries are very permeable and col-
lect tissue ﬂuid and proteins. Lacteals are specialized
lymph capillaries in the villi of the small intestine; they
absorb the fat-soluble end products of digestion, such
as fatty acids and vitamins A, D, E, and K.
Lymph capillaries unite to form larger lymph ves-
sels, whose structure is very much like that of veins.
There is no pump for lymph (as the heart is the pump
for blood), but the lymph is kept moving within lymph
vessels by the same mechanisms that promote venous
return. The smooth muscle layer of the larger lymph
vessels constricts, and the one-way valves (just like
those of veins) prevent backﬂow of lymph. Lymph ves-
sels in the extremities, especially the legs, are com-
pressed by the skeletal muscles that surround them;
this is the skeletal muscle pump. The respiratory
pump alternately expands and compresses the lymph
vessels in the chest cavity and keeps the lymph moving.
Where is the lymph going? Back to the blood to
become plasma again. Refer to Fig. 14–3 as you read
the following. The lymph vessels from the lower body
unite in front of the lumbar vertebrae to form a vessel
called the cisterna chyli, which continues upward in
front of the backbone as the thoracic duct. Lymph
vessels from the upper left quadrant of the body join
the thoracic duct, which empties lymph into the left
subclavian vein. Lymph vessels from the upper right
quadrant of the body unite to form the right lymphatic
duct, which empties lymph into the right subclavian
vein. Flaps in both subclavian veins permit the entry of
lymph but prevent blood from ﬂowing into the lymph
vessels.
LYMPHATIC TISSUE
Lymphatic tissue consists mainly of lymphocytes in a
mesh-like framework of connective tissue. Recall that
most lymphocytes are produced from stem cells in the
red bone marrow, then migrate to the lymph nodes
and nodules, to the spleen, and to the thymus. In these
structures, lymphocytes become activated and prolif-
erate in response to infection (this is a function of all
lymphatic tissue). The thymus has stem cells that pro-
duce a signiﬁcant portion of the T lymphocytes.
LYMPH NODES AND NODULES
Lymph nodes and nodules are masses of lymphatic
tissue. Nodes and nodules differ with respect to size
and location. Nodes are usually larger, 10 to 20 mm in
length, and are encapsulated; nodules range from a
fraction of a millimeter to several millimeters in length
and do not have capsules.
Lymph nodes are found in groups along the path-
ways of lymph vessels, and lymph ﬂows through these
nodes on its way to the subclavian veins. Lymph enters
a node through several afferent lymph vessels and
322
The Lymphatic System and Immunity
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

leaves through one or two efferent vessels (Fig. 14–4).
As lymph passes through a lymph node, bacteria and
other foreign materials are phagocytized by ﬁxed (sta-
tionary) macrophages. Plasma cells develop from
lymphocytes exposed to pathogens in the lymph and
produce antibodies. These antibodies will eventually
reach the blood and circulate throughout the body.
There are many groups of lymph nodes along all
the lymph vessels throughout the body, but three
paired groups deserve mention because of their strate-
gic locations. These are the cervical, axillary, and
inguinal lymph nodes (see Fig. 14–3). Notice that
these are at the junctions of the head and extremities
with the trunk of the body. Breaks in the skin, with
entry of pathogens, are much more likely to occur in
the arms or legs or head rather than in the trunk. If
these pathogens get to the lymph, they will be
destroyed by the lymph nodes before they get to the
trunk, before the lymph is returned to the blood in the
subclavian veins.
The Lymphatic System and Immunity
323
Subclavian vein
Lymphatic
vessel
Valve
Heart
Lymph
flow
Lymph node
Blood
flow
Lymph
capillaries
Blood
capillaries
Figure 14–1.
Relationship of lym-
phatic vessels to the cardiovascular
system. Lymph capillaries collect tis-
sue ﬂuid, which is returned to the
blood. The arrows indicate the direc-
tion of ﬂow of the blood and lymph.
QUESTION: To which large veins is
lymph returned, and why is this
return important?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

You may be familiar with the expression “swollen
glands,” as when a child has a strep throat (an inﬂam-
mation of the pharynx caused by Streptococcus bacteria).
These “glands” are the cervical lymph nodes that have
enlarged as their macrophages attempt to destroy the
bacteria in the lymph from the pharynx (see Box 14–1:
Hodgkin’s Disease).
Lymph nodules are small masses of lymphatic tis-
sue found just beneath the epithelium of all mucous
membranes. The body systems lined with mucous
membranes are those that have openings to the envi-
ronment: the respiratory, digestive, urinary, and repro-
ductive tracts. You can probably see that these are also
strategic locations for lymph nodules, because any nat-
ural body opening is a possible portal of entry for
pathogens. For example, if bacteria in inhaled air get
through the epithelium of the trachea, lymph nodules
with their macrophages are in position to destroy these
bacteria before they get to the blood.
Some of the lymph nodules have speciﬁc names.
Those of the small intestine are called Peyer’s
patches, and those of the pharynx are called tonsils.
The palatine tonsils are on the lateral walls of the
pharynx, the adenoid (pharyngeal tonsil) is on the pos-
terior wall, and the lingual tonsils are on the base of
the tongue. The tonsils, therefore, form a ring of lym-
phatic tissue around the pharynx, which is a common
pathway for food and air and for the pathogens they
contain. A tonsillectomy is the surgical removal of
the palatine tonsils and the adenoid and may be per-
formed if the tonsils are chronically inﬂamed and
swollen, as may happen in children. As mentioned ear-
lier, the body has redundant structures to help ensure
survival if one structure is lost or seriously impaired.
Thus, there are many other lymph nodules in the
pharynx to take over the function of the surgically
removed tonsils.
SPLEEN
The spleen is located in the upper left quadrant of the
abdominal cavity, just below the diaphragm, behind
the stomach. The lower rib cage protects the spleen
from physical trauma (see Fig. 14–3).
In the fetus, the spleen produces red blood cells, a
function assumed by the red bone marrow after birth.
After birth the spleen is very much like a large lymph
node, except that its functions affect the blood that
ﬂows through it rather than lymph.
The functions of the spleen after birth are:
1. Contains plasma cells that produce antibodies to
foreign antigens.
2. Contains ﬁxed macrophages (RE cells) that phago-
cytize pathogens or other foreign material in the
blood. The macrophages of the spleen also phago-
cytize old red blood cells and form bilirubin. By
way of portal circulation, the bilirubin is sent to the
liver for excretion in bile.
3. Stores platelets and destroys them when they are
no longer useful.
The spleen is not considered a vital organ, because
other organs compensate for its functions if the spleen
must be removed. The liver and red bone marrow
will remove old red blood cells and platelets from cir-
culation. The many lymph nodes and nodules will
phagocytize pathogens (as will the liver) and have lym-
phocytes to be activated and plasma cells to produce
antibodies. Despite this redundancy, a person without
a spleen is somewhat more susceptible to certain bac-
terial infections such as pneumonia and meningitis.
THYMUS
The thymus is located inferior to the thyroid gland.
In the fetus and infant, the thymus is large and extends
under the sternum (Fig. 14–5). With increasing age,
the thymus shrinks, and relatively little thymus tissue
is found in adults, though it is still active.
324
The Lymphatic System and Immunity
Tissue fluid
Cells
Lymph
capillary
Venule
Blood capillary
Arteriole
Figure 14–2.
Dead-end lymph capillaries found in tis-
sue spaces. Arrows indicate the movement of plasma,
lymph, and tissue ﬂuid.
QUESTION: Just before water enters lymph capillaries,
what name does it have?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Lymphatic System and Immunity
325
Cervical nodes
Submaxillary nodes
Left subclavian vein
Thoracic duct 
Axillary nodes
Cisterna chyli
Mesenteric nodes
Inguinal nodes
Right lymphatic duct
Mammary plexus
Cubital nodes
Iliac nodes
Popliteal nodes
Spleen
Figure 14–3.
System of lymph vessels and the major groups of lymph nodes. Lymph is
returned to the blood in the right and left subclavian veins.
QUESTION: Where are the major paired groups of lymph nodes located?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The stem cells of the thymus produce T lympho-
cytes or T cells; their functions are discussed in the
next section. Thymic hormones are necessary for what
may be called “immunological competence.” To be
competent means to be able to do something well.
The thymic hormones enable the T cells to participate
in the recognition of foreign antigens and to provide
immunity. This capability of T cells is established
early in life and then is perpetuated by the lympho-
cytes themselves. The newborn’s immune system is
not yet fully mature, and infants are more susceptible
to certain infections than are older children and
adults. Usually by the age of 2 years, the immune sys-
tem matures and becomes fully functional. This is why
some vaccines, such as the measles vaccine, are not
recommended for infants younger than 15 to 18
months of age. Their immune systems are not mature
enough to respond strongly to the vaccine, and the
326
The Lymphatic System and Immunity
Afferent lymphatic vessel
Capsule
Cortex
Nodal vein
Nodal artery
Hilus
Valve
Efferent lymphatic
vessel
Bacteria
Lymphocytes
Neutrophil
Plasma cell
Macrophage
Antibody molecule
(enlarged)
Antigen
(enlarged)
A
B
Figure 14–4.
Lymph node. (A) Section through a lymph node, showing the ﬂow of
lymph. (B) Microscopic detail of bacteria being destroyed within the lymph node.
QUESTION: What is the function of the plasma cells in a lymph node?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

protection provided by the vaccine may be incom-
plete.
IMMUNITY
Immunity may be deﬁned as the ability to destroy
pathogens or other foreign material and to prevent
further cases of certain infectious diseases. This ability
is of vital importance because the body is exposed to
pathogens from the moment of birth.
Antigens are chemical markers that identify cells.
Human cells have their own antigens that identify all
the cells in an individual as “self ” (recall the HLA
types mentioned in Chapter 11). When antigens are
foreign, or “non-self,” they may be recognized as such
and destroyed. Bacteria, viruses, fungi, and protozoa
are all foreign antigens that activate immune re-
sponses, as are cell products such as bacterial toxins.
Malignant cells, which may be formed within the
body as a result of mutations of normal cells, are also
recognized as foreign and are usually destroyed before
they can establish themselves and cause cancer. Unfor-
tunately, organ transplants are also foreign tissue, and
the immune system may reject (destroy) a transplanted
kidney or heart. Sometimes the immune system mis-
takenly reacts to part of the body itself and causes
an autoimmune disease; several of these were men-
tioned in previous chapters. Most often, however, the
immune mechanisms function to protect the body
from the microorganisms around us and within us.
Immunity has two main components: innate immu-
nity and adaptive immunity. Before we describe each
component, a brief general comparison may be help-
ful. Innate immunity may be called nonspeciﬁc, does
not create memory, and its responses are always the
same regardless of the target. Adaptive immunity is
very speciﬁc as to its target, may involve antibodies,
does create memory, and may become more efficient.
Both kinds of immunity work together to prevent
damage and disease.
INNATE IMMUNITY
Innate immunity has several aspects: anatomic and
physiological barriers, phagocytic and other defensive
cells, and chemical secretions and reactions, including
inﬂammation. These are not separate and distinct;
rather there is a great deal of overlap among them, as
you will see. The innate immune responses are always
the same, and their degree of efficiency does not
increase with repeated exposure.
Barriers
The stratum corneum of the epidermis of the skin is
non-living, and when unbroken is an excellent barrier
to pathogens of all kinds. The fatty acids in sebum
help limit the growth of bacteria on the skin. The liv-
ing cells of the epidermis produce defensins, which are
antimicrobial chemicals. The mucous membranes of
the respiratory, digestive, urinary, and reproductive
tracts are living tissue, yet still a good barrier. The
The Lymphatic System and Immunity
327
BOX 14–1
HODGKIN’S DISEASE
Hodgkin’s disease is a malignant disorder of
the lymph nodes; the cause is not known. The
ﬁrst symptom is usually a swollen but painless
lymph node, often in the cervical region. The
individual is prompted to seek medical attention
because of other symptoms: chronic fever,
fatigue, and weight loss. The diagnosis involves
biopsy of the lymph node and the ﬁnding of
characteristic cells.
Treatment of Hodgkin’s disease requires
chemotherapy, radiation, or both. With early
diagnosis and proper treatment, this malignancy
is very often curable.
Trachea 
Clavicle
First
rib
Thymus
gland
Figure 14–5.
Location of the thymus in a young child.
QUESTION: Which blood cells mature in the thymus?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

ciliated epithelium of the upper respiratory tract is an
especially effective barrier. Dust and pathogens are
trapped on the mucus, the cilia sweep the mucus to the
pharynx, and it is swallowed. The hydrochloric acid of
the gastric juice destroys most pathogens that enter
the stomach, either in mucus or with food and drink.
Lysozyme, an enzyme found in saliva and tears,
inhibits the growth of bacteria in the oral cavity and
on the warm, wet surface of the eye. The subcuta-
neous tissue contains many white blood cells (WBCs),
as does the areolar connective tissue below the epithe-
lium of mucous membranes.
Defensive Cells
Recall from Chapter 11 that many of our defensive
cells are white blood cells. Macrophages, both ﬁxed
and wandering, have receptors for the pathogens
humans are likely to encounter (this probably reﬂects
millions of years of coexistence) and are very efficient
phagocytes. Other cells capable of phagocytosis of
pathogens or other foreign antigens are the neutro-
phils and, to a lesser extent, the eosinophils. Phago-
cytic cells use intracellular enzymes and chemicals
such as hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) to destroy ingested
pathogens.
The Langerhans cells of the skin, and other den-
dritic cells throughout the body, also phagocytize for-
eign material, not merely to destroy it, but to take it to
a lymph node where the lymphocytes of adaptive
immune mechanisms are then activated. The macro-
phages are also involved in activating these lympho-
cytes. This is a very important link between the two
components of immunity.
Natural killer cells (NK cells) circulate in the
blood but are also found in the red bone marrow,
spleen, and lymph nodes. They are a small portion
(about 10%) of the total lymphocytes, but are able to
destroy many kinds of pathogens and tumor cells. NK
cells make direct contact with foreign cells, and kill
them by rupturing their cell membranes (with chemi-
cals called perforins) or by inﬂicting some other kind
of chemical damage.
Basophils and mast cells (a type of connective tissue
cell) are also defensive cells that are found throughout
areolar connective tissue. They produce histamine and
leukotrienes. Histamine causes vasodilation and makes
capillaries more permeable; these are aspects of
inﬂammation. Leukotrienes also increase capillary
permeability and attract phagocytic cells to the area.
Chemical Defenses
Chemicals that help the body resist infection include
the interferons, complement, and the chemicals
involved in inﬂammation. The interferons (alpha-,
beta-, and gamma-interferons) are proteins produced
by cells infected with viruses and by T cells. Viruses
must be inside a living cell to reproduce, and although
interferon cannot prevent the entry of viruses into
cells, it does block their reproduction. When viral
reproduction is blocked, the viruses cannot infect new
cells and cause disease. Interferon is probably a factor
in the self-limiting nature of many viral diseases (and
is used in the treatment of some diseases, such as hep-
atitis C).
Complement is a group of more than 20 plasma
proteins that circulate in the blood until activated.
They are involved in the lysis of cellular antigens and
the labeling of noncellular antigens. Some stimulate
the release of histamine in inﬂammation; others
attract WBCs to the site.
Inﬂammation is a general response to damage of
any kind: microbial, chemical, or physical. Basophils
and mast cells release histamine and leukotrienes,
which affect blood vessels as previously described.
Vasodilation increases blood ﬂow to the damaged area,
and capillaries become more permeable; tissue ﬂuid
and WBCs collect at the site. The purpose of inﬂam-
mation is to try to contain the damage, keep it from
spreading, eliminate the cause, and permit repair of the
tissue to begin. From even this brief description you
can see why the four signs of inﬂammation are redness,
heat, swelling, and pain: redness from greater blood
ﬂow, heat from the blood and greater metabolic activ-
ity, swelling from the accumulation of tissue ﬂuid, and
pain from the damage itself and perhaps the swelling.
As mentioned in Chapter 10, inﬂammation is a pos-
itive feedback mechanism that may become a vicious
cycle of damage and more damage. The hormone cor-
tisol is one brake that prevents this, and at least one of
the complement proteins has this function as well.
There are probably other chemical signals (in general
called cytokines and chemokines) that help limit
inﬂammation to an extent that is useful.
In summary, innate immunity is nonspeciﬁc, is
always the same, does not create memory, and does
not become more efficient upon repeated exposures.
Some cells of innate immune mechanisms also activate
the adaptive immune mechanisms. The aspects of
innate immunity are shown in Fig. 14–6.
328
The Lymphatic System and Immunity
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Lymphatic System and Immunity
329
•
Integumentary system
Mucous membranes and lysozyme
Langerhans cells
Phagocytes
Natural killer cells
Basophils and mast cells
Interferon
Complement
Inflammation
T cell
Blocks viral
reproduction
Lyses cells,
attracts WBC's
Histamine and leukotrienes
Vasodilation
•
Increased
capillary
permeability
•
Tissue fluid
and WBCs
•
Histamine and leukotrienes
Activate lymphocytes
Perforins
•
Macrophage
•
•
Bacteria
•
Neutrophils
•
•
Antigen
•
•
Subcutaneous tissue
and WBC's
Defensins
Langerhans cells
Stratum corneum
•
•
•
Hydrochloric
acid
Ciliated epithelium
Lacrimal gland
•
Salivary glands
•
•
•
A   Barriers
B   Cells
C   Chemicals
Figure 14–6.
Innate immunity. (A) Barriers. (B) Defensive cells. (C) Chemical defenses.
See text for description.
QUESTION: The three aspects of innate immunity are interconnected; describe two of
these connections.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

ADAPTIVE IMMUNITY
To adapt means to become suitable, and adaptive
immunity can become “suitable” for and respond to
almost any foreign antigen. Adaptive immunity is spe-
ciﬁc and is carried out by lymphocytes and macro-
phages.
The majority of lymphocytes are the T lympho-
cytes and B lymphocytes, or, more simply, T cells and
B cells. In the embryo, T cells are produced in the
bone marrow and thymus. They must pass through
the thymus, where the thymic hormones bring about
their maturation. The T cells then migrate to the
spleen, lymph nodes, and lymph nodules, where they
are found after birth.
Produced in the embryonic bone marrow, B cells
migrate directly to the spleen and lymph nodes and
nodules. When activated during an immune response,
some B cells will divide many times and become
plasma cells that produce antibodies to a speciﬁc for-
eign antigen.
The mechanisms of immunity that involve T cells
and B cells are speciﬁc, meaning that one foreign anti-
gen is the target each time a mechanism is activated. A
macrophage has receptor sites for foreign chemicals
such as those of bacterial cell walls or ﬂagella, and may
phagocytize just about any foreign material it comes
across (as will the Langerhans or dendritic cells). T
cells and B cells, however, become very speciﬁc, as you
will see.
The ﬁrst step in the destruction of a pathogen or
foreign cell is the recognition of its antigens as for-
eign. Both T cells and B cells are capable of this, but
the immune mechanisms are activated especially well
when this recognition is accomplished by macro-
phages and a specialized group of T lymphocytes
called helper T cells (also called CD4 T cells). The
foreign antigen is ﬁrst phagocytized by a macrophage,
and parts of it are “presented” on the macrophage’s
cell membrane. Also on the macrophage membrane
are “self” antigens that are representative of the
antigens found on all of the cells of the individual.
Therefore, the helper T cell that encounters this
macrophage is presented not only with the foreign
antigen but also with “self” antigens for comparison.
The helper T cell becomes sensitized to and speciﬁc
for the foreign antigen, the one that does not belong
in the body (see Box 14–2: AIDS).
The recognition of an antigen as foreign initiates
one or both of the mechanisms of adaptive immunity.
These are cell-mediated immunity (sometimes
called simply cellular immunity), in which T cells and
macrophages participate, and antibody-mediated
immunity (or humoral immunity), which involves T
cells, B cells, and macrophages.
Cell-Mediated Immunity
This mechanism of immunity does not result in the
production of antibodies, but it is effective against
intracellular pathogens (such as viruses), fungi,
malignant cells, and grafts of foreign tissue. As men-
tioned earlier, the ﬁrst step is the recognition of the
foreign antigen by macrophages and helper T cells,
which become activated and are speciﬁc. (You may
ﬁnd it helpful to refer to Fig. 14–7 as you read the fol-
lowing.)
These activated T cells, which are antigen speciﬁc,
divide many times to form memory T cells and cyto-
toxic (killer) T cells (also called CD8 T cells). The
memory T cells will remember the speciﬁc foreign
antigen and become active if it enters the body again.
Cytotoxic T cells are able to chemically destroy for-
eign antigens by disrupting cell membranes. This
is how cytotoxic T cells destroy cells infected with
viruses and prevent the viruses from reproducing.
These T cells also produce cytokines, which are chem-
icals that attract macrophages to the area and activate
them to phagocytize the foreign antigen and cellular
debris.
It was once believed that another subset of T cells
served to stop the immune response, but this may not
be so. It seems probable that the CD4 and CD8 T
cells also produce feedback chemicals to limit the
immune response once the foreign antigen has been
destroyed. The memory T cells, however, will quickly
initiate the cell-mediated immune response should
there be a future exposure to the antigen.
Antibody-Mediated Immunity
This mechanism of immunity does involve the pro-
duction of antibodies and is also diagrammed in Fig.
14–7. Again, the ﬁrst step is the recognition of the for-
eign antigen, this time by B cells as well as by
macrophages and helper T cells. The sensitized helper
T cell presents the foreign antigen to B cells, which
provides a strong stimulus for the activation of B cells
speciﬁc for this antigen. The activated B cells begin to
divide many times, and two types of cells are formed.
Some of the new B cells produced are memory B
cells, which will remember the speciﬁc antigen and
330
The Lymphatic System and Immunity
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Lymphatic System and Immunity
331
331
Produces cytokines to
attract macrophages
Chemically destroys
foreign cells
Memory T cell
Helper T cell
Cytotoxic T cell
Macrophage
•
Foreign antigen
•
•
Self antigens
•
•
Receptor sites
•
•
Self antigens
•
•
Receptor sites
Macrophage
Helper T cells
Memory B cell
B cell
Plasma cell
Antibodies
Antigen-antibody complex
Opsonization
Complement fixation
lysis of
cellular antigen
Macrophage
A   Cell-mediated
B   Antibody-mediated
Figure 14–7.
Adaptive immunity. (A) Cell-mediated immunity. (B) Antibody-mediated
immunity. See text for description.
QUESTION: Adaptive immunity has memory; which cells provide this? What kind of mem-
ory is it?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

332
The Lymphatic System and Immunity
initiate a rapid response upon a second exposure.
Other B cells become plasma cells that produce anti-
bodies speciﬁc for this one foreign antigen.
Antibodies, also called immune globulins (Ig) or
gamma globulins, are proteins shaped somewhat like
the letter Y. Antibodies do not themselves destroy for-
eign antigens, but rather become attached to such anti-
gens to “label” them for destruction. Each antibody
BOX 14–2
AIDS
placental transmission of the virus from mother to
fetus.
In the United States, most of the cases of AIDS
during the 1980s were in homosexual men and IV
drug users who shared syringes contaminated with
their blood. By the 1990s, however, it was clear that
AIDS was becoming more of a heterosexually trans-
mitted disease, with rapidly increasing case rates
among women and teenagers. In much of the rest
of the world, especially Africa and Asia, the trans-
mission of AIDS has always been primarily by het-
erosexual contact, with equal numbers of women
and men infected. In many of these countries AIDS
is an enormous public health problem, and the
annual number of new cases is still rising.
At present we have no medications that will
eradicate HIV, although certain combinations of
drugs effectively suppress the virus in some people.
For these people, AIDS may become a chronic but
not fatal disease. Unfortunately, the medications do
not work for everyone, and they are very expensive,
beyond the means of most of the world’s AIDS
patients.
Development of an AIDS vaccine has not yet
been successful, although dozens of vaccines are
undergoing clinical trials. A vaccine stimulates anti-
body production to a speciﬁc pathogen, but every-
one who has died of AIDS had antibodies to HIV.
Those antibodies were not protective because HIV is
a mutating virus; it constantly changes itself, mak-
ing previously produced antibodies ineffective. An
AIDS vaccine may not be entirely effective, may not
have the 80% to 90% protection rate we have
come to expect from vaccines.
If we cannot cure AIDS and we cannot yet pre-
vent it by vaccination, what recourse is left?
Education. Everyone should know how AIDS is
spread. The obvious reason is to be able to avoid
the high-risk behaviors that make acquiring HIV
more likely. Yet another reason, however, is that
everyone should know that they need not fear
casual contact with people with AIDS. Healthcare
personnel have a special responsibility, not only to
educate themselves, but to provide education
about AIDS for their patients and the families of
their patients.
In 1981, young homosexual men in New York and
California were diagnosed with Kaposi’s sarcoma
and Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia. At that time,
Kaposi’s sarcoma was known as a rare, slowly grow-
ing malignancy in elderly men. Pneumocystis pneu-
monia was almost unheard of; P. carinii (now P.
jiroveci) is a pathogen that does not cause disease in
healthy people. That in itself was a clue. These
young men were not healthy; their immune sys-
tems were not functioning normally. As the number
of patients increased rapidly, the disease was given
a name (acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome—
AIDS) and the pathogen was found. Human
immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) is a retrovirus that
infects helper T cells, macrophages, and other
human cells. Once infected, the human cells con-
tain HIV genes for the rest of their lives. Without suf-
ﬁcient helper T cells, the immune system is seriously
impaired. Foreign antigens are not recognized, B
cells are not activated, and killer T cells are not
stimulated to proliferate.
The person with AIDS is susceptible to oppor-
tunistic infections, that is, those infections caused
by fungi and protozoa that would not affect aver-
age healthy adults. Some of these infections may be
treated with medications and even temporarily
cured, but the immune system cannot prevent the
next infection, or the next. As of this writing, AIDS
is considered an incurable disease, although with
proper medical treatment, some people with AIDS
may live for many years.
Where did this virus come from? The latest
research suggests that HIV evolved from a harmless
chimpanzee virus in Africa sometime during the
1930s. Spread of the virus was very slow at ﬁrst,
and only when air travel became commonplace did
the virus spread worldwide.
The incubation period of AIDS is highly variable,
ranging from a few months to several years.
An infected person may unknowingly spread HIV to
others before any symptoms appear. It should
be emphasized that AIDS, although communicable,
is not a contagious disease. It is not spread
by casual contact as is measles or the common
cold. Transmission of AIDS occurs through sexual
contact, by contact with infected blood, or by
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

produced is speciﬁc for only one antigen. Because
there are so many different pathogens, you might
think that the immune system would have to be capa-
ble of producing many different antibodies, and in fact
this is so. It is estimated that millions of different anti-
gen-speciﬁc antibodies can be produced, should there
be a need for them. The structure of antibodies is
shown in Fig. 14–8, and the ﬁve classes of antibodies
are described in Table 14–1.
The antibodies produced will bond to the antigen,
forming an antigen–antibody complex. This complex
results in opsonization, which means that the antigen
The Lymphatic System and Immunity
333
Table 14–1 CLASSES OF ANTIBODIES
Name
Location
Functions
IgG
IgA
IgM
IgD
IgE
Blood
Extracellular ﬂuid
External secretions (tears,
saliva, etc.)
Blood
B lymphocytes
Mast cells or basophils
• Crosses the placenta to provide passive immunity for newborns
• Provides long-term immunity following recovery or a vaccine
• Present in breast milk to provide passive immunity for breast-fed infants
• Found in secretions of all mucous membranes
• Produced ﬁrst by the maturing immune system of infants
• Produced ﬁrst during an infection (IgG production follows)
• Part of the ABO blood group
• Receptors on B lymphocytes
• Important in allergic reactions (mast cells release histamine)
A
Antigen binding
site
Complement
binding site
Macrophage
binding site
B
IgG
IgD
IgE
IgA
IgM
Bacteria
Virus
Toxin
Agglutination
C
Neutralization
Disulfide
bonds
Figure 14–8.
Antibodies.
(A) Structure of one IgG mol-
ecule. Notice how the many
disulﬁde bonds maintain the
shape 
of 
the 
molecule.
(B) Structure of the ﬁve classes
of antibodies. (C) Antibody
activity: Agglutination of bac-
teria and neutralization of
viruses or toxins.
QUESTION: In part C, why
does neutralization inactivate
a bacterial toxin?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

is now “labeled” for phagocytosis by macrophages or
neutrophils. The antigen–antibody complex also stim-
ulates the process of complement ﬁxation (see Box
14–3: Diagnostic Tests).
Some of the circulating complement proteins are
activated, or ﬁxed, by an antigen–antibody complex.
Complement ﬁxation may be complete or partial. If
the foreign antigen is cellular, the complement pro-
teins bond to the antigen–antibody complex, then to
one another, forming an enzymatic ring that punches
a hole in the cell to bring about the death of the cell.
This is complete (or entire) complement ﬁxation and
is what happens to bacterial cells (it is also the cause of
hemolysis in a transfusion reaction).
If the foreign antigen is not a cell—let’s say it’s a
virus for example—partial complement ﬁxation takes
place, in which some of the complement proteins bond
to the antigen–antibody complex. This is a chemotac-
tic factor. Chemotaxis means “chemical movement” and
is actually another label that attracts macrophages to
engulf and destroy the foreign antigen.
In summary, adaptive immunity is very speciﬁc,
does create memory, and because it does, often be-
comes more efficient with repeated exposures.
Antibody Responses
The ﬁrst exposure to a foreign antigen does stimulate
antibody production, but antibodies are produced
slowly and in small amounts (see Fig. 14–9). Let us
take as a speciﬁc example the measles virus. On a per-
son’s ﬁrst exposure to this virus, antibody production is
usually too slow to prevent the disease itself, and the
person will have clinical measles. Most people who get
measles recover, and upon recovery have antibodies
and memory cells that are speciﬁc for the measles
virus.
On a second exposure to this virus, the memory
cells initiate rapid production of large amounts of anti-
bodies, enough to prevent a second case of measles.
This is the reason why we develop immunity to certain
diseases, and this is also the basis for the protection
given by vaccines (see Box 14–4: Vaccines).
As mentioned previously, antibodies label patho-
gens or other foreign antigens for phagocytosis or
complement ﬁxation. More speciﬁcally, antibodies
cause agglutination or neutralization of pathogens
before their eventual destruction. Agglutination
means “clumping,” and this is what happens when
antibodies bind to bacterial cells. The bacteria that are
clumped together by attached antibodies are more eas-
ily phagocytized by macrophages (see Fig. 14–8).
The activity of viruses may be neutralized by anti-
bodies. A virus must get inside a living cell in order to
reproduce itself. However, a virus with antibodies
attached to it is unable to enter a cell, cannot repro-
duce, and will soon be phagocytized. Bacterial toxins
may also be neutralized by attached antibodies. The
antibodies change the shape of the toxin, prevent it
from exerting its harmful effects, and promote its
phagocytosis by macrophages.
Allergies are also the result of antibody activity
(see box 14–5: Allergies).
TYPES OF IMMUNITY
If we consider the source of immunity, that is, where
it comes from, we can begin with two major cate-
gories: genetic immunity and acquired immunity.
Genetic immunity is conferred by our DNA, and
acquired immunity is developed or acquired by natu-
ral or artiﬁcial means.
Genetic immunity does not involve antibodies or
the immune system; it is the result of our genetic
makeup. What this means is that some pathogens
334
The Lymphatic System and Immunity
BOX 14–3
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
Several important laboratory tests involve anti-
bodies and may be very useful to conﬁrm a diag-
nosis.
Complement ﬁxation test—determines the
presence of a particular antibody in the patient’s
blood, but does not indicate when the infection
occurred.
Antibody titer—determines the level or
amount of a speciﬁc antibody in the patient’s
blood. If another titer is done 1 to several weeks
later, an increase in the antibody level shows the
infection to be current.
Fluorescent antibody test—uses antibodies
tagged with ﬂuorescent dyes, which are added
to a clinical specimen such as blood, sputum, or
a biopsy of tissue. If the suspected pathogen is
present, the ﬂuorescent antibodies will bond to it
and the antigen–antibody complex will “glow”
when examined with a ﬂuorescent microscope.
Tests such as these are used in conjunction
with patient history and symptoms to arrive at a
diagnosis.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Lymphatic System and Immunity
335
Primary and secondary antibody responses
Antibody level
First
exposure
to
antigen
Second
exposure
to
antigen
10 days
20 days
some months
some years
20 days
10 days
Time after exposure
IgG
IgG
IgM
IgM
Figure 14–9.
Antibody responses to ﬁrst and subsequent exposures to a pathogen. See
text for description.
QUESTION: State the two differences in IgG production after a ﬁrst and a second exposure
to the same antigen.
BOX 14–4
VACCINES
the inactivated toxins of these bacteria. Vaccines for
pneumococcal pneumonia and meningitis contain
bacterial capsules. These vaccines cannot cause dis-
ease because the capsules are non-toxic and non-
living; there is nothing that can reproduce.
Inﬂuenza and rabies vaccines contain killed viruses.
Measles and the oral polio vaccines contain attenu-
ated (weakened) viruses.
Although attenuated pathogens are usually
strongly antigenic and stimulate a protective
immune response, there is a very small chance that
the pathogen may regain its virulence and cause
the disease. The live-virus oral polio vaccine (still
being used in the quest to eliminate polio through-
out the world) has a risk of 1 in 500,000 of causing
polio. The killed-virus injectable polio vaccine has
no such risk.
The purpose of vaccines is to prevent disease. A vac-
cine contains an antigen that the immune system
will respond to, just as it would to the actual
pathogen. The types of vaccine antigens are a killed
or weakened (attenuated) pathogen, part of a
pathogen such as a bacterial capsule, or an inacti-
vated bacterial toxin called a toxoid.
Because the vaccine itself does not cause disease
(with very rare exceptions), the fact that antibody
production to it is slow is not detrimental to the
person. The vaccine takes the place of the ﬁrst
exposure to the pathogen and stimulates produc-
tion of antibodies and memory cells. On exposure
to the pathogen itself, the memory cells initiate
rapid production of large amounts of antibody,
enough to prevent disease.
We now have vaccines for many diseases. The
tetanus and diphtheria vaccines contain toxoids,
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

cause disease in certain host species but not in others.
Dogs and cats, for example, have genetic immunity
to the measles virus, which is a pathogen only for peo-
ple. Mouse leukemia viruses affect only mice, not
people; we have genetic immunity to them. This is
not because we have antibodies against these mouse
viruses, but rather that we have genes that are the
codes for proteins that make it impossible for such
pathogens to reproduce in our cells and tissues.
Monkeys have similar protective genes and proteins
for the human AIDS virus; HIV does not cause disease
in these monkeys. Because this is a genetic character-
istic programmed in DNA, genetic immunity always
lasts a lifetime.
Acquired immunity does involve antibodies.
Passive immunity means that the antibodies are from
another source, whereas active immunity means that
the individual produces his or her own antibodies.
One type of naturally acquired passive immunity is
the placental transmission of antibodies (IgG) from
maternal blood to fetal circulation. The baby will then
be born temporarily immune to the diseases the
mother is immune to. Such passive immunity may be
prolonged by breast-feeding, because breast milk also
contains maternal antibodies (IgA).
Artiﬁcially acquired passive immunity is obtained
by the injection of immune globulins (gamma globu-
lins or preformed antibodies) after presumed exposure
to a particular pathogen. Such immune globulins are
available for German measles, hepatitis A and B,
tetanus and botulism (anti-toxins), and rabies. These
are not vaccines; they do not stimulate immune mech-
anisms, but rather provide immediate antibody pro-
tection. Passive immunity is always temporary, lasting
a few weeks to a few months, because antibodies from
another source eventually break down.
Active immunity is the production of one’s own
antibodies and may be stimulated by natural or artiﬁ-
cial means. Naturally acquired active immunity means
that a person has recovered from a disease and now
has antibodies and memory cells speciﬁc for that
pathogen. Artiﬁcially acquired active immunity is the
result of a vaccine that has stimulated production of
antibodies and memory cells (see Box 14–6: Vaccines
That Have Changed Our Lives). No general state-
ment can be made about the duration of active immu-
nity. Recovering from plague, for example, confers
lifelong immunity, but the plague vaccine does not.
Duration of active immunity, therefore, varies with
the particular disease or vaccine.
The types of immunity are summarized in Table
14–2.
336
The Lymphatic System and Immunity
BOX 14–5
ALLERGIES
In an allergic reaction, the effects of inﬂamma-
tory chemicals create symptoms such as watery
eyes and runny nose (hay fever) or the more serious
wheezing and difficult breathing that characterize
asthma. Several medications are available to coun-
teract these effects (see Chapter 15 for a description
of asthma).
Anaphylactic shock is an extreme allergic
response that may be elicited by exposure to peni-
cillin or insect venoms. On the ﬁrst exposure, the
person becomes highly sensitized to the foreign
antigen. On the second exposure, histamine is
released from mast cells throughout the body and
causes a drastic decrease in blood volume. The
resulting drop in blood pressure may be fatal in
only a few minutes. People who know they are
allergic to bee stings, for example, may obtain a
self-contained syringe of epinephrine to carry with
them. Epinephrine can delay the progression of
anaphylactic shock long enough for the person to
seek medical attention.
An allergy is a hypersensitivity to a particular for-
eign antigen, called an allergen. Allergens include
plant pollens, foods, chemicals in cosmetics, antibi-
otics such as penicillin, dust, and mold spores. Such
allergens are not themselves harmful. Most people,
for example, can inhale pollen, eat peanuts, or take
penicillin with no ill effects.
Hypersensitivity means that the immune system
overresponds to the allergen, and produces tissue
damage by doing so. Allergic responses are charac-
terized by the production of IgE antibodies, which
bond to mast cells. Mast cells are specialized con-
nective tissue cells and are numerous in the con-
nective tissue of the skin and mucous membranes.
Chemicals in mast cells include histamine and
leukotrienes, which are released by the bonding of
IgE antibodies or when tissue damage occurs.
These chemicals contribute to the process of
inﬂammation by increasing the permeability of cap-
illaries and venules. Tissue ﬂuid collects and more
WBCs are brought to the damaged area.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

AGING AND THE
LYMPHATIC SYSTEM
The aging of the lymphatic system is apparent in the
decreased efficiency of immune responses. Elderly
people are more likely than younger ones to develop
shingles, when an aging immune system cannot keep
the chickenpox virus dormant. They are also more
susceptible to infections such as inﬂuenza and to what
are called secondary infections, such as pneumonia
following a case of the ﬂu. Vaccines for both of these
are available, and elderly people should be encouraged
to get them. Elderly people should also be sure to get
a tetanus-diphtheria booster every 10 years.
Autoimmune disorders are also more common
among older people; the immune system mistakenly
perceives a body tissue as foreign and initiates its des-
truction. Rheumatoid arthritis and myasthenia gravis
are examples of autoimmune diseases. The incidence
of cancer is also higher. Malignant cells that once
might have been quickly destroyed remain alive and
proliferate.
The Lymphatic System and Immunity
337
BOX 14–6
VACCINES THAT HAVE CHANGED OUR LIVES
they are no longer possible reservoirs or sources of
the pathogen for others, and the spread of disease
may be greatly limited.
Other diseases that have been controlled by the
use of vaccines are tetanus, mumps, inﬂuenza,
measles, and German measles. Whooping cough
had been controlled until recently, when the vacci-
nation rate decreased; the annual number of cases
in the United States has more than doubled. The
vaccine for hepatitis B has signiﬁcantly decreased
the number of cases of this disease among health-
care workers, and the vaccine is recommended for
all children. People who have been exposed to
rabies, which is virtually always fatal, can be pro-
tected by a safe vaccine.
Without such vaccines our lives would be very
different. Infant mortality or death in childhood
would be much more frequent, and all of us would
have to be much more aware of infectious diseases.
In many parts of the world this is still true; many of
the developing countries in Africa and Asia still can-
not afford extensive vaccination programs for their
children. Many of the diseases mentioned here,
which we may rarely think of, are still a very signif-
icant part of the lives of millions of people.
In 1797, Edward Jenner (in England) published his
results on the use of the cowpox virus called vac-
cinia as the ﬁrst vaccine for smallpox, a closely
related virus. (He was unaware of the actual patho-
gens, because viruses had not yet been discovered,
but he had noticed that milkmaids who got cow-
pox rarely got smallpox.) In 1980, the World Health
Organization declared that smallpox had been
eradicated throughout the world. A disease that
had killed or disﬁgured millions of people through-
out recorded history is now considered part of his-
tory (except for the possible use of the virus as a
biological weapon).
In the 19th century in the northern United
States, thousands of children died of diphtheria
every winter. Today there are fewer than 10 cases
of diphtheria each year in the entire country. In
the early 1950s, 50,000 cases of paralytic polio
were reported in the United States each year.
Today, wild-type polio virus is not found in North
America.
Smallpox, diphtheria, and polio are no longer
the terrible diseases they once were, and this is
because of the development and widespread use of
vaccines. When people are protected by a vaccine,
Table 14–2
TYPES OF IMMUNITY
Type
Description
Genetic
Acquired
Passive
NATURAL
ARTIFICIAL
Active
NATURAL
ARTIFICIAL
• Does not involve antibodies; is
programmed in DNA
• Some pathogens affect certain
host species but not others
• Does involve antibodies
• Antibodies from another source
• Placental transmission of antibodies
from mother to fetus
• Transmission of antibodies in
breast milk
• Injection of preformed antibodies
(gamma globulins or immune
globulins) after presumed exposure
• Production of one’s own antibodies
• Recovery from a disease, with pro-
duction of antibodies and memory
cells
• A vaccine stimulates production of
antibodies and memory cells
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

SUMMARY
The preceding discussions of immunity will give you a
small idea of the complexity of the body’s defense sys-
tem. However, there is still much more to be learned,
especially about the effects of the nervous system and
endocrine system on immunity. For example, it is
known that people under great stress have immune
systems that may not function as they did when stress
was absent.
At present, much research is being done in this
ﬁeld. The goal is not to eliminate all disease, for that
would not be possible. Rather, the aim is to enable
people to live healthier lives by preventing certain
diseases.
338
The Lymphatic System and Immunity
STUDY OUTLINE
Functions of the Lymphatic System
1. To return tissue ﬂuid to the blood to maintain
blood volume (see Fig. 14–1).
2. To protect the body against pathogens and other
foreign material.
Parts of the Lymphatic System
1. Lymph and lymph vessels.
2. Lymphatic tissue: lymph nodes and nodules,
spleen, and thymus; lymphocytes mature and pro-
liferate.
Lymph—the tissue ﬂuid that enters lymph
capillaries
1. Similar to plasma, but more WBCs are present,
and has less protein.
2. Must be returned to the blood to maintain blood
volume and blood pressure.
Lymph Vessels
1. Dead-end lymph capillaries are found in most tis-
sue spaces; collect tissue ﬂuid and proteins (see Fig.
14–2).
2. The structure of larger lymph vessels is like that of
veins; valves prevent the backﬂow of lymph.
3. Lymph is kept moving in lymph vessels by:
• constriction of the lymph vessels
• the skeletal muscle pump
• the respiratory pump
4. Lymph from the lower body and upper left quad-
rant enters the thoracic duct and is returned to the
blood in the left subclavian vein (see Fig. 14–3).
5. Lymph from the upper right quadrant enters the
right lymphatic duct and is returned to the blood in
the right subclavian vein.
Lymph Nodes—encapsulated masses of lym-
phatic tissue
1. Found in groups along the pathways of lymph ves-
sels.
2. As lymph ﬂows through the nodes:
• foreign material is phagocytized by ﬁxed macro-
phages
• lymphocytes are activated and ﬁxed plasma cells
produce antibodies to foreign antigens (see Fig.
14–4)
3. The major paired groups of lymph nodes are the
cervical, axillary, and inguinal groups. These are
at the junctions of the head and extremities with
the trunk; remove pathogens from the lymph from
the extremities before the lymph is returned to the
blood.
Lymph Nodules—small unencapsulated
masses of lymphatic tissue
1. Found beneath the epithelium of all mucous mem-
branes, that is, the tracts that have natural openings
to the environment.
2. Destroy pathogens that penetrate the epithelium of
the respiratory, digestive, urinary, or reproductive
tracts.
3. Tonsils are the lymph nodules of the pharynx;
Peyer’s patches are those of the small intestine.
Spleen—located in the upper left abdominal
quadrant behind the stomach
1. The fetal spleen produces RBCs.
2. Functions after birth:
• contains lymphocytes to be activated and ﬁxed
plasma cells that produce antibodies
• contains fixed macrophages (RE cells) that
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

phagocytize pathogens and old RBCs; bilirubin
is formed and sent to the liver for excretion in
bile
• stores platelets and destroys damaged platelets
Thymus—inferior to the thyroid gland; in
the fetus and infant the thymus is large (see
Fig. 14–5); with age the thymus shrinks
1. Produces T lymphocytes (T cells).
2. Produces thymic hormones that make T cells
immunologically competent, that is, able to recog-
nize foreign antigens and provide immunity.
Immunity—the ability to destroy foreign
antigens and prevent future cases of certain
infectious diseases
1. Antigens are chemical markers that identify cells.
Human cells have “self” antigens—the HLA types.
2. Foreign antigens stimulate antibody production
or other immune responses, and include bacteria,
viruses, fungi, protozoa, and malignant cells.
Innate Immunity (see Fig. 14–6)
1. Is nonspeciﬁc, responses are always the same, does
not create memory, and does not become more
efficient. Consists of barriers, defensive cells, and
chemical defenses.
2. Barriers
• Unbroken stratum corneum and sebum; living
epidermal cells secrete defensins
• Subcutaneous tissue with WBCs
• Mucous membranes and areolar CT with WBCs;
upper respiratory epithelium is ciliated
• HCl in gastric juice
• Lysozyme in saliva and tears
3. Defensive cells
• Phagocytes—macrophages, neutrophils, eosino-
phils; macrophages also activate the lymphocytes
of adaptive immunity
• Langerhans cells and other dendritic cells—acti-
vate lymphocytes
• Natural killer cells—destroy foreign cells by rup-
turing their cell membranes
• Basophils and mast cells—produce histamine and
leukotrienes (inﬂammation)
4. Chemical defenses
• Interferon blocks viral reproduction
• Complement proteins lyse foreign cells, attract
WBCs, and contribute to inﬂammation
• Inﬂammation—the response to any kind of dam-
age; vasodilation and increased capillary perme-
ability bring tissue ﬂuid and WBCs to the area.
Purpose: to contain the damage, eliminate the
cause, and make tissue repair possible.
Signs: redness, heat, swelling, and pain
Adaptive Immunity (see Fig. 14–7)
1. Is very speciﬁc, may involve antibodies, does create
memory, and responses become more efficient.
Consists of cell-mediated and antibody-mediated
immunity; is carried out by T cells, B cells, and
macrophages.
2. T lymphocytes (T cells)—in the embryo are pro-
duced in the thymus and RBM; they require the
hormones of the thymus for maturation; migrate to
the spleen, lymph nodes, and nodules.
3. B lymphocytes (B cells)—in the embryo are pro-
duced in the RBM; migrate to the spleen, lymph
nodes, and nodules.
4. The antigen must ﬁrst be recognized as foreign;
this is accomplished by B cells or by helper T cells
that compare the foreign antigen to “self” antigens
present on macrophages.
5. Helper T cells strongly initiate one or both of the
immune mechanisms: cell-mediated immunity and
antibody-mediated immunity.
Cell-Mediated (cellular) Immunity (see Fig.
14–7)
1. Does not involve antibodies; is effective against
intracellular pathogens, malignant cells, and grafts
of foreign tissue.
2. Helper T cells recognize the foreign antigen, are
antigen speciﬁc, and begin to divide to form differ-
ent groups of T cells.
3. Memory T cells will remember the speciﬁc foreign
antigen.
4. Cytotoxic (killer) T cells chemically destroy for-
eign cells and produce cytokines to attract macro-
phages.
Antibody-Mediated (Humoral) Immunity
(see Fig. 14–7)
1. Does involve antibody production; is effective
against pathogens and foreign cells.
The Lymphatic System and Immunity
339
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

2. B cells and helper T cells recognize the foreign
antigen; the B cells are antigen speciﬁc and begin
to divide.
3. Memory B cells will remember the speciﬁc foreign
antigen.
4. Other B cells become plasma cells that produce
antigen-speciﬁc antibodies.
5. An antigen–antibody complex is formed, which
attracts macrophages (opsonization).
6. Complement ﬁxation is stimulated by antigen–
antibody complexes. The complement proteins
bind to the antigen–antibody complex and lyse cel-
lular antigens or enhance the phagocytosis of non-
cellular antigens.
Antibodies—immune globulins (Ig) or
gamma globulins (see Table 14–1 and
Fig. 14–8)
1. Proteins produced by plasma cells in response to
foreign antigens.
2. Each antibody is speciﬁc for only one foreign anti-
gen.
3. Bond to the foreign antigen to label it for phagocy-
tosis (opsonization).
Antibody Responses and Functions (see Fig.
14–9)
1. On the ﬁrst exposure to a foreign antigen, antibod-
ies are produced slowly and in small amounts, and
the person may develop clinical disease.
2. On the second exposure, the memory cells initiate
rapid production of large amounts of antibodies,
and a second case of the disease may be prevented.
This is the basis for the protection given by vac-
cines, which take the place of the ﬁrst exposure.
3. Antibodies cause agglutination (clumping) of bac-
terial cells; clumped cells are easier for macro-
phages to phagocytize (see Fig. 14–8).
4. Antibodies neutralize viruses by bonding to them
and preventing their entry into cells.
5. Antibodies neutralize bacterial toxins by bonding
to them and changing their shape.
Types of Immunity (see Table 14–2)
340
The Lymphatic System and Immunity
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Explain the relationships among plasma, tissue
ﬂuid, and lymph, in terms of movement of water
throughout the body. (p. 322)
2. Describe the system of lymph vessels. Explain how
lymph is kept moving in these vessels. Into which
veins is lymph emptied? (p. 322)
3. State the locations of the major groups of lymph
nodes, and explain their functions. (pp. 322–323)
4. State the locations of lymph nodules, and explain
their functions. (pp. 324)
5. Describe the location of the spleen and explain its
functions. If the spleen is removed, what organs
will compensate for its functions? (p. 324)
6. Explain the function of the thymus, and state when
(age). this function is most important. (pp. 324,
326)
7. Name the different kinds of foreign antigens to
which the immune system responds, and state three
general differences between innate immunity and
adaptive immunity. (p. 327)
8. Innate immunity includes barriers, defensive
cells, and chemicals; give two examples of each.
(p. 328)
9. Explain how a foreign antigen is recognized as
foreign. Which mechanism of adaptive immunity
involves antibody production? Explain what
opsonization means. (pp. 330, 333)
10. State the functions of helper T cells, cytotoxic
T cells, and memory T cells. Plasma cells
differentiate from which type of lymphocyte?
State the function of plasma cells. What other
type of cell comes from B lymphocytes? (pp. 330,
332)
11. What is the stimulus for complement ﬁxation?
How does this process destroy cellular antigens
and non-cellular antigens? (pp. 334)
12. Explain the antibody reactions of agglutination
and neutralization. (p. 334)
13. Explain how a vaccine provides protective immu-
nity in terms of ﬁrst and second exposures to a
pathogen. (p. 334)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

14. Explain the difference between the following: (pp.
336–337)
a. Genetic immunity and acquired immunity
b. Passive acquired immunity and active acquired
immunity
c. Natural and artiﬁcial passive acquired immunity
d. Natural and artiﬁcial active acquired immunity
The Lymphatic System and Immunity
341
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
1. Bubonic plague, also called black plague, is a seri-
ous disease caused by a bacterium and spread by
ﬂeas from rats or rodents to people. It got its
“black” name from “buboes,” dark swellings found
in the groin or armpit of people with plague.
Explain what buboes are, and why they were usu-
ally found in the groin and armpit.
2. In Rh disease of the newborn, maternal antibodies
enter fetal circulation and destroy the red blood
cells of the fetus. A mother with type O blood has
anti-A and anti-B antibodies, but may have a dozen
type A children without any problem at all. Explain
why. (Look at Table 14–1 and Fig. 14–8.)
3. Most vaccines are given by injection. The oral
polio vaccine (OPV), however, is not; it is given by
mouth. Remembering that the purpose of a vaccine
is to expose the individual to the pathogen, what
does this tell you about the polio viruses (there are
three) and their usual site of infection?
4. Everyone should have a tetanus booster shot every
10 years. That is what we often call a “tetanus
shot.” Someone who sustains a soil-contaminated
injury should also receive a tetanus booster (if none
in the past 10 years). But someone who has symp-
toms of tetanus should get TIG, tetanus immune
globulin. Explain the difference, and why TIG is so
important.
5. People with AIDS are susceptible to many other
diseases. Which of these would be least likely:
pneumonia, rheumatoid arthritis, yeast infection of
the mouth, or protozoan infection of the intes-
tines? Explain your answer.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

342
CHAPTER 15
Chapter Outline
Divisions of the Respiratory System
Nose and Nasal Cavities
Pharynx
Larynx
Trachea and Bronchial Tree
Lungs and Pleural Membranes
Alveoli
Mechanism of Breathing
Inhalation
Exhalation
Pulmonary Volumes
Exchange of Gases
Diffusion of Gases—Partial Pressures
Transport of Gases in the Blood
Regulation of Respiration
Nervous Regulation
Chemical Regulation
Respiration and Acid–Base Balance
Respiratory Acidosis and Alkalosis
Respiratory Compensation
Aging and the Respiratory System
BOX 15–1
ASTHMA
BOX 15–2
HYALINE MEMBRANE DISEASE
BOX 15–3
PNEUMOTHORAX
BOX 15–4
EMPHYSEMA
BOX 15–5
THE HEIMLICH MANEUVER
BOX 15–6
PULMONARY EDEMA
BOX 15–7
PNEUMONIA
BOX 15–8
CARBON MONOXIDE
Student Objectives
• State the general function of the respiratory sys-
tem.
• Describe the structure and functions of the nasal
cavities and pharynx.
• Describe the structure of the larynx and explain
the speaking mechanism.
• Describe the structure and functions of the trachea
and bronchial tree.
• State the locations of the pleural membranes, and
explain the functions of serous ﬂuid.
• Describe the structure of the alveoli and pul-
monary capillaries, and explain the importance of
surfactant.
• Name and describe the important air pressures
involved in breathing.
• Describe normal inhalation and exhalation and
forced exhalation.
• Name the pulmonary volumes and deﬁne each.
• Explain the diffusion of gases in external respira-
tion and internal respiration.
• Describe how oxygen and carbon dioxide are
transported in the blood.
• Explain the nervous and chemical mechanisms
that regulate respiration.
• Explain how respiration affects the pH of body
ﬂuids.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Respiratory System
343
New Terminology
Alveoli (al-VEE-oh-lye)
Bronchial tree (BRONG-kee-uhl TREE)
Epiglottis (ep-i-GLAH-tis)
Glottis (GLAH-tis)
Intrapleural pressure (IN-trah-PLOOR-uhl PRES-
shur)
Intrapulmonic pressure (IN-trah-pull-MAHN-ik
PRES-shur)
Larynx (LA-rinks)
Partial pressure (PAR-shul PRES-shur)
Phrenic nerves (FREN-ik NURVZ)
Pulmonary surfactant (PULL-muh-ner-ee sir-FAK-
tent)
Residual air (ree-ZID-yoo-al AYRE)
Respiratory acidosis (RES-pi-rah-TOR-ee ass-i-
DOH-sis)
Respiratory alkalosis (RES-pi-rah-TOR-ee al-kah-
LOH-sis)
Soft palate (SAWFT PAL-uht)
Tidal volume (TIGH-duhl VAHL-yoom)
Ventilation (VEN-ti-LAY-shun)
Vital capacity (VY-tuhl kuh-PASS-i-tee)
Related Clinical Terminology
Cyanosis (SIGH-uh-NOH-sis)
Dyspnea (DISP-nee-ah)
Emphysema (EM-ﬁ-SEE-mah)
Heimlich maneuver (HIGHM-lik ma-NEW-ver)
Hyaline membrane disease (HIGH-e-lin MEM-
brain dis-EEZ)
Pneumonia (new-MOH-nee-ah)
Pneumothorax (NEW-moh-THAW-raks)
Pulmonary edema (PULL-muh-ner-ee
uh-DEE-muh).
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Sometimes a person will describe a habit as being
“as natural as breathing.” Indeed, what could be more
natural? We rarely think about breathing, and it isn’t
something we look forward to, as we might look for-
ward to a good dinner. We just breathe, usually at the
rate of 12 to 20 times per minute, and faster when
necessary (such as during exercise). You may have
heard of trained singers “learning how to breathe,”
but they are really learning how to make their breath-
ing more efficient.
Most of the respiratory system is concerned with
what we think of as breathing: moving air into and out
of the lungs. The lungs are the site of the exchanges of
oxygen and carbon dioxide between the air and the
blood. Both of these exchanges are important. All
of our cells must obtain oxygen to carry out cell respi-
ration to produce ATP. Just as crucial is the elimina-
tion of the CO2 produced as a waste product of cell
respiration, and, as you already know, the proper func-
tioning of the circulatory system is essential for the
transport of these gases in the blood.
DIVISIONS OF THE
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
The respiratory system may be divided into the upper
respiratory tract and the lower respiratory tract. The
upper respiratory tract consists of the parts outside
the chest cavity: the air passages of the nose, nasal cav-
ities, pharynx, larynx, and upper trachea. The lower
respiratory tract consists of the parts found within
the chest cavity: the lower trachea and the lungs them-
selves, which include the bronchial tubes and alveoli.
Also part of the respiratory system are the pleural
membranes and the respiratory muscles that form the
chest cavity: the diaphragm and intercostal muscles.
Have you recognized some familiar organs and
structures thus far? There will be more, because this
chapter includes material from all of the previous
chapters. Even though we are discussing the body
system by system, the respiratory system is an excel-
lent example of the interdependent functioning of all
the body systems.
NOSE AND NASAL CAVITIES
Air enters and leaves the respiratory system through
the nose, which is made of bone and cartilage covered
with skin. Just inside the nostrils are hairs, which help
block the entry of dust.
The two nasal cavities are within the skull, sepa-
rated by the nasal septum, which is a bony plate made
of the ethmoid bone and vomer. The nasal mucosa
(lining) is ciliated epithelium, with goblet cells that
produce mucus. Three shelf-like or scroll-like bones
called conchae project from the lateral wall of each
nasal cavity (Figs. 15–1 and 6–6). Just as shelves in a
cabinet provide more ﬂat space for storage, the con-
chae increase the surface area of the nasal mucosa. As
air passes through the nasal cavities it is warmed and
humidiﬁed, so that air that reaches the lungs is warm
and moist. Bacteria and particles of air pollution are
trapped on the mucus; the cilia continuously sweep
the mucus toward the pharynx. Most of this mucus is
eventually swallowed, and most bacteria present will
be destroyed by the hydrochloric acid in the gastric
juice.
In the upper nasal cavities are the olfactory recep-
tors, which detect vaporized chemicals that have been
inhaled. The olfactory nerves pass through the eth-
moid bone to the brain.
You may also recall our earlier discussion of the
paranasal sinuses, air cavities in the maxillae, frontal,
sphenoid, and ethmoid bones (see Figs. 15–1 and 6–9).
These sinuses are lined with ciliated epithelium, and
the mucus produced drains into the nasal cavities. The
functions of the paranasal sinuses are to lighten the
skull and provide resonance (more vibrating air) for
the voice.
PHARYNX
The pharynx is a muscular tube posterior to the nasal
and oral cavities and anterior to the cervical vertebrae.
For descriptive purposes, the pharynx may be divided
into three parts: the nasopharynx, oropharynx, and
laryngopharynx (see Fig. 15–1).
The uppermost portion is the nasopharynx, which
is behind the nasal cavities. The soft palate is elevated
during swallowing to block the nasopharynx and pre-
vent food or saliva from going up rather than down.
The uvula is the part of the soft palate you can see at
the back of the throat. On the posterior wall of the
nasopharynx is the adenoid or pharyngeal tonsil, a
lymph nodule that contains macrophages. Opening
into the nasopharynx are the two eustachian tubes,
which extend to the middle ear cavities. The purpose
344
The Respiratory System
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

of the eustachian tubes is to permit air to enter or
leave the middle ears, allowing the eardrums to vibrate
properly.
The nasopharynx is a passageway for air only, but
the remainder of the pharynx serves as both an air and
food passageway, although not for both at the same
time. The oropharynx is behind the mouth; its
mucosa is stratiﬁed squamous epithelium, continuous
with that of the oral cavity. On its lateral walls are the
palatine tonsils, also lymph nodules. Together with
The Respiratory System
345
Frontal sinus
Ethmoid bone
Olfactory receptors
Conchae
Superior
Middle
Inferior
Nostril
Hard
palate
Maxilla
Palatine
  bone
Sphenoid sinus
Opening of
eustachian tube
Pharyngeal tonsil
Nasopharynx
Soft palate
Uvula
Palatine tonsil
Oropharynx
Lingual tonsil
Epiglottis
Laryngopharynx
Esophagus
Hyoid bone
Larynx
Thyroid
cartilage
Cricoid
cartilage
Trachea
Figure 15–1.
Midsagittal section of the head and neck showing the structures of the
upper respiratory tract.
QUESTION: Describe the shape of the conchae by using a familiar object. What is the func-
tion of the conchae?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

the adenoid and the lingual tonsils on the base of the
tongue, they form a ring of lymphatic tissue around
the pharynx to destroy pathogens that penetrate the
mucosa.
The laryngopharynx is the most inferior portion
of the pharynx. It opens anteriorly into the larynx and
posteriorly into the esophagus. Contraction of the
muscular wall of the oropharynx and laryngopharynx
is part of the swallowing reﬂex.
LARYNX
The larynx is often called the voice box, a name that
indicates one of its functions, which is speaking. The
other function of the larynx is to be an air passageway
between the pharynx and the trachea. Air passages
must be kept open at all times, and so the larynx is
made of nine pieces of cartilage connected by liga-
ments. Cartilage is a ﬁrm yet ﬂexible tissue that pre-
vents collapse of the larynx. In comparison, the
esophagus is a collapsed tube except when food is pass-
ing through it.
The largest cartilage of the larynx is the thyroid
cartilage (Fig. 15–2), which you can feel on the ante-
rior surface of your neck. The epiglottis is the upper-
most cartilage. During swallowing, the larynx is
elevated, and the epiglottis closes over the top, rather
like a trap door or hinged lid, to prevent the entry of
saliva or food into the larynx.
The mucosa of the larynx is ciliated epithelium,
except for the vocal cords (stratiﬁed squamous epithe-
lium). The cilia of the mucosa sweep upward to
remove mucus and trapped dust and microorganisms.
The vocal cords (or vocal folds) are on either side
of the glottis, the opening between them. During
breathing, the vocal cords are held at the sides of the
glottis, so that air passes freely into and out of the tra-
chea (Fig. 15–3). During speaking, the intrinsic mus-
cles of the larynx pull the vocal cords across the glottis,
and exhaled air vibrates the vocal cords to produce
sounds that can be turned into speech. It is also phys-
ically possible to speak while inhaling, but this is not
what we are used to. The cranial nerves that are motor
nerves to the larynx for speaking are the vagus and
accessory nerves. You may also recall that for most
people, the speech areas are in the left cerebral hemi-
sphere.
TRACHEA AND BRONCHIAL TREE
The trachea is about 4 to 5 inches (10 to 13 cm) long
and extends from the larynx to the primary bronchi.
The wall of the trachea contains 16 to 20 C-shaped
pieces of cartilage, which keep the trachea open. The
gaps in these incomplete cartilage rings are posterior,
to permit the expansion of the esophagus when food is
swallowed. The mucosa of the trachea is ciliated
epithelium with goblet cells. As in the larynx, the cilia
sweep upward toward the pharynx.
The right and left primary bronchi (Fig. 15–4) are
the branches of the trachea that enter the lungs. Their
structure is just like that of the trachea, with C-shaped
cartilages and ciliated epithelium. Within the lungs,
each primary bronchus branches into secondary
bronchi leading to the lobes of each lung (three right,
two left). The further branching of the bronchial tubes
is often called the bronchial tree. Imagine the trachea
as the trunk of an upside-down tree with extensive
branches that become smaller and smaller; these
smaller branches are the bronchioles. No cartilage is
present in the walls of the bronchioles; this becomes
clinically important in asthma (see Box 15–1: Asthma).
The smallest bronchioles terminate in clusters of alve-
oli, the air sacs of the lungs.
LUNGS AND PLEURAL MEMBRANES
The lungs are located on either side of the heart in
the chest cavity and are encircled and protected by the
346
The Respiratory System
Epiglottis
Hyoid
bone
Thyroid
cartilage
Vocal
cords
Cricoid
cartilage
Tracheal
cartilages
A
B
Figure 15–2.
Larynx. (A) Anterior view. (B) Midsagittal
section through the larynx, viewed from the left side.
QUESTION: What is the function of the epiglottis?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

rib cage. The base of each lung rests on the diaphragm
below; the apex (superior tip) is at the level of the clav-
icle. On the medial surface of each lung is an indenta-
tion called the hilus, where the primary bronchus and
the pulmonary artery and veins enter the lung.
The pleural membranes are the serous membranes
of the thoracic cavity. The parietal pleura lines the
chest wall, and the visceral pleura is on the surface of
the lungs. Between the pleural membranes is serous
ﬂuid, which prevents friction and keeps the two mem-
branes together during breathing.
Alveoli
The functional units of the lungs are the air sacs called
alveoli. The ﬂat alveolar type I cells that form most of
the alveolar walls are simple squamous epithelium. In
the spaces between clusters of alveoli is elastic con-
nective tissue, which is important for exhalation.
Within the alveoli are macrophages that phagocytize
pathogens or other foreign material that may not have
been swept out by the ciliated epithelium of the
bronchial tree. There are millions of alveoli in each
lung, and their total surface area is estimated to be 700
to 800 square feet (picture a sidewalk two and a half
feet wide that is as long as an American football ﬁeld,
or a rectangle 25 feet by 30 feet). Each alveolus is sur-
rounded by a network of pulmonary capillaries (see
Fig 15–4). Recall that capillaries are also made of sim-
ple squamous epithelium, so there are only two cells
between the air in the alveoli and the blood in the pul-
monary capillaries, which permits efficient diffusion of
gases (Fig. 15–5).
Each alveolus is lined with a thin layer of tissue
ﬂuid, which is essential for the diffusion of gases, be-
cause a gas must dissolve in a liquid in order to enter
or leave a cell (the earthworm principle—an earth-
worm breathes through its moist skin, and will suffo-
cate if its skin dries out). Although this tissue ﬂuid is
necessary, it creates a potential problem in that it
would make the walls of an alveolus stick together
internally. Imagine a plastic bag that is wet inside; its
walls would stick together because of the surface ten-
sion of the water. This is just what would happen in
alveoli, and inﬂation would be very difficult.
This problem is overcome by pulmonary surfac-
tant, a lipoprotein secreted by alveolar type II cells,
also called septal cells. Surfactant mixes with the tissue
ﬂuid within the alveoli and decreases its surface ten-
sion, permitting inﬂation of the alveoli (see Box 15–2:
Hyaline Membrane Disease). Normal inﬂation of the
alveoli in turn permits the exchange of gases, but
before we discuss this process, we will ﬁrst see how air
gets into and out of the lungs.
MECHANISM OF BREATHING
Ventilation is the term for the movement of air to and
from the alveoli. The two aspects of ventilation are
inhalation and exhalation, which are brought about by
The Respiratory System
347
Epiglottis
Vocal cord
A                                                                                                              B
Trachea
Glottis
Figure 15–3.
Vocal cords and glottis, superior view. (A) Position of the vocal cords dur-
ing breathing. (B) Position of the vocal cords during speaking.
QUESTION: What makes the vocal cords vibrate?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

the nervous system and the respiratory muscles. The
respiratory centers are located in the medulla and
pons. Their speciﬁc functions will be covered in a later
section, but it is the medulla that generates impulses
to the respiratory muscles.
These muscles are the diaphragm and the external
and internal intercostal muscles (Fig. 15–6). The
diaphragm is a dome-shaped muscle below the lungs;
when it contracts, the diaphragm ﬂattens and moves
downward. The intercostal muscles are found between
the ribs. The external intercostal muscles pull the
ribs upward and outward, and the internal inter-
costal muscles pull the ribs downward and inward.
Ventilation is the result of the respiratory muscles pro-
ducing changes in the pressure within the alveoli and
bronchial tree.
348
The Respiratory System
Frontal sinuses
Sphenoidal sinuses
Nasal cavity
Nasopharynx
Soft palate
Epiglottis
Larynx and vocal folds
Trachea
Superior lobe
Right lung
Right primary
bronchus
Inferior lobe
Mediastinum
Cardiac notch
Pleural space
Pleural membranes
Inferior lobe
Bronchioles
Superior lobe
Left primary bronchus
Left lung
Venule
Alveolus
Alveolar duct
Arteriole
Pulmonary capillaries
B
A
Middle lobe
Diaphragm
Figure 15–4.
Respiratory system. (A) Anterior view of the upper and lower respiratory
tracts. (B) Microscopic view of alveoli and pulmonary capillaries. (The colors represent the
vessels, not the oxygen content of the blood within the vessels.)
QUESTION: What are the ﬁrst branches of the trachea, and how do they resemble the tra-
chea in structure?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

With respect to breathing, three types of pressure
are important:
1. Atmospheric pressure—the pressure of the air
around us. At sea level, atmospheric pressure is 760
mmHg. At higher altitudes, of course, atmospheric
pressure is lower.
2. Intrapleural pressure—the pressure within the
potential pleural space between the parietal pleura
and visceral pleura. This is a potential rather than a
real space. A thin layer of serous ﬂuid causes the
two pleural membranes to adhere to one another.
Intrapleural pressure is always slightly below
atmospheric pressure (about 756 mmHg), and is
called a negative pressure. The elastic lungs are
always tending to collapse and pull the visceral
pleura away from the parietal pleura. The serous
ﬂuid, however, prevents actual separation of the
pleural membranes (see Box 15–3: Pneumothorax).
3. Intrapulmonic pressure—the pressure within the
bronchial tree and alveoli. This pressure ﬂuctuates
below and above atmospheric pressure during each
cycle of breathing.
INHALATION
Inhalation, also called inspiration, is a precise
sequence of events that may be described as follows:
Motor impulses from the medulla travel along the
phrenic nerves to the diaphragm and along the inter-
costal nerves to the external intercostal muscles. The
diaphragm contracts, moves downward, and expands
the chest cavity from top to bottom. The external
intercostal muscles pull the ribs up and out, which
expands the chest cavity from side to side and front to
back.
As the chest cavity is expanded, the parietal pleura
expands with it. Intrapleural pressure becomes even
more negative as a sort of suction is created between
the pleural membranes. The adhesion created by the
serous ﬂuid, however, permits the visceral pleura to be
expanded too, and this expands the lungs as well.
As the lungs expand, intrapulmonic pressure falls
below atmospheric pressure, and air enters the nose
and travels through the respiratory passages to the
alveoli. Entry of air continues until intrapulmonic
pressure is equal to atmospheric pressure; this is a nor-
mal inhalation. Of course, inhalation can be continued
beyond normal, that is, a deep breath. This requires a
more forceful contraction of the respiratory muscles
to further expand the lungs, permitting the entry of
more air.
EXHALATION
Exhalation may also be called expiration and begins
when motor impulses from the medulla decrease and
the diaphragm and external intercostal muscles relax.
As the chest cavity becomes smaller, the lungs are
compressed, and their elastic connective tissue, which
was stretched during inhalation, recoils and also com-
The Respiratory System
349
BOX 15–1
ASTHMA
emphysema. When obstructed bronchioles prevent
ventilation of alveoli, the walls of the alveoli begin
to deteriorate and break down, leaving large cavi-
ties that do not provide much surface area for gas
exchange.
One possible way to prevent such serious lung
damage is to prevent asthma attacks with a med-
ication that blocks the release of IgE antibodies. An
allergy is an immune overreaction, and blocking
such a reaction would prevent the damaging effects
of inﬂammation. In the United States the incidence
of asthma is increasing among children; this may be
a result of higher levels of air pollution, though
genetic and immunologic factors may contribute as
well.
Asthma is usually triggered by an infection or aller-
gic reaction that affects the smooth muscle and
glands of the bronchioles. Allergens include foods
and inhaled substances such as dust and pollen.
Wheezing and dyspnea (difficult breathing) charac-
terize an asthma attack, which may range from
mild to fatal.
As part of the allergic response, the smooth mus-
cle of the bronchioles constricts. Because there is no
cartilage present in their walls, the bronchioles may
close completely. The secretion of mucus increases,
perhaps markedly, so the already constricted bron-
chioles may become clogged or completely
obstructed with mucus.
Chronic asthma is a predisposing factor for
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

350
The Respiratory System
Figure 15–5.
(A) Alveolar structure showing type I and type II cells, and alveolar
macrophages. The respiratory membrane: the structures and substances through which
gases must pass as they diffuse from air to blood (oxygen) or from blood to air (CO2).
(B) Sections of human lungs embedded in plastic. On the left is a normal adult lung; on
the right is a smoker’s lung. (Photograph by Dan Kaufman.)
QUESTION: Which cells shown here are part of the respiratory membrane? Which cells are
not, and what are their functions?
Elastin fibers
Macrophage
Type I cell 
Type II
surfactant
cell
Surfactant
and tissue fluid
Alveolar epithelium
Capillary endothelium
Basement membrane
of capillary endothelium
Capillary
Red blood cells
Interstitial
space
Exhalation
Inhalation
Respiration
Oxygen (O )
Carbon dioxide
(CO )
2
2
Primary
bronchi
B
A
Alveolus
Respiratory
membrane
presses the alveoli. As intrapulmonic pressure rises
above atmospheric pressure, air is forced out of the
lungs until the two pressures are again equal.
Notice that inhalation is an active process that
requires muscle contraction, but normal exhalation is
a passive process, depending to a great extent on the
normal elasticity of healthy lungs. In other words,
under normal circumstances we must expend energy
to inhale but not to exhale (see Box 15–4: Emphy-
sema).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

We can, however, go beyond a normal exhalation
and expel more air, such as when talking, singing, or
blowing up a balloon. Such a forced exhalation is an
active process that requires contraction of other mus-
cles. Contraction of the internal intercostal muscles
pulls the ribs down and in and squeezes even more air
out of the lungs. Contraction of abdominal muscles,
such as the rectus abdominis, compresses the abdomi-
nal organs and pushes the diaphragm upward, which
also forces more air out of the lungs (see Box 15–5:
The Heimlich Maneuver).
PULMONARY VOLUMES
The capacity of the lungs varies with the size and age
of the person. Taller people have larger lungs than do
shorter people. Also, as we get older our lung capacity
diminishes as lungs lose their elasticity and the respi-
ratory muscles become less efficient. For the following
pulmonary volumes, the values given are those for
healthy young adults. These are also shown in Fig.
15–7.
The Respiratory System
351
External
intercostal
muscles
Sternum
Diaphragm
Ribs
Lung
Trachea
Ribs
Inhalation
Exhalation
A
B
Figure 15–6.
Actions of the res-
piratory muscles. (A) Inhalation:
diaphragm contracts downward;
external intercostal muscles pull rib
cage upward and outward; lungs
are expanded. (B) Normal exhala-
tion: diaphragm relaxes upward;
rib cage falls down and in as exter-
nal intercostal muscles relax; lungs
are compressed.
QUESTION: Why is a normal exha-
lation a passive process?
BOX 15–2
HYALINE MEMBRANE DISEASE
lapse after each breath rather than remain inﬂated.
Each breath, therefore, is difficult, and the newborn
must expend a great deal of energy just to breathe.
Premature infants may require respiratory assis-
tance until their lungs are mature enough to pro-
duce surfactant. Use of a synthetic surfactant has
signiﬁcantly helped some infants, and because they
can breathe more normally, their dependence on
respirators is minimized. Still undergoing evaluation
are the effects of the long-term use of this surfac-
tant in the most premature babies, who may
require it for much longer periods of time.
Hyaline membrane disease is also called respira-
tory distress syndrome (RDS) of the newborn, and
most often affects premature infants whose lungs
have not yet produced sufficient quantities of pul-
monary surfactant.
The ﬁrst few breaths of a newborn inﬂate most of
the previously collapsed lungs, and the presence of
surfactant permits the alveoli to remain open. The
following breaths become much easier, and normal
breathing is established.
Without surfactant, the surface tension of the tis-
sue ﬂuid lining the alveoli causes the air sacs to col-
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

BOX 15–3
PNEUMOTHORAX
trauma, may result from rupture of weakened alve-
oli on the lung surface. Pulmonary diseases such as
emphysema may weaken alveoli.
Puncture wounds of the chest wall also allow air
into the pleural space, with resulting collapse of a
lung. In severe cases, large amounts of air push the
heart, great vessels, trachea, and esophagus toward
the opposite side (mediastinal shift), putting pres-
sure on the other lung and making breathing diffi-
cult. This is called tension pneumothorax, and
requires rapid medical intervention to remove the
trapped air.
Pneumothorax is the presence of air in the pleural
space, which causes collapse of the lung on that
side. Recall that the pleural space is only a potential
space because the serous ﬂuid keeps the pleural
membranes adhering to one another, and the
intrapleural pressure is always slightly below atmos-
pheric pressure. Should air at atmospheric pressure
enter the pleural cavity, the suddenly higher pres-
sure outside the lung will contribute to its collapse
(the other factor is the normal elasticity of the
lungs).
A spontaneous pneumothorax, without apparent
BOX 15–4
EMPHYSEMA
In progressive emphysema, damaged lung tissue
is replaced by ﬁbrous connective tissue (scar tissue),
which further limits the diffusion of gases. Blood
oxygen level decreases, and blood carbon dioxide
level increases. Accumulating carbon dioxide
decreases the pH of body ﬂuids; this is a respiratory
acidosis.
One of the most characteristic signs of emphy-
sema is that the affected person must make an
effort to exhale. The loss of lung elasticity makes
normal exhalation an active process, rather than the
passive process it usually is. The person must
expend energy to exhale in order to make room in
the lungs for inhaled air. This extra “work” required
for exhalation may be exhausting for the person
and contribute to the debilitating nature of emphy-
sema.
Emphysema, a form of chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease (COPD), is a degenerative disease
in which the alveoli lose their elasticity and cannot
recoil. Perhaps the most common (and avoidable)
cause is cigarette smoking; other causes are long-
term exposure to severe air pollution or industrial
dusts, or chronic asthma. Inhaled irritants damage
the alveolar walls and cause deterioration of the
elastic connective tissue surrounding the alveoli.
Macrophages migrate to the damaged areas and
seem to produce an enzyme that contributes to the
destruction of the protein elastin. This is an instance
of a useful body response (for cleaning up damaged
tissue) becoming damaging when it is excessive. As
the alveoli break down, larger air cavities are cre-
ated that are not efficient in gas exchange (see Box
Fig. 15–A).
Normal Lung
Emphysema
A
B
Box Figure 15–A
(A) Lung tissue with normal alveoli. (B) Lung tissue in emphysema.
352
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

1. Tidal volume—the amount of air involved in one
normal inhalation and exhalation. The average tidal
volume is 500 mL, but many people often have
lower tidal volumes because of shallow breathing.
2. Minute respiratory volume (MRV)—the amount
of air inhaled and exhaled in 1 minute. MRV is cal-
culated by multiplying tidal volume by the number
of respirations per minute (average range: 12 to 20
per minute). If tidal volume is 500 mL and the res-
piratory rate is 12 breaths per minute, the MRV is
6000 mL, or 6 liters of air per minute, which is
average. Shallow breathing usually indicates a
smaller than average tidal volume, and would thus
require more respirations per minute to obtain the
necessary MRV.
3. Inspiratory reserve—the amount of air, beyond
tidal volume, that can be taken in with the deepest
possible inhalation. Normal inspiratory reserve
ranges from 2000 to 3000 mL.
4. Expiratory reserve—the amount of air, beyond
tidal volume, that can be expelled with the most
forceful exhalation. Normal expiratory reserve
ranges from 1000 to 1500 mL.
5. Vital capacity—the sum of tidal volume, inspira-
tory reserve, and expiratory reserve. Stated another
way, vital capacity is the amount of air involved in
the deepest inhalation followed by the most force-
ful exhalation. Average range of vital capacity is
3500 to 5000 mL.
6. Residual air—the amount of air that remains in
the lungs after the most forceful exhalation; the
average range is 1000 to 1500 mL. Residual air is
important to ensure that there is some air in the
lungs at all times, so that exchange of gases is a con-
tinuous process, even between breaths.
Some of the volumes just described can be deter-
mined with instruments called spirometers, which
measure movement of air. Trained singers and musi-
cians who play wind instruments often have vital
capacities much larger than would be expected for
their height and age, because their respiratory muscles
have become more efficient with “practice.” The same
is true for athletes who exercise regularly. A person
with emphysema, however, must “work” to exhale,
and vital capacity and expiratory reserve volume are
often much lower than average.
Another kind of pulmonary volume is alveolar
The Respiratory System
353
BOX 15–5
THE HEIMLICH MANEUVER
The Heimlich maneuver has received much well-
deserved publicity, and indeed it is a life-saving
technique.
If a person is choking on a foreign object (such
as food) lodged in the pharynx or larynx, the air in
the lungs may be utilized to remove the object. The
physiology of this technique is illustrated in the
accompanying ﬁgure.
The person performing the maneuver stands
behind the choking victim and puts both arms
around the victim’s waist. One hand forms a ﬁst
that is placed between the victim’s navel and rib
cage (below the diaphragm), and the other hand
covers the ﬁst. It is important to place hands cor-
rectly, in order to avoid breaking the victim’s ribs.
With both hands, a quick, forceful upward thrust is
made and repeated if necessary. This forces the
diaphragm upward to compress the lungs and force
air out. The forcefully expelled air is often sufficient
to dislodge the foreign object.
Foreign object
Lung
Diaphragm
Box Figure 15–B
The Heimlich maneuver.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

ventilation, which is the amount of air that actually
reaches the alveoli and participates in gas exchange.
An average tidal volume is 500 mL, of which 350 to
400 mL is in the alveoli at the end of an inhalation.
The remaining 100 to 150 mL of air is anatomic dead
space, the air still within the respiratory passages.
Despite the rather grim name, anatomic dead space is
normal; everyone has it.
Physiological dead space is not normal, and is the
volume of non-functioning alveoli that decrease gas
exchange. Causes of increased physiological dead space
include bronchitis, pneumonia, tuberculosis, emphy-
sema, asthma, pulmonary edema, and a collapsed lung.
The compliance of the thoracic wall and the lungs,
that is, their normal expansibility, is necessary for suf-
ﬁcient alveolar ventilation. Thoracic compliance may
be decreased by fractured ribs, scoliosis, pleurisy, or
ascites. Lung compliance will be decreased by any
condition that increases physiologic dead space. Nor-
mal compliance thus promotes sufficient gas exchange
in the alveoli.
EXCHANGE OF GASES
There are two sites of exchange of oxygen and carbon
dioxide: the lungs and the tissues of the body. The
exchange of gases between the air in the alveoli and
the blood in the pulmonary capillaries is called exter-
nal respiration. This term may be a bit confusing at
ﬁrst, because we often think of “external” as being
outside the body. In this case, however, “external”
means the exchange that involves air from the external
environment, though the exchange takes place within
the lungs. Internal respiration is the exchange of
gases between the blood in the systemic capillaries and
the tissue ﬂuid (cells) of the body.
The air we inhale (the earth’s atmosphere) is
approximately 21% oxygen and 0.04% carbon diox-
ide. Although most (78%) of the atmosphere is nitro-
gen, this gas is not physiologically available to us, and
we simply exhale it. This exhaled air also contains
about 16% oxygen and 4.5% carbon dioxide, so it is
apparent that some oxygen is retained within the body
and the carbon dioxide produced by cells is exhaled.
DIFFUSION OF GASES—
PARTIAL PRESSURES
Within the body, a gas will diffuse from an area of
greater concentration to an area of lesser concentra-
tion. The concentration of each gas in a particular site
(alveolar air, pulmonary blood, and so on) is expressed
in a value called partial pressure. The partial pressure
354
The Respiratory System
Figure 15–7.
Pulmonary
volumes. See text for descrip-
tion.
QUESTION: Which volumes
make up vital capacity? Which
volume cannot be measured
with a spirometer?
Liters
6
5
4
3
2.5
2
1
0
Inspiratory
reserve
Expiratory
reserve
Residual volume
Tidal volume
(normal breath)
Total
lung
capacity
Vital
capacity
Time
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

of a gas, measured in mmHg, is the pressure it exerts
within a mixture of gases, whether the mixture is actu-
ally in a gaseous state or is in a liquid such as blood.
The partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide in
the atmosphere and in the sites of exchange in the
body are listed in Table 15–1. The abbreviation for
partial pressure is “P,” which is used, for example, on
hospital lab slips for blood gases and will be used here.
The partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide
at the sites of external respiration (lungs) and internal
respiration (body) are shown in Fig. 15–8. Because
partial pressure reﬂects concentration, a gas will dif-
fuse from an area of higher partial pressure to an area
of lower partial pressure.
The air in the alveoli has a high PO2 and a low PCO2.
The blood in the pulmonary capillaries, which has just
come from the body, has a low PO2 and a high PCO2.
Therefore, in external respiration, oxygen diffuses
from the air in the alveoli to the blood, and carbon
dioxide diffuses from the blood to the air in the alveoli.
The blood that returns to the heart now has a high PO2
and a low PCO2 and is pumped by the left ventricle into
systemic circulation.
The arterial blood that reaches systemic capillaries
has a high PO2 and a low PCO2. The body cells and tis-
sue ﬂuid have a low PO2 and a high PCO2 because cells
continuously use oxygen in cell respiration (energy
production) and produce carbon dioxide in this
process. Therefore, in internal respiration, oxygen dif-
fuses from the blood to tissue ﬂuid (cells), and carbon
dioxide diffuses from tissue ﬂuid to the blood. The
blood that enters systemic veins to return to the heart
now has a low PO2 and a high PCO2 and is pumped by
the right ventricle to the lungs to participate in exter-
nal respiration.
Disorders of gas exchange often involve the lungs,
that is, external respiration (see Box 15–6: Pulmonary
Edema and Box 15–7: Pneumonia).
TRANSPORT OF GASES
IN THE BLOOD
Although some oxygen is dissolved in blood plasma
and does create the PO2 values, it is only about 1.5%
of the total oxygen transported, not enough to sustain
life. As you already know, most oxygen is carried in the
blood bonded to the hemoglobin in red blood cells
(RBCs). The mineral iron is part of hemoglobin and
gives this protein its oxygen-carrying ability.
The Respiratory System
355
Table 15–1 PARTIAL PRESSURES AND OXYGEN SATURATION
Site
PO2 (mmHg)
PCO2 (mmHg)
Hemoglobin Saturation (SaO2)
Atmosphere
160
0.15
—
Alveolar air
104
40
—
Systemic venous blood  
40
45
70–75%
(to pulmonary arteries)
Systemic arterial blood 
100
40
95–100%
(from pulmonary veins)
Tissue ﬂuid
40
50
—
Partial pressure is calculated as follows:
% of the gas in the mixture  total pressure  PGAS
Example: O2 in the atmosphere
21%  760 mmHg  160 mmHg (PO2)
Example: CO2 in the atmosphere
0.04%  760 mmHg  0.15 mmHg (PCO2)
Notice that alveolar partial pressures are not exactly those of the atmosphere. Alveolar air contains signiﬁcant amounts of
water vapor and the CO2 diffusing in from the blood. Oxygen also diffuses readily from the alveoli into the pulmonary capillaries.
Therefore, alveolar PO2 is lower than atmospheric PO2, and alveolar PCO2 is signiﬁcantly higher than atmospheric PCO2.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The oxygen–hemoglobin bond is formed in the
lungs where PO2 is high. This bond, however, is rela-
tively unstable, and when blood passes through tissues
with a low PO2, the bond breaks, and oxygen is
released to the tissues. The lower the oxygen concen-
tration in a tissue, the more oxygen the hemoglobin
will release. This ensures that active tissues, such as
exercising muscles, receive as much oxygen as possible
to continue cell respiration. Other factors that increase
the release of oxygen from hemoglobin are a high
PCO2 (actually a lower pH) and a high temperature,
both of which are also characteristic of active tissues.
Another measure of blood oxygen is the percent of
oxygen saturation of hemoglobin (SaO2). The higher
the PO2, the higher the SaO2, and as PO2 decreases, so
does SaO2, though not as rapidly. A PO2 of 100 is an
SaO2 of about 97% , as is found in systemic arteries. A
PO2 of 40, as is found in systemic veins, is an SaO2 of
about 75%. Notice that venous blood still has quite a
bit of oxygen. Had this blood ﬂowed through a very
active tissue, more of its oxygen would have been
released from hemoglobin. This venous reserve of
oxygen provides active tissues with the oxygen they
need (see also Box 15–8: Carbon Monoxide).
356
The Respiratory System
Pulmonary
capillaries
Alveoli
Po  40
2
Po  105
2
Po  40
2
Po  40
2
Po  100
2
Po  100
2
Pco  40
2
Pco  45
2
Pco  45
2
Pco  50
2
Pco  40
2
Pco  40
2
Pulmonary
artery
External
respiration
Pulmonary
veins
Aorta
Arteries
Veins
Venae
cavae
Right
heart
Left
heart
CO2
to
alveoli
CO2
to blood
O  to
2
blood
O  to tissue
2
Internal
respiration
Systemic
capillaries
Figure 15–8.
External respi-
ration in the lungs and internal
respiration in the body. The
partial pressures of oxygen and
carbon dioxide are shown at
each site.
QUESTION: In external respi-
ration, describe the movement
of oxygen. In internal respira-
tion, describe the movement
of carbon dioxide.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Respiratory System
357
BOX 15–8
CARBON MONOXIDE
light skin as cyanosis, a bluish cast to the skin, lips,
and nail beds. This is because hemoglobin is dark
red unless something (usually oxygen) is bonded to
it. When hemoglobin bonds to CO, however, it
becomes a bright, cherry red. This color may be
seen in light skin and may be very misleading; the
person with CO poisoning is in a severely hypoxic
state.
Although CO is found in cigarette smoke, it is
present in such minute quantities that it is not
lethal. Heavy smokers, however, may be in a mild
but chronic hypoxic state because much of their
hemoglobin is ﬁrmly bonded to CO. As a compen-
sation, RBC production may increase, and a heavy
smoker may have a hematocrit over 50%.
Carbon monoxide (CO) is a colorless, odorless gas
that is produced during the combustion of fuels
such as gasoline, coal, oil, and wood. As you know,
CO is a poison that may cause death if inhaled in
more than very small quantities or for more than a
short period of time.
The reason CO is so toxic is that it forms a very
strong and stable bond with the hemoglobin in
RBCs (carboxyhemoglobin). Hemoglobin with CO
bonded to it cannot bond to and transport oxygen.
The effect of CO, therefore, is to drastically decrease
the amount of oxygen carried in the blood. As little
as 0.1% CO in inhaled air can saturate half the total
hemoglobin with CO.
Lack of oxygen is often apparent in people with
BOX 15–6
PULMONARY EDEMA
capillaries. As blood pressure increases in the pul-
monary capillaries, ﬁltration creates tissue ﬂuid that
collects in the alveoli.
Fluid-ﬁlled alveoli are no longer sites of efficient
gas exchange, and the resulting hypoxia leads to
the symptoms of dyspnea and increased respira-
tory rate. The most effective treatment is that which
restores the pumping ability of the heart to normal.
Pulmonary edema is the accumulation of ﬂuid in
the alveoli. This is often a consequence of conges-
tive heart failure in which the left side of the heart
(or the entire heart) is not pumping efficiently. If the
left ventricle does not pump strongly, the chamber
does not empty as it should and cannot receive all
the blood ﬂowing in from the left atrium. Blood
ﬂow, therefore, is “congested,” and blood backs up
in the pulmonary veins and then in the pulmonary
BOX 15–7
PNEUMONIA
that accumulates in the air sacs. Many neutrophils
migrate to the site of infection and attempt to
phagocytize the bacteria. The alveoli become ﬁlled
with ﬂuid, bacteria, and neutrophils (this is called
consolidation); this decreases the exchange of
gases.
Pneumovax is a vaccine for this type of pneumo-
nia. It contains only the capsules of S. pneumoniae
and cannot cause the disease. The vaccine is rec-
ommended for people over the age of 60 years,
and for those with chronic pulmonary disorders or
any debilitating disease. It has also been approved
for administration to infants.
Pneumonia is a bacterial infection of the lungs.
Although many bacteria can cause pneumonia,
the most common one is probably Streptococcus
pneumoniae. This species is estimated to cause at
least 500,000 cases of pneumonia every year in the
United States, with 50,000 deaths.
S. pneumoniae is a transient inhabitant of the
upper respiratory tract, but in otherwise healthy
people, the ciliated epithelium and the immune sys-
tem prevent infection. Most cases of pneumonia
occur in elderly people following a primary infec-
tion such as inﬂuenza.
When the bacteria are able to establish them-
selves in the alveoli, the alveolar cells secrete ﬂuid
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Carbon dioxide transport is a little more compli-
cated. Some carbon dioxide is dissolved in the plasma,
and some is carried by hemoglobin (carbaminohemo-
globin), but these account for only about 20% of total
CO2 transport. Most carbon dioxide is carried in the
plasma in the form of bicarbonate ions (HCO3
–). Let
us look at the reactions that transform CO2 into a
bicarbonate ion.
When carbon dioxide enters the blood, most dif-
fuses into red blood cells, which contain the enzyme
carbonic anhydrase. This enzyme (which contains
zinc) catalyzes the reaction of carbon dioxide and
water to form carbonic acid:
CO2 + H2O →H2CO3
The carbonic acid then dissociates:
H2CO3 →H+ + HCO3
–
The bicarbonate ions diffuse out of the red blood
cells into the plasma, leaving the hydrogen ions (H+)
in the red blood cells. The many H+ ions would tend
to make the red blood cells too acidic, but hemoglobin
acts as a buffer to prevent acidosis. To maintain an
ionic equilibrium, chloride ions (Cl–) from the plasma
enter the red blood cells; this is called the chloride
shift. Where is the CO2? It is in the plasma as part of
HCO3
– ions. When the blood reaches the lungs, an
area of lower PCO2, these reactions are reversed, and
CO2 is re-formed and diffuses into the alveoli to be
exhaled.
REGULATION OF RESPIRATION
Two types of mechanisms regulate breathing: nervous
mechanisms and chemical mechanisms. Because any
changes in the rate or depth of breathing are ulti-
mately brought about by nerve impulses, we will con-
sider nervous mechanisms ﬁrst.
NERVOUS REGULATION
The respiratory centers are located in the medulla
and pons, which are parts of the brain stem (see Fig.
15–9). Within the medulla are the inspiration center
and expiration center.
The inspiration center automatically generates
impulses in rhythmic spurts. These impulses travel
along nerves to the respiratory muscles to stimulate
their contraction. The result is inhalation. As the
lungs inﬂate, baroreceptors in lung tissue detect this
stretching and generate sensory impulses to the
medulla; these impulses begin to depress the inspira-
tion center. This is called the Hering-Breuer inﬂation
reﬂex, which also helps prevent overinﬂation of the
lungs.
As the inspiration center is depressed, the result is
a decrease in impulses to the respiratory muscles,
which relax to bring about exhalation. Then the inspi-
ration center becomes active again to begin another
cycle of breathing. When there is a need for more
forceful exhalations, such as during exercise, the inspi-
ration center activates the expiration center, which
generates impulses to the internal intercostal and
abdominal muscles.
The two respiratory centers in the pons work with
the inspiration center to produce a normal rhythm of
breathing. The apneustic center prolongs inhalation,
and is then interrupted by impulses from the pneu-
motaxic center, which contributes to exhalation. In
normal breathing, inhalation lasts 1 to 2 seconds, fol-
lowed by a slightly longer (2 to 3 seconds) exhalation,
producing the normal respiratory rate range of 12 to
20 breaths per minute.
What has just been described is normal breathing,
but variations are possible and quite common. Emo-
tions often affect respiration; a sudden fright may bring
about a gasp or a scream, and anger usually increases
the respiratory rate. In these situations, impulses from
the hypothalamus modify the output from the
medulla. The cerebral cortex enables us to voluntar-
ily change our breathing rate or rhythm to talk, sing,
breathe faster or slower, or even to stop breathing for
1 or 2 minutes. Such changes cannot be continued
indeﬁnitely, however, and the medulla will eventually
resume control.
Coughing and sneezing are reﬂexes that remove
irritants from the respiratory passages; the medulla
contains the centers for both of these reﬂexes. Sneez-
ing is stimulated by an irritation of the nasal mucosa,
and coughing is stimulated by irritation of the mucosa
of the pharynx, larynx, or trachea. The reﬂex action is
essentially the same for both: An inhalation is followed
by exhalation beginning with the glottis closed to
build up pressure. Then the glottis opens suddenly,
and the exhalation is explosive. A cough directs the
exhalation out the mouth, while a sneeze directs the
exhalation out the nose.
358
The Respiratory System
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Hiccups, also a reﬂex, are spasms of the diaphragm.
The result is a quick inhalation that is stopped when
the glottis snaps shut, causing the “hic” sound. The
stimulus may be irritation of the phrenic nerves 
or nerves of the stomach. Excessive alcohol is an irri-
tant that can cause hiccups. Some causes are simply
unknown.
Yet another respiratory reﬂex is yawning. Most of
us yawn when we are tired, but the stimulus for and
purpose of yawning are not known with certainty.
There are several possibilities, such as lack of oxygen
or accumulation of carbon dioxide, but we really do
not know. Nor do we know why yawning is conta-
gious, but seeing someone yawn is almost sure to elicit
a yawn of one’s own. You may even have yawned while
reading this paragraph about yawning.
CHEMICAL REGULATION
Chemical regulation refers to the effect on breathing
of blood pH and blood levels of oxygen and carbon
dioxide. This is shown in Fig. 15–10. Chemorecep-
The Respiratory System
359
Hypothalamus
Pneumotaxic
center
Apneustic
center
Stimulatory
Inhibitory
Cerebral cortex
External intercostal muscles 
Baroreceptors in
lungs
Diaphragm
Inspiration center
Expiration center
Medulla
Pons
A
B
C
Figure 15–9.
Nervous regulation of respiration. (A) Midsagittal section of brain.
(B) Respiratory centers in medulla and pons. (C) Respiratory muscles. See text for descrip-
tion.
QUESTION: Which center directly stimulates inhalation? How can you tell from this
picture?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

tors that detect changes in blood gases and pH are
located in the carotid and aortic bodies and in the
medulla itself.
A decrease in the blood level of oxygen (hypoxia) is
detected by the chemoreceptors in the carotid and
aortic bodies. The sensory impulses generated by
these receptors travel along the glossopharyngeal and
vagus nerves to the medulla, which responds by
increasing respiratory rate or depth (or both). This
response will bring more air into the lungs so that
more oxygen can diffuse into the blood to correct the
hypoxic state.
Carbon dioxide becomes a problem when it is pres-
ent in excess in the blood, because excess CO2 (hyper-
capnia) lowers the pH when it reacts with water to
form carbonic acid (a source of H+ ions). That is,
excess CO2 makes the blood or other body ﬂuids less
alkaline (or more acidic). The medulla contains
chemoreceptors that are very sensitive to changes
in pH, especially decreases. If accumulating CO2 low-
ers blood pH, the medulla responds by increasing res-
piration. This is not for the purpose of inhaling, but
rather to exhale more CO2 to raise the pH back to
normal.
Of the two respiratory gases, which is the more
important as a regulator of respiration? Our guess
might be oxygen, because it is essential for energy pro-
duction in cell respiration. However, the respiratory
system can maintain a normal blood level of oxygen
even if breathing decreases to half the normal rate or
stops for a few moments. Recall that exhaled air is
16% oxygen. This oxygen did not enter the blood but
was available to do so if needed. Also, the residual air
in the lungs supplies oxygen to the blood even if
breathing rate slows.
Therefore, carbon dioxide must be the major regu-
lator of respiration, and the reason is that carbon diox-
ide affects the pH of the blood. As was just mentioned,
an excess of CO2 causes the blood pH to decrease, a
process that must not be allowed to continue.
Therefore, any increase in the blood CO2 level is
quickly compensated for by increased breathing to
exhale more CO2. If, for example, you hold your
breath, what is it that makes you breathe again? Have
you run out of oxygen? Probably not, for the reasons
mentioned. What has happened is that accumulating
CO2 has lowered blood pH enough to stimulate the
medulla to start the breathing cycle again.
In some situations, oxygen does become the major
regulator of respiration. People with severe, chronic
pulmonary diseases such as emphysema have de-
creased exchange of both oxygen and carbon dioxide
in the lungs. The decrease in pH caused by accumu-
lating CO2 is corrected by the kidneys, but the blood
oxygen level keeps decreasing. Eventually, the oxygen
level may fall so low that it does provide a very strong
stimulus to increase the rate and depth of respiration.
RESPIRATION AND
ACID–BASE BALANCE
As you have just seen, respiration affects the pH of
body ﬂuids because it regulates the amount of carbon
360
The Respiratory System
Chemoreceptors
in carotid and
aortic bodies
Chemoreceptors
in medulla
O2
CO2 or
pH
Medulla;
inspiration
center
Increase rate
and depth of
respiration
More O2 available
to enter blood
More CO2 exhaled
pH
Figure 15–10.
Chemical regulation of respiration. See text for description.
QUESTION: The body’s response to two very different changes (less O2 or more CO2)
is the same. Explain why.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

dioxide in these ﬂuids. Remember that CO2 reacts
with water to form carbonic acid (H2CO3), which ion-
izes into H+ ions and HCO3
– ions. The more hydro-
gen ions present in a body ﬂuid, the lower the pH, and
the fewer hydrogen ions present, the higher the pH.
The respiratory system may be the cause of a pH
imbalance, or it may help correct a pH imbalance cre-
ated by some other cause.
RESPIRATORY ACIDOSIS
AND ALKALOSIS
Respiratory acidosis occurs when the rate or effi-
ciency of respiration decreases, permitting carbon
dioxide to accumulate in body ﬂuids. The excess CO2
results in the formation of more H+ ions, which
decrease the pH. Holding one’s breath can bring about
a mild respiratory acidosis, which will soon stimulate
the medulla to initiate breathing again. More serious
causes of respiratory acidosis are pulmonary diseases
such as pneumonia and emphysema, or severe asthma.
Each of these impairs gas exchange and allows excess
CO2 to remain in body ﬂuids.
Respiratory alkalosis occurs when the rate of res-
piration increases, and CO2 is very rapidly exhaled.
Less CO2 decreases H+ ion formation, which increases
the pH. Breathing faster for a few minutes can bring
about a mild state of respiratory alkalosis. Babies who
cry for extended periods (crying is a noisy exhalation)
put themselves in this condition. In general, however,
respiratory alkalosis is not a common occurrence.
Severe physical trauma and shock, or certain states
of mental or emotional anxiety, may be accompanied
by hyperventilation and also result in respiratory
alkalosis. In addition, traveling to a higher altitude
(less oxygen in the atmosphere) may cause a tempo-
rary increase in breathing rate before compensation
occurs (increased rate of RBC production—see
Chapter 11).
RESPIRATORY COMPENSATION
If a pH imbalance is caused by something other than a
change in respiration, it is called metabolic acidosis or
alkalosis. In either case, the change in pH stimulates a
change in respiration that may help restore the pH of
body ﬂuids to normal.
Metabolic acidosis may be caused by untreated
diabetes mellitus (ketoacidosis), kidney disease, or
severe diarrhea. In such situations, the H+ ion concen-
tration of body ﬂuids is increased. Respiratory com-
pensation involves an increase in the rate and depth of
respiration to exhale more CO2 to decrease H+ ion
formation, which will raise the pH toward the normal
range.
Metabolic alkalosis is not a common occurrence
but may be caused by ingestion of excessive amounts
of alkaline medications such as those used to relieve
gastric disturbances. Another possible cause is vomit-
ing of stomach contents only. In such situations, the
H+ ion concentration of body ﬂuids is decreased.
Respiratory compensation involves a decrease in res-
piration to retain CO2 in the body to increase H+ ion
formation, which will lower the pH toward the normal
range.
Respiratory compensation for an ongoing meta-
bolic pH imbalance cannot be complete, because there
are limits to the amounts of CO2 that may be exhaled
or retained. At most, respiratory compensation is only
about 75% effective. A complete discussion of acid–
base balance is found in Chapter 19.
AGING AND THE
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Perhaps the most important way to help your respira-
tory system age gracefully is not to smoke. In the
absence of chemical assault, respiratory function does
diminish but usually remains adequate. The respira-
tory muscles, like all skeletal muscles, weaken with
age. Lung tissue loses its elasticity and alveoli are
lost as their walls deteriorate. All of this results in de-
creased ventilation and lung capacity, but the remain-
ing capacity is usually sufficient for ordinary activities.
The cilia of the respiratory mucosa deteriorate with
age, and the alveolar macrophages are not as efficient,
which make elderly people more prone to pneumonia,
a serious pulmonary infection.
Chronic alveolar hypoxia from diseases such as
emphysema or chronic bronchitis may lead to pul-
monary hypertension, which in turn overworks the
right ventricle of the heart. Systemic hypertension
often weakens the left ventricle of the heart, leading to
congestive heart failure and pulmonary edema, in
which excess tissue ﬂuid collects in the alveoli and
decreases gas exchange. Though true at any age, the
interdependence of the respiratory and circulatory
systems is particularly apparent in elderly people.
The Respiratory System
361
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

SUMMARY
As you have learned, respiration is much more than
the simple mechanical actions of breathing. Inhalation
provides the body with the oxygen that is necessary for
the production of ATP in the process of cell respira-
tion. Exhalation removes the CO2 that is a product of
cell respiration. Breathing also regulates the level of
CO2 within the body, and this contributes to the
maintenance of the acid–base balance of body ﬂuids.
Although the respiratory gases do not form structural
components of the body, their contributions to the
chemical level of organization are essential to the
functioning of the body at every level.
362
The Respiratory System
STUDY OUTLINE
The respiratory system moves air into and
out of the lungs, which are the site of
exchange for O2 and CO2 between the air
and the blood. The functioning of the respi-
ratory system depends directly on the
proper functioning of the circulatory system.
1. The upper respiratory tract consists of those parts
outside the chest cavity.
2. The lower respiratory tract consists of those parts
within the chest cavity.
Nose—made of bone and cartilage covered
with skin
1. Hairs inside the nostrils block the entry of dust.
Nasal Cavities—within the skull; separated
by the nasal septum (see Fig. 15–1)
1. Nasal mucosa is ciliated epithelium with goblet
cells; surface area is increased by the conchae.
2. Nasal mucosa warms and moistens the incoming
air; dust and microorganisms are trapped on mucus
and swept by the cilia to the pharynx.
3. Olfactory receptors respond to vapors in inhaled
air.
4. Paranasal sinuses in the maxillae, frontal, sphenoid,
and ethmoid bones open into the nasal cavities:
functions are to lighten the skull and provide reso-
nance for the voice.
Pharynx—posterior to nasal and oral cavities
(see Fig. 15–1)
1. Nasopharynx—above the level of the soft palate,
which blocks it during swallowing; a passageway
for air only. The eustachian tubes from the middle
ears open into it. The adenoid is a lymph nodule on
the posterior wall.
2. Oropharynx—behind the mouth; a passageway for
both air and food. Palatine tonsils are on the lateral
walls.
3. Laryngopharynx—a passageway for both air and
food; opens anteriorly into the larynx and posteri-
orly into the esophagus.
Larynx—the voice box and the airway
between the pharynx and trachea (see Fig.
15–2)
1. Made of nine cartilages; the thyroid cartilage is the
largest and most anterior.
2. The epiglottis is the uppermost cartilage; covers
the larynx during swallowing.
3. The vocal cords are lateral to the glottis, the open-
ing for air (see Fig. 15–3).
4. During speaking, the vocal cords are pulled across
the glottis and vibrated by exhaled air, producing
sounds that may be turned into speech.
5. The cranial nerves for speaking are the vagus and
accessory.
Trachea—extends from the larynx to the pri-
mary bronchi (see Fig. 15–4)
1. Sixteen to 20 C-shaped cartilages in the tracheal
wall keep the trachea open.
2. Mucosa is ciliated epithelium with goblet cells; cilia
sweep mucus, trapped dust, and microorganisms
upward to the pharynx.
Bronchial Tree—extends from the trachea to
the alveoli (see Fig. 15–4)
1. The right and left primary bronchi are branches of
the trachea; one to each lung; same structure as the
trachea.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

2. Secondary bronchi: to the lobes of each lung (three
right, two left)
3. Bronchioles—no cartilage in their walls.
Pleural Membranes—serous membranes of
the thoracic cavity
1. Parietal pleura lines the chest wall.
2. Visceral pleura covers the lungs.
3. Serous ﬂuid between the two layers prevents fric-
tion and keeps the membranes together during
breathing.
Lungs—on either side of the heart in the
chest cavity; extend from the diaphragm
below up to the level of the clavicles
1. The rib cage protects the lungs from mechanical
injury.
2. Hilus—indentation on the medial side: primary
bronchus and pulmonary artery and veins enter
(also bronchial vessels).
Alveoli—the sites of gas exchange in the
lungs
1. Made of alveolar type I cells, simple squamous
epithelium; thin to permit diffusion of gases.
2. Surrounded by pulmonary capillaries, which are
also made of simple squamous epithelium (see Fig.
15–4).
3. Elastic connective tissue between alveoli is impor-
tant for normal exhalation.
4. A thin layer of tissue ﬂuid lines each alveolus; essen-
tial to permit diffusion of gases (see Fig. 15–5).
5. Alveolar type II cells produce pulmonary surfactant
that mixes with the tissue ﬂuid lining to decrease
surface tension to permit inﬂation of the alveoli.
6. Alveolar macrophages phagocytize foreign mate-
rial.
Mechanism of Breathing
1. Ventilation is the movement of air into and out of
the lungs: inhalation and exhalation.
2. Respiratory centers are in the medulla and pons.
3. Respiratory muscles are the diaphragm and exter-
nal and internal intercostal muscles (see Fig. 15–6).
• Atmospheric pressure is air pressure: 760 mmHg
at sea level.
• Intrapleural pressure is within the potential pleu-
ral space; always slightly below atmospheric
pressure (“negative”).
• Intrapulmonic pressure is within the bronchial
tree and alveoli; ﬂuctuates during breathing.
Inhalation (inspiration)
1. Motor impulses from medulla travel along phrenic
nerves to diaphragm, which contracts and moves
down. Impulses are sent along intercostal nerves to
external intercostal muscles, which pull ribs up and
out.
2. The chest cavity is expanded and expands the pari-
etal pleura.
3. The visceral pleura adheres to the parietal pleura
and is also expanded and in turn expands the lungs.
4. Intrapulmonic pressure decreases, and air rushes
into the lungs.
Exhalation (expiration)
1. Motor impulses from the medulla decrease, and the
diaphragm and external intercostal muscles relax.
2. The chest cavity becomes smaller and compresses
the lungs.
3. The elastic lungs recoil and further compress the
alveoli.
4. Intrapulmonic pressure increases, and air is forced
out of the lungs. Normal exhalation is passive.
5. Forced exhalation: contraction of the internal
intercostal muscles pulls the ribs down and in; con-
traction of the abdominal muscles forces the
diaphragm upward.
Pulmonary Volumes (see Fig. 15–7)
1. Tidal volume—the amount of air in one normal
inhalation and exhalation.
2. Minute respiratory volume—the amount of air
inhaled and exhaled in 1 minute.
3. Inspiratory reserve—the amount of air beyond
tidal in a maximal inhalation.
4. Expiratory reserve—the amount of air beyond tidal
in the most forceful exhalation.
5. Vital capacity—the sum of tidal volume, inspira-
tory and expiratory reserves.
6. Residual volume—the amount of air that remains
in the lungs after the most forceful exhalation; pro-
vides for continuous exchange of gases.
7. Alveolar ventilation—air that reaches the alveoli
for gas exchange; depends on normal thoracic and
lung compliance.
• Anatomic dead space—air still in the respiratory
passages at the end of inhalation (is normal).
The Respiratory System
363
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

• Physiological dead space—the volume of non-
functional alveoli; decreases compliance.
Exchange of Gases
1. External respiration is the exchange of gases
between the air in the alveoli and the blood in the
pulmonary capillaries.
2. Internal respiration is the exchange of gases
between blood in the systemic capillaries and tissue
ﬂuid (cells).
3. Inhaled air (atmosphere) is 21% O2 and 0.04%
CO2. Exhaled air is 16% O2 and 4.5% CO2.
4. Diffusion of O2 and CO2 in the body occurs
because of pressure gradients (see Table 15–1). A
gas will diffuse from an area of higher partial pres-
sure to an area of lower partial pressure.
5. External respiration: PO2 in the alveoli is high, and
PO2in the pulmonary capillaries is low, so O2 dif-
fuses from the air to the blood. PCO2 in the alveoli
is low, and PCO2 in the pulmonary capillaries is
high, so CO2 diffuses from the blood to the air and
is exhaled (see Fig. 15–8).
6. Internal respiration: PO2 in the systemic capillaries
is high, and PO2 in the tissue ﬂuid is low, so O2 dif-
fuses from the blood to the tissue ﬂuid and cells.
PCO2 in the systemic capillaries is low, and PCO2 in
the tissue ﬂuid is high, so CO2 diffuses from the tis-
sue ﬂuid to the blood (see Fig. 15–8).
Transport of Gases in the Blood
1. Oxygen is carried by the iron of hemoglobin (Hb)
in the RBCs. The O2–Hb bond is formed in the
lungs where the PO2 is high.
2. In tissues, Hb releases much of its O2; the impor-
tant factors are low PO2 in tissues, high PCO2 in tis-
sues, and a high temperature in tissues.
3. Oxygen saturation of hemoglobin (SaO2) is 95% to
97% in systemic arteries and averages 70% to 75%
in systemic veins.
4. Most CO2 is carried as HCO3
– ions in blood
plasma. CO2 enters the RBCs and reacts with H2O
to form carbonic acid (H2CO3). Carbonic anhy-
drase is the enzyme that catalyzes this reaction.
H2CO3 dissociates to H+ ions and HCO3
– ions.
The HCO3
– ions leave the RBCs and enter the
plasma; Hb buffers the H+ ions that remain in the
RBCs. Cl– ions from the plasma enter the RBCs to
maintain ionic equilibrium (the chloride shift).
5. When blood reaches the lungs, CO2 is re-formed,
diffuses into the alveoli, and is exhaled.
Nervous Regulation of Respiration
(see Fig. 15–9)
1. The medulla contains the inspiration center and
expiration center.
2. Impulses from the inspiration center to the respira-
tory muscles cause their contraction; the chest cav-
ity is expanded.
3. Baroreceptors in lung tissue detect stretching and
send impulses to the medulla to depress the inspi-
ration center. This is the Hering-Breuer inﬂation
reﬂex, which also prevents overinﬂation of the
lungs.
4. The expiration center is stimulated by the inspi-
ration center when forceful exhalations are needed.
5. In the pons: the apneustic center prolongs inhala-
tion, and the pneumotaxic center helps bring about
exhalation. These centers work with the inspiration
center in the medulla to produce a normal breath-
ing rhythm.
6. The hypothalamus inﬂuences changes in breathing
in emotional situations. The cerebral cortex per-
mits voluntary changes in breathing.
7. Coughing and sneezing remove irritants from the
upper respiratory tract; the centers for these
reﬂexes are in the medulla.
Chemical Regulation of Respiration
(see Fig. 15–10)
1. Decreased blood O2 is detected by chemoreceptors
in the carotid body and aortic body. Response:
increased respiration to take more air into the
lungs.
2. Increased blood CO2 level is detected by chemo-
receptors in the medulla. Response: increased res-
piration to exhale more CO2.
3. CO2 is the major regulator of respiration because
excess CO2 decreases the pH of body ﬂuids (CO2 +
H2O →H2CO3 →H+ + HCO3
–). Excess H+ ions
lower pH.
4. Oxygen becomes a major regulator of respiration
when blood level is very low, as may occur with
severe, chronic pulmonary disease.
Respiration and Acid–Base Balance
1. Respiratory acidosis: a decrease in the rate or effi-
ciency of respiration permits excess CO2 to accu-
mulate in body ﬂuids, resulting in the formation of
excess H+ ions, which lower pH. Occurs in severe
pulmonary disease.
2. Respiratory alkalosis: an increase in the rate of res-
364
The Respiratory System
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Respiratory System
365
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. State the three functions of the nasal mucosa.
(p. 344)
2. Name the three parts of the pharynx; state whether
each is an air passage only or an air and food pas-
sage. (pp. 344–346)
3. Name the tissue that lines the larynx and trachea,
and describe its function. State the function of the
cartilage of the larynx and trachea. (p. 346)
4. Name the pleural membranes, state the location
of each, and describe the functions of serous ﬂuid.
(pp. 347)
5. Name the tissue of which the alveoli and pul-
monary capillaries are made, and explain the
importance of this tissue in these locations. Explain
the function of pulmonary surfactant. (p. 347)
6. Name the respiratory muscles, and describe how
they are involved in normal inhalation and exhala-
tion. Deﬁne these pressures and relate them to a
cycle of breathing: atmospheric pressure, intrapul-
monic pressure. (pp. 348–349)
7. Describe external respiration in terms of partial
pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide. (p. 355)
8. Describe internal respiration in terms of partial
pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide. (p. 355)
9. Name the cell, protein, and mineral that transport
oxygen in the blood. State the three factors
that increase the release of oxygen in tissues.
(pp. 355–356)
10. Most carbon dioxide is transported in what part of
the blood, and in what form? Explain the function
of hemoglobin with respect to carbon dioxide
transport. (p. 358)
11. Name the respiratory centers in the medulla and
pons, and explain how each is involved in a
breathing cycle. (p. 358)
12. State the location of chemoreceptors affected by a
low blood oxygen level; describe the body’s
response to hypoxia and its purpose. State the
location of chemoreceptors affected by a high
blood CO2 level; describe the body’s response and
its purpose. (p. 360)
13. For respiratory acidosis and alkalosis: state a cause
and explain what happens to the pH of body ﬂu-
ids. (p. 361)
14. Explain how the respiratory system may compen-
sate for metabolic acidosis or alkalosis. For an
ongoing pH imbalance, what is the limit of respi-
ratory compensation? (pp. 361)
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
1. The success of an organ transplant depends on
many factors. What factor would diminish the
chance of success of a lung transplant, but is not a
factor at all in a heart transplant?
2. Name four types of tissues that contribute to the
functioning of the lungs, and describe the physical
characteristics of each that are important. Name
two types of cells that are also important to the
functioning of the lungs.
3. As recently as 45 years ago (the early 1960s)
it was believed that mouth-to-mouth resusci-
tation was not really helpful to another per-
son. What mistaken belief about the air we exhale
contributed to that thinking, and what are the
facts?
4. You are making a list of vital organs, organs we can-
not live without. Should you include the larynx on
your list? Explain why or why not.
piration increases the CO2 exhaled, which de-
creases the formation of H+ ions and raises pH.
Occurs during hyperventilation or when ﬁrst at a
high altitude.
3. Respiratory compensation for metabolic acidosis:
increased respiration to exhale CO2 to decrease H+
ion formation to raise pH to normal.
4. Respiratory compensation for metabolic alkalosis:
decreased respiration to retain CO2 to increase H+
ion formation to lower pH to normal.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

5. At a construction site, a hole caved in and buried a
workman up to his shoulders in wet sand. The fore-
man told the trapped man that a crane would be
there in 20 minutes to pull him out, but another
worker said they couldn’t wait, and had to dig now.
He was right. Why is this a life-threatening emer-
gency?
6. A patient’s blood pH is 7.34, and his respirations
are 32 per minute. What acid–base situation is this
patient in? State your reasoning step-by-step.
7. Mrs. D is in the emergency room because of severe
abdominal pain that may be appendicitis. Her
blood pH is 7.47 and her respirations are 34 per
minute. What acid–base situation is Mrs. D in?
State your reasoning step-by-step.
366
The Respiratory System
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CHAPTER 16
The Digestive System
367
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

368
CHAPTER 16
Chapter Outline
Divisions of the Digestive System
Types of Digestion
End Products of Digestion
Oral Cavity
Teeth
Tongue
Salivary Glands
Pharynx
Esophagus
Structural Layers of the Alimentary Tube
Mucosa
Submucosa
External Muscle Layer
Serosa
Stomach
Small Intestine
Liver
Gallbladder
Pancreas
Completion of Digestion and Absorption
Small Intestine
Absorption
Large Intestine
Elimination of Feces
Other Functions of the Liver
Aging and the Digestive System
BOX 16–1
DISORDERS OF THE STOMACH
BOX 16–2
GALLSTONES
BOX 16–3
DISORDERS OF THE INTESTINES
BOX 16–4
INFANT BOTULISM
BOX 16–5
FIBER
BOX 16–6
HEPATITIS
Student Objectives
• Describe the general functions of the digestive
system, and name its major divisions.
• Explain the difference between mechanical and
chemical digestion, and name the end products of
digestion.
• Describe the structure and functions of the teeth
and tongue.
• Explain the functions of saliva.
• Describe the location and function of the pharynx
and esophagus.
• Describe the structure and function of each of the
four layers of the alimentary tube.
• Describe the location, structure, and function of
the stomach, small intestine, liver, gallbladder, and
pancreas.
• Describe absorption in the small intestine.
• Describe the location and functions of the large
intestine.
• Explain the functions of the normal ﬂora of the
colon.
• Describe the functions of the liver.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Digestive System
369
New Terminology
Alimentary tube (AL-i-MEN-tah-ree TOOB)
Chemical digestion (KEM-i-kuhl dye-JES-chun)
Common bile duct (KOM-mon BYL DUKT)
Defecation reﬂex (DEF-e-KAY-shun)
Duodenum (dew-AH-den-um)
Emulsify (e-MULL-si-fye)
Enamel (e-NAM-uhl)
Essential amino acids (e-SEN-shul ah-ME-noh
ASS-ids)
External anal sphincter (eks-TER-nuhl AY-nuhl
SFINK-ter)
Ileocecal valve (ILL-ee-oh-SEE-kuhl VALV)
Internal anal sphincter (in-TER-nuhl AY-nuhl
SFINK-ter)
Lower esophageal sphincter (e-SOF-uh-JEE-uhl
SFINK-ter)
Mechanical digestion (muh-KAN-i-kuhl dye-JES-
chun)
Non-essential amino acids (NON-e-SEN-shul ah-
ME-noh ASS-ids)
Normal ﬂora (NOR-muhl FLOOR-ah)
Periodontal membrane (PER-ee-oh-DON-tal)
Pyloric sphincter (pye-LOR-ik SFINK-ter)
Rugae (ROO-gay)
Villi (VILL-eye)
Related Clinical Terminology
Appendicitis (uh-PEN-di-SIGH-tis)
Diverticulitis (DYE-ver-TIK-yoo-LYE-tis)
Gastric ulcer (GAS-trik UL-ser)
Hepatitis (HEP-uh-TIGH-tis)
Lactose intolerance (LAK-tohs in-TAHL-er-ense)
Lithotripsy (LITH-oh-TRIP-see)
Paralytic ileus (PAR-uh-LIT-ik ILL-ee-us)
Peritonitis (per-i-toh-NIGH-tis)
Pyloric stenosis (pye-LOR-ik ste-NOH-sis)
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

A hurried breakfast when you are late for work or
school . . . Thanksgiving dinner . . . going on a diet to
lose 5 pounds . . . what do these experiences all have in
common? Food. We may take food for granted, cele-
brate with it, or wish we wouldn’t eat quite so much of
it. Although food is not as immediate a need for
human beings as is oxygen, it is a very important part
of our lives. Food provides the raw materials or nutri-
ents that cells use to reproduce and to build new tis-
sue. The energy needed for cell reproduction and
tissue building is released from food in the process of
cell respiration. In fact, a supply of nutrients from reg-
ular food intake is so important that the body can even
store any excess for use later. Those “extra 5 pounds”
are often stored fat in adipose tissue.
The food we eat, however, is not in a form that our
body cells can use. A turkey sandwich, for example,
consists of complex proteins, fats, and carbohydrates.
The function of the digestive system is to change
these complex organic nutrient molecules into simple
organic and inorganic molecules that can then be
absorbed into the blood or lymph to be transported to
cells. In this chapter we will discuss the organs of
digestion and the contribution each makes to diges-
tion and absorption.
DIVISIONS OF THE
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
The two divisions of the digestive system are the ali-
mentary tube and the accessory organs (Fig. 16–1).
The alimentary tube extends from the mouth to the
anus. It consists of the oral cavity, pharynx, esophagus,
stomach, small intestine, and large intestine.
Digestion takes place within the oral cavity, stomach,
and small intestine; most absorption of nutrients takes
place in the small intestine. Undigestible material, pri-
marily cellulose, is eliminated by the large intestine
(also called the colon).
The accessory organs of digestion are the teeth,
tongue, salivary glands, liver, gallbladder, and pancreas.
Digestion does not take place within these organs, but
each contributes something to the digestive process.
TYPES OF DIGESTION
The food we eat is broken down in two complemen-
tary processes: mechanical digestion and chemical
digestion. Mechanical digestion is the physical break-
ing up of food into smaller pieces. Chewing is an
example of this. As food is broken up, more of its sur-
face area is exposed for the action of digestive enzymes.
Enzymes are discussed in Chapter 2. The work of the
digestive enzymes is the chemical digestion of bro-
ken-up food particles, in which complex chemical mol-
ecules are changed into much simpler chemicals that
the body can utilize. Such enzymes are speciﬁc with
respect to the fat, protein, or carbohydrate food mole-
cules each can digest. For example, protein-digesting
enzymes work only on proteins, not on carbohydrates
or fats. Each enzyme is produced by a particular diges-
tive organ and functions at a speciﬁc site. However, the
enzyme’s site of action may or may not be its site of
production. These digestive enzymes and their func-
tions are discussed in later sections.
END PRODUCTS OF DIGESTION
Before we describe the organs of digestion, let us see
where the process of digestion will take us, or rather,
will take our food. The three types of complex organic
molecules found in food are carbohydrates, proteins,
and fats. Each of these complex molecules is digested
to a much more simple substance that the body can
then use. Carbohydrates, such as starches and disac-
charides, are digested to monosaccharides such as glu-
cose, fructose, and galactose. Proteins are digested to
amino acids, and fats are digested to fatty acids and
glycerol. Also part of food, and released during diges-
tion, are vitamins, minerals, and water.
We will now return to the beginning of the alimen-
tary tube and consider the digestive organs and the
process of digestion.
ORAL CAVITY
Food enters the oral cavity (or buccal cavity) by way
of the mouth. The boundaries of the oral cavity are
the hard and soft palates superiorly; the cheeks later-
ally; and the ﬂoor of the mouth inferiorly. Within the
oral cavity are the teeth and tongue and the openings
of the ducts of the salivary glands.
TEETH
The function of the teeth is, of course, chewing. This
is the process that mechanically breaks food into
smaller pieces and mixes it with saliva. An individual
370
The Digestive System
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Digestive System
371
Tongue
Teeth
Parotid gland
Sublingual gland
Submandibular  gland
Esophagus
Liver
Left lobe
Stomach (cut)
Right lobe
Gallbladder
Bile duct
Transverse colon
(cut)
Ascending colon
Cecum
Vermiform appendix
Spleen
Duodenum
Pancreas
Descending colon
Small intestine
Rectum
Anal canal
Pharynx
Figure 16–1.
The digestive organs
shown in anterior view of the trunk
and left lateral view of the head. (The
spleen is not a digestive organ but is
included to show its location relative
to the stomach, pancreas, and colon.)
QUESTION: In which parts of the
digestive system does digestion actu-
ally take place?
develops two sets of teeth: deciduous and permanent.
The deciduous teeth begin to erupt through the
gums at about 6 months of age, and the set of 20 teeth
is usually complete by the age of 2 years. These teeth
are gradually lost throughout childhood and replaced
by the permanent teeth, the ﬁrst of which are molars
that emerge around the age of 6 years. A complete set
of permanent teeth consists of 32 teeth; the types of
teeth are incisors, canines, premolars, and molars. The
wisdom teeth are the third molars on either side of
each jawbone. In some people, the wisdom teeth may
not emerge from the jawbone because there is no
room for them along the gum line. These wisdom
teeth are said to be impacted and may put pressure on
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

the roots of the second molars. In such cases, extrac-
tion of a wisdom tooth may be necessary to prevent
damage to other teeth.
The structure of a tooth is shown in Fig. 16–2. The
crown is visible above the gum (gingiva). The root is
enclosed in a socket in the mandible or maxillae. The
periodontal membrane lines the socket and produces
a bone-like cement that anchors the tooth. The outer-
most layer of the crown is enamel, which is made by
cells called ameloblasts. Enamel provides a hard chew-
ing surface and is more resistant to decay than are
other parts of the tooth. Within the enamel is dentin,
which is very similar to bone and is produced by cells
called odontoblasts. Dentin also forms the roots of a
tooth. The innermost portion of a tooth is the pulp
cavity, which contains blood vessels and nerve end-
ings of the trigeminal nerve (5th cranial). Erosion of
the enamel and dentin layers by bacterial acids (dental
caries or cavities) may result in bacterial invasion of
the pulp cavity and a very painful toothache.
TONGUE
The tongue is made of skeletal muscle that is inner-
vated by the hypoglossal nerves (12th cranial). On the
upper surface of the tongue are small projections
called papillae, many of which contain taste buds (see
also Chapter 9). The sensory nerves for taste are also
cranial nerves: the facial (7th) and glossopharyngeal
(9th). As you know, the sense of taste is important
because it makes eating enjoyable, but the tongue has
other functions as well.
Chewing is efficient because of the action of the
tongue in keeping the food between the teeth and
mixing it with saliva. Elevation of the tongue is the
ﬁrst step in swallowing. This is a voluntary action, in
which the tongue contracts and meets the resistance of
the hard palate. The mass of food, called a bolus, is
thus pushed backward toward the pharynx. The
remainder of swallowing is a reﬂex, which is described
in the section on the pharynx.
SALIVARY GLANDS
The digestive secretion in the oral cavity is saliva,
produced by three pairs of salivary glands, which are
shown in Fig. 16–3. The parotid glands are just
below and in front of the ears. The submandibular
(also called submaxillary) glands are at the posterior
corners of the mandible, and the sublingual glands
are below the ﬂoor of the mouth. Each gland has at
least one duct that takes saliva to the oral cavity.
Secretion of saliva is continuous, but the amount
varies in different situations. The presence of food
(or anything else) in the mouth increases saliva secre-
tion. This is a parasympathetic response mediated
by the facial and glossopharyngeal nerves. The sight
or smell of food also increases secretion of saliva.
Sympathetic stimulation in stress situations decreases
secretion, making the mouth dry and swallowing
difficult.
Saliva is mostly water, which is important to dis-
solve food for tasting and to moisten food for swal-
lowing. The digestive enzyme in saliva is salivary
amylase, which breaks down starch molecules to
shorter chains of glucose molecules, or to maltose, a
disaccharide. Most of us, however, do not chew our
food long enough for the action of salivary amylase to
be truly effective. As you will see, another amylase
from the pancreas is also available to digest starch.
Table 16–1 summarizes the functions of digestive
secretions.
Saliva is made from blood plasma and thus contains
many of the chemicals that are found in plasma.
Considerable research is focused on detecting in saliva
chemical markers for diseases such as cancer, with the
372
The Digestive System
Enamel
Dentin
Pulp
cavity
Gingiva
(gum)
Cementum
Periodontal
membrane
Blood vessels
Crown
Neck
Root
Nerve
Figure 16–2.
Tooth structure. Longitudinal section of a
tooth showing internal structure.
QUESTION: Which parts of a tooth are living? How do
you know?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

goal of using saliva rather than blood for diagnostic
tests.
PHARYNX
As described in the preceding chapter, the oropharynx
and laryngopharynx are food passageways connecting
the oral cavity to the esophagus. No digestion takes
place in the pharynx. Its only related function is swal-
lowing, the mechanical movement of food. When the
bolus of food is pushed backward by the tongue, the
constrictor muscles of the pharynx contract as part of
the swallowing reﬂex. The reﬂex center for swallow-
ing is in the medulla, which coordinates the many
actions that take place: constriction of the pharynx,
cessation of breathing, elevation of the soft palate to
block the nasopharynx, elevation of the larynx and clo-
sure of the epiglottis, and peristalsis of the esophagus.
As you can see, swallowing is rather complicated, but
because it is a reﬂex we don’t have to think about mak-
ing it happen correctly. Talking or laughing while eat-
ing, however, may interfere with the reﬂex and cause
food to go into the “wrong pipe,” the larynx. When
that happens, the cough reﬂex is usually effective in
clearing the airway.
ESOPHAGUS
The esophagus is a muscular tube that takes food
from the pharynx to the stomach; no digestion takes
place here. Peristalsis of the esophagus propels food in
one direction and ensures that food gets to the stom-
ach even if the body is horizontal or upside down. At
the junction with the stomach, the lumen (cavity) of
the esophagus is surrounded by the lower esophageal
sphincter (LES or cardiac sphincter), a circular
smooth muscle. The LES relaxes to permit food to
enter the stomach, then contracts to prevent the
backup of stomach contents. If the LES does not close
completely, gastric juice may splash up into the esoph-
agus; this is a painful condition we call heartburn, or
gastroesophageal reﬂux disease (GERD). Most people
experience heartburn once in a while, and it is merely
uncomfortable, but chronic GERD is more serious.
The lining of the esophagus cannot withstand the cor-
rosive action of gastric acid and will be damaged, per-
haps resulting in bleeding or even perforation.
Medications are available to treat this condition.
STRUCTURAL LAYERS
OF THE ALIMENTARY TUBE
Before we continue with our discussion of the organs
of digestion, we will ﬁrst examine the typical structure
of the alimentary tube. When viewed in cross-section,
the alimentary tube has four layers (Fig. 16–4): the
mucosa, submucosa, external muscle layer, and serosa.
Each layer has a speciﬁc structure, and its functions
contribute to the functioning of the organs of which it
is a part.
MUCOSA
The mucosa, or lining, of the alimentary tube is made
of epithelial tissue, areolar connective tissue, and two
The Digestive System
373
Parotid duct
Sublingual
ducts
Parotid
gland
Submandibular
gland
Sublingual gland
Submandibular duct
Figure 16–3.
The salivary glands shown in left lateral
view.
QUESTION: Why are these exocrine glands? What is
saliva made from?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

374
The Digestive System
Table 16–1
THE PROCESS OF DIGESTION
Enzyme or 
Organ
Other Secretion
Function
Site of Action
Salivary glands
Stomach
Liver
Pancreas
Small intestine
Amylase
Amylase
Sucrase, Maltase, Lactase
Lipase
Bile
Pepsin
Trypsin
Peptidases
Proteins
Fats
Carbohydrates
Salivary
glands
Liver
Stomach
Pancreas
Small
intestine
Amylase
Pepsin
HCI
Bile salts
Amylase
Trypsin
Lipase
Peptidases
Sucrase
Maltase
Lactase
• Converts starch to maltose
• Converts proteins to polypeptides
• Changes pepsinogen to pepsin; maintains pH
1–2; destroys pathogens
• Emulsify fats
• Converts starch to maltose
• Converts polypeptides to peptides
• Converts emulsiﬁed fats to fatty acids and glycerol
• Convert peptides to amino acids
• Converts sucrose to glucose and fructose
• Converts maltose to glucose (2)
• Converts lactose to glucose and galactose
Oral cavity
Stomach
Stomach
Small intestine
Small intestine
Small intestine
Small intestine
Small intestine
Small intestine
Small intestine
Small intestine
Table Figure 16–A
Functions of digestive secretions.
QUESTION: Proteins are digested by secretions from which organs? How did you decide?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

375
Small intestine
Mucosa
Submucosa
External
muscle
layer
Serosa
Epithelium
Lacteal
Capillary
network
Lymph
nodule
Lymphatic
vessel
Smooth
muscle
Venule
Arteriole
Meissner's
plexus
Circular
smooth muscle
Longitudinal
smooth muscle
Auerbach's
plexus
Parietal
peritoneum
Transverse
colon
Greater
omentum
Uterus
Bladder
Diaphragm
Liver
Pancreas
Stomach
Duodenum
Mesentery
Small intestine
Sigmoid colon
Rectum
A
B
Figure 16–4.
(A) The four layers of the wall of the
alimentary tube. A small part of the wall of the small
intestine has been magniﬁed to show the four layers
typical of the alimentary tube. (B) Sagittal section
through the abdomen showing the relationship of the
peritoneum and mesentery to the abdominal organs.
QUESTION: What is the function of the external mus-
cle layer?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

thin layers of smooth muscle. In the esophagus the
epithelium is stratiﬁed squamous epithelium; in the
stomach and intestines it is simple columnar epithe-
lium. The epithelium secretes mucus, which lubricates
the passage of food, and also secretes the digestive
enzymes of the stomach and small intestine. Just
below the epithelium, within the areolar connective
tissue, are lymph nodules that contain lymphocytes to
produce antibodies, and macrophages to phagocytize
bacteria or other foreign material that get through the
epithelium. The thin layers of smooth muscle create
folds in the mucosa, and ripples, so that all of the
epithelial cells are in touch with the contents of the
organ. In the stomach and small intestine this is
important for absorption.
SUBMUCOSA
The submucosa is made of areolar connective tissue
with many blood vessels and lymphatic vessels. Many
millions of nerve ﬁbers are also present, part of what
is called the enteric nervous system, or the “brain of
the gut,” which extends the entire length of the ali-
mentary tube. The nerve networks in the submucosa
are called Meissner’s plexus (or submucosal plexus),
and they innervate the mucosa to regulate secretions.
Parasympathetic impulses increase secretions, whereas
sympathetic impulses decrease secretions. Sensory
neurons are also present to the smooth muscle (a
stretched or cramping gut is painful), as are motor
neurons to blood vessels, to regulate vessel diameter
and blood ﬂow.
EXTERNAL MUSCLE LAYER
The external muscle layer typically contains two layers
of smooth muscle: an inner, circular layer and an outer,
longitudinal layer. Variations from the typical do
occur, however. In the esophagus, this layer is striated
muscle in the upper third, which gradually changes to
smooth muscle in the lower portions. The stomach has
three layers of smooth muscle, rather than two.
Contractions of this muscle layer help break up
food and mix it with digestive juices. The one-way
contractions of peristalsis move the food toward the
anus. Auerbach’s plexus (or myenteric plexus) is the
portion of the enteric nervous system in this layer, and
some of its millions of neurons are autonomic. Sympa-
thetic impulses decrease contractions and peristalsis,
whereas parasympathetic impulses increase contrac-
tions and peristalsis, promoting normal digestion. The
parasympathetic nerves are the vagus (10th cranial)
nerves; they truly live up to the meaning of vagus,
which is “wanderer.”
SEROSA
Above the diaphragm, for the esophagus, the serosa,
the outermost layer, is ﬁbrous connective tissue. Below
the diaphragm, the serosa is the mesentery or visceral
peritoneum, a serous membrane. Lining the abdomi-
nal cavity is the parietal peritoneum, usually simply
called the peritoneum. The peritoneum-mesentery is
actually one continuous membrane (see Fig. 16–4).
The serous ﬂuid between the peritoneum and mesen-
tery prevents friction when the alimentary tube con-
tracts and the organs slide against one another.
The preceding descriptions are typical of the layers
of the alimentary tube. As noted, variations are possi-
ble, and any important differences are mentioned in
the sections that follow on speciﬁc organs.
STOMACH
The stomach is located in the upper left quadrant of
the abdominal cavity, to the left of the liver and in
front of the spleen. Although part of the alimentary
tube, the stomach is not a tube, but rather a sac that
extends from the esophagus to the small intestine.
Because it is a sac, the stomach is a reservoir for food,
so that digestion proceeds gradually and we do not
have to eat constantly. Both mechanical and chemical
digestion take place in the stomach.
The parts of the stomach are shown in Fig. 16–5.
The cardiac oriﬁce is the opening of the esophagus,
and the fundus is the portion above the level of this
opening. The body of the stomach is the large central
portion, bounded laterally by the greater curvature and
medially by the lesser curvature. The pylorus is adja-
cent to the duodenum of the small intestine, and the
pyloric sphincter surrounds the junction of the two
organs. The fundus and body are mainly storage areas,
whereas most digestion takes place in the pylorus.
When the stomach is empty, the mucosa appears
wrinkled or folded. These folds are called rugae; they
ﬂatten out as the stomach is ﬁlled and permit expan-
sion of the lining without tearing it. The gastric pits
are the glands of the stomach and consist of several
376
The Digestive System
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

types of cells; their collective secretions are called gas-
tric juice. Mucous cells secrete mucus, which coats
the stomach lining and helps prevent erosion by the
gastric juice. Chief cells secrete pepsinogen, an inac-
tive form of the enzyme pepsin. Parietal cells pro-
duce hydrochloric acid (HCl); these cells have
enzymes called proton pumps, which secrete H+ ions
into the stomach cavity. The H+ ions unite with Cl–
ions that have diffused from the parietal cells to form
HCl in the lumen of the stomach. HCl converts
pepsinogen to pepsin, which then begins the digestion
of proteins to polypeptides, and also gives gastric juice
its pH of 1 to 2. This very acidic pH is necessary for
pepsin to function and also kills most microorganisms
that enter the stomach. The parietal cells also secrete
intrinsic factor, which is necessary for the absorption
of vitamin B12. Enteroendocrine cells called G cells
secrete the hormone gastrin.
Gastric juice is secreted in small amounts at the
sight or smell of food. This is a parasympathetic
response that ensures that some gastric juice will be
present in the stomach when food arrives. The pres-
The Digestive System
377
Esophagus
Fundus of stomach
Longitudinal muscle
layer
Circular muscle layer
Oblique muscle layer
Body
Greater curvature
Rugae
Pylorus
Duodenum
Pyloric sphincter
Lesser curvature
Cardiac orifice
Mucous cell
Parietal cell
Chief cell
G cell
B
A
Figure 16–5.
(A) The stomach in anterior view. The stomach wall has been sectioned to
show the muscle layers and the rugae of the mucosa. (B) Gastric pits (glands) showing the
types of cells present. See text for functions.
QUESTION: What is the function of the pyloric sphincter?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

ence of food in the stomach causes the G cells to
secrete gastrin, a hormone that stimulates the secre-
tion of greater amounts of gastric juice.
The external muscle layer of the stomach consists
of three layers of smooth muscle: circular, longitudi-
nal, and oblique layers. These three layers are inner-
vated by the myenteric plexuses of the enteric nervous
system. Stimulatory impulses are carried from the
CNS by the vagus nerves (10th cranial) and provide
for very efficient mechanical digestion to change food
into a thick liquid called chyme. The pyloric sphincter
is usually contracted when the stomach is churning
food; it relaxes at intervals to permit small amounts of
chyme to pass into the duodenum. This sphincter then
contracts again to prevent the backup of intestinal
contents into the stomach (see Box 16–1: Disorders of
the Stomach).
SMALL INTESTINE
The small intestine is about 1 inch (2.5 cm) in diam-
eter and approximately 20 feet (6 m) long and extends
from the stomach to the cecum of the large intestine.
Within the abdominal cavity, the large intestine encir-
cles the coils of the small intestine (see Fig. 16–1).
The duodenum is the ﬁrst 10 inches (25 cm) of the
small intestine. The common bile duct enters the duo-
denum at the ampulla of Vater (or hepatopancreatic
ampulla). The jejunum is about 8 feet long, and the
ileum is about 11 feet in length. In a living person,
however, the small intestine is always contracted and is
therefore somewhat shorter.
Digestion is completed in the small intestine, and
the end products of digestion are absorbed into the
blood and lymph. The mucosa (see Fig. 16–4) has
simple columnar epithelium that includes cells with
microvilli and goblet cells that secrete mucus.
Enteroendocrine cells secrete the hormones of the
small intestine. Lymph nodules called Peyer’s patches
are especially abundant in the ileum to destroy
absorbed pathogens. The external muscle layer has the
typical circular and longitudinal smooth muscle layers
that mix the chyme with digestive secretions and pro-
pel the chyme toward the colon. Stimulatory impulses
to the enteric nerves of these muscle layers are carried
by the vagus nerves. The waves of peristalsis, however,
can take place without stimulation by the central nerv-
378
The Digestive System
BOX 16–1
DISORDERS OF THE STOMACH
pyloric stenosis. Correcting this condition requires
surgery to widen the opening in the sphincter.
A gastric ulcer is an erosion of the mucosa of
the stomach. Because the normal stomach lining is
adapted to resist the corrosive action of gastric
juice, ulcer formation is the result of oversecretion
of HCl or undersecretion of mucus.
As erosion reaches the submucosa, small blood
vessels are ruptured and bleed. If vomiting occurs,
the vomitus has a “coffee-ground” appearance due
to the presence of blood acted on by gastric juice.
A more serious complication is perforation of the
stomach wall, with leakage of gastric contents into
the abdominal cavity, and peritonitis.
The bacterium called Helicobacter pylori is the
cause of most gastric ulcers. For many patients, a
few weeks of antibiotic therapy to eradicate this
bacterium has produced rapid healing of their
ulcers. This bacterium also seems to be responsible
for virtually all cases of stomach cancer.
The medications that decrease the secretion of
HCl are useful for ulcer patients not helped by
antibiotics.
Vomiting is the expulsion of stomach and intes-
tinal contents through the esophagus and mouth.
Stimuli include irritation of the stomach, motion
sickness, food poisoning, or diseases such as menin-
gitis. The vomiting center is in the medulla, which
coordinates the simultaneous contraction of the
diaphragm and the abdominal muscles. This
squeezes the stomach and upper intestine, expell-
ing their contents. As part of the reﬂex, the lower
esophageal sphincter relaxes, and the glottis closes.
If the glottis fails to close, as may happen in alcohol
or drug intoxication, aspiration of vomitus may
occur and result in fatal obstruction of the respira-
tory passages.
Pyloric stenosis means that the opening of the
pyloric sphincter is narrowed, and emptying of the
stomach is impaired. This is most often a congeni-
tal disorder caused by hypertrophy of the pyloric
sphincter. For reasons unknown, this condition is
more common in male infants than in female
infants. When the stomach does not empty effi-
ciently, its internal pressure increases. Vomiting
relieves the pressure; this is a classic symptom of
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

ous system; the enteric nervous system can function
independently and promote normal peristalsis.
There are three sources of digestive secretions that
function within the small intestine: the liver, the pan-
creas, and the small intestine itself. We will return to
the small intestine after considering these other
organs.
LIVER
The liver (Fig. 16–6) consists of two large lobes, right
and left, and ﬁlls the upper right and center of the
abdominal cavity, just below the diaphragm. The
structural unit of the liver is the liver lobule, a
roughly hexagonal column of liver cells (hepatocytes).
Between adjacent lobules are branches of the hepatic
artery and portal vein. The capillaries of a lobule are
sinusoids, large and very permeable vessels between
the rows of liver cells. The sinusoids receive blood
from both the hepatic artery and portal vein, and it is
with this mixture of blood that the liver cells carry out
their functions. The hepatic artery brings oxygenated
blood, and the portal vein brings blood from the
digestive organs and spleen (see Fig. 13–7). Each lob-
ule has a central vein. The central veins of all the lob-
ules unite to form the hepatic veins, which take blood
out of the liver to the inferior vena cava.
The cells of the liver have many functions (which
are discussed in a later section), but their only diges-
tive function is the production of bile. Bile enters the
small bile ducts, called bile canaliculi, on the liver
cells, which unite to form larger ducts and ﬁnally
merge to form the hepatic duct, which takes bile out
of the liver (see Fig. 16–6). The hepatic duct unites
with the cystic duct of the gallbladder to form the
common bile duct, which takes bile to the duode-
num.
Bile is mostly water and has an excretory function
in that it carries bilirubin and excess cholesterol to the
intestines for elimination in feces. The digestive func-
tion of bile is accomplished by bile salts, which emul-
sify fats in the small intestine. Emulsiﬁcation means
that large fat globules are broken into smaller glob-
ules. This is mechanical, not chemical, digestion; the
fat is still fat but now has more surface area to facili-
tate chemical digestion.
Production of bile is stimulated by the hormone
secretin, which is produced by the duodenum when
food enters the small intestine. Table 16–2 summa-
The Digestive System
379
rizes the regulation of secretion of all digestive secre-
tions.
GALLBLADDER
The gallbladder is a sac about 3 to 4 inches (7.5 to 10
cm) long located on the undersurface of the right lobe
of the liver. Bile in the hepatic duct of the liver ﬂows
through the cystic duct into the gallbladder (see Fig.
16–6), which stores bile until it is needed in the small
intestine. The gallbladder also concentrates bile by
absorbing water (see Box 16–2: Gallstones).
When fatty foods enter the duodenum, the
enteroendocrine cells of the duodenal mucosa secrete
the hormone cholecystokinin. This hormone stimu-
lates contraction of the smooth muscle in the wall of
the gallbladder, which forces bile into the cystic duct,
then into the common bile duct, and on into the duo-
denum.
PANCREAS
The pancreas is located in the upper left abdominal
quadrant between the curve of the duodenum and the
spleen and is about 6 inches (15 cm) in length. The
endocrine functions of the pancreas were discussed in
Chapter 10, so only the exocrine functions will be
considered here. The exocrine glands of the pancreas
are called acini (singular: acinus) (Fig. 16–7). They
produce enzymes that are involved in the digestion of
all three types of complex food molecules.
The pancreatic enzyme amylase digests starch to
maltose. You may recall that this is the “backup”
enzyme for salivary amylase, though pancreatic amy-
lase is responsible for most digestion of starch. Lipase
converts emulsiﬁed fats to fatty acids and glycerol.
The emulsifying or fat-separating action of bile salts
increases the surface area of fats so that lipase works
effectively. Trypsinogen is an inactive enzyme that is
changed to active trypsin in the duodenum. Trypsin
digests polypeptides to shorter chains of amino acids.
The pancreatic enzyme juice is carried by small
ducts that unite to form larger ducts, then ﬁnally the
main pancreatic duct. An accessory duct may also be
present. The main pancreatic duct emerges from the
medial side of the pancreas and joins the common bile
duct to the duodenum (see Fig. 16–7).
The pancreas also produces a bicarbonate juice
(containing sodium bicarbonate), which is alkaline.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

380
Right hepatic vein
Liver
Cystic
duct
Inferior vena cava
Left  hepatic vein
Hepatic duct
Common bile duct
Hepatic artery
Portal vein
Central vein
(branch of
hepatic vein)
A
Gallbladder
Sinusoids
Bile duct
Liver lobule
Branch of portal vein
Branch of hepatic artery
Bile duct
Hepatocytes
B
Figure 16–6.
(A) The liver and gallbladder with blood vessels and bile ducts.
(B) Magniﬁed view of one liver lobule. See text for description.
QUESTION: In part B, trace the pathway of blood ﬂow through a liver lobule.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Because the gastric juice that enters the duodenum
is very acidic, it must be neutralized to prevent dam-
age to the duodenal mucosa. This neutralizing is
accomplished by the sodium bicarbonate in pancreatic
juice, and the pH of the duodenal chyme is raised to
about 7.5.
Secretion of pancreatic juice is stimulated by the
hormones secretin and cholecystokinin, which are
produced by the duodenal mucosa when chyme enters
the small intestine. Secretin stimulates the produc-
tion of bicarbonate juice by the pancreas, and chole-
cystokinin stimulates the secretion of the pancreatic
enzymes.
COMPLETION OF DIGESTION
AND ABSORPTION
SMALL INTESTINE
The secretion of the epithelium of the intestinal
glands (or crypts of Lieberkühn) is stimulated by the
The Digestive System
381
Table 16–2
REGULATION OF DIGESTIVE SECRETIONS
Secretion
Nervous Regulation
Chemical Regulation
Saliva
Gastric juice
Bile
Secretion by
the liver
Contraction of
the gallbladder
Enzyme pancreatic juice
Bicarbonate pancreatic juice
Intestinal juice
Presence of food in mouth or sight of food;
parasympathetic impulses along 7th and
9th cranial nerves
Sight or smell of food; parasympathetic
impulses along 10th cranial nerves
None
None
None
None
Presence of chyme in the duodenum; parasym-
pathetic impulses along 10th cranial nerves
None
Gastrin—produced by the G cells of
the gastric mucosa when food is
present in the stomach
Secretin—produced by the enteroen-
docrine cells of the duodenum
when chyme enters
Cholecystokinin—produced by the
enteroendocrine cells of the duo-
denum when chyme enters
Cholecystokinin—from the duodenum
Secretin—from the duodenum
None
BOX 16–2
GALLSTONES
Several treatments are available for gallstones.
Medications that dissolve gallstones work slowly,
over the course of several months, and are useful if
biliary obstruction is not severe. An instrument that
generates shock waves (called a lithotripter) may be
used to pulverize the stones into smaller pieces that
may easily pass into the duodenum; this procedure
is called lithotripsy. Surgery to remove the gall-
bladder (cholecystectomy) is required in some
cases. The hepatic duct is then connected directly
to the common bile duct, and dilute bile ﬂows into
the duodenum. Following such surgery, the patient
should avoid meals high in fats.
One of the functions of the gallbladder is to con-
centrate bile by absorbing water. If the bile contains
a high concentration of cholesterol, absorption of
water may lead to precipitation and the formation of
cholesterol crystals. These crystals are gallstones.
If the gallstones are small, they will pass through
the cystic duct and common bile duct to the duo-
denum without causing symptoms. If large, how-
ever, the gallstones cannot pass out of the
gallbladder, and may cause mild to severe pain that
often radiates to the right shoulder. Obstructive
jaundice may occur if bile backs up into the liver
and bilirubin is reabsorbed into the blood.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

presence of food in the duodenum. The intestinal
enzymes are the peptidases and sucrase, maltase, and
lactase. Peptidases complete the digestion of protein
by breaking down short polypeptide chains to amino
acids. Sucrase, maltase, and lactase, respectively,
digest the disaccharides sucrose, maltose, and lactose
to monosaccharides.
The enteroendocrine cells of the intestinal glands
secrete the hormones of the small intestine. Secretion
is stimulated by food entering the duodenum.
382
The Digestive System
Pyloric sphincter
Hepatic duct
Cystic duct
Duodenum
Main
pancreatic
duct
Pancreas
Superior mesenteric
artery and vein
Islets of
Langerhans
Ducts
Acini
Capillaries
Delta cell
Beta cell
Alpha cell
A
B
Common
bile duct
Ampulla of Vater
Figure 16–7.
(A) The pancreas, sectioned to show the pancreatic ducts. The main pan-
creatic duct joins the common bile duct. (B) Microscopic section showing acini with their
ducts and several islets of Langerhans.
QUESTION: In part B, what do the acini secrete?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

A summary of the digestive secretions and their
functions is found in Table 16–1. Regulation of these
secretions is shown in Table 16–2.
ABSORPTION
Most absorption of the end products of digestion takes
place in the small intestine (although the stomach does
absorb water and alcohol). The process of absorption
requires a large surface area, which is provided by sev-
eral structural modiﬁcations of the small intestine;
these are shown in Fig. 16–8. Plica circulares, or cir-
cular folds, are macroscopic folds of the mucosa and
submucosa, somewhat like accordion pleats. The
mucosa is further folded into projections called villi,
which give the inner surface of the intestine a velvet-
like appearance. Each columnar cell (except the
mucus-secreting goblet cells) of the villi also has
microvilli on its free surface. Microvilli are micro-
scopic folds of the cell membrane, and are collectively
The Digestive System
383
Small intestine
Plica
circulares
Intestinal
gland
Microvilli
Absorptive cell
Goblet cell
Lacteal
Capillary
network
Enteroendocrine cell
A
B
Figure 16–8.
The small intestine. (A) Section through the small intestine showing plica
circulares. (B) Microscopic view of a villus showing the internal structure. The enteroen-
docrine cells secrete the intestinal hormones.
QUESTION: What is the purpose of the villi? What other structures have the same purpose?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

called the brush border. All of these folds greatly
increase the surface area of the intestinal lining. It is
estimated that if the intestinal mucosa could be ﬂat-
tened out, it would cover more than 2000 square feet
(half a basketball court).
The absorption of nutrients takes place from the
lumen of the intestine into the vessels within the
villi. Refer to Fig. 16–8 and notice that within each vil-
lus is a capillary network and a lacteal, which is a
dead-end lymph capillary. Water-soluble nutrients
are absorbed into the blood in the capillary networks.
Monosaccharides, amino acids, positive ions, and the
water-soluble vitamins (vitamin C and the B vitamins)
are absorbed by active transport. Negative ions may
be absorbed by either passive or active transport
mechanisms. Water is absorbed by osmosis following
the absorption of minerals, especially sodium. Certain
nutrients have additional special requirements for
their absorption: For example, vitamin B12 requires
the intrinsic factor produced by the parietal cells
of the gastric mucosa, and the efficient absorption of
calcium ions requires parathyroid hormone and vita-
min D.
Fat-soluble nutrients are absorbed into the lymph
in the lacteals of the villi. Bile salts are necessary for
the efficient absorption of fatty acids and the fat-solu-
ble vitamins (A, D, E, and K). Once absorbed, fatty
acids are recombined with glycerol to form triglyc-
erides. These triglycerides then form globules that
include cholesterol and protein; these lipid–protein
complexes are called chylomicrons. In the form of
chylomicrons, most absorbed fat is transported by the
lymph and eventually enters the blood in the left sub-
clavian vein.
Blood from the capillary networks in the villi does
not return directly to the heart but ﬁrst travels
through the portal vein to the liver. You may recall the
importance of portal circulation, discussed in Chapter
13. This pathway enables the liver to regulate the
blood levels of glucose and amino acids, store certain
vitamins, and remove potential poisons from the
blood (see Box 16–3: Disorders of the Intestines).
384
The Digestive System
BOX 16–3
DISORDERS OF THE INTESTINES
Salmonella food poisoning is caused by bac-
teria in the genus Salmonella. These are part of the
intestinal ﬂora of animals, and animal foods such as
meat and eggs may be sources of infection. These
bacteria are not normal for people, and they cause
the intestines to secrete large amounts of ﬂuid.
Symptoms include diarrhea, abdominal cramps,
and vomiting and usually last only a few days. For
elderly or debilitated people, however, salmonella
food poisoning may be very serious or even fatal.
Diverticula are small outpouchings through
weakened areas of the intestinal wall. They are
more likely to occur in the colon than in the small
intestine and may exist for years without causing
any symptoms. The presence of diverticula is called
diverticulosis. Inflammation of diverticula is
called diverticulitis, which is usually the result of
entrapment of feces and bacteria. Symptoms
include abdominal pain and tenderness and fever. If
uncomplicated, diverticulitis may be treated with
antibiotics and modiﬁcations in diet. The most seri-
ous complication is perforation of diverticula, allow-
ing fecal material into the abdominal cavity, causing
peritonitis. A diet high in ﬁber is believed to be an
important aspect of prevention, to provide bulk in
the colon and prevent weakening of its wall.
Duodenal ulcers are erosions of the duodenal
wall caused by the gastric juice that enters from the
stomach. The most serious consequences are bleed-
ing and perforation.
Paralytic ileus is the cessation of contraction
of the smooth muscle layer of the intestine. This
is a possible complication of abdominal surgery,
but it may also be the result of peritonitis or
inﬂammation elsewhere in the abdominal cavity.
In the absence of peristalsis, intestinal obstruc-
tion may occur. Bowel movements cease, and vom-
iting occurs to relieve the pressure within the
alimentary tube. Treatment involves suctioning
the intestinal contents to eliminate any obstruc-
tion and to allow the intestine to regain its normal
motility.
Lactose intolerance is the inability to digest
lactose because of deﬁciency of the enzyme lactase.
Lactase deﬁciency may be congenital, a conse-
quence of prematurity, or acquired later in life. The
delayed form is quite common among people of
African or Asian ancestry, and in part is genetic.
When lactose, or milk sugar, is not digested, it
undergoes fermentation in the intestine. Symptoms
include diarrhea, abdominal pain, bloating, and
ﬂatulence (gas formation).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

LARGE INTESTINE
The large intestine, also called the colon, is approx-
imately 2.5 inches (6.3 cm) in diameter and 5 feet (1.5
m) in length. It extends from the ileum of the small
intestine to the anus, the terminal opening. The parts
of the colon are shown in Fig. 16–9. The cecum is the
ﬁrst portion, and at its junction with the ileum is
the ileocecal valve, which is not a sphincter but serves
the same purpose. After undigested food (which is
now mostly cellulose) and water pass from the ileum
into the cecum, closure of the ileocecal valve prevents
the backﬂow of fecal material.
Attached to the cecum is the appendix, a small,
dead-end tube with abundant lymphatic tissue. The
appendix seems to be a vestigial organ, that is, one
whose size and function seem to be reduced. Although
there is abundant lymphatic tissue in the wall of the
appendix, the possibility that the appendix is con-
cerned with immunity is not known with certainty.
Appendicitis refers to inﬂammation of the appendix,
which may occur if fecal material becomes impacted
within it. This usually necessitates an appendectomy,
the surgical removal of the appendix.
The remainder of the colon consists of the ascend-
ing, transverse, and descending colon, which encircle
the small intestine; the sigmoid colon, which turns
medially and downward; the rectum; and the anal
canal. The rectum is about 6 inches long, and the anal
canal is the last inch of the colon that surrounds the
anus. Clinically, however, the terminal end of the
colon is usually referred to as the rectum.
No digestion takes place in the colon. The only
secretion of the colonic mucosa is mucus, which lubri-
cates the passage of fecal material. The longitudinal
smooth muscle layer of the colon is in three bands
called taeniae coli. The rest of the colon is “gathered”
to ﬁt these bands. This gives the colon a puckered
appearance; the puckers or pockets are called haustra,
which provide for more surface area within the colon.
The functions of the colon are the absorption of
water, minerals, and vitamins and the elimination of
undigestible material. About 80% of the water that
The Digestive System
385
Hepatic flexure
Haustra
Taeniae coli
Splenic flexure
Transverse colon
Ascending
colon
lleum
Descending
colon
lleocecal valve
Appendix
Cecum
Sigmoid colon
Rectum
Anus
Anal canal
Figure 16–9.
The large intestine shown in
anterior view. The term ﬂexure means a turn or
bend.
QUESTION: What is the function of the ileoce-
cal valve?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

enters the colon is absorbed (400 to 800 mL per day).
Positive and negative ions are also absorbed. The vita-
mins absorbed are those produced by the normal
ﬂora, the trillions of bacteria that live in the colon.
Vitamin K is produced and absorbed in amounts usu-
ally sufficient to meet a person’s daily need. Other
vitamins produced in smaller amounts include
riboﬂavin, thiamin, biotin, and folic acid. Everything
absorbed by the colon circulates ﬁrst to the liver by
way of portal circulation. Yet another function of the
normal colon flora is to inhibit the growth of
pathogens (see Box 16–4: Infant Botulism).
ELIMINATION OF FECES
Feces consist of cellulose and other undigestible mate-
rial, dead and living bacteria, and water. Elimination
of feces is accomplished by the defecation reﬂex, a
spinal cord reﬂex that may be controlled voluntarily.
The rectum is usually empty until peristalsis of the
colon pushes feces into it. These waves of peristalsis
tend to occur after eating, especially when food enters
the duodenum. The wall of the rectum is stretched by
the entry of feces, and this is the stimulus for the defe-
cation reﬂex.
Stretch receptors in the smooth muscle layer of the
rectum generate sensory impulses that travel to the
sacral spinal cord. The returning motor impulses
cause the smooth muscle of the rectum to contract.
Surrounding the anus is the internal anal sphincter,
which is made of smooth muscle. As part of the reﬂex,
this sphincter relaxes, permitting defecation to take
place.
The external anal sphincter is made of skeletal
muscle and surrounds the internal anal sphincter (Fig.
16–10). If defecation must be delayed, the external
sphincter may be voluntarily contracted to close the
anus. The awareness of the need to defecate passes as
the stretch receptors of the rectum adapt. These
receptors will be stimulated again when the next wave
of peristalsis reaches the rectum (see Box 16–5: Fiber).
OTHER FUNCTIONS OF THE LIVER
The liver is a remarkable organ, and only the brain is
capable of a greater variety of functions. The liver
cells (hepatocytes) produce many enzymes that cat-
alyze many different chemical reactions. These reac-
tions are the functions of the liver. As blood ﬂows
through the sinusoids (capillaries) of the liver (see Fig.
16–6), materials are removed by the liver cells, and the
products of the liver cells are secreted into the blood.
Some of the liver functions will already be familiar
to you. Others are mentioned again and discussed in
more detail in the next chapter. Because the liver
has such varied effects on so many body systems, we
will use the categories below to summarize the liver
functions.
1. Carbohydrate metabolism—As you know, the
liver regulates the blood glucose level. Excess glu-
cose is converted to glycogen (glycogenesis) when
blood glucose is high; the hormones insulin and
cortisol facilitate this process. During hypo-
glycemia or stress situations, glycogen is converted
back to glucose (glycogenolysis) to raise the blood
glucose level. Epinephrine and glucagon are the
hormones that facilitate this process.
386
The Digestive System
BOX 16–4
INFANT BOTULISM
Botulism is most often acquired from food.
When the spores of the botulism bacteria are in
an anaerobic (without oxygen) environment
such as a can of food, they germinate into active
bacteria that produce a neurotoxin. If people
ingest food containing this toxin, they will
develop the paralysis that is characteristic of
botulism.
For infants less than 1 year of age, however,
ingestion of just the bacterial spores may be
harmful. The infant’s stomach does not produce
much HCl, so ingested botulism spores may not
be destroyed. Of equal importance, the infant’s
normal colon ﬂora is not yet established. Without
the normal population of colon bacteria to pro-
vide competition, spores of the botulism bacteria
may germinate and produce their toxin.
An affected infant becomes lethargic and
weak; paralysis may progress slowly or rapidly.
Treatment (antitoxin) is available, but may be
delayed if botulism is not suspected. Many cases
of infant botulism have been traced to honey
that was found to contain botulism spores. Such
spores are not harmful to older children and
adults, who have a normal colon ﬂora that pre-
vents the botulism bacteria from becoming
established.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

387
BOX 16–5
FIBER
no protective effect of ﬁber against colon cancer.
What we can say for sure is that ﬁber may not be
the only dietary or environmental factor involved.
Claims that high-ﬁber diets directly lower blood
levels of cholesterol and fats are not supported by
deﬁnitive clinical or experimental studies. One pos-
sible explanation may be that a person whose diet
consists largely of high-ﬁber foods simply eats less
of the foods high in cholesterol and fats, and this is
the reason for that person’s lower blood levels of
fats and cholesterol.
Should people try to make great changes in their
diets? Probably not, not if they are careful to limit
fat intake and to include signiﬁcant quantities of
vegetables and fruits. Besides the possible beneﬁts
of ﬁber, unprocessed plant foods provide important
amounts of vitamins and minerals.
Fiber is a term we use to refer to the organic mate-
rials in the cell walls of plants. These are mainly cel-
lulose and pectins. The role of dietary ﬁber and
possible beneﬁts that a high-ﬁber diet may provide
are currently the focus of much research. It is
important to differentiate what is known from what
is, at present, merely speculation.
Many studies have shown that populations
(large groups of people, especially those of different
cultures) who consume high-ﬁber diets tend to
have a lower frequency of certain diseases. These
include diverticulitis, colon cancer, coronary artery
disease, diabetes, and hypertension. Such diseases
are much more common among populations
whose diets are low in vegetables, fruits, and whole
grains, and high in meat, dairy products, and
processed foods. In contrast, a 2005 study showed
Rectum
Anal canal
Anal
columns
Longitudinal muscle
Circular muscle
Rectal fold
Levator ani
muscle
Internal anal
sphincter
External anal
sphincter
Anus
A
B
Figure 16–10.
(A) Internal and external anal sphincters shown in a frontal section
through the lower rectum and anal canal. (B) Position of rectum and anal canal relative to
pelvic bone.
QUESTION: The internal anal sphincter is a continuation of which part of the rectum?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The liver also changes other monosaccharides to
glucose. Fructose and galactose, for example, are
end products of the digestion of sucrose and lac-
tose. Because most cells, however, cannot readily
use fructose and galactose as energy sources, they
are converted by the liver to glucose, which is eas-
ily used by cells.
2. Amino acid metabolism—The liver regulates
blood levels of amino acids based on tissue needs
for protein synthesis. Of the 20 different amino
acids needed for the production of human proteins,
the liver is able to synthesize 12, called the non-
essential amino acids. The chemical process by
which this is done is called transamination, the
transfer of an amino group (NH2) from an amino
acid present in excess to a free carbon chain that
forms a complete, new amino acid molecule. The
other eight amino acids, which the liver cannot
synthesize, are called the essential amino acids. In
this case, “essential” means that the amino acids
must be supplied by our food, because the liver
cannot manufacture them. Similarly, “non-essen-
tial” means that the amino acids do not have to be
supplied in our food because the liver can make
them. All 20 amino acids are required in order to
make our body proteins.
Excess amino acids, those not needed right away
for protein synthesis, cannot be stored. However,
they do serve another useful purpose. By the
process of deamination, which also occurs in the
liver, the NH2 group is removed from an amino
acid, and the remaining carbon chain may be con-
verted to a simple carbohydrate molecule or to fat.
Thus, excess amino acids are utilized for energy
production: either for immediate energy or for the
potential energy stored as fat in adipose tissue. The
NH2 groups that were detached from the original
amino acids are combined to form urea, a waste
product that will be removed from the blood by the
kidneys and excreted in urine.
3. Lipid metabolism—The liver forms lipoproteins,
which as their name tells us, are molecules of lipids
and proteins, for the transport of fats in the blood
to other tissues. The liver also synthesizes choles-
terol and excretes excess cholesterol into bile to be
eliminated in feces.
Fatty acids are a potential source of energy, but
in order to be used in cell respiration they must be
broken down to smaller molecules. In the process
of beta-oxidation, the long carbon chains of fatty
acids are split into two-carbon molecules called
acetyl groups, which are simple carbohydrates.
These acetyl groups may be used by the liver cells
to produce ATP or may be combined to form
ketones to be transported in the blood to other
cells. These other cells then use the ketones to pro-
duce ATP in cell respiration.
4. Synthesis of plasma proteins—This is a liver
function that you will probably remember from
Chapter 11. The liver synthesizes many of the pro-
teins that circulate in the blood. Albumin, the most
abundant plasma protein, helps maintain blood vol-
ume by pulling tissue ﬂuid into capillaries.
The clotting factors are also produced by the
liver. These, as you recall, include prothrombin,
ﬁbrinogen, and Factor 8, which circulate in the
blood until needed in the chemical clotting mech-
anism. The liver also synthesizes alpha and beta
globulins, which are proteins that serve as carriers
for other molecules, such as fats, in the blood.
5. Formation of bilirubin—This is another familiar
function: The liver contains ﬁxed macrophages
that phagocytize old red blood cells (RBCs).
Bilirubin is then formed from the heme portion of
the hemoglobin. The liver also removes from the
blood the bilirubin formed in the spleen and red
bone marrow and excretes it into bile to be elimi-
nated in feces.
6. Phagocytosis by Kupffer cells—The fixed
macrophages of the liver are called Kupffer cells
(or stellate reticuloendothelial cells). Besides
destroying old RBCs, Kupffer cells phagocytize
pathogens or other foreign material that circulate
through the liver. Many of the bacteria that get to
the liver come from the colon. These bacteria are
part of the normal ﬂora of the colon but would be
very harmful elsewhere in the body. The bacteria
that enter the blood with the water absorbed by the
colon are carried to the liver by way of portal cir-
culation. The Kupffer cells in the liver phagocytize
and destroy these bacteria, removing them from
the blood before the blood returns to the heart.
7. Storage—The liver stores the fat-soluble vitamins
A, D, E, and K, and the water-soluble vitamin B12.
Up to a 6- to 12-month supply of vitamins A and D
may be stored, and beef or chicken liver is an excel-
lent dietary source of these vitamins.
Also stored by the liver are the minerals iron and
copper. You already know that iron is needed for
hemoglobin and myoglobin and enables these pro-
388
The Digestive System
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

teins to bond to oxygen. Copper (as well as iron) is
part of some of the proteins needed for cell respi-
ration, and is part of some of the enzymes neces-
sary for hemoglobin synthesis.
8. Detoxiﬁcation—The liver is capable of synthesiz-
ing enzymes that will detoxify harmful substances,
that is, change them to less harmful ones. Alcohol,
for example, is changed to acetate, which is a two-
carbon molecule (an acetyl group) that can be used
in cell respiration.
Medications are all potentially toxic, but the
liver produces enzymes that break them down or
change them. When given in a proper dosage, a
medication exerts its therapeutic effect but is then
changed to less active substances that are usually
excreted by the kidneys. An overdose of a drug
means that there is too much of it for the liver to
detoxify in a given time, and the drug will remain
in the body with possibly harmful effects. This is
why alcohol should never be consumed when tak-
ing medication. Such a combination may cause the
liver’s detoxiﬁcation ability to be overworked and
ineffective, with the result that both the alcohol
and the medication will remain toxic for a longer
time. Barbiturates taken as sleeping pills after con-
sumption of alcohol have too often proved fatal for
just this reason.
Ammonia is a toxic substance produced by the
bacteria in the colon. Because it is soluble in water,
some ammonia is absorbed into the blood, but it is
carried ﬁrst to the liver by portal circulation. The
liver converts ammonia to urea, a less toxic sub-
stance, before the ammonia can circulate and dam-
age other organs, especially the brain. The urea
formed is excreted by the kidneys (see Box 16–6:
Hepatitis).
AGING AND THE
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
Many changes can be expected in the aging digestive
system. The sense of taste becomes less acute, less
saliva is produced, and there is greater likelihood of
The Digestive System
389
BOX 16–6
HEPATITIS
include blood and semen. Hepatitis B may be
severe or even fatal, and approximately 10% of
those who recover become carriers of the virus.
Possible consequences of the carrier state are
chronic hepatitis progressing to cirrhosis or primary
liver cancer. Of equal importance, carriers are
sources of the virus for others, especially their sex-
ual partners.
A vaccine is available for hepatitis B, and health-
care workers who have contact with blood, even
just occasional contact, should receive it. Other
potential recipients of the vaccine are the sexual
partners of carriers. Pediatricians now consider this
vaccine one of the standard ones for infants.
The hepatitis C virus is also present in body ﬂu-
ids and is spread by blood or mucous membrane
contact. Most people develop chronic disease, but
many may remain asymptomatic for years after
being infected. With active disease the virus may
cause liver failure. The only therapy then is a liver
transplant.
It is important for healthcare personnel, and
their patients, to know that these types of hepatitis
are not spread by blood transfusions. Donated
blood is tested for all three viruses.
Hepatitis is inﬂammation of the liver caused
by any of several viruses. The most common of
these hepatitis viruses have been designated A, B,
and C, although there are others. Symptoms of hep-
atitis include anorexia, nausea, fatigue, and possibly
jaundice. Severity of disease ranges from very mild
(even asymptomatic) to fatal. Hundreds of thou-
sands of cases of hepatitis occur in the United States
every year, and although liver inﬂammation is com-
mon to all of them, the three hepatitis viruses have
different modes of transmission and different conse-
quences for affected people.
Hepatitis A is an intestinal virus that is spread
by the fecal–oral route. Food contaminated by the
hands of people with mild cases is the usual vehicle
of transmission, although shellﬁsh harvested from
water contaminated with human sewage are
another possible source of this virus. Hepatitis A is
most often mild, recovery provides lifelong immu-
nity, and the carrier state is not known to occur. A
vaccine is available, but people who have been
exposed to hepatitis A may receive gamma globu-
lin by injection to prevent the disease.
Hepatitis B is contracted by exposure to the
body ﬂuids of an infected person; these ﬂuids
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Function of the Digestive System—to break
down food into simple chemicals that can
be absorbed into the blood and lymph and
utilized by cells
Divisions of the Digestive System
1. Alimentary tube—oral cavity, pharynx, esophagus,
stomach, small intestine, large intestine. Digestion
takes place in the oral cavity, stomach, and small
intestine.
2. Accessory organs—salivary glands, teeth, tongue,
liver, gallbladder, and pancreas. Each contributes to
digestion.
Types of Digestion
1. Mechanical—breaks food into smaller pieces to
increase the surface area for the action of enzymes.
2. Chemical—enzymes break down complex organics
into simpler organics and inorganics; each enzyme
is speciﬁc for the food it will digest.
End Products of Digestion
1. Carbohydrates are digested to monosaccharides.
2. Fats are digested to fatty acids and glycerol.
3. Proteins are digested to amino acids.
4. Other end products are vitamins, minerals, and
water.
Oral Cavity—food enters by way of the
mouth
1. Teeth and tongue break up food and mix it with
saliva.
2. Tooth structure (see Fig. 16–2)—enamel covers the
crown and provides a hard chewing surface; dentin
is within the enamel and forms the roots; the pulp
cavity contains blood vessels and endings of the
trigeminal nerve; the periodontal membrane
produces cement to anchor the tooth in the jaw-
bone.
3. The tongue is skeletal muscle innervated by the
hypoglossal nerves. Papillae on the upper surface
contain taste buds (facial and glossopharyngeal
nerves). Functions: taste, keeps food between the
teeth when chewing, elevates to push food back-
ward for swallowing.
4. Salivary glands—parotid, submandibular, and sub-
lingual (see Fig. 16–3); ducts take saliva to the oral
cavity.
390
The Digestive System
STUDY OUTLINE
periodontal disease and loss of teeth. Secretions are
reduced throughout the digestive system, and the
effectiveness of peristalsis diminishes. Indigestion may
become more frequent, especially if the LES loses its
tone, and there is a greater chance of esophageal dam-
age. In the colon, diverticula may form; these are bub-
ble-like outpouchings of the weakened wall of the
colon that may be asymptomatic or become infected.
Intestinal obstruction, of the large or small bowel,
occurs with greater frequency among the elderly.
Sluggish peristalsis contributes to constipation, which
in turn may contribute to the formation of hemor-
rhoids. The risk of oral cancer or colon cancer also
increases with age.
The liver usually continues to function adequately
even well into old age, unless damaged by pathogens
such as the hepatitis viruses or by toxins such as alco-
hol. There is a greater tendency for gallstones to form,
perhaps necessitating removal of the gallbladder.
Inﬂammation of the gallbladder (cholecystitis) is also
more frequent in older adults. In the absence of spe-
ciﬁc diseases, the pancreas usually functions well,
although acute pancreatitis of unknown cause is some-
what more likely in elderly people.
SUMMARY
The processes of the digestion of food and the absorp-
tion of nutrients enable the body to use complex food
molecules for many purposes. Much of the food we eat
literally becomes part of us. The body synthesizes pro-
teins and lipids for the growth and repair of tissues and
produces enzymes to catalyze all of the reactions that
contribute to homeostasis. Some of our food provides
the energy required for growth, repair, movement,
sensation, and thinking. In the next chapter we will
discuss the chemical basis of energy production from
food and consider the relationship of energy produc-
tion to the maintenance of body temperature.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

5. Saliva—amylase digests starch to maltose; water
dissolves food for tasting and moistens food for
swallowing; lysozyme inhibits the growth of bacte-
ria (see Tables 16–1 and 16–2).
Pharynx—food passageway from the oral
cavity to the esophagus
1. No digestion takes place.
2. Contraction of pharyngeal muscles is part of swal-
lowing reﬂex, regulated by the medulla.
Esophagus—food passageway from pharynx
to stomach
1. No digestion takes place.
2. Lower esophageal sphincter (LES) at junction with
stomach prevents backup of stomach contents.
Structural Layers of the Alimentary Tube
(see Fig. 16–4)
1. Mucosa (lining)—made of epithelial tissue that
produces the digestive secretions; lymph nodules
contain macrophages to phagocytize pathogens
that penetrate the mucosa; thin layer of smooth
muscle to ripple the epithelium.
2. Submucosa—areolar connective tissue with blood
vessels and lymphatic vessels; Meissner’s plexus is a
nerve network that innervates the mucosa, part of
the enteric nervous system that extends the entire
length of the alimentary tube.
3. External muscle layer—typically an inner circular
layer and an outer longitudinal layer of smooth
muscle; function is mechanical digestion and peri-
stalsis; innervated by Auerbach’s plexus, part of the
enteric nervous system; sympathetic impulses
decrease motility; parasympathetic impulses
increase motility.
4. Serosa—outermost layer; above the diaphragm is
ﬁbrous connective tissue; below the diaphragm is
the mesentery (serous). The peritoneum (serous)
lines the abdominal cavity; serous ﬂuid prevents
friction between the serous layers.
Stomach—in upper left abdominal quadrant;
a muscular sac that extends from the esoph-
agus to the small intestine (see Fig. 16–5)
1. Reservoir for food; begins the digestion of protein.
2. Gastric juice is secreted by gastric pits (see Tables
16–1 and 16–2).
3. The pyloric sphincter at the junction with the duo-
denum prevents backup of intestinal contents.
Liver—consists of two lobes in the upper
right and center of the abdominal cavity
(see Figs. 16–1 and 16–6)
1. Functional unit is the hexagonal liver lobule: liver
cells, sinusoids, branches of the hepatic artery and
portal vein, and bile ducts.
2. The only digestive secretion is bile; the hepatic
duct takes bile out of the liver and unites with the
cystic duct of the gallbladder to form the common
bile duct to the duodenum.
3. Bile salts emulsify fats, a type of mechanical diges-
tion (see Table 16–1).
4. Excess cholesterol and bilirubin are excreted by the
liver into bile.
Gallbladder—on undersurface of right lobe
of liver (see Fig. 16–6)
1. Stores and concentrates bile until needed in the
duodenum (see Table 16–2).
2. The cystic duct joins the hepatic duct to form the
common bile duct.
Pancreas—in upper left abdominal quadrant
between the duodenum and the spleen (see
Fig. 16–1)
1. Pancreatic juice is secreted by acini, carried by pan-
creatic duct to the common bile duct to the duode-
num (see Fig. 16–7).
2. Enzyme pancreatic juice contains enzymes for the
digestion of all three food types (see Tables 16–1
and 16–2).
3. Bicarbonate pancreatic juice neutralizes HCl from
the stomach in the duodenum.
Small Intestine—coiled within the center of
the abdominal cavity (see Fig. 16–1); extends
from stomach to colon
1. Duodenum—ﬁrst 10 inches; the common bile duct
brings in bile and pancreatic juice. Jejunum (8 feet)
and ileum (11 feet).
2. Enzymes secreted by the intestinal glands complete
digestion (see Tables 16–1 and 16–2). Surface area
for absorption is increased by plica circulares, villi,
and microvilli (see Fig. 16–8); microvilli are the
brush border.
3. The villi contain capillary networks for the absorp-
tion of water-soluble nutrients: monosaccharides,
The Digestive System
391
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

amino acids, vitamin C and the B vitamins, miner-
als, and water. Blood from the small intestine goes
to the liver ﬁrst by way of portal circulation.
4. The villi contain lacteals (lymph capillaries) for the
absorption of fat-soluble nutrients: vitamins A, D,
E, and K, fatty acids, and glycerol, which are com-
bined to form chylomicrons. Lymph from the small
intestine is carried back to the blood in the left sub-
clavian vein.
Large Intestine (colon)—extends from the
small intestine to the anus
1. Colon—parts (see Fig. 16–9): cecum, ascending
colon, transverse colon, descending colon, sigmoid
colon, rectum, anal canal.
2. Ileocecal valve—at the junction of the cecum and
ileum; prevents backup of fecal material into the
small intestine.
3. Colon—functions: absorption of water, minerals,
vitamins; elimination of undigestible material.
4. Normal ﬂora—the bacteria of the colon; produce
vitamins, especially vitamin K, and inhibit the
growth of pathogens.
5. Defecation reﬂex—stimulus: stretching of the rec-
tum when peristalsis propels feces into it. Sensory
impulses go to the sacral spinal cord, and motor
impulses return to the smooth muscle of the rec-
tum, which contracts. The internal anal sphincter
relaxes to permit defecation. Voluntary control is
provided by the external anal sphincter, made of
skeletal muscle (see Fig. 16–10).
Liver—other functions
1. Carbohydrate metabolism—excess glucose is
stored in the form of glycogen and converted back
to glucose during hypoglycemia; fructose and
galactose are changed to glucose.
2. Amino acid metabolism—the non-essential amino
acids are synthesized by transamination; excess
amino acids are changed to carbohydrates or fats by
deamination; the amino groups are converted to
urea and excreted by the kidneys.
3. Lipid metabolism—formation of lipoproteins for
transport of fats in the blood; synthesis of choles-
terol; excretion of excess cholesterol into bile; beta-
oxidation of fatty acids to form two-carbon acetyl
groups for energy use.
4. Synthesis of plasma proteins—albumin to help
maintain blood volume; clotting factors for blood
clotting; alpha and beta globulins as carrier mole-
cules.
5. Formation of bilirubin—old RBCs are phagocy-
tized, and bilirubin is formed from the heme and
put into bile to be eliminated in feces.
6. Phagocytosis by Kupffer cells—ﬁxed macrophages;
phagocytize old RBCs and bacteria, especially bac-
teria absorbed by the colon.
7. Storage—vitamins: B12, A, D, E, and K, and the
minerals iron and copper.
8. Detoxiﬁcation—liver enzymes change potential
poisons to less harmful substances; examples of
toxic substances are alcohol, medications, and
ammonia absorbed by the colon.
392
The Digestive System
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Name the organs of the alimentary tube, and
describe the location of each. Name the accessory
digestive organs, and describe the location of each.
(pp. 370, 372, 373, 376, 378, 379, 385)
2. Explain the purpose of mechanical digestion, and
give two examples. Explain the purpose of chemical
digestion, and give two examples. (pp. 370, 374)
3. Name the end products of digestion, and explain
how each is absorbed in the small intestine.
(pp. 370, 384)
4. Explain the function of teeth and tongue, salivary
amylase, enamel of teeth, lysozyme, and water of
saliva. (pp. 370–372)
5. Describe the function of the pharynx, esophagus,
and lower esophageal sphincter. (p. 373)
6. Name and describe the four layers of the alimen-
tary tube. (pp. 373, 376)
7. State the two general functions of the stomach and
the function of the pyloric sphincter. Explain the
function of pepsin, HCl, and mucus. (pp. 376–378)
8. Describe the general functions of the small intes-
tine, and name the three parts. Describe the struc-
tures that increase the surface area of the small
intestine. (pp. 378, 383–384)
9. Explain how the liver, gallbladder, and pancreas
contribute to digestion. (pp. 379, 381)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

1. Many people with GERD take proton-pump
inhibitors, medications that reduce stomach acid.
Why should these people be especially careful
about what they eat or drink?
2. The colon does not have villi as part of its mucosa.
Explain why villi are not necessary.
3. Food remains in the stomach for several hours.
Passage of food through the small intestine also
requires several hours. These two organs have very
different shapes. Explain why they are able to
retain food for so long, for efficient digestion and
absorption.
4. Diarrhea can be unpleasant, but does have a
purpose. Explain, and state the disadvantages as
well.
5. Explain how a spinal cord transection at the level of
T10 will affect the defecation reﬂex.
6. You have seen the word enteric (or entero) several
times in this chapter. What does it mean? Deﬁne
each of these: enteric bacilli, enterovirus, Entero-
coccus.
7. The word symbiosis indicates two different kinds of
living things, and literally means “together-life.”
Our own alimentary tube is a perfect example.
Explain, and state the advantages to each living
thing.
The Digestive System
393
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
10. Describe the internal structure of a villus, and
explain how its structure is related to absorption.
(p. 384)
11. Name the parts of the large intestine, and
describe the function of the ileocecal valve.
(p. 385)
12. Describe the functions of the colon and of the
normal ﬂora of the colon. (pp. 385–386)
13. With respect to the defecation reﬂex, explain the
stimulus, the part of the CNS directly involved,
the effector muscle, the function of the internal
anal sphincter, and the voluntary control possible.
(p. 386)
14. Name the vitamins and minerals stored in the
liver. Name the ﬁxed macrophages of the liver,
and explain their function. (p. 388)
15. Describe how the liver regulates blood glucose
level. Explain the purpose of the processes of
deamination and transamination. (pp. 386, 388)
16. Name the plasma proteins produced by the liver,
and state the function of each. (p. 388)
17. Name the substances excreted by the liver into
bile. (p. 388)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

394
CHAPTER 17
Chapter Outline
Body Temperature
Heat Production
Heat Loss
Heat loss through the skin
Heat loss through the respiratory tract
Heat loss through the urinary and digestive tracts
Regulation of Body Temperature
Mechanisms to increase heat loss
Mechanisms to conserve heat
Fever
Metabolism
Cell Respiration
Glycolysis
Krebs citric acid cycle
Cytochrome transport system
Proteins and fats as energy sources
Energy available from the three nutrient types
Synthesis Uses of Foods
Glucose
Amino acids
Fatty acids and glycerol
Vitamins and Minerals
Metabolic Rate
Aging and Metabolism
BOX 17–1
HEAT-RELATED DISORDERS
BOX 17–2
COLD-RELATED DISORDERS
BOX 17–3
KETOSIS
BOX 17–4
METABOLIC RATE
BOX 17–5
WEIGHT LOSS
BOX 17–6
LEPTIN AND BODY-MASS INDEX
Student Objectives
• State the normal range of human body tempera-
ture.
• Explain how cell respiration produces heat and the
factors that affect heat production.
• Describe the pathways of heat loss through the
skin and respiratory tract.
• Explain why the hypothalamus is called the “ther-
mostat” of the body.
• Describe the mechanisms to increase heat loss.
• Describe the mechanisms to conserve heat.
• Explain how a fever is caused and its advantages
and disadvantages.
• Deﬁne metabolism, anabolism, and catabolism.
• Describe what happens to a glucose molecule dur-
ing the three stages of cell respiration.
• State what happens to each of the products of cell
respiration.
• Explain how amino acids and fats may be used for
energy production.
• Describe the synthesis uses for glucose, amino
acids, and fats.
• Explain what is meant by metabolic rate and kilo-
calories.
• Describe the factors that affect a person’s meta-
bolic rate.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Body Temperature
and Metabolism
395
New Terminology
Anabolism (an-AB-uh-lizm)
Catabolism (kuh-TAB-uh-lizm)
Coenzyme (ko-EN-zime)
Conduction (kon-DUK-shun)
Convection (kon-VEK-shun)
Cytochromes (SIGH-toh-krohms)
Endogenous pyrogen (en-DOJ-en-us PYE-roh-jen)
Fever (FEE-ver)
Glycolysis (gly-KAHL-ah-sis)
Kilocalorie (KILL-oh-KAL-oh-ree)
Krebs cycle (KREBS SIGH-kuhl)
Pyrogen (PYE-roh-jen)
Radiation (RAY-dee-AY-shun)
Vitamins (VY-tah-mins)
Related Clinical Terminology
Antipyretic (AN-tigh-pye-RET-ik)
Basal metabolic rate (BAY-zuhl met-ah-BAHL-ik
RAYT)
Frostbite (FRAWST-bite)
Heat exhaustion (HEET eks-ZAWS-chun)
Heat stroke (HEET STROHK)
Hypothermia (HIGH-poh-THER-mee-ah)
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

During every moment of our lives, our cells are
breaking down food molecules to obtain ATP (adeno-
sine triphosphate) for energy-requiring cellular
processes. Naturally, we are not aware of the process
of cell respiration, but we may be aware of one of the
products—energy in the form of heat. The human
body is indeed warm, and its temperature is regulated
very precisely. Though we cannot stand barefoot on
the ice of Antarctica for months in winter, as penguins
do, we can adapt to and survive a wide range of envi-
ronmental temperatures.
This chapter discusses the regulation of body tem-
perature and also discusses metabolism, which is the
total of all reactions that take place within the body.
These reactions include the energy-releasing ones of
cell respiration and energy-requiring ones such as
protein synthesis, or DNA synthesis for mitosis. As
you will see, body temperature and metabolism are
inseparable.
BODY TEMPERATURE
The normal range of human body temperature is
96.5° to 99.5°F (36° to 38°C), with an average oral
temperature of 98.6°F (37°C). (A 1992 study sug-
gested a slightly lower average oral temperature: 98.2°
or 36.8°. But everyone seems to prefer the “tradi-
tional” average temperature.) Within a 24-hour
period, an individual’s temperature ﬂuctuates 1° to 2°,
with the lowest temperatures occurring during sleep.
At either end of the age spectrum, however, tem-
perature regulation may not be as precise as it is in
older children or younger adults. Infants have more
surface area (skin) relative to volume and are likely to
lose heat more rapidly. In the elderly, the mechanisms
that maintain body temperature may not function as
efficiently as they once did, and changes in environ-
mental temperature may not be compensated for as
quickly or effectively. This is especially important to
remember when caring for patients who are very
young or very old.
HEAT PRODUCTION
Cell respiration, the process that releases energy from
food to produce ATP, also produces heat as one of its
energy products. Although cell respiration takes place
constantly, many factors inﬂuence the rate of this
process:
1. The hormone thyroxine (and T3), produced by the
thyroid gland, increases the rate of cell respiration
and heat production. The secretion of thyroxine is
regulated by the body’s rate of energy production,
the metabolic rate itself. (See Chapter 10 for a dis-
cussion of the feedback mechanism involving the
hypothalamus and anterior pituitary gland and
Chapter 1 for an illustration.) When the metabolic
rate decreases, the thyroid gland is stimulated to
secrete more thyroxine. As thyroxine increases the
rate of cell respiration, a negative feedback mecha-
nism inhibits further secretion until metabolic rate
decreases again. Thus, thyroxine is secreted when-
ever there is a need for increased cell respiration
and is probably the most important regulator of
day-to-day energy production.
2. In stress situations, epinephrine and norepineph-
rine are secreted by the adrenal medulla, and the
sympathetic nervous system becomes more active.
Epinephrine increases the rate of cell respiration,
especially in organs such as the heart, skeletal mus-
cles, and liver. Sympathetic stimulation also in-
creases the activity of these organs. The increased
production of ATP to meet the demands of the
stress situation also means that more heat will be
produced.
3. Organs that are normally active (producing
ATP) are signiﬁcant sources of heat when the body
is at rest. The skeletal muscles, for example, are
usually in a state of slight contraction called muscle
tone. Because even slight contraction requires ATP,
the muscles are also producing heat. This amounts
to about 25% of the total body heat at rest and
much more during exercise, when more ATP is
produced.
The liver is another organ that is continually
active, producing ATP to supply energy for its
many functions. As a result, the liver produces as
much as 20% of the total body heat at rest. The
heat produced by these active organs is dispersed
throughout the body by the blood. As the relatively
cooler blood ﬂows through organs such as the mus-
cles and liver, the heat they produce is transferred
to the blood, warming it. The warmed blood circu-
lates to other areas of the body, distributing this
heat.
4. The intake of food also increases heat production,
because the metabolic activity of the digestive tract
is increased. Heat is generated as the digestive
396
Body Temperature and Metabolism
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

organs produce ATP for peristalsis and for the syn-
thesis of digestive enzymes.
5. Changes in body temperature also have an effect
on metabolic rate and heat production. This
becomes clinically important when a person has
a fever, an abnormally high body tempera-
ture. The higher temperature increases the meta-
bolic rate, which increases heat production and
elevates body temperature further. Thus, a high
fever may trigger a vicious cycle of ever-increasing
heat production. Fever is discussed later in this
chapter.
The factors that affect heat production are summa-
rized in Table 17–1.
HEAT LOSS
The pathways of heat loss from the body are the skin,
the respiratory tract, and, to a lesser extent, the uri-
nary and digestive tracts.
Heat Loss through the Skin
Because the skin covers the body, most body heat is
lost from the skin to the environment. When the envi-
ronment is cooler than body temperature (as it usually
is), heat loss is unavoidable. The amount of heat that
is lost is determined by blood ﬂow through the skin
and by the activity of sweat glands.
Blood ﬂow through the skin inﬂuences the amount
of heat lost by the processes of radiation, conduction,
and convection. Radiation means that heat from the
body is transferred to cooler objects not touching the
skin, much as a radiator warms the contents of a room
(radiation starts to become less effective when the
environmental temperature rises above 88°F). Con-
duction is the loss of heat to cooler air or objects, such
as clothing, that touch the skin. Convection means
that air currents move the warmer air away from the
skin surface and facilitate the loss of heat; this is why a
fan makes us feel cooler on hot days. Loss of heat by
convection also gives us the “wind chill factor” we
hear about in winter. A cold day that is windy will feel
colder than a cold day when the air is still, because the
wind blows the slightly warmer air surrounding the
body away, replacing it with colder air.
As you may recall from Chapter 5, the tempera-
ture of the skin and the subsequent loss of heat are
determined by blood ﬂow through the skin. The arte-
rioles in the dermis may constrict or dilate to decrease
or increase blood ﬂow. In a cold environment, vaso-
constriction decreases blood ﬂow through the dermis
and thereby decreases heat loss. In a warm environ-
ment, vasodilation in the dermis increases blood ﬂow
to the body surface and loss of heat to the environ-
ment.
The other mechanism by which heat is lost from
the skin is sweating. The eccrine sweat glands
secrete sweat (water) onto the skin surface, and excess
body heat evaporates the sweat. Think of running
water into a hot frying pan; the pan is rapidly cooled
as its heat vaporizes the water. Although sweating is
not quite as dramatic (no visible formation of steam),
the principle is just the same.
Sweating is most efficient when the humidity of the
surrounding air is low. Humidity is the percentage of
the maximum amount of water vapor the atmosphere
can contain. A humidity reading of 90% means that
the air is already 90% saturated with water vapor and
can hold little more. In such a situation, sweat does
not readily evaporate, but instead remains on the skin
even as more sweat is secreted. If the humidity is 40%,
Body Temperature and Metabolism
397
Table 17–1 FACTORS THAT AFFECT
HEAT PRODUCTION
Factor
Effect
Thyroxine
Epinephrine and
sympathetic
stimulation
Skeletal muscles
Liver
Food intake
Higher body
temperature
• The most important regulator
of day-to-day metabolism;
increases use of foods for ATP
production, thereby increasing
heat production
• Important in stress situations;
increases the metabolic activity
of many organs; increases ATP
and heat production
• Normal muscle tone requires
ATP; the heat produced is
about 25% of the total body
heat at rest
• Always metabolically active;
produces as much as 20% of
total body heat at rest
• Increases activity of the GI
tract; increases ATP and heat
production
• Increases metabolic rate, which
increases heat production,
which further increases meta-
bolic rate and heat production;
may become detrimental dur-
ing high fevers
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

however, the air can hold a great deal more water
vapor, and sweat evaporates quickly from the skin sur-
face, removing excess body heat. In air that is com-
pletely dry, a person may tolerate a temperature of
200°F for nearly 1 hour.
Although sweating is a very effective mechanism of
heat loss, it does have a disadvantage in that it requires
the loss of water in order to also lose heat. Water loss
during sweating may rapidly lead to dehydration, and
the water lost must be replaced by drinking ﬂuids (see
Box 17–1: Heat-Related Disorders).
Small amounts of heat are also lost in what is called
“insensible water loss.” Because the skin is not like a
plastic bag, but is somewhat permeable to water, a
small amount of water diffuses through the skin and is
evaporated by body heat. Compared to sweating, how-
ever, insensible water loss is a minor source of heat
loss.
Heat Loss through
the Respiratory Tract
Heat is lost from the respiratory tract as the warmth of
the respiratory mucosa evaporates some water from
the living epithelial surface. The water vapor formed
is exhaled, and a small amount of heat is lost.
Animals such as dogs that do not have numerous
sweat glands often pant in warm weather. Panting is
the rapid movement of air into and out of the upper
respiratory passages, where the warm surfaces evapo-
rate large amounts of water. In this way the animal
may lose large amounts of heat.
Heat Loss through the Urinary
and Digestive Tracts
When excreted, urine and feces are at body tempera-
ture, and their elimination results in a very small
amount of heat loss.
The pathways of heat loss are summarized in Table
17–2.
REGULATION OF BODY TEMPERATURE
The hypothalamus is responsible for the regulation
of body temperature and is considered the “thermo-
stat” of the body. As the thermostat, the hypothalamus
maintains the “setting” of body temperature by bal-
ancing heat production and heat loss to keep the body
at the set temperature.
To do this, the hypothalamus must receive infor-
mation about the temperature within the body and
about the environmental temperature. Specialized
neurons of the hypothalamus detect changes in the
temperature of the blood that ﬂows through the brain.
The temperature receptors in the skin provide infor-
mation about the external temperature changes to
which the body is exposed. The hypothalamus then
integrates this sensory information and promotes the
necessary responses to maintain body temperature
within the normal range.
Mechanisms to Increase Heat Loss
In a warm environment or during exercise, the body
temperature tends to rise, and greater heat loss is
398
Body Temperature and Metabolism
BOX 17–1
HEAT-RELATED DISORDERS
of heat loss, but in high heat the sweating process
continues. As ﬂuid loss increases, sweating stops to
preserve body ﬂuid, and body temperature rises
rapidly (over 105°F , possibly as high as 110°F ).
The classic symptom of heat stroke is hot, dry
skin. The affected person often loses consciousness,
reﬂecting the destructive effect of such a high body
temperature on the brain. Treatment should involve
hospitalization so that IV ﬂuids may be adminis-
tered and body temperature lowered under med-
ical supervision. A ﬁrst-aid measure would be the
application of cool (not ice cold) water to as much
of the skin as possible. Fluids should never be forced
on an unconscious person, because the ﬂuid may
be aspirated into the respiratory tract.
Heat exhaustion is caused by excessive sweating
with loss of water and salts, especially NaCl. The
affected person feels very weak, and the skin is usu-
ally cool and clammy (moist). Body temperature is
normal or slightly below normal, the pulse is often
rapid and weak, and blood pressure may be low
because of ﬂuid loss. Other symptoms may include
dizziness, vomiting, and muscle cramps. Treatment
involves rest and consumption of salty ﬂuids or fruit
juices (in small amounts at frequent intervals).
Heat stroke is a life-threatening condition that
may affect elderly or chronically ill people on hot,
humid days, or otherwise healthy people who exer-
cise too strenuously during such weather. High
humidity makes sweating an ineffective mechanism
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

needed. This is accomplished by vasodilation in the
dermis and an increase in sweating. Vasodilation
brings more warm blood close to the body surface,
and heat is lost to the environment. However, if the
environmental temperature is close to or higher than
body temperature, this mechanism becomes ineffec-
tive. The second mechanism is increased sweating, in
which excess body heat evaporates the sweat on the
skin surface. As mentioned previously, sweating
becomes inefficient when the atmospheric humidity is
high.
On hot days, heat production may also be
decreased by a decrease in muscle tone. This is why we
may feel very sluggish on hot days; our muscles are
even slightly less contracted than usual and are slower
to respond.
Mechanisms to Conserve Heat
In a cold environment, heat loss from the body is
unavoidable but may be reduced to some extent.
Vasoconstriction in the dermis shunts blood away
from the body surface, so that more heat is kept in the
core of the body. Sweating decreases, and will stop
completely if the temperature of the hypothalamus
falls below about 98.6°F. (Remember that the internal
temperature of the brain is higher than an oral tem-
perature, and is less subject to any changes in environ-
mental temperature.)
If these mechanisms are not sufficient to prevent
the body temperature from dropping, more heat may
be produced by increasing muscle tone. When this
greater muscle tone becomes noticeable and rhythmic,
it is called shivering and may increase heat production
by as much as ﬁve times the normal.
People also have behavioral responses to cold, and
these too are important to prevent heat loss. Such
things as putting on a sweater or going indoors reﬂect
our awareness of the discomfort of being cold. For
people (we do not have thick fur as do some other
mammals), these voluntary activities are of critical
importance to the prevention of excessive heat loss
when it is very cold (see Box 17–2: Cold-Related
Disorders).
FEVER
A fever is an abnormally high body temperature
and may accompany infectious diseases, extensive
physical trauma, cancer, or damage to the CNS. The
substances that may cause a fever are called pyrogens.
Pyrogens include bacteria, foreign proteins, and
chemicals released during inflammation. These
inﬂammatory chemicals are called endogenous pyro-
gens. Endogenous means “generated from within.” It
is believed that pyrogens chemically affect the hypo-
thalamus and “raise the setting” of the hypothalamic
thermostat. The hypothalamus will then stimulate
responses by the body to raise body temperature to
this higher setting.
Let us use as a speciﬁc example a child who has a
strep throat. The bacterial and endogenous pyrogens
reset the hypothalamic thermostat upward, to 102°F.
At ﬁrst, the body is “colder” than the setting of the
hypothalamus, and the heat conservation and produc-
tion mechanisms are activated. The child feels cold
and begins to shiver (chills). Eventually, sufficient heat
is produced to raise the body temperature to the hypo-
thalamic setting of 102°F. At this time, the child will
feel neither too warm nor too cold, because the body
temperature is what the hypothalamus wants.
As the effects of the pyrogens diminish, the hypo-
thalamic setting decreases, perhaps close to normal
again, 99°F. Now the child will feel warm, and the heat
loss mechanisms will be activated. Vasodilation in the
skin and sweating will occur until the body tempera-
ture drops to the new hypothalamic setting. This
is sometimes referred to as the “crisis,” but actually
the crisis has passed, because sweating indicates that
Body Temperature and Metabolism
399
Table 17–2
PATHWAYS OF HEAT LOSS
Pathway
Mechanism
Skin (major
pathway)
Respiratory tract
(secondary
pathway)
Urinary tract
(minor pathway)
Digestive tract
(minor pathway)
• Radiation and conduction—
heat is lost from the body to
cooler air or objects.
• Convection—air currents move
warm air away from the skin.
• Sweating—excess body heat
evaporates sweat on the skin
surface.
• Evaporation—body heat evap-
orates water from the respira-
tory mucosa, and water vapor
is exhaled.
• Urination—urine is at body
temperature when eliminated.
• Defecation—feces are at body
temperature when eliminated.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

the body temperature is returning to normal. The
sequence of temperature changes during a fever is
shown in Fig. 17–1.
You may be wondering if a fever serves a useful pur-
pose. For low fevers that are the result of infection, the
answer is yes. White blood cells increase their activity
at moderately elevated temperatures, and the metabo-
lism of some pathogens is inhibited. Thus, a fever may
be beneﬁcial in that it may shorten the duration of an
infection by accelerating the destruction of the
pathogen.
High fevers, however, may have serious conse-
quences. A fever increases the metabolic rate, which
increases heat production, which in turn raises body
temperature even more. This is a positive feedback
mechanism that will continue until an external event
(such as aspirin or death of the pathogens) acts as a
brake (see Fig. 1–3). When the body temperature rises
above 106°F, the hypothalamus begins to lose its abil-
ity to regulate temperature. The proteins of cells,
especially the enzymes, are also damaged by such high
temperatures. Enzymes become denatured, that is,
lose their shape and do not catalyze the reactions nec-
essary within cells (see Fig. 2–9). As a result, cells
begin to die. This is most serious in the brain, because
neurons cannot be replaced, and cellular death is the
cause of brain damage that may follow a prolonged
high fever. The effects of changes in body temperature
on the hypothalamus are shown in Fig. 17–2.
A medication such as aspirin is called an anti-
pyretic because it lowers a fever, probably by affecting
the hypothalamic thermostat. To help lower a high
fever, the body may be cooled by sponging it with cool
water. The excessive body heat will cause this external
water to evaporate, thus reducing temperature. A very
high fever requires medical attention.
METABOLISM
The term metabolism encompasses all of the reac-
tions that take place in the body. Everything that hap-
pens within us is part of our metabolism. The reactions
of metabolism may be divided into two major cate-
gories: anabolism and catabolism.
Anabolism means synthesis or “formation” reac-
tions, the bonding together of smaller molecules to
form larger ones. The synthesis of hemoglobin by
cells of the red bone marrow, synthesis of glycogen by
liver cells, and synthesis of fat to be stored in adipose
tissue are all examples of anabolism. Such reactions
require energy, usually in the form of ATP.
400
Body Temperature and Metabolism
BOX 17–2
COLD-RELATED DISORDERS
slurred speech, drowsiness, and lack of coordina-
tion. At this stage, people often do not realize the
seriousness of their condition, and if outdoors (ice
skating or skiing) may not seek a warmer environ-
ment. In progressive hypothermia, breathing and
heart rate slow, and coma and death follow.
Other people at greater risk for hypothermia
include the elderly, whose temperature-regulating
mechanisms are no longer effective, and quadriple-
gics, who have no sensation of cold in the body. For
both of these groups, heat production is or may be
low because of inactivity of skeletal muscles.
Artiﬁcial hypothermia may be induced during
some types of cardiovascular or neurologic surgery.
This carefully controlled lowering of body tempera-
ture decreases the metabolic rate and need for
oxygen and makes possible prolonged surgery
without causing extensive tissue death in the
patient.
Frostbite is the freezing of part of the body.
Fingers, toes, the nose, and ears are most often
affected by prolonged exposure to cold, because
these areas have little volume in proportion to their
surface.
At ﬁrst the skin tingles, then becomes numb. If
body ﬂuids freeze, ice crystals may destroy capillar-
ies and tissues (because water expands when it
freezes), and blisters form. In the most severe cases
gangrene develops; that is, tissue dies because of
lack of oxygen.
Treatment of frostbite includes rewarming the
affected area. If skin damage is apparent, it should
be treated as if it were a burn injury.
Hypothermia is an abnormally low body tem-
perature (below 95°F) that is most often the result
of prolonged exposure to cold. Although the
affected person certainly feels cold at ﬁrst, this sen-
sation may pass and be replaced by confusion,
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Catabolism means decomposition, the breaking of
bonds of larger molecules to form smaller molecules.
Cell respiration is a series of catabolic reactions that
break down food molecules to carbon dioxide and
water. During catabolism, energy is often released and
used to synthesize ATP (the heat energy released was
discussed in the previous section). The ATP formed
during catabolism is then used for energy-requiring
anabolic reactions.
Most of our anabolic and catabolic reactions are
catalyzed by enzymes. Enzymes are proteins that
enable reactions to take place rapidly at body temper-
ature (see Chapter 2 to review the active site theory of
enzyme functioning). The body has thousands of
enzymes, and each is speciﬁc, that is, will catalyze only
one type of reaction. As you read the discussions that
follow, keep in mind the essential role of enzymes.
CELL RESPIRATION
You are already familiar with the summary reaction of
cell respiration,
C6H12O6  O2 →CO2  H2O  ATP  Heat,
(glucose)
the purpose of which is to produce ATP. Glucose con-
tains potential energy, and when it is broken down to
CO2 and H2O, this energy is released in the forms of
ATP and heat. The oxygen that is required comes
from breathing, and the CO2 formed is circulated to
the lungs to be exhaled. The water formed is called
metabolic water, and helps to meet our daily need for
water. Energy in the form of heat gives us a body tem-
perature, and the ATP formed is used for energy-
requiring reactions. Synthesis of ATP means that
Body Temperature and Metabolism
401
105˚
104˚
103˚
102˚
101˚
100˚
99˚
98˚
2 hr
4 hr
6 hr
8 hr
10 hr
12 hr
14 hr
16 hr
18 hr
20 hr
22 hr
24 hr
Body temperature
Time
Hypothalamic
thermostat
Actual body
temperature
Pyrogen affects hypothalamus
Vasoconstriction, shivering
Effect of pyrogen diminishes
Sweating, vasodilation
Figure 17–1.
Changes in body temperature during an episode of fever. The body tem-
perature changes (purple line) lag behind the changes in the hypothalamic thermostat
(blue line) but eventually reach whatever the thermostat has called for.
QUESTION: In this cycle of fever, why do sweating and vasodilation occur when they do?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

energy is used to bond a free phosphate molecule to
ADP (adenosine diphosphate). ADP and free phos-
phates are present in cells after ATP has been broken
down for energy-requiring processes.
The breakdown of glucose summarized here is not
quite that simple, however, and involves a complex
series of reactions. Glucose is taken apart “piece by
piece,” with the removal of hydrogens and the split-
ting of carbon–carbon bonds. This releases the energy
of glucose gradually, so that a signiﬁcant portion
(about 40%) is available to synthesize ATP.
Cell respiration of glucose involves three major
stages: glycolysis, the Krebs citric acid cycle, and the
cytochrome (or electron) transport system. Although
402
Body Temperature and Metabolism
114˚
112˚
110˚
108˚
106˚
104˚
102˚
100˚
98˚
96˚
94˚
92˚
90˚
88˚
86˚
84˚
82˚
80˚
78˚
76˚
74˚
72˚
70˚
68˚
66˚
44˚
42˚
40˚
38˚
37˚
36˚
34˚
32˚
30˚
28˚
26˚
24˚
Upper limit of survival?
Body temperature
Temperature regulation by
the hypothalamus
Heat stroke or high fever
Strenuous exercise or fever
Usual range of normal
Hypothermia
(cold weather or
immersion in
cold water)
Lower limit of survival?
˚F
˚C
Temperature regulation is
lost
Temperature regulation is
impaired
Temperature regulation is
efficient
Temperature regulation is
seriously impaired
Figure 17–2.
Effects of changes in body temperature on the temperature-regulating
ability of the hypothalamus. Body temperature is shown in degrees Fahrenheit and degrees
Celsius.
QUESTION: Give a range of temperature that an average person would probably survive.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

the details of each stage are beyond the scope of this
book, we will summarize the most important aspects
of each, and then relate to them the use of amino acids
and fats for energy. This simple summary is depicted
in Fig. 17–3.
Glycolysis
The enzymes for the reactions of glycolysis are found
in the cytoplasm of cells, and oxygen is not required
(glycolysis is an anaerobic process). Refer now to Fig.
17–3 as you read the following. In glycolysis, a six-
carbon glucose molecule is broken down to two three-
carbon molecules of pyruvic acid. Two molecules of
ATP are necessary to start the process. The energy
they supply is called energy of activation and is neces-
sary to make glucose unstable enough to begin to break
down. As a result of these reactions, enough energy is
released to synthesize four molecules of ATP, for a net
gain of two ATP molecules per glucose molecule. Also
during glycolysis, two pairs of hydrogens are removed
by NAD, a carrier molecule that contains the vitamin
niacin. Two NAD molecules thus become 2NADH2,
and these attached hydrogen pairs will be transported
to the cytochrome transport system (stage 3).
If no oxygen is present in the cell, as may happen in
muscle cells during exercise, pyruvic acid is converted
to lactic acid, which causes muscle fatigue. If oxygen is
present, however, pyruvic acid continues into the next
stage, the Krebs citric acid cycle (or, more simply, the
Krebs cycle).
Krebs Citric Acid Cycle
The enzymes for the Krebs cycle (or citric acid
cycle) are located in the mitochondria of cells. This
second stage of cell respiration is aerobic, meaning
that oxygen is required. In a series of reactions, a pyru-
vic acid molecule is “taken apart,” and its carbons are
converted to CO2. The ﬁrst CO2 molecule is removed
by an enzyme that contains the vitamin thiamine.
This leaves a two-carbon molecule called an acetyl
group, which combines with a molecule called coen-
zyme A to form acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl CoA). As
acetyl CoA continues in the Krebs cycle, two more
carbons are removed as CO2, and more pairs of hydro-
gens are picked up by NAD and FAD (another carrier
molecule that contains the vitamin riboflavin).
NADH2 and FADH2 will carry their hydrogens to the
cytochrome transport system.
During the Krebs cycle, a small amount of energy
is released, enough to synthesize one molecule of ATP
(two per glucose). Notice also that a four-carbon mol-
ecule (oxaloacetic acid) is regenerated after the forma-
tion of CO2. This molecule will react with the next
acetyl CoA, which is what makes the Krebs cycle truly
a self-perpetuating cycle. The results of the stages of
cell respiration are listed in Table 17–3. Before you
continue, you may wish to look at that table to see just
where the process has gotten thus far.
Cytochrome Transport System
Cytochromes are proteins that contain either iron or
copper and are found in the mitochondria of cells.
The pairs of hydrogens that were once part of glucose
are brought to the cytochromes by the carrier mole-
cules NAD and FAD. Each hydrogen atom is then
split into its proton (H+ ion) and its electron. The
electrons of the hydrogens are passed from one
cytochrome to the next, and ﬁnally to oxygen. The
reactions of the electrons with the cytochromes
release most of the energy that was contained in the
glucose molecule, enough to synthesize 34 molecules
of ATP. As you can see, most of the ATP produced in
cell respiration comes from this third stage.
Finally, and very importantly, each oxygen atom
that has gained two electrons (from the cytochromes)
reacts with two of the H+ ions (protons) to form water.
The formation of metabolic water contributes to the
necessary intracellular ﬂuid, and also prevents acido-
sis. If H+ ions accumulated, they would rapidly lower
the pH of the cell. This does not happen, however,
because the H+ ions react with oxygen to form water,
and a decrease in pH is prevented.
The summary of the three stages of cell respiration
in Table 17–3 also includes the vitamins and minerals
that are essential for this process. An important over-
all concept is the relationship between eating and
breathing. Eating provides us with a potential energy
source (often glucose) and with necessary vitamins and
minerals. However, to release the energy from food,
we must breathe. This is why we breathe. The oxygen
we inhale is essential for the completion of cell respi-
ration, and the CO2 produced is exhaled.
Proteins and Fats as Energy Sources
Although glucose is the preferred energy source for
cells, proteins and fats also contain potential energy
and are alternative energy sources in certain situations.
As you know, proteins are made of the smaller mol-
ecules called amino acids, and the primary use for the
amino acids we obtain from food is the synthesis of
Body Temperature and Metabolism
403
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

404
Body Temperature and Metabolism
Carbohydrates
Fats
Fatty acid
Pyruvic acid
Acetyl CoA   
Citric acid 
(Beta
oxidation
in the liver)
Glycerol
Glucose
ATP
ATP
ATP
H+
H
e
H+
H+
ATP
34
Cytochromes
Metabolic water
H2O
CO2
H2
H2
FAD
NH2
NH2
NH2
NH2
NH2
NH2
H2
NAD
NAD
Urea
3
4
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C C C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C C
C
C
C C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
CO2
CO2
=Oxygen
Proteins
Amino
acids
(Digestion)
(Digestion)
(Digestion)
2
Coenzyme A
Acetyl
groups
Oxaloacetic
acid
2
Figure 17–3.
Schematic representation of cell respiration. The breakdown of glucose is
shown in the center, amino acids on the left, and fatty acids and glycerol on the right. See
text for description.
QUESTION: To which two molecules can all three food types be converted to enter the cit-
ric acid cycle?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

new proteins. Excess amino acids, however, those not
needed immediately for protein synthesis, may be
used for energy production. In the liver, excess amino
acids are deaminated, that is, the amino group (NH2)
is removed. The remaining portion is converted to a
molecule that will ﬁt into the Krebs cycle. For exam-
ple, a deaminated amino acid may be changed to a
three-carbon pyruvic acid or to a two-carbon acetyl
group. When these molecules enter the Krebs cycle,
the results are just the same as if they had come from
glucose. This is diagrammed in Fig. 17–3.
Fats are made of glycerol and fatty acids, which are
the end products of fat digestion. These molecules may
also be changed to ones that will take part in the Krebs
cycle, and the reactions that change them usually take
place in the liver. Glycerol is a three-carbon molecule
that can be converted to the three-carbon pyruvic acid,
which enters the Krebs cycle. In the process of beta-
oxidation, the long carbon chains of fatty acids are split
into two-carbon acetyl groups, which enter a later step
in the Krebs cycle (see Fig. 17–3).
Both amino acids and fatty acids may be converted
by the liver to ketones, which are two- or four-carbon
molecules such as acetone and acetoacetic acid.
Although body cells can use ketones in cell respira-
tion, they do so slowly. In situations in which fats or
amino acids have become the primary energy sources,
a state called ketosis may develop; this is described in
Box 17–3: Ketosis. Excess amino acids may also be
converted to glucose; this is important to supply the
brain when dietary intake of carbohydrates is low. The
effects of hormones on the metabolism of food are
summarized in Table 17–4.
Energy Available from
the Three Nutrient Types
The potential energy in food is measured in units
called Calories or kilocalories. A calorie (lowercase
“c”) is the amount of energy needed to raise the tem-
perature of 1 gram of water 1°C. A kilocalorie or
Calorie (capital “C”) is 1000 times that amount of
energy.
One gram of carbohydrate yields about 4 kilocalo-
ries. A gram of protein also yields about 4 kilocalories.
A gram of fat, however, yields 9 kilocalories, and
a gram of alcohol yields 7 kilocalories. This is why a
diet high in fat is more likely to result in weight gain
if the calories are not expended in energy-requiring
activities.
You may have noticed that calorie content is part of
the nutritional information on food labels. On such
labels the term calorie actually means Calorie or kilo-
calories but is used for the sake of simplicity.
SYNTHESIS USES OF FOODS
Besides being available for energy production, each of
the three food types is used in anabolic reactions to
Body Temperature and Metabolism
405
Table 17–3
SUMMARY OF CELL RESPIRATION
Molecules That 
Vitamins or 
Stage
Enter the Process
Results
Minerals Needed
Glycolysis
(cytoplasm)
Krebs citric acid cycle
(mitochondria)
Cytochrome
transport system
(mitochondria)
• 2 ATP (net)
• 2 NADH2 (to cytochrome
transport system)
• 2 pyruvic acid (aerobic:
to Krebs cycle; anaerobic:
lactic acid formation)
• CO2 (exhaled)
• ATP (2 per glucose)
• 3 NADH2 and 1 FADH2 (to
cytochrome transport system)
• A 4-carbon molecule is regen-
erated for the next cycle
• 34 ATP
• Metabolic water
• Niacin (part of NAD)
• Thiamine (for removal
of CO2)
• Niacin (part of NAD)
• Riboﬂavin (part of FAD)
• Pantothenic acid (part
of coenzyme A)
• Iron and copper (part
of some cytochromes)
Glucose—ATP needed as
energy of activation
Pyruvic acid—from glucose
or glycerol or excess
amino acids
or
Acetyl CoA—from fatty acids
or excess amino acids
NADH2 and FADH2—from
glycolysis or the Krebs
cycle
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

synthesize necessary materials for cells and tissues. A
simple summary of these reactions is shown in Fig.
17–4. The three food types and their end products of
digestion are at the bottom of the picture, and the
arrows going upward indicate synthesis and lead to the
products formed. You may wish to refer to Fig. 17–4
as you read the next sections.
Glucose
Glucose is the raw material for the synthesis of
another important monosaccharide, the pentose sug-
ars that are part of nucleic acids. Deoxyribose is the
ﬁve-carbon sugar found in DNA, and ribose is found
in RNA. This function of glucose is very important,
for without the pentose sugars our cells could neither
produce new chromosomes for cell division nor carry
out the process of protein synthesis.
Any glucose in excess of immediate energy needs or
the need for pentose sugars is converted to glycogen
in the liver and skeletal muscles. Glycogen is then an
energy source during states of hypoglycemia or during
exercise. If still more glucose is present, it will be
changed to fat and stored in adipose tissue.
Amino Acids
As mentioned previously, the primary uses for amino
acids are the synthesis of the non-essential amino
acids by the liver and the synthesis of new proteins in
all tissues. By way of review, we can mention some
proteins with which you are already familiar: keratin
and melanin in the epidermis; collagen in the dermis,
tendons, and ligaments; myosin, actin, and myoglobin
in muscle cells; hemoglobin in RBCs; antibodies pro-
duced by WBCs; prothrombin and ﬁbrinogen for
406
Body Temperature and Metabolism
Table 17–4
HORMONES THAT
REGULATE METABOLISM
Hormone (Gland)
Effects
Thyroxine (thyroid
gland)
Growth hormone
(anterior pituitary)
Insulin (pancreas)
Glucagon (pancreas)
Cortisol (adrenal
cortex)
Epinephrine
(adrenal medulla)
• Increases use of all three
food types for energy (glu-
cose, fats, amino acids)
• Increases protein synthesis
• Increases amino acid trans-
port into cells
• Increases protein synthesis
• Increases use of fats for
energy
• Increases glucose transport
into cells and use for energy
• Increases conversion of glu-
cose to glycogen in liver
and muscles
• Increases transport of amino
acids and fatty acids into
cells to be used for synthe-
sis (not energy production)
• Increases conversion of
glycogen to glucose
• Increases use of amino acids
and fats for energy
• Increases conversion of glu-
cose to glycogen in liver
• Increases use of amino acids
and fats for energy
• Decreases protein synthesis
except in liver and GI tract
• Increases conversion of
glycogen to glucose
• Increases use of fats for
energy
BOX 17–3
KETOSIS
When fats and amino acids are to be used for
energy, they are often converted by the liver to
ketones. Ketones are organic molecules such as
acetone that may be changed to acetyl CoA and
enter the Krebs cycle. Other cells are able to use
ketones as an energy source, but they do so
slowly. When ketones are produced in small
amounts, as they usually are between meals, the
blood level does not rise sharply.
A state of ketosis exists when fats and pro-
teins become the primary energy sources, and
ketones accumulate in the blood faster than cells
can utilize them. Because ketones are organic
acids, they lower the pH of the blood. As the
blood ketone level rises, the kidneys excrete
ketones, but they must also excrete more water
as a solvent, which leads to dehydration.
Ketosis is clinically important in diabetes mel-
litus, starvation, and eating disorders such as
anorexia nervosa. Diabetics whose disease is
poorly controlled may progress to ketoacido-
sis, a form of metabolic acidosis that may lead to
confusion, coma, and death. Reversal of this
state requires a carbohydrate energy source and
the insulin necessary to utilize it.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

clotting; albumin to maintain blood volume; pepsin
and amylase for digestion; growth hormone and
insulin; and the thousands of enzymes needed to cat-
alyze reactions within the body.
The amino acids we obtain from the proteins in
our food are used by our cells to synthesize all of these
proteins in the amounts needed by the body. Only
when the body’s needs for new proteins have been
met are amino acids used for energy production. But
notice in Fig. 17–4 what happens to excess amino
acids; they will be deaminated and converted to simple
carbohydrates and contribute to glycogen storage
or they may be changed to fat and stored in adipose
tissue.
Body Temperature and Metabolism
407
Proteins
(enzymes, structural)
Non-essential
amino acids
Transamination
Proteins
(Digestion)
Amino
acids
NH2
C
C
NH2
NH2
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
(Digestion)
(Digestion)
Glucose
Glycerol
Fatty acid
Fats
Carbohydrates
Phospholipids
(cell membranes)
Pentose sugars
Excess
(deamination)
Excess
Glycogen
True fats
(adipose tissue)
Cholesterol
and other
steroids
Figure 17–4.
Synthesis uses of foods. See text for description.
QUESTION: Excess amino acids can be used to synthesize carbohydrates or fats. Can any
other food be used to synthesize proteins?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Fatty Acids and Glycerol
The end products of fat digestion that are not needed
immediately for energy production may be stored as
fat (triglycerides) in adipose tissue. Most adipose tis-
sue is found subcutaneously and is potential energy for
times when food intake decreases. Notice in Table
17–4 that insulin promotes fat synthesis and storage.
One theory of weight gain proposes that a diet high in
sugars and starches stimulates the secretion of so
much insulin that fat can only be stored, not taken out
of storage and used for energy.
Fatty acids and glycerol are also used for the syn-
thesis of phospholipids, which are essential compo-
nents of all cell membranes. Myelin, for example, is a
phospholipid of the membranes of Schwann cells,
which form the myelin sheath of peripheral neurons.
The liver can synthesize most of the fatty acids
needed by the body. Two exceptions are linoleic acid
and linolenic acid, which are essential fatty acids and
must be obtained from the diet. Linoleic acid is part of
lecithin, which in turn is part of all cell membranes.
Vegetable oils are good sources of these essential fatty
acids.
When fatty acids are broken down in the process of
beta-oxidation, the resulting acetyl groups may also be
used for the synthesis of cholesterol, a steroid. This
takes place primarily in the liver, although all cells are
capable of synthesizing cholesterol for their cell mem-
branes. The liver uses cholesterol to synthesize bile
salts for the emulsiﬁcation of fats in digestion. The
steroid hormones are also synthesized from choles-
terol. Cortisol and aldosterone are produced by the
adrenal cortex, estrogen and progesterone by the
ovaries, and testosterone by the testes.
VITAMINS AND MINERALS
Vitamins are organic molecules needed in very small
amounts for normal body functioning. Some vitamins
are coenzymes; that is, they are necessary for the
functioning of certain enzymes. Others are antioxi-
dant vitamins, including vitamins C, E, and beta-
carotene (a precursor for vitamin A). Antioxidants
prevent damage from free radicals, which are mole-
cules that contain an unpaired electron and are highly
reactive. The reactions of free radicals can damage
DNA, cell membranes, and the cell organelles. Free
radicals are formed during some normal body reac-
tions, but smoking and exposure to pollution will
increase their formation. Antioxidant vitamins com-
bine with free radicals before they can react with cel-
lular components. Plant foods are good sources of
these vitamins. Table 17–5 summarizes some impor-
tant metabolic and nutritional aspects of the vitamins
we need.
Deﬁciencies of vitamins often result in disease:
vitamin C deﬁciency and scurvy, for example (see Box
4–2). Other deﬁciency diseases that have been known
for decades include pellagra (lack of niacin), beri-beri
(riboﬂavin), pernicious anemia (B12), and rickets (D).
More recently the importance of folic acid (folacin)
for the development of the fetal central nervous sys-
tem has been recognized. Adequate folic acid during
pregnancy can signiﬁcantly decrease the chance of
spina biﬁda (open spinal column) and anencephaly
(absence of the cerebrum, always fatal) in a fetus. All
women should be aware of the need for extra (400
micrograms) folic acid during pregnancy.
Minerals are simple inorganic chemicals and have
a variety of functions, many of which you are already
familiar with. Table 17–6 lists some important aspects
of minerals. We will return to the minerals as part of
our study of ﬂuid–electrolyte balance in Chapter 19.
METABOLIC RATE
Although the term metabolism is used to describe all
of the chemical reactions that take place within the
body, metabolic rate is usually expressed as an
amount of heat production. This is because many
body processes that utilize ATP also produce heat.
These processes include the contraction of skeletal
muscle, the pumping of the heart, and the normal
breakdown of cellular components. Therefore, it is
possible to quantify heat production as a measure of
metabolic activity.
As mentioned previously, the energy available from
food is measured in kilocalories (kcal). Kilocalories are
also the units used to measure the energy expended by
the body. During sleep, for example, energy expended
by a 150-pound person is about 60 to 70 kcal per hour.
Getting up and preparing breakfast increases energy
expenditure to 80 to 90 kcal per hour. For mothers
with several small children, this value may be signiﬁ-
cantly higher. Clearly, greater activity results in
greater energy expenditure.
The energy required for merely living (lying qui-
etly in bed) is the basal metabolic rate (BMR). See
Box 17–4: Metabolic Rate for a formula to estimate
408
Body Temperature and Metabolism
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

409
Table 17–5
VITAMINS
Vitamin
Functions
Food Sources
Comment
Water Soluble
Thiamine (B1)
Riboﬂavin (B2)
Niacin (nicotinamide)
Pyridoxine (B6)
B12 (cyanocobalamin)
Biotin
Folic acid (folacin)
Pantothenic acid
Vitamin C (ascorbic
acid)
Fat Soluble
Vitamin A
Vitamin D
Vitamin E
Vitamin K
• Conversion of pyruvic acid to acetyl
CoA in cell respiration
• Synthesis of pentose sugars
• Synthesis of acetylcholine
• Part of FAD in cell respiration
• Part of NAD in cell respiration
• Metabolism of fat for energy
• Part of enzymes needed for amino
acid metabolism and protein synthe-
sis, nucleic acid synthesis, synthesis of
antibodies
• Synthesis of DNA, especially in RBC
production
• Metabolism of amino acids for energy
• Synthesis of nucleic acids
• Metabolism of fatty acids and amino
acids
• Synthesis of DNA, especially in blood
cell production
• Contributes to development of fetal
CNS
• Part of coenzyme A in cell respiration,
use of amino acids and fats for energy
• Synthesis of collagen, especially for
wound healing
• Metabolism of amino acids
• Absorption of iron
• An antioxidant—prevents cellular
damage from free radicals
• Synthesis of rhodopsin
• Calciﬁcation of growing bones
• Maintenance of epithelial tissues
• Absorption of calcium and phospho-
rus in the small intestine
• Contributes to immune responses,
action of insulin, and preservation of
muscle mass and strength
• An antioxidant—prevents destruction
of cell membranes
• Contributes to wound healing and
detoxifying ability of the liver
• Synthesis of prothrombin and
other clotting factors
• Meat, eggs,
legumes, green
leafy vegetables,
grains
• Meat, milk, cheese,
grains
• Meat, ﬁsh, grains,
legumes
• Meat, ﬁsh, grains,
yeast, yogurt
• Liver, meat, ﬁsh,
eggs, milk, cheese
• Yeast, liver, eggs
• Liver, grains,
legumes, leafy
green vegetables
• Meat, ﬁsh, grains,
legumes, vegetables
• Citrus fruits, toma-
toes, potatoes
• Yellow and green
vegetables, liver,
milk, eggs
• Fortiﬁed milk, egg
yolks, ﬁsh liver oils
• Nuts, wheat germ,
seed oils
• Liver, spinach,
cabbage
Rapidly destroyed by heat
Small amounts produced
by GI bacteria
Small amounts produced
by GI bacteria
Contains cobalt; intrinsic
factor required for
absorption
Small amounts produced
by GI bacteria
Small amounts produced
by GI bacteria
Small amounts produced
by GI bacteria
Rapidly destroyed by
heat
Stored in liver; bile salts
required for absorp-
tion
Produced in skin exposed
to UV rays; stored
in liver; bile salts
required for absorp-
tion
Stored in liver and adi-
pose tissue; bile salts
required for absorp-
tion
Large amounts produced
by GI bacteria; bile salts
required for absorption;
stored in liver
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

your own metabolic rate. A number of factors affect
the metabolic rate of an active person:
1. Exercise—Contraction of skeletal muscle increases
energy expenditure and raises metabolic rate (see
Box 17–5: Weight Loss).
2. Age—Metabolic rate is highest in young children
and decreases with age. The energy require-
ments for growth and the greater heat loss by a
smaller body contribute to the higher rate in chil-
dren. After growth has stopped, metabolic rate
decreases about 2% per decade. If a person
410
Body Temperature and Metabolism
Table 17–6
MINERALS
Mineral
Functions
Food Sources
Comment
Calcium
Phosphorus
Sodium
Potassium
Chlorine
Iron
Iodine
Sulfur
Magnesium
Manganese
Copper
Cobalt
Zinc
• Formation of bones and teeth
• Neuron and muscle functioning
• Blood clotting
• Formation of bones and teeth
• Part of DNA, RNA, and ATP
• Part of phosphate buffer system
• Contributes to osmotic pressure
of body ﬂuids
• Nerve impulse transmission and
muscle contraction
• Part of bicarbonate buffer system
• Contributes to osmotic pressure of
body ﬂuids
• Nerve impulse transmission and
muscle contraction
• Contributes to osmotic pressure of
body ﬂuids
• Part of HCI in gastric juice
• Part of hemoglobin and myoglobin
• Part of some cytochromes in cell
respiration
• Part of thyroxine and T3
• Part of some amino acids
• Part of thiamine and biotin
• Formation of bone
• Metabolism of ATP–ADP
• Formation of urea
• Synthesis of fatty acids and choles-
terol
• Synthesis of hemoglobin
• Part of some cytochromes in cell
respiration
• Synthesis of melanin
• Part of vitamin B12
• Part of carbonic anhydrase needed
for CO2 transport
• Part of peptidases needed for protein
digestion
• Necessary for normal taste sensation
• Involved in wound healing
• Milk, cheese, yogurt,
shellﬁsh, leafy green
vegetables
• Milk, cheese, ﬁsh, meat
• Table salt, almost all
foods
• Virtually all foods
• Table salt
• Meat, shellﬁsh, dried
apricots, legumes, eggs
• Iodized salt, seafood
• Meat, eggs
• Green vegetables,
legumes, seafood, milk
• Legumes, grains, nuts,
leafy green vegetables
• Liver, seafood, grains,
nuts, legumes
• Liver, meat, ﬁsh
• Meat, seafood, grains,
legumes
Vitamin D required for
absorption; stored in
bones
Vitamin D required for
absorption; stored in
bones
Most abundant cation ()
in extracellular ﬂuid
Most abundant cation ()
in intracellular ﬂuid
Most abundant anion ()
in extracellular ﬂuid
Stored in liver
Insulin and keratin require
sulfur
Part of chlorophyll in green
plants
Some stored in liver
Stored in liver
Vitamin B12 stored in liver
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Body Temperature and Metabolism
411
BOX 17–4
METABOLIC RATE
Example: A 160-pound man:
1. 160 lb at 2.2 lb/kg = 73 kg
2. 73 kg x 1.0 kcal/kg/hr = 73 kcal/hr
3. 73 kcal/hr x 24 = 1752 kcal/day
To approximate the amount of energy actually
expended during an average day (24 hours), the
following percentages may be used:
Sedentary activity: add 40% to 50% of the BMR to
the BMR
Light activity: add 50% to 65% of the BMR to the
BMR
Moderate activity: add 65% to 75% of the BMR to
the BMR
Strenuous activity: add 75% to 100% of the BMR to
the BMR
Using our example of the 120-pound woman
with a BMR of 1200 kcal/day:
Sedentary: 1680 to 1800 kcal/day
Light: 1800 to 1980 kcal/day
Moderate: 1980 to 2100 kcal/day
Strenuous: 2100 to 2400 kcal/day
To estimate your own basal metabolic rate
(BMR), calculate kilocalories (kcal) used per hour as
follows:
For women: use the factor of 0.9 kcal per kilogram
(kg) of body weight
For men: use the factor of 1.0 kcal per kg of body
weight
Then multiply kcal/hour by 24 hours to determine
kcal per day.
Example: A 120-pound woman:
1. Change pounds to kilograms:
120 lb at 2.2 lb/kg = 55 kg
2. Multiply kg weight by the BMR factor:
55 kg x 0.9 kcal/kg/hr = 49.5 kcal/hr
3. Multiply kcal/hr by 24:
49.5 kcal/hr x 24 = 1188 kcal/day
(An approximate BMR, about 1200
kcal/day)
BOX 17–5
WEIGHT LOSS
food. Keeping track of daily caloric intake is an
important part of a decision to try to lose weight. It
is also important to remember that sustained loss of
fat usually does not exceed 1 to 2 pounds per week.
In part this is so because as calorie intake decreases,
the metabolic rate decreases. There will also be loss
of some body protein so that amino acids can be
converted to carbohydrates to supply the brain.
A sensible weight-loss diet will include carbohy-
drate to supply energy needs, will have sufficient
protein (40 to 45 grams per day), and will be low in
animal fat. Including vegetables and fruits will sup-
ply vitamins, minerals, and ﬁber.
Although diet books are often found on the best-
seller lists, there is no magic method that will result
in weight loss. Losing weight depends on one sim-
ple fact: calorie expenditure in activity must exceed
calorie intake in food (the term calorie here will be
used to mean kilocalorie).
To lose 1 pound of body fat, which consists of fat,
water, and protein, 3500 calories of energy must be
expended. Although any form of exercise requires
calories, the more strenuous the exercise, the more
calories expended. Some examples are shown in the
accompanying table.
Most food packaging contains nutritional infor-
mation, including the calories per serving of the
Calories per 10 
Calories per 10 
minutes (average
minutes (average
Activity
for a 150-lb person)
Activity
for a 150-lb person)
Walking slowly
Walking briskly
Walking up stairs
Dancing (slow)
Dancing (fast)
30
45
170
40
65
Running (8 mph)
Cycling (10 mph)
Cycling (15 mph)
Swimming
120
70
115
100
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

becomes less active, the total decrease is almost 5%
per decade.
3. Body conﬁguration of adults—Tall, thin people
usually have higher metabolic rates than do short,
stocky people of the same weight. This is so because
the tall, thin person has a larger surface area (pro-
portional to weight) through which heat is con-
tinuously lost. The metabolic rate, therefore, is
slightly higher to compensate for the greater heat
loss. The variance of surface-to-weight ratios for
different body configurations is illustrated in
Fig. 17–5.
4. Sex hormones—Testosterone increases metabolic
activity to a greater degree than does estrogen, giv-
ing men a slightly higher metabolic rate than
women. Also, men tend to have more muscle, an
active tissue, whereas women tend to have more
fat, a relatively inactive tissue.
5. Sympathetic stimulation—In stress situations, the
metabolism of many body cells is increased. Also
contributing to this are the hormones epinephrine
and norepinephrine. As a result, metabolic rate
increases.
6. Decreased food intake—If the intake of food
decreases for a prolonged period of time, metabolic
rate also begins to decrease. It is as if the body’s
metabolism is “slowing down” to conserve what-
ever energy sources may still be available. (See also
Box 17–6: Leptin and Body-Mass Index.)
7. Climate—People who live in cold climates may
have metabolic rates 10% to 20% higher than peo-
ple who live in tropical regions. This is believed to
be due to the variations in the secretion of thyrox-
ine, the hormone most responsible for regulation
of metabolic rate. In a cold climate, the necessity
for greater heat production brings about an
412
Figure 17–5.
Surface-to-weight ratios. Imagine that
the three shapes are people who all weigh the same
amount. The “tall, thin person” on the right has about
50% more surface area than does the “short, stocky per-
son” on the left. The more surface area (where heat is
lost), the higher the metabolic rate.
QUESTION: Which of these ratios best represents an
infant? (Rather than weight, think of inside-outside
proportion.)
Box 17–6
LEPTIN AND BODY-MASS INDEX
directly decreases fat storage in cells, and improves
the efficiency of the pancreatic cells that produce
insulin. What was ﬁrst believed to be a simple chem-
ical signal has proved to be much more complex.
A good measure of leanness or fatness is the
body-mass index.
To calculate: Multiple weight in pounds by 703.
Divide by height in inches.
Divide again by height in inches = body-mass
index
Example: A person ﬁve foot six weighing 130
pounds.
130 x 703 = 91,390
91,390  66 = 1385
1385  66 = 20.98
The optimal body-mass index is considered to be
21. Any index over 25 is considered overweight.
The 1994 discovery of the hormone leptin was
reported to the general public in 1995, along with
speculation that leptin could become an anti-obe-
sity medication, which it has not. Leptin is a protein
produced by fat cells, and signals the hypothalamus
to release a chemical that acts as an appetite sup-
pressant. It seems to inform the brain of how much
stored fat the body has, and is therefore involved in
the regulation of body weight (along with many
other chemicals, some still unknown).
Another likely role for leptin is as a contributor to
the onset of puberty, especially in females. Girls
who are very thin, with little body fat, tend to have
a later ﬁrst menstrual period than girls with average
body fat, and a certain level of body fat is necessary
for continued ovulation. Leptin may be the chemi-
cal mediator of this information.
The most recent research indicates that leptin
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Body Temperature
1. Normal range is 96.5° to 99.5°F (36° to 38°C),
with an average of 98.6°F (37°C).
2. Normal ﬂuctuation in 24 hours is 1° to 2°F.
3. Temperature regulation in infants and the elderly is
not as precise as it is at other ages.
Heat Production
Heat is one of the energy products of cell respiration.
Many factors affect the total heat actually produced
(see Table 17–1).
1. Thyroxine from the thyroid gland—the most im-
portant regulator of daily heat production. As meta-
bolic rate decreases, more thyroxine is secreted to
increase the rate of cell respiration.
2. Stress—sympathetic impulses and epinephrine and
norepinephrine increase the metabolic activity of
many organs, increasing the production of ATP
and heat.
3. Active organs continuously produce heat. Skeletal
muscle tone produces 25% of the total body heat at
rest. The liver provides up to 20% of the resting
body heat.
4. Food intake increases the activity of the digestive
organs and increases heat production.
5. Changes in body temperature affect metabolic rate.
A fever increases the metabolic rate, and more heat
is produced; this may become detrimental during
very high fevers.
Heat Loss (see Table 17–2)
1. Most heat is lost through the skin.
2. Blood ﬂow through the dermis determines the
amount of heat that is lost by radiation, conduc-
tion, and convection.
3. Vasodilation in the dermis increases blood ﬂow and
heat loss; radiation and conduction are effective
only if the environment is cooler than the body.
4. Vasoconstriction in the dermis decreases blood
ﬂow and conserves heat in the core of the body.
5. Sweating is a very effective heat loss mechanism;
excess body heat evaporates sweat on the skin sur-
face; sweating is most effective when the atmos-
pheric humidity is low.
6. Sweating also has a disadvantage in that water is
lost and must be replaced to prevent serious dehy-
dration.
7. Heat is lost from the respiratory tract by the evap-
oration of water from the warm respiratory
mucosa; water vapor is part of exhaled air.
8. A very small amount of heat is lost as urine and
feces are excreted at body temperature.
Body Temperature and Metabolism
413
STUDY OUTLINE
increased secretion of thyroxine and a higher meta-
bolic rate.
AGING AND METABOLISM
As mentioned in the previous section, metabolic rate
decreases with age. Elderly people who remain active,
however, can easily maintain a metabolic rate (energy
production) adequate for their needs as long as their
general health is good. Some elderly people subject to
physical or emotional disability, however, may be at
risk for malnutrition. Caregivers may assess such a risk
by asking how often the person eats every day; if
appetite is good, fair, or poor; and how the food tastes.
These simple questions may help ensure adequate
nutrition.
Sensitivity to external temperature changes may
decrease with age, and the regulation of body temper-
ature is no longer as precise. Sweat glands are not as
active, and prolonged high environmental tempera-
tures are a real danger for elderly people. In August
2003, in Europe, an unusually long and severe heat
wave was the cause of at least 25,000 deaths. Most of
those who died were elderly.
SUMMARY
Food is needed for the synthesis of new cells and tis-
sues, or is utilized to produce the energy required for
such synthesis reactions. As a consequence of metabo-
lism, heat energy is released to provide a constant
body temperature and permit the continuation of
metabolic activity. The metabolic pathways described
in this chapter are only a small portion of the body’s
total metabolism. Even this simple presentation, how-
ever, suggests the great chemical complexity of the
functioning human being.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Regulation of Heat Loss
1. The hypothalamus is the thermostat of the body
and regulates body temperature by balancing heat
production and heat loss.
2. The hypothalamus receives information from its
own neurons (blood temperature) and from the
temperature receptors in the dermis.
3. Mechanisms to increase heat loss are vasodilation
in the dermis and increased sweating. Decreased
muscle tone will decrease heat production.
4. Mechanisms to conserve heat are vasoconstriction
in the dermis and decreased sweating. Increased
muscle tone (shivering) will increase heat produc-
tion.
Fever—an abnormally elevated body temper-
ature
1. Pyrogens are substances that cause a fever: bacteria,
foreign proteins, or chemicals released during
inﬂammation (endogenous pyrogens).
2. Pyrogens raise the setting of the hypothalamic
thermostat; the person feels cold and begins to
shiver to produce heat.
3. When the pyrogen has been eliminated, the hypo-
thalamic setting returns to normal; the person feels
warm, and sweating begins to lose heat to lower the
body temperature.
4. A low fever may be beneﬁcial because it increases
the activity of WBCs and inhibits the activity of
some pathogens.
5. A high fever may be detrimental because enzymes
are denatured at high temperatures. This is most
critical in the brain, where cells that die cannot be
replaced.
Metabolism—all the reactions within the
body
1. Anabolism—synthesis reactions that usually
require energy in the form of ATP.
2. Catabolism—decomposition reactions that often
release energy in the form of ATP.
3. Enzymes catalyze most anabolic and catabolic reac-
tions.
Cell Respiration—the breakdown of food
molecules to release their potential energy
and synthesize ATP (Fig. 17–3)
1. Glucose  oxygen yields CO2  H2O  ATP 
heat.
2. The breakdown of glucose involves three stages:
glycolysis, the Krebs cycle, and the cytochrome
(electron) transport system (see also Table 17–3).
3. The oxygen necessary comes from breathing.
4. The water formed becomes part of intracellular
ﬂuid; CO2 is exhaled; ATP is used for energy-
requiring reactions; heat provides a body tempera-
ture.
Proteins and Fats—as energy sources (see
Table 17–4 for hormonal regulation)
1. Excess amino acids are deaminated in the liver and
converted to pyruvic acid or acetyl groups to enter
the Krebs cycle. Amino acids may also be converted
to glucose to supply the brain (Fig. 17–3).
2. Glycerol is converted to pyruvic acid to enter the
Krebs cycle.
3. Fatty acids, in the process of beta-oxidation in the
liver, are split into acetyl groups to enter the Krebs
cycle; ketones are formed for transport to other
cells (see Fig. 17–3).
Energy Available from Food
1. Energy is measured in kilocalories (Calories):
kcal.
2. There are 4 kcal per gram of carbohydrate, 4 kcal
per gram of protein, 9 kcal per gram of fat. With
reference to food, kilocalories may be called calo-
ries.
Synthesis Uses of Foods (Fig. 17–4)
1. Glucose—used to synthesize the pentose sugars for
DNA and RNA; used to synthesize glycogen to
store energy in liver and muscles.
2. Amino acids—used to synthesize new proteins and
the non-essential amino acids; essential amino
acids must be obtained in the diet.
3. Fatty acids and glycerol—used to synthesize phos-
pholipids for cell membranes, triglycerides for fat
storage in adipose tissue, and cholesterol and other
steroids; essential fatty acids must be obtained in
the diet.
4. Any food eaten in excess will be changed to fat and
stored.
5. Vitamins and minerals—see Tables 17–5 and 17–6.
Metabolic Rate—heat production by the
body; measured in kcal
1. Basal metabolic rate (BMR) is the energy required
to maintain life (see Box 17–4); several factors
inﬂuence the metabolic rate of an active person.
414
Body Temperature and Metabolism
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

2. Age—metabolic rate is highest in young children
and decreases with age.
3. Body conﬁguration—more surface area propor-
tional to weight (tall and thin) means a higher
metabolic rate.
4. Sex hormones—men usually have a higher meta-
bolic rate than do women; men have more muscle
proportional to fat than do women.
5. Sympathetic stimulation—metabolic activity in-
creases in stress situations.
6. Decreased food intake—metabolic rate decreases
to conserve available energy sources.
7. Climate—people who live in cold climates usually
have higher metabolic rates because of a greater
need for heat production.
Body Temperature and Metabolism
415
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. State the normal range of human body temperature
in °F and °C. (p. 396)
2. State the summary equation of cell respiration, and
state what happens to (or the purpose of) each of
the products. (p. 401)
3. Describe the role of each in heat production: thy-
roxine, skeletal muscles, stress situations, and the
liver. (p. 396)
4. Describe the two mechanisms of heat loss through
the skin, and explain the role of blood ﬂow.
Describe how heat is lost through the respiratory
tract. (pp. 397–398)
5. Explain the circumstances that exist when sweating
and vasodilation in the dermis are not effective
mechanisms of heat loss. (p. 397)
6. Name the part of the brain that regulates body
temperature, and explain what is meant by a ther-
mostat. (p. 398)
7. Describe the responses by the body to a warm envi-
ronment and to a cold environment. (pp. 399)
8. Explain how pyrogens are believed to cause a fever,
and give two examples of pyrogens. (p. 399)
9. Deﬁne metabolism, anabolism, catabolism, kilo-
calorie, and metabolic rate. (pp. 400, 401, 405,
408)
10. Name the three stages of the cell respiration
of glucose and state where in the cell each takes
place and whether or not oxygen is required.
(pp. 403)
11. For each, state the molecules that enter the
process and the results of the process: glycolysis,
Krebs cycle, and cytochrome transport system.
(pp. 403–405)
12. Explain how fatty acids, glycerol, and excess
amino acids are used for energy production in cell
respiration. (pp. 403, 405)
13. Describe the synthesis uses for glucose, amino
acids, and fatty acids. (pp. 406–408)
14. Describe four factors that affect the metabolic
rate of an active person. (pp. 410, 412)
15. If lunch consists of 60 grams of carbohydrate,
15 grams of protein, and 10 grams of fat, how
many kilocalories are provided by this meal?
(p. 405)
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
1. For many people, iceberg lettuce is the vegetable
eaten most often. What does lettuce provide? What
does lettuce lack, compared to vegetables such as
broccoli?
2. Fourteen-year-old Donna has just decided that eat-
ing meat is “gross,” and that she will be a vegetar-
ian. What difficulties are there with such a diet;
that is, what nutrients may be lacking? How may
they be obtained?
3. Studies with animals have shown that caloric
restriction may prolong life by protecting the brain
from some effects of aging. The animals’ diet was
about half the usual calories they would consume.
For people, 1250 to 1500 calories per day would be
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

restrictive (compared to the 2000 calories or more
that many of us in North America consume).
Would it be worth it for a life span of 110 years?
Describe the problems with such a diet.
4. Every summer small children are left alone in cars
“just for a few minutes,” while a parent does an
errand. The result may be tragic—severe brain
damage or death of the child from heat stroke.
Explain why small children are so susceptible to
heat.
5. Remember the Titanic, which sank in April of
1912? There were not enough lifeboats for every-
one, and many people were in the water of the
North Atlantic. They did have life jackets, and did
not drown, but many were dead within half an
hour. Explain why.
6. An elderly person and a quadriplegic person may
each have difficulties during cold weather. Explain
how the problem is a little different for each.
416
Body Temperature and Metabolism
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CHAPTER 18
The Urinary System
417
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

418
CHAPTER 18
Chapter Outline
Kidneys
Internal Structure of the Kidney
The Nephron
Renal corpuscle
Renal tubule
Blood Vessels of the Kidney
Formation of Urine
Glomerular Filtration
Tubular Reabsorption
Mechanisms of reabsorption
Tubular Secretion
Hormones That Inﬂuence Reabsorption of Water
Summary of Urine Formation
The Kidneys and Acid–Base Balance
Other Functions of the Kidneys
Elimination of Urine
Ureters
Urinary Bladder
Urethra
The Urination Reﬂex
Characteristics of Urine
Aging and the Urinary System
BOX 18–1
FLOATING KIDNEY
BOX 18–2
RENAL FAILURE AND HEMODIALYSIS
BOX 18–3
ERYTHROPOIETIN
BOX 18–4
KIDNEY STONES
BOX 18–5
BLOOD TESTS AND KIDNEY FUNCTION
BOX 18–6
URINARY TRACT INFECTIONS
Student Objectives
• Describe the location and general function of each
organ of the urinary system.
• Name the parts of a nephron and the important
blood vessels associated with them.
• Explain how the following are involved in urine
formation: glomerular ﬁltration, tubular reabsorp-
tion, tubular secretion, and blood ﬂow through the
kidney.
• Describe the mechanisms of tubular reabsorption,
and explain the importance of tubular secretion.
• Describe how the kidneys help maintain normal
blood volume and blood pressure.
• Name and state the functions of the hormones
that affect the kidneys.
• Describe how the kidneys help maintain normal
pH of blood and tissue ﬂuid.
• Describe the urination reﬂex, and explain how vol-
untary control is possible.
• Describe the characteristics of normal urine.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Urinary System
419
New Terminology
Bowman’s capsule (BOW-manz KAP-suhl)
Detrusor muscle (de-TROO-ser)
External urethral sphincter (yoo-REE-thruhl
SFINK-ter)
Glomerular ﬁltration rate (gloh-MER-yoo-ler ﬁll-
TRAY-shun RAYT)
Glomerulus (gloh-MER-yoo-lus)
Internal urethral sphincter (yoo-REE-thruhl
SFINK-ter)
Juxtaglomerular cells ( JUKS-tah-gloh-MER-yoo-ler
SELLS)
Micturition (MIK-tyoo-RISH-un)
Nephron (NEFF-ron)
Nitrogenous wastes (nigh-TRAH-jen-us)
Peritubular capillaries (PER-ee-TOO-byoo-ler)
Renal corpuscle (REE-nuhl KOR-pus’l)
Renal ﬁltrate (REE-nuhl FILL-trayt)
Renal tubule (REE-nuhl TOO-byoo’l)
Retroperitoneal (RE-troh-PER-i-toh-NEE-uhl)
Speciﬁc gravity (spe-SIF-ik GRA-vi-tee)
Threshold level (THRESH-hold LE-vuhl)
Trigone (TRY-gohn)
Ureter (YOOR-uh-ter)
Urethra (yoo-REE-thrah)
Urinary bladder (YOOR-i-NAR-ee BLA-der)
Related Clinical Terminology
Cystitis (sis-TIGH-tis)
Dysuria (dis-YOO-ree-ah)
Hemodialysis (HEE-moh-dye-AL-i-sis)
Nephritis (ne-FRY-tis)
Oliguria (AH-li-GYOO-ree-ah)
Polyuria (PAH-li-YOO-ree-ah)
Renal calculi (REE-nuhl KAL-kew-lye)
Renal failure (REE-nuhl FAYL-yer)
Uremia (yoo-REE-me-ah)
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The ﬁrst successful human organ transplant was a
kidney transplant performed in 1953. Because the
donor and recipient were identical twins, rejection was
not a problem. Thousands of kidney transplants have
been performed since then, and the development of
immunosuppressive medications has permitted many
people to live normal lives with donated kidneys.
Although a person usually has two kidneys, one kidney
is sufficient to carry out the complex work required to
maintain homeostasis of the body ﬂuids.
The urinary system consists of two kidneys, two
ureters, the urinary bladder, and the urethra (Fig.
18–1). The formation of urine is the function of the
kidneys, and the rest of the system is responsible for
eliminating the urine.
Body cells produce waste products such as urea,
420
The Urinary System
Diaphragm
Right kidney
Psoas major muscle
lliacus muscle
Right ureter
Urinary bladder
Urethra
Symphysis pubis
Trigone of bladder
Opening of ureter
Sacrum
Pelvis
Lumbar vertebra
Left common iliac
artery and vein
Left ureter
Left kidney
Left renal artery and vein
Superior mesenteric artery
Left adrenal gland
Inferior vena cava
Aorta
Ribs
Figure 18–1.
The urinary system shown in anterior view.
QUESTION: Why is blood pressure relatively high in the kidneys? What do you see that
would suggest this?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

creatinine, and ammonia, which must be removed
from the blood before they accumulate to toxic levels.
As the kidneys form urine to excrete these waste prod-
ucts, they also accomplish several other important
functions:
1. Regulation of the volume of blood by excretion or
conservation of water
2. Regulation of the electrolyte content of the blood
by the excretion or conservation of minerals
3. Regulation of the acid–base balance of the blood by
excretion or conservation of ions such as H ions
or HCO3
 ions
4. Regulation of all of the above in tissue ﬂuid
The process of urine formation, therefore, helps
maintain the normal composition, volume, and pH of
both blood and tissue ﬂuid by removing those sub-
stances that would upset the normal constancy and
balance of these extracellular ﬂuids.
KIDNEYS
The two kidneys are located in the upper abdominal
cavity on either side of the vertebral column, behind
the peritoneum (retroperitoneal). The upper por-
tions of the kidneys rest on the lower surface of the
diaphragm and are enclosed and protected by the
lower rib cage (see Fig. 18–1). The kidneys are
embedded in adipose tissue that acts as a cushion and
is in turn covered by a ﬁbrous connective tissue mem-
brane called the renal fascia, which helps hold the
kidneys in place (see Box 18–1: Floating Kidney).
Each kidney has an indentation called the hilus
on its medial side. At the hilus, the renal artery enters
the kidney, and the renal vein and ureter emerge. The
renal artery is a branch of the abdominal aorta, and the
renal vein returns blood to the inferior vena cava (see
Fig. 18–1). The ureter carries urine from the kidney to
the urinary bladder.
INTERNAL STRUCTURE
OF THE KIDNEY
In a coronal or frontal section of the kidney, three
areas can be distinguished (Fig. 18–2). The lateral and
middle areas are tissue layers, and the medial area at
the hilus is a cavity. The outer tissue layer is called the
renal cortex; it is made of renal corpuscles and convo-
luted tubules. These are parts of the nephron and are
described in the next section. The inner tissue layer is
the renal medulla, which is made of loops of Henle
and collecting tubules (also parts of the nephron). The
renal medulla consists of wedge-shaped pieces called
renal pyramids. The tip of each pyramid is its apex or
papilla.
The third area is the renal pelvis; this is not a layer
of tissues, but rather a cavity formed by the expansion
of the ureter within the kidney at the hilus. Funnel-
shaped extensions of the renal pelvis, called calyces
(singular: calyx), enclose the papillae of the renal pyr-
amids. Urine ﬂows from the renal pyramids into the
calyces, then to the renal pelvis and out into the ureter.
THE NEPHRON
The nephron is the structural and functional unit of
the kidney. Each kidney contains approximately 1 mil-
lion nephrons. It is in the nephrons, with their associ-
ated blood vessels, that urine is formed. Each nephron
has two major portions: a renal corpuscle and a renal
tubule. Each of these major parts has further subdivi-
sions, which are shown with their blood vessels in Fig.
18–3.
Renal Corpuscle
A renal corpuscle consists of a glomerulus surroun-
ded by a Bowman’s capsule. The glomerulus is a cap-
illary network that arises from an afferent arteriole
and empties into an efferent arteriole. The diameter
The Urinary System
421
BOX 18–1
FLOATING KIDNEY
A ﬂoating kidney is one that has moved out of its
normal position. This may happen in very thin
people whose renal cushion of adipose tissue is
thin, or it may be the result of a sharp blow to
the back that dislodges a kidney.
A kidney can function in any position; the
problem with a ﬂoating kidney is that the ureter
may become twisted or kinked. If urine cannot
ﬂow through the ureter, the urine backs up and
collects in the renal pelvis. Incoming urine
from the renal tubules then backs up as well. If
the renal ﬁltrate cannot ﬂow out of Bowman’s
capsules, the pressure within Bowman’s capsules
increases, opposing the blood pressure in the
glomeruli. Glomerular ﬁltration then cannot take
place efficiently. If uncorrected, this may lead to
permanent kidney damage.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

422
The Urinary System
Renal corpuscle
Renal cortex
Renal tubule
Renal medulla
Papillary duct
B
D
Papilla of pyramid
Calyx
Renal pelvis
Renal artery
Renal vein
Interlobar
artery
Arcuate artery
Ureter
A
C
Nephron
Renal cortex
Renal medulla
(pyramids)
Figure 18–2.
(A) Frontal section of the right kidney showing internal structure and
blood vessels. (B) The magniﬁed section of the kidney shows several nephrons. (C) Vascular
cast of a kidney in lateral view. Red plastic ﬁlls the blood vessels. (D) Vascular cast in medial
view. Blood vessels have been removed; yellow plastic ﬁlls the renal pelvis. (Photographs C
and D by Dan Kaufman.)
QUESTION: Which main parts of a nephron are found in the renal cortex? Which areas of
a kidney have many blood vessels?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

423
Bowman's capsule
(inner layer)
Bowman's capsule
(outer layer)
Efferent arteriole
Juxtaglomerular
cells
Afferent arteriole
Collecting tubule
Distal
convoluted tubule
Podocyte
Glomerulus
Proximal convoluted
tubule
Loop of Henle
Peritubular capillaries
Renal
cortex
Renal
medulla
Figure 18–3.
A nephron with its associated blood vessels. Portions of the nephron have
been magniﬁed. The arrows indicate the direction of blood ﬂow and ﬂow of renal ﬁltrate.
See text for description.
QUESTION: How does the shape of a podocyte contribute to its function? How is the lin-
ing of the proximal convoluted tubule specialized?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

of the efferent arteriole is smaller than that of the
afferent arteriole, which helps maintain a fairly high
blood pressure in the glomerulus.
Bowman’s capsule (or glomerular capsule) is the
expanded end of a renal tubule; it encloses the
glomerulus. The inner layer of Bowman’s capsule is
made of podocytes; the name means “foot cells,” and
the “feet” of the podocytes are on the surface of the
glomerular capillaries. The arrangement of podocytes
creates pores, spaces between adjacent “feet,” which
make this layer very permeable. The outer layer of
Bowman’s capsule has no pores and is not permeable.
The space between the inner and outer layers of
Bowman’s capsule contains renal ﬁltrate, the ﬂuid that
is formed from the blood in the glomerulus and will
eventually become urine.
Renal Tubule
The renal tubule continues from Bowman’s capsule
and consists of the following parts: proximal convo-
luted tubule (in the renal cortex), loop of Henle (or
loop of the nephron, in the renal medulla), and distal
convoluted tubule (in the renal cortex). The distal
convoluted tubules from several nephrons empty into
a collecting tubule. Several collecting tubules then
unite to form a papillary duct that empties urine into
a calyx of the renal pelvis.
Cross-sections of the parts of the renal tubule are
shown in Fig. 18–3. Notice how thin the walls of the
tubule are, and also the microvilli in the proximal con-
voluted tubule. These anatomic characteristics provide
for efficient exchanges of materials, as you will see.
All parts of the renal tubule are surrounded by
peritubular capillaries, which arise from the efferent
arteriole. The peritubular capillaries will receive the
materials reabsorbed by the renal tubules; this is
described in the section on urine formation.
BLOOD VESSELS OF THE KIDNEY
The pathway of blood ﬂow through the kidney is an
essential part of the process of urine formation. Blood
from the abdominal aorta enters the renal artery,
which branches extensively within the kidney into
smaller arteries (see Fig. 18–2). The smallest arteries
give rise to afferent arterioles in the renal cortex (see
Fig. 18–3). From the afferent arterioles, blood ﬂows
into the glomeruli (capillaries), to efferent arterioles,
to peritubular capillaries, to veins within the kidney, to
the renal vein, and ﬁnally to the inferior vena cava.
Notice that in this pathway there are two sets of cap-
illaries, and recall that it is in capillaries that exchanges
take place between the blood and surrounding tissues.
Therefore, in the kidneys there are two sites of ex-
change. The exchanges that take place between the
nephrons and the capillaries of the kidneys will form
urine from blood plasma.
Figure 18–2 shows two views of a vascular cast of a
kidney; the shape of the blood vessels has been pre-
served in red plastic. You can see how dense the vas-
culature of a kidney is, and most of these vessels are
capillaries.
FORMATION OF URINE
The formation of urine involves three major pro-
cesses. The ﬁrst is glomerular ﬁltration, which takes
place in the renal corpuscles. The second and third are
tubular reabsorption and tubular secretion, which take
place in the renal tubules.
GLOMERULAR FILTRATION
You may recall that ﬁltration is the process in which
blood pressure forces plasma and dissolved material
out of capillaries. In glomerular ﬁltration, blood
pressure forces plasma, dissolved substances, and small
proteins out of the glomeruli and into Bowman’s cap-
sules. This ﬂuid is no longer plasma but is called renal
ﬁltrate.
The blood pressure in the glomeruli, compared
with that in other capillaries, is relatively high, about
60 mmHg. The pressure in Bowman’s capsule is very
low, and its inner, podocyte layer is very permeable, so
that approximately 20% to 25% of the blood that
enters glomeruli becomes renal ﬁltrate in Bowman’s
capsules. The blood cells and larger proteins are too
large to be forced out of the glomeruli, so they remain
in the blood. Waste products are dissolved in blood
plasma, so they pass into the renal ﬁltrate. Useful
materials such as nutrients and minerals are also dis-
solved in plasma and are also present in renal ﬁltrate.
Filtration is not selective with respect to usefulness; it
is selective only with respect to size. Therefore, renal
ﬁltrate is very much like blood plasma, except that
there is far less protein and no blood cells are present.
The glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR) is the
amount of renal ﬁltrate formed by the kidneys in 1
minute, and averages 100 to 125 mL per minute. GFR
424
The Urinary System
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

may be altered if the rate of blood ﬂow through the
kidney changes. If blood ﬂow increases, the GFR
increases, and more ﬁltrate is formed. If blood ﬂow
decreases (as may happen following a severe hemor-
rhage), the GFR decreases, less ﬁltrate is formed, and
urinary output decreases (see Box 18–2: Renal Failure
and Hemodialysis).
TUBULAR REABSORPTION
Tubular reabsorption takes place from the renal
tubules into the peritubular capillaries. In a 24-hour
period, the kidneys form 150 to 180 liters of ﬁltrate,
and normal urinary output in that time is 1 to 2 liters.
Therefore, it becomes apparent that most of the renal
ﬁltrate does not become urine. Approximately 99% of
the ﬁltrate is reabsorbed back into the blood in the
peritubular capillaries. Only about 1% of the ﬁltrate
will enter the renal pelvis as urine.
Most reabsorption and secretion (about 65%) take
place in the proximal convoluted tubules, whose cells
have microvilli that greatly increase their surface area.
The distal convoluted tubules and collecting tubules
are also important sites for the reabsorption of water
(Fig. 18–4).
Mechanisms of Reabsorption
1. Active transport—the cells of the renal tubule use
ATP to transport most of the useful materials from
the ﬁltrate to the blood. These useful materials
include glucose, amino acids, vitamins, and positive
ions.
For many of these substances, the renal tubules
have a threshold level of reabsorption. This means
that there is a limit to how much the tubules can
remove from the ﬁltrate. For example, if the ﬁltrate
level of glucose is normal (reﬂecting a normal
The Urinary System
425
BOX 18–2
RENAL FAILURE AND HEMODIALYSIS
artiﬁcial kidney machine to do what the patient’s
nephrons can no longer do. The patient’s blood is
passed through minute tubes surrounded by ﬂuid
(dialysate) with the same chemical composition as
plasma. Waste products and excess minerals diffuse
out of the patient’s blood into the ﬂuid of the
machine.
Although hemodialysis does prolong life for those
with chronic renal failure, it does not fully take the
place of functioning kidneys. The increasing success
rate of kidney transplants, however, does indeed
provide the possibility of a normal life for people
with chronic renal failure.
Renal failure, the inability of the kidneys to func-
tion properly, may be the result of three general
causes, which may be called prerenal, intrinsic
renal, and postrenal.
“Prerenal” means that the problem is “before”
the kidneys, that is, in the blood ﬂow to the kid-
neys. Any condition that decreases blood ﬂow to
the kidneys may result in renal damage and failure.
Examples are severe hemorrhage or very low blood
pressure following a heart attack (MI).
“Intrinsic renal” means that the problem is in the
kidneys themselves. Diabetes and hypertension
damage the blood vessels of the kidneys, and are
the causes of 70% of all cases of end-stage renal
failure. Bacterial infections of the kidneys or expo-
sure to chemicals (certain antibiotics) may cause
damage to the nephrons. Polycystic kidney disease
is a genetic disorder in which the kidney tubules
dilate and become nonfunctional. Severe damage
may not be apparent until age 40 to 60 years but
may then progress to renal failure.
“Postrenal” means that the problem is “after” the
kidneys, somewhere in the rest of the urinary tract.
Obstruction of urine ﬂow may be caused by kidney
stones, a twisted ureter, or prostatic hypertrophy.
Treatment of renal failure involves correcting the
speciﬁc cause, if possible. If not possible, and kidney
damage is permanent, the person is said to have
chronic renal failure. Hemodialysis is the use of an
A
C
B
Box Figure 18–A
Causes of renal failure. (A) Prerenal.
(B) Intrinsic renal. (C) Postrenal.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

426
The Urinary System
Proximal convoluted tubule
H2O
Glucose
Amino acids
Small proteins
Minerals
Wastes
Bowman's capsule
Glomerulus
Efferent arteriole
Afferent arteriole
Distal
convoluted
tubule
Collecting
tubule
H2O
H+
Ammonia
H2O
Glucose
Amino acids
Small proteins
Minerals
H2O
H2O
Wastes
H+
Na+
K+
Urine
Artery
Vein
Creatinine
Medications
Peritubular
capillaries
Loop of Henle
Glomerular
filtration
Tubular
reabsorption
Tubular secretion
Figure 18–4.
Schematic representation of glomerular ﬁltration, tubular reabsorption,
and tubular secretion. The renal tubule has been uncoiled, and the peritubular capillaries
are shown adjacent to the tubule.
QUESTION: Describe tubular secretion; that is, it goes from where to where? What sub-
stances may be secreted?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

blood glucose level), the tubules will reabsorb all of
the glucose, and none will be found in the urine.
What happens is this: The number of glucose
transporter molecules in the membranes of the
tubule cells is sufficient to take in the number of
glucose molecules passing by in the ﬁltrate. If,
however, the blood glucose level is above normal,
the amount of glucose in the ﬁltrate will also be
above normal and will exceed the threshold level of
reabsorption. The number of glucose molecules to
be reabsorbed is more than the number of the
transporter molecules available to do so. In this sit-
uation, therefore, some glucose will remain in the
ﬁltrate and be present in urine.
The reabsorption of Ca2 ions is increased by
parathyroid hormone (PTH). The parathyroid
glands secrete PTH when the blood calcium level
decreases. The reabsorption of Ca2 ions by the
kidneys is one of the mechanisms by which the
blood calcium level is raised back to normal.
The hormone aldosterone, secreted by the adre-
nal cortex, increases the reabsorption of Na ions
and the excretion of K ions. Besides regulating the
blood levels of sodium and potassium, aldosterone
also affects the volume of blood.
2. Passive transport—many of the negative ions that
are returned to the blood are reabsorbed following
the reabsorption of positive ions, because unlike
charges attract.
3. Osmosis—the reabsorption of water follows the
reabsorption of minerals, especially sodium ions.
The hormones that affect reabsorption of water are
discussed in the next section.
4. Pinocytosis—small proteins are too large to be
reabsorbed by active transport. They become
adsorbed to the membranes of the cells of the prox-
imal convoluted tubules. The cell membrane then
sinks inward and folds around the protein to take it
in (see Fig. 3–3 for depictions of this and the other
transport mechanisms). Normally all proteins in
the ﬁltrate are reabsorbed; none is found in urine.
TUBULAR SECRETION
This mechanism also changes the composition of
urine. In tubular secretion, substances are actively
secreted from the blood in the peritubular capillaries
into the ﬁltrate in the renal tubules. Waste products,
such as ammonia and some creatinine, and the meta-
bolic products of medications may be secreted into the
ﬁltrate to be eliminated in urine. Hydrogen ions (H)
may be secreted by the tubule cells to help maintain
the normal pH of blood.
HORMONES THAT INFLUENCE
REABSORPTION OF WATER
Aldosterone is secreted by the adrenal cortex in re-
sponse to a high blood potassium level, to a low blood
sodium level, or to a decrease in blood pressure. When
aldosterone stimulates the reabsorption of Na ions,
water follows from the ﬁltrate back to the blood. This
helps maintain normal blood volume and blood pres-
sure.
You may recall that the antagonist to aldosterone is
atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), which is secreted
by the atria of the heart when the atrial walls are
stretched by high blood pressure or greater blood vol-
ume. ANP decreases the reabsorption of Na ions by
the kidneys; these remain in the ﬁltrate, as does water,
and are excreted. By increasing the elimination of
sodium and water, ANP lowers blood volume and
blood pressure.
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) is released by the
posterior pituitary gland when the amount of water in
the body decreases. Under the inﬂuence of ADH, the
distal convoluted tubules and collecting tubules are
able to reabsorb more water from the renal ﬁltrate.
This helps maintain normal blood volume and blood
pressure, and also permits the kidneys to produce
urine that is more concentrated than body ﬂuids.
Producing a concentrated urine is essential to prevent
excessive water loss while still excreting all the sub-
stances that must be eliminated.
If the amount of water in the body increases, how-
ever, the secretion of ADH diminishes, and the kid-
neys will reabsorb less water. Urine then becomes
dilute, and water is eliminated until its concentration
in the body returns to normal. This may occur follow-
ing ingestion of excessive quantities of ﬂuids.
SUMMARY OF URINE FORMATION
1. The kidneys form urine from blood plasma. Blood
ﬂow through the kidneys is a major factor in deter-
mining urinary output.
2. Glomerular ﬁltration is the ﬁrst step in urine for-
mation. Filtration is not selective in terms of use-
fulness of materials; it is selective only in terms of
size. High blood pressure in the glomeruli forces
The Urinary System
427
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

plasma, dissolved materials, and small proteins into
Bowman’s capsules; the ﬂuid is now called renal
ﬁltrate.
3. Tubular reabsorption is selective in terms of useful-
ness. Nutrients such as glucose, amino acids, and
vitamins are reabsorbed by active transport and
may have renal threshold levels. Positive ions are
reabsorbed by active transport and negative
ions are reabsorbed most often by passive trans-
port. Water is reabsorbed by osmosis, and small
proteins are reabsorbed by pinocytosis.
Reabsorption takes place from the ﬁltrate in the
renal tubules to the blood in the peritubular capil-
laries.
4. Tubular secretion takes place from the blood in the
peritubular capillaries to the ﬁltrate in the renal
tubules and can ensure that wastes such as creati-
nine or excess H ions are actively put into the ﬁl-
trate to be excreted.
5. Hormones such as aldosterone, ANP, and ADH
inﬂuence the reabsorption of water and help main-
tain normal blood volume and blood pressure. The
secretion of ADH determines whether a concen-
trated or dilute urine will be formed.
6. Waste products remain in the renal ﬁltrate and are
excreted in urine. The effects of hormones on the
kidneys are summarized in Table 18–1 and illus-
trated in Fig. 18–5.
THE KIDNEYS AND
ACID–BASE BALANCE
The kidneys are the organs most responsible for main-
taining the pH of blood and tissue ﬂuid within normal
ranges. They have the greatest ability to compensate
for the pH changes that are a normal part of body
metabolism or the result of disease, and to make the
necessary corrections.
This regulatory function of the kidneys is complex,
but at its simplest it may be described as follows. If
body ﬂuids are becoming too acidic, the kidneys will
secrete more H ions into the renal ﬁltrate and will
return more HCO3
 ions to the blood. This will help
raise the pH of the blood back to normal. The reac-
tions involved in such a mechanism are shown in Fig.
18–6, to which we will return later. First, however, let
us brieﬂy consider how the kidneys will compensate
for body ﬂuids that are becoming too alkaline. You
might expect the kidneys to do just the opposite of
what was just described, and that is just what happens.
The kidneys will return H ions to the blood and
excrete HCO3
 ions in urine. This will help lower the
pH of the blood back to normal.
Because the natural tendency is for body ﬂuids to
become more acidic, let us look at the pH-raising
mechanism in more detail (see Fig. 18–6). The cells
of the renal tubules can secrete H ions or ammonia
in exchange for Na ions and, by doing so, inﬂuence
the reabsorption of other ions. Hydrogen ions are
obtained from the reaction of CO2 and water (or other
processes). An amine group from an amino acid is
combined with an H ion to form ammonia.
The tubule cell secretes the H ion and the ammo-
nia into the renal ﬁltrate, and two Na ions are reab-
sorbed in exchange. In the ﬁltrate, the H ion and
ammonia form NH4
 (an ammonium radical), which
reacts with a chloride ion (Cl) to form NH4Cl
(ammonium chloride) that is excreted in urine.
As the Na ions are returned to the blood in the
428
The Urinary System
Table 18–1 EFFECTS OF HORMONES ON THE KIDNEYS
Hormone (gland)
Function
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
(posterior pituitary)
Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
(parathyroid glands)
Aldosterone
(adrenal cortex)
Atrial natriuretic peptide
(ANP) (atria of heart)
• Increases reabsorption of water from the ﬁltrate to the blood.
• Increases reabsorption of Ca2 ions from ﬁltrate to the blood and excretion of
phosphate ions into the ﬁltrate.
• Increases reabsorption of Na ions from the ﬁltrate to the blood and excretion of
K ions into the ﬁltrate. Water is reabsorbed following the reabsorption of sodium.
• Decreases reabsorption of Na ions, which remain in the ﬁltrate. More sodium
and water are eliminated in urine.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

peritubular capillaries, HCO3
 ions follow. Notice
what has happened: Two H ions have been excreted
in urine, and two Na ions and two HCO3
 ions have
been returned to the blood. As reactions like these
take place, the body ﬂuids are prevented from becom-
ing too acidic.
Another mechanism used by the cells of the kidney
tubules to regulate pH is the phosphate buffer system,
which is described in Chapter 19.
OTHER FUNCTIONS
OF THE KIDNEYS
In addition to the functions described thus far, the kid-
neys have other functions, some of which are not
directly related to the formation of urine. These func-
tions are secretion of renin (which does inﬂuence
urine formation), production of erythropoietin, and
activation of vitamin D.
1. Secretion of renin—When blood pressure de-
creases, the juxtaglomerular ( juxta means “next
to”) cells in the walls of the afferent arterioles
secrete the enzyme renin. Renin then initiates the
renin-angiotensin mechanism to raise blood pres-
sure. This was ﬁrst described in Chapter 13, and
the sequence of events is presented in Table 18–2.
The end product of this mechanism is angiotensin
II, which causes vasoconstriction and increases the
secretion of aldosterone, both of which help raise
blood pressure.
The Urinary System
429
Increases reabsorption of H2O
ADH
ANP
PTH
Aldosterone
Blood
Urine
Increases reabsorption of Ca+2
Increases reabsorption of Na+
and excretion of K+
Decreases reabsorption of Na+
Figure 18–5.
Effects of hormones on the kidneys.
QUESTION: Do any of these hormones affect both reabsorption and secretion? If so, how?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

A normal blood pressure is essential to normal
body functioning. Perhaps the most serious change
is a sudden, drastic decrease in blood pressure, such
as would follow a severe hemorrhage. In response to
such a decrease, the kidneys will decrease ﬁltration
and urinary output and will initiate the formation of
angiotensin II. In these ways the kidneys help
ensure that the heart has enough blood to pump to
maintain cardiac output and blood pressure.
2. Secretion of erythropoietin—This hormone is
secreted whenever the blood oxygen level decreases
(a state of hypoxia). Erythropoietin stimulates
the red bone marrow to increase the rate of RBC
production. With more RBCs in circulation, the
oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood is greater,
and the hypoxic state may be corrected (see also
Box 18–3: Erythropoietin).
3. Activation of vitamin D—This vitamin exists in
several structural forms that are converted to cal-
citriol (D2) by the kidneys. Calcitriol is the most
active form of vitamin D, which increases the
absorption of calcium and phosphate in the small
intestine.
430
The Urinary System
Peritubular
capillary
Filtrate
Renal tubule
Na+
Na+
Na+
HCO3

Na+
HCO3

HCO3

HCO3

CI CI
Na+
Na+
CI
H+
H+
Na+
Na+
CO2
H2O
H2CO3

CO2
H2O
H2CO3

H+
H+



+
NH3
NH2
NH4
NH3
NH4Cl
Blood
Urine
Figure 18–6.
Renal regulation of acid–base
balance. The cells of the renal tubule secrete H
ions and ammonia into the ﬁltrate and return
Na ions and HCO3
 ions to the blood in the
peritubular capillaries. See text for further des-
cription.
QUESTION: The cells of the renal tubule make
good use of CO2. What do the cells use CO2 for?
Table 18–2
THE RENIN-ANGIOTENSIN
MECHANISM
Sequence
1. Decreased blood pressure stimulates the kidneys to
secrete renin.
2. Renin splits the plasma protein angiotensinogen
(synthesized by the liver) to angiotensin I.
3. Angiotensin I is converted to angiotensin II by an
enzyme found in lung tissue and vascular endothe-
lium.
4. Angiotensin II causes vasoconstriction and stimulates
the adrenal cortex to secrete aldosterone.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

ELIMINATION OF URINE
The ureters, urinary bladder, and urethra do not
change the composition or amount of urine, but are
responsible for the periodic elimination of urine.
URETERS
Each ureter extends from the hilus of a kidney to the
lower, posterior side of the urinary bladder (see Fig.
18–1). Like the kidneys, the ureters are retroperi-
toneal, that is, behind the peritoneum of the dorsal
abdominal cavity.
The smooth muscle in the wall of the ureter con-
tracts in peristaltic waves to propel urine toward the
urinary bladder. As the bladder ﬁlls, it expands and
compresses the lower ends of the ureters to prevent
backﬂow of urine.
URINARY BLADDER
The urinary bladder is a muscular sac below the peri-
toneum and behind the pubic bones. In women, the
bladder is inferior to the uterus; in men, the bladder is
superior to the prostate gland. The bladder is a reser-
voir for accumulating urine, and it contracts to elimi-
nate urine.
The mucosa of the bladder is transitional epithe-
lium, which permits expansion without tearing the
lining. When the bladder is empty, the mucosa
appears wrinkled; these folds are rugae, which also
permit expansion. On the ﬂoor of the bladder is a tri-
angular area called the trigone, which has no rugae
and does not expand. The points of the triangle are
the openings of the two ureters and that of the urethra
(Fig. 18–7).
The smooth muscle layer in the wall of the bladder
is called the detrusor muscle. It is a muscle in the
form of a sphere; when it contracts it becomes a
smaller sphere, and its volume diminishes. Around the
opening of the urethra the muscle ﬁbers of the detru-
sor form the internal urethral sphincter (or sphinc-
ter of the bladder), which is involuntary.
URETHRA
The urethra (see Fig. 18–7) carries urine from the
bladder to the exterior. The external urethral
sphincter is made of the surrounding skeletal muscle
of the pelvic ﬂoor, and is under voluntary control.
In women, the urethra is 1 to 1.5 inches (2.5 to 4
cm) long and is anterior to the vagina. In men, the
urethra is 7 to 8 inches (17 to 20 cm) long. The ﬁrst
part just outside the bladder is called the prostatic ure-
thra because it is surrounded by the prostate gland.
The next inch is the membranous urethra, around
which is the external urethral sphincter. The longest
portion is the cavernous urethra (or spongy or penile
urethra), which passes through the cavernous (or erec-
tile) tissue of the penis. The male urethra carries
semen as well as urine.
THE URINATION REFLEX
Urination may also be called micturition or voiding.
This reﬂex is a spinal cord reﬂex over which voluntary
control may be exerted. The stimulus for the reﬂex is
stretching of the detrusor muscle of the bladder. The
bladder can hold as much as 800 mL of urine, or even
more, but the reﬂex is activated long before the maxi-
mum is reached.
When urine volume reaches 200 to 400 mL, the
stretching is sufficient to generate sensory impulses
that travel to the sacral spinal cord. Motor impulses
return along parasympathetic nerves to the detrusor
muscle, causing contraction. At the same time, the
internal urethral sphincter relaxes. If the external ure-
thral sphincter is voluntarily relaxed, urine ﬂows into
the urethra, and the bladder is emptied.
Urination can be prevented by voluntary contrac-
tion of the external urethral sphincter. However, if the
bladder continues to ﬁll and be stretched, voluntary
control is eventually no longer possible.
The Urinary System
431
BOX 18–3
ERYTHROPOIETIN
Anemia is one of the most debilitating conse-
quences of renal failure, one that hemodialysis
cannot reverse. Diseased kidneys stop produc-
ing erythropoietin, a natural stimulus for RBC
production. Erythropoietin can be produced by
genetic engineering and is available for hemo-
dialysis patients. In the past, their anemia could
only be treated with transfusions, which exposed
these patients to possible immunologic compli-
cations of repeated exposure to donated blood
or to viral diseases. The synthetic erythropoietin
eliminates such risks. Others who beneﬁt from
this medication are cancer patients and AIDS
patients with severe anemia.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CHARACTERISTICS OF URINE
The characteristics of urine include the physical and
chemical aspects that are often evaluated as part of a
urinalysis. Some of these are described in this section,
and others are included in Appendix D: Normal
Values for Some Commonly Used Urine Tests.
Amount—normal urinary output per 24 hours is 1
to 2 liters. Many factors can signiﬁcantly change
output. Excessive sweating or loss of ﬂuid through
432
The Urinary System
Internal
urethral sphincter
External
urethral sphincter
Urethra
Urethral orifice
Trigone
Ureter
Trigone
Rugae
Openings of
ureters
Detrusor muscle
Parietal peritoneum
Ureter
Prostate gland
Prostatic urethra
Membranous
urethra
Cavernous (spongy)
urethra
Cavernous (erectile)
tissue of penis
A
B
Figure 18–7.
(A) Frontal section of female urinary bladder and urethra. (B) Frontal sec-
tion of male urinary bladder and urethra.
QUESTION: Name the sphincters of the urinary system and state whether each is volun-
tary or involuntary.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

diarrhea will decrease urinary output (oliguria) to
conserve body water. Excessive ﬂuid intake will
increase urinary output (polyuria). Consumption of
alcohol will also increase output because alcohol
inhibits the secretion of ADH, and the kidneys will
reabsorb less water.
Color—the typical yellow color of urine (from
urochrome, a breakdown product of bile) is often
referred to as “straw” or “amber.” Concentrated
urine is a deeper yellow (amber) than is dilute urine.
Freshly voided urine is also clear rather than cloudy.
Speciﬁc gravity—the normal range is 1.010 to 1.025;
this is a measure of the dissolved materials in urine.
The speciﬁc gravity of distilled water is 1.000, mean-
ing that there are no solutes present. Therefore, the
higher the speciﬁc gravity number, the more dis-
solved material is present. Someone who has been
exercising strenuously and has lost body water in
sweat will usually produce less urine, which will
be more concentrated and have a higher speciﬁc
gravity.
The speciﬁc gravity of the urine is an indicator of
the concentrating ability of the kidneys: The kid-
neys must excrete the waste products that are con-
stantly formed in as little water as possible.
pH—the pH range of urine is between 4.6 and 8.0,
with an average value of 6.0. Diet has the greatest
inﬂuence on urine pH. A vegetarian diet will result
in a more alkaline urine, whereas a high-protein
diet will result in a more acidic urine.
Constituents—urine is approximately 95% water,
which is the solvent for waste products and salts.
Salts are not considered true waste products because
they may well be utilized by the body when needed,
but excess amounts will be excreted in urine (see
Box 18–4: Kidney Stones).
Nitrogenous wastes—as their name indicates, all of
these wastes contain nitrogen. Urea is formed by
liver cells when excess amino acids are deaminated
to be used for energy production. Creatinine comes
from the metabolism of creatine phosphate, an
energy source in muscles. Uric acid comes from the
metabolism of nucleic acids, that is, the breakdown
of DNA and RNA. Although these are waste prod-
ucts, there is always a certain amount of each in the
blood. Box 18–5: Blood Tests and Kidney Function
describes the relationship between blood levels of
these waste products and kidney function.
Other non-nitrogenous waste products include
small amounts of urobilin from the hemoglobin of
old RBCs (see Fig. 11–4), and may include the
metabolic products of medications. Table 18–3
summarizes the characteristics of urine.
When a substance not normally found in urine
does appear there, there is a reason for it. The rea-
son may be quite speciﬁc or more general. Table
18–4 lists some abnormal constituents of urine and
possible reasons for each (see also Box 18–6:
Urinary Tract Infections).
AGING AND THE URINARY SYSTEM
With age, the number of nephrons in the kidneys
decreases, often to half the original number by the age
of 70 to 80, and the kidneys lose some of their con-
The Urinary System
433
BOX 18–4
KIDNEY STONES
The entry of a kidney stone into a ureter may
cause intense pain (renal colic) and bleeding.
Obstruction of a ureter by a stone may cause
backup of urine and possible kidney damage.
Treatments include surgery to remove the stone, or
lithotripsy, the use of shock waves to crush the
stone into pieces small enough to be eliminated
without damage to the urinary tract. A recent study
links lithotripsy with an increased risk of diabetes or
hypertension later in life, though the mechanisms
that would bring about these conditions have not
yet been discovered.
Kidney stones, or renal calculi, are crystals of the
salts that are normally present in urine. A very high
concentration of salts in urine may trigger precipi-
tation of the salt and formation of crystals, which
can range in size from microscopic to 10 to 20 mm
in diameter. The most common type of kidney
stone is made of calcium salts; a less common type
is made of uric acid.
Kidney stones are most likely to form in the renal
pelvis. Predisposing factors include decreased ﬂuid
intake or overingestion of minerals (as in mineral
supplements), both of which lead to the formation
of a very concentrated urine.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

434
The Urinary System
Table 18–3
CHARACTERISTICS OF NORMAL URINE
Characteristic
Description
Amount
Color
Speciﬁc gravity
pH
Composition
Nitrogenous wastes
1–2 liters per 24 hours; highly variable depending on ﬂuid intake and water loss through the
skin and GI tract
Straw or amber; darker means more concentrated; should be clear, not cloudy
1.010–1.025; a measure of the dissolved material in urine; the lower the value, the more dilute
the urine
Average 6; range 4.6–8.0; diet has the greatest effect on urine pH
95% water; 5% salts and waste products
Urea—from amino acid metabolism
Creatinine—from muscle metabolism
Uric acid—from nucleic acid metabolism
Table 18–4
ABNORMAL CONSTITUENTS IN URINE
Characteristic
Reason(s)
Glycosuria
(presence of
glucose)
Proteinuria
(presence of
protein)
Hematuria
(presence of
blood—RBCs)
Bacteriuria
(presence
of bacteria)
Ketonuria
(presence of
ketones)
As long as blood glucose levels are within normal limits, ﬁltrate levels will also be normal and will
not exceed the threshold level for reabsorption. In an untreated diabetic, for example, blood
glucose is too high; therefore the ﬁltrate glucose level is too high. The kidneys reabsorb glucose
up to their threshold level, but the excess remains in the ﬁltrate and is excreted in urine.
Most plasma proteins are too large to be forced out of the glomeruli, and the small proteins that
enter the ﬁltrate are reabsorbed by pinocytosis. The presence of protein in the urine indicates
that the glomeruli have become too permeable, as occurs in some types of kidney disease.
The presence of RBCs in urine may also indicate that the glomeruli have become too permeable.
Another possible cause might be bleeding somewhere in the urinary tract. Pinpointing the site
of bleeding would require speciﬁc diagnostic tests.
Bacteria give urine a cloudy rather than clear appearance; WBCs may be present also. The pres-
ence of bacteria means that there is an infection somewhere in the urinary tract. Further diag-
nostic tests would be needed to determine the precise location.
Ketones are formed from fats and proteins that are used for energy production. A trace of ketones
in urine is normal. Higher levels of ketones indicate an increased use of fats and proteins for
energy. This may be the result of malfunctioning carbohydrate metabolism (as in diabetes mel-
litus) or simply the result of a high-protein diet.
BOX 18–5
BLOOD TESTS AND KIDNEY FUNCTION
impaired. Of the three, the creatinine level is proba-
bly the most reliable indicator of kidney functioning.
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) may vary considerably in
certain situations not directly related to the kidneys.
For example, BUN may be elevated as a conse-
quence of a high-protein diet or of starvation when
body protein is being broken down at a faster rate
than normal. Uric acid levels may also vary accord-
ing to diet. However, elevated blood levels of all
three nitrogenous wastes usually indicate impaired
glomerular ﬁltration.
Waste products are normally present in the blood,
and the concentration of each varies within a nor-
mal range. As part of the standard lab work called
blood chemistry, the levels of the three nitrogenous
waste products are determined (urea, creatinine,
and uric acid).
If blood levels of these three substances are
within normal ranges, it may be concluded that the
kidneys are excreting these wastes at normal rates.
If, however, these blood levels are elevated, one
possible cause is that kidney function has been
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

centrating ability. The glomerular ﬁltration rate also
decreases, partly as a consequence of arteriosclerosis
and diminished renal blood ﬂow. Despite these chan-
ges, excretion of nitrogenous wastes usually remains
adequate.
The urinary bladder decreases in size, and the tone
of the detrusor muscle decreases. These changes may
lead to a need to urinate more frequently. Urinary
incontinence (the inability to control voiding) is not an
inevitable consequence of aging, and can be prevented
or minimized. Elderly people are, however, more at
risk for infections of the urinary tract, especially if
voiding leaves residual urine in the bladder.
SUMMARY
The kidneys are the principal regulators of the inter-
nal environment of the body. The composition of all
body ﬂuids is either directly or indirectly regulated by
the kidneys as they form urine from blood plasma.
The kidneys are also of great importance in the regu-
lation of the pH of the body ﬂuids. These topics are
the subject of the next chapter.
The Urinary System
435
BOX 18–6
URINARY TRACT INFECTIONS
Symptoms include frequency of urination, painful
voiding, and low back pain. Nephritis (or pyelo-
nephritis) is inﬂammation of the kidneys. Although
this may be the result of a systemic bacterial in-
fection, nephritis is a common complication of
untreated lower urinary tract infections such as cys-
titis. Possible symptoms are fever and ﬂank pain (in
the area of the kidneys). Untreated nephritis may
result in severe damage to nephrons and progress
to renal failure.
Infections may occur anywhere in the urinary tract
and are most often caused by the microbial agents
of sexually transmitted diseases (see Chapter 20) or
by the bacteria that are part of the normal ﬂora of
the colon. In women especially, the urinary and
anal openings are in close proximity, and colon bac-
teria on the skin of the perineum may invade the
urinary tract. The use of urinary catheters in hospi-
talized or bedridden patients may also be a factor if
sterile technique is not carefully followed.
Cystitis is inﬂammation of the urinary bladder.
STUDY OUTLINE
The urinary system consists of two kidneys,
two ureters, the urinary bladder, and the
urethra.
1. The kidneys form urine to excrete waste products
and to regulate the volume, electrolytes, and pH of
blood and tissue ﬂuid.
2. The other organs of the system are concerned with
elimination of urine.
Kidneys (see Fig. 18–1)
1. Retroperitoneal on either side of the backbone in
the upper abdominal cavity; partially protected by
the lower rib cage.
2. Adipose tissue and the renal fascia cushion the kid-
neys and help hold them in place.
3. Hilus—an indentation on the medial side; renal
artery enters, renal vein and ureter emerge.
Kidney—internal structure (see Fig. 18–2)
1. Renal cortex—outer tissue layer, made of renal cor-
puscles and convoluted tubules.
2. Renal medulla (pyramids)—inner tissue layer,
made of loops of Henle and collecting tubules.
3. Renal pelvis—a cavity formed by the expanded end
of the ureter within the kidney at the hilus; exten-
sions around the papillae of the pyramids are called
calyces, which collect urine.
The Nephron—the functional unit of the kid-
ney (see Fig. 18–3); 1 million per kidney
1. Renal corpuscle—consists of a glomerulus sur-
rounded by a Bowman’s capsule.
• Glomerulus—a capillary network between an
afferent arteriole and an efferent arteriole.
• Bowman’s capsule—the expanded end of a renal
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

tubule that encloses the glomerulus; inner layer
is made of podocytes, has pores, and is very per-
meable; contains renal ﬁltrate (potential urine).
2. Renal tubule—consists of the proximal convoluted
tubule, loop of Henle, distal convoluted tubule,
and collecting tubule. Collecting tubules unite to
form papillary ducts that empty urine into the
calyces of the renal pelvis.
• Peritubular capillaries—arise from the efferent
arteriole and surround all parts of the renal
tubule.
Blood Vessels of the Kidney (see Figs. 18–1,
18–2, and 18–3)
1. Pathway: abdominal aorta →renal artery →small
arteries in the kidney →afferent arterioles →
glomeruli →efferent arterioles →peritubular cap-
illaries →small veins in the kidney →renal vein →
inferior vena cava.
2. Two sets of capillaries provide for two sites of
exchanges between the blood and tissues in the
process of urine formation.
Formation of Urine (see Fig. 18–4)
1. Glomerular filtration—takes place from the
glomerulus to Bowman’s capsule. High blood pres-
sure (60 mmHg) in the glomerulus forces plasma,
dissolved materials, and small proteins out of the
blood and into Bowman’s capsule. The ﬂuid is now
called ﬁltrate. Filtration is selective only in terms of
size; blood cells and large proteins remain in the
blood.
2. GFR is 100 to 125 mL per minute. Increased blood
ﬂow to the kidney increases GFR; decreased blood
ﬂow decreases GFR.
3. Tubular reabsorption—takes place from the ﬁltrate
in the renal tubule to the blood in the peritubular
capillaries; 99% of the ﬁltrate is reabsorbed; only
1% becomes urine.
• Active transport—reabsorption of glucose,
amino acids, vitamins, and positive ions; thresh-
old level is a limit to the quantity that can be
reabsorbed.
• Passive transport—most negative ions follow the
reabsorption of positive ions.
• Osmosis—water follows the reabsorption of
minerals, especially sodium.
• Pinocytosis—small proteins are engulfed by
proximal tubule cells.
4. Tubular secretion—takes place from the blood in
the peritubular capillaries to the ﬁltrate in the renal
tubule; creatinine and other waste products may be
secreted into the ﬁltrate to be excreted in urine;
secretion of H ions helps maintain pH of blood.
5. Hormones that affect reabsorption—aldosterone,
atrial natriuretic peptide, antidiuretic hormone,
and parathyroid hormone—see Table 18–1 and
Fig. 18–5.
The Kidneys and Acid–Base Balance
1. The kidneys have the greatest capacity to compen-
sate for normal and abnormal pH changes.
2. If the body ﬂuids are becoming too acidic, the kid-
neys excrete H ions and return HCO3
 ions to
the blood (see Fig. 18–6).
3. If the body ﬂuids are becoming too alkaline, the
kidneys return H ions to the blood and excrete
HCO3
 ions.
Other Functions of the Kidneys
1. Secretion of renin by juxtaglomerular cells when
blood pressure decreases (see Table 18–2). Angio-
tensin II causes vasoconstriction and increases
secretion of aldosterone.
2. Secretion of erythropoietin in response to hypoxia;
stimulates red bone marrow to increase rate of
RBC production.
3. Activation of vitamin D—conversion of inactive
forms to the active form.
Elimination of Urine—the function of the
ureters, urinary bladder, and urethra
Ureters (see Figs. 18–1 and 18–7)
1. Each extends from the hilus of a kidney to the
lower posterior side of the urinary bladder.
2. Peristalsis of smooth muscle layer propels urine
toward bladder.
Urinary Bladder (see Figs. 18–1 and 18–7)
1. A muscular sac below the peritoneum and behind
the pubic bones; in women, below the uterus; in
men, above the prostate gland.
2. Mucosa—transitional epithelial tissue folded into
rugae; permit expansion without tearing.
3. Trigone—triangular area on bladder ﬂoor; no
rugae, does not expand; bounded by openings of
ureters and urethra.
436
The Urinary System
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

4. Detrusor muscle—the smooth muscle layer, a
spherical muscle; contracts to expel urine (reﬂex).
5. Internal urethral sphincter—involuntary; formed
by detrusor muscle ﬁbers around the opening of
the urethra.
Urethra—takes urine from the bladder to
the exterior (see Fig. 18–7)
1. In women—1 to 1.5 inches long; anterior to vagina.
2. In men—7 to 8 inches long; passes through the
prostate gland and penis.
3. Has the external urethral sphincter: skeletal muscle
of pelvic ﬂoor (voluntary).
The Urination Reﬂex—also called micturition
or voiding
1. Stimulus: stretching of the detrusor muscle by
accumulating urine.
2. Sensory impulses to spinal cord, motor impulses
(parasympathetic) return to detrusor muscle, which
contracts; internal urethral sphincter relaxes.
3. The external urethral sphincter provides voluntary
control.
Characteristics of Urine (see Table 18–3)
Abnormal Constituents of Urine (see
Table 18–4)
The Urinary System
437
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Describe the location of the kidneys, ureters, uri-
nary bladder, and urethra. (pp. 421, 431)
2. Name the three areas of the kidney, and state what
each consists of. (p. 421)
3. Name the two major parts of a nephron. State the
general function of nephrons. (p. 421)
4. Name the parts of a renal corpuscle. What process
takes place here? Name the parts of a renal tubule.
What processes take place here? (pp. 421, 424)
5. State the mechanism of tubular reabsorption of
each of the following: (pp. 425, 427)
a. Water
b. Glucose
c. Small proteins
d. Positive ions
e. Negative ions
f. Amino acids
g. Vitamins
Also explain what is meant by a threshold level of
reabsorption.
6. Explain the importance of tubular secretion. (p.
427)
7. Describe the pathway of blood ﬂow through the
kidney from the abdominal aorta to the inferior
vena cava. (p. 424)
8. Name the two sets of capillaries in the kidney, and
state the processes that take place in each. (pp. 424,
425)
9. Name the hormone that has each of these effects
on the kidneys: (pp. 428–429)
a. Promotes reabsorption of Na ions
b. Promotes direct reabsorption of water
c. Promotes reabsorption of Ca2 ions
d. Promotes excretion of K ions
e. Decreases reabsorption of Na ions
10. In what circumstances will the kidneys excrete H
ions? What ions will be returned to the blood?
How will this affect the pH of blood? (p. 428)
11. In what circumstances do the kidneys secrete
renin, and what is its purpose? (p. 429)
12. In what circumstances do the kidneys secrete ery-
thropoietin, and what is its purpose? (p. 430)
13. Describe the function of the ureters and that of
the urethra. (p. 431)
14. With respect to the urinary bladder, describe
the function of rugae and the detrusor muscle.
(p. 431)
15. Describe the urination reﬂex in terms of stimulus,
part of the CNS involved, effector muscle, inter-
nal urethral sphincter, and voluntary control.
(pp. 431)
16. Describe the characteristics of normal urine in
terms of appearance, amount, pH, speciﬁc gravity,
and composition. (pp. 432–433)
17. State the source of each of the nitrogenous waste
products: creatinine, uric acid, and urea. (p. 433)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

1. The functioning of the kidneys may be likened to
cleaning your room by throwing everything out the
window, then going outside to retrieve what you
wish to keep, such as jammies and slippers. Imagine
the contents of a room, liken them to the materials
in the blood (you yourself are a kidney), and
describe what happens to each, and why.
2. Explain why fatty acids are not found in urine.
Under what circumstances are water-soluble vita-
mins (such as vitamin C) found in urine?
3. Explain how a spinal cord transection at the level of
T11 will affect the urination reﬂex.
4. As part of his yearly physical for the college foot-
ball team, 20-year-old Patrick has a urinalysis,
which shows a high level of ketones. He is not
diabetic, and is not ill. What might cause the
high urine level of ketones? What blood chemistry
test (for nitrogenous wastes) would help conﬁrm
this?
5. A patient being evaluated for food poisoning has a
blood pH of 7.33, a urine pH of 4.5, and a respira-
tory rate of 28 per minute. What kind of pH imbal-
ance is this? Explain your reasoning step by step.
6. Erythropoietin, called EPO, has become a drug
used illegally by some athletes. Which athletes use
EPO, that is, in what kind of sports? What beneﬁts
are they hoping for? What part of a CBC would
indicate that an athlete is taking EPO? Explain.
7. After a 4-hour workout on a hot June day, the high
school track coach tells her group to keep drinking
plenty of water. The girls assure their coach that
they will know just how to determine if they are suf-
ﬁciently hydrated that evening, that they have their
color scheme memorized. What do they mean?
438
The Urinary System
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CHAPTER 19
Fluid–Electrolyte and
Acid–Base Balance
439
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

440
CHAPTER 19
M
Chapter Outline
Water Compartments
Water Intake and Output
Regulation of Water Intake and Output
Electrolytes
Electrolytes in Body Fluids
Intake, Output, and Regulation
Acid–Base Balance
Buffer Systems
Bicarbonate buffer system
Phosphate buffer system
Protein buffer system
Respiratory Mechanisms
Respiratory acidosis and alkalosis
Respiratory compensation for metabolic pH
changes
Renal Mechanisms
Effects of pH Changes
Aging and Fluid and pH Regulation
BOX 19–1
EDEMA
BOX 19–2
ELECTROLYTE IMBALANCES
Student Objectives
• Describe the water compartments and the name
for the water in each.
• Explain how water moves between compartments.
• Explain the regulation of the intake and output of
water.
• Name the major electrolytes in body ﬂuids, and
state their functions.
• Explain the regulation of the intake and output of
electrolytes.
• Describe the three buffer systems in body ﬂuids.
• Explain why the respiratory system has an effect
on pH, and describe respiratory compensating
mechanisms.
• Explain the renal mechanisms for pH regulation
of extracellular ﬂuid.
• Describe the effects of acidosis and alkalosis.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Fluid–Electrolyte and
Acid–Base Balance
441
New Terminology
Amine group (ah-MEEN)
Anions (AN-eye-ons)
Carboxyl group (kar-BAHK-sul)
Cations (KAT-eye-ons)
Electrolytes (ee-LEK-troh-lites)
Osmolarity (ahs-moh-LAR-i-tee)
Osmoreceptors (AHS-moh-re-SEP-ters)
Related Clinical Terminology
Edema (uh-DEE-muh)
Hypercalcemia (HIGH-per-kal-SEE-me-ah)
Hyperkalemia (HIGH-per-kuh-LEE-me-ah)
Hypernatremia (HIGH-per-nuh-TREE-me-ah)
Hypocalcemia (HIGH-poh-kal-SEE-me-ah)
Hypokalemia (HIGH-poh-kuh-LEE-me-ah)
Hyponatremia (HIGH-poh-nuh-TREE-me-ah)
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

People are watery creatures. More precisely, we are
salt-watery creatures, though not as salty as the oceans.
Water, the ﬂuid medium of the human body, makes up
55% to 75% of the total body weight. Electrolytes are
the positive and negative ions present in body ﬂuids. In
previous chapters we have called these salts or, in some
cases, trace elements. Many of these ions are minerals
that are already familiar to you. They each have spe-
ciﬁc functions in body ﬂuids, and some of them are
also involved in the maintenance of the normal pH of
the body ﬂuids. In this chapter we will ﬁrst discuss
ﬂuid–electrolyte balance, then review and summarize
the mechanisms involved in acid–base balance.
WATER COMPARTMENTS
Most of the water of the body, about two-thirds of the
total water volume, is found within individual cells and
is called intracellular ﬂuid (ICF). The remaining
third is called extracellular ﬂuid (ECF) and includes
blood plasma, lymph, tissue ﬂuid, and the specialized
ﬂuids such as cerebrospinal ﬂuid, synovial ﬂuid, aque-
ous humor, and serous ﬂuid.
Water constantly moves from one ﬂuid site in the
body to another by the processes of ﬁltration and
osmosis. These ﬂuid sites are called water compart-
ments (Fig. 19–1). The chambers of the heart and all
of the blood vessels form one compartment, and the
water within is called plasma. By the process of ﬁltra-
tion in capillaries, some plasma is forced out into tis-
sue spaces (another compartment) and is then called
tissue ﬂuid. When tissue ﬂuid enters cells by the
process of osmosis, it has moved to still another com-
partment and is called intracellular ﬂuid. The tissue
ﬂuid that enters lymph capillaries is in yet another
compartment and is called lymph.
The other process (besides ﬁltration) by which
water moves from one compartment to another is
osmosis, which, you may recall, is the diffusion of
water through a semi-permeable membrane. Water
will move through cell membranes from the area of its
greater concentration to the area of its lesser concen-
tration. Another way of expressing this is to say that
water will diffuse to an area with a greater concentra-
tion of dissolved material. The concentration of elec-
trolytes present in the various water compartments
determines just how osmosis will take place. There-
442
Fluid–Electrolyte and Acid–Base Balance
Fluid
movement
Intracellular fluid
Cell
Capillary
Lymph
capillary
Lymph
Interstitial
(tissue) fluid
Plasma
Figure 19–1.
Water compartments. The name given to water in each of its locations is
indicated.
QUESTION: Name two specialized ﬂuids that are similar to tissue ﬂuid.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

fore, if water is in balance in all of the compartments,
the electrolytes are also in balance. Although water
and ions are constantly moving, their relative propor-
tions in the compartments remain constant; this is
ﬂuid–electrolyte homeostasis, and its maintenance is
essential for life (see Box 19–1: Edema).
WATER INTAKE AND OUTPUT
Most of the water the body requires comes from the
ingestion of liquids; this amount averages 1600 mL
per day. The food we eat also contains water. Even
foods we think of as somewhat dry, such as bread,
contain signiﬁcant amounts of water. The daily water
total from food averages 700 mL. The last source of
water, about 200 mL per day, is the metabolic water
that is a product of cell respiration. The total intake
of water per day, therefore, is about 2500 mL, or 2.5
liters.
Most of the water lost from the body is in the form
of urine produced by the kidneys; this averages 1500
mL per day. About 500 mL per day is lost in the form
of sweat, another 300 mL per day is in the form of
water vapor in exhaled air, and another 200 mL per
day is lost in feces. The total output of water is thus
about 2500 mL per day.
Naturally, any increase in water output must be
compensated for by an increase in intake. Someone
who exercises strenuously, for example, may lose 1 to
2 liters of water in sweat and must replace that water
by drinking more ﬂuids. In a healthy individual, water
intake equals water output, even though the amounts
of each may vary greatly from the averages just men-
tioned (Fig. 19–2 and Table 19–1).
REGULATION OF WATER
INTAKE AND OUTPUT
The hypothalamus in the brain contains osmorecep-
tors that detect changes in the osmolarity of body
Fluid–Electrolyte and Acid–Base Balance
443
BOX 19–1
EDEMA
lower extremities (pulmonary edema was described
in Chapter 15).
Systemic bacterial infections may increase capil-
lary permeability, and loss of plasma to tissue spaces
is one aspect of septicemia. In this situation, how-
ever, the edema is of secondary importance to the
hypotension, which may be life-threatening.
Insufficient osmosis, the return of tissue ﬂuid into
capillaries, is a consequence of a decrease in plasma
proteins, especially albumin. This may occur in
severe liver diseases such as cirrhosis, kidney disease
involving loss of protein in urine, malnutrition, or
severe burn injuries.
Because edema is a symptom rather than a dis-
ease, treatment is aimed at correcting the speciﬁc
cause. If that is not possible, the volume of tissue
ﬂuid may be diminished by a low-salt diet and the
use of diuretics.
Edema is an abnormal increase in the amount of
tissue ﬂuid, which may be localized or systemic.
Sometimes edema is inapparent, and sometimes it
is apparent as swelling.
Localized edema follows injury and inﬂamma-
tion of a body part. Spraining an ankle, for
example, damages tissues that then release
histamine. Histamine increases the permeability of
capillaries, and more tissue ﬂuid is formed. As
tissue ﬂuid accumulates, the ankle may become
swollen.
Systemic edema is the result of an imbalance
between the movement of water out of and into
capillaries, that is, between ﬁltration and osmosis.
Excessive ﬁltration will occur when capillary pres-
sure rises. This may be caused by venous obstruc-
tion due to blood clots or by congestive heart
failure. Edema of this type is often apparent in the
Table 19–1 WATER INTAKE AND OUTPUT
Average Amount
Form
per 24 Hours (mL)
Intake
Liquids
1600
Food
700
Metabolic water
200
Output
Urine
1500
Sweat (and insensible
500
water loss)
Exhaled air (water vapor)
300
Feces
200
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

ﬂuids. Osmolarity is the concentration of dissolved
materials present in a ﬂuid. Dehydration raises the
osmolarity of the blood; that is, there is less water in
proportion to the amount of dissolved materials.
Another way to express this is to simply say that the
blood is now a more concentrated solution. When
dehydrated, we feel the sensation of thirst, character-
ized by dryness of the mouth and throat, as less saliva
is produced. Thirst is an uncomfortable sensation, and
we drink ﬂuids to relieve it. The water we drink is
readily absorbed by the mucosa of the stomach and
small intestine and has the effect of decreasing the
osmolarity of the blood. In other words, we can say
that the water we just drank is causing the blood to
become a more dilute solution, and, as the serum
osmolarity returns to normal, the sensation of thirst
diminishes.
As you may recall, the hypothalamus is also
involved in water balance because of its production
of antidiuretic hormone (ADH), which is stored in the
posterior pituitary gland. In a state of dehydration, the
hypothalamus stimulates the release of ADH from
the posterior pituitary. Antidiuretic hormone then
increases the reabsorption of water by the kidney
tubules. Water is returned to the blood to preserve
blood volume, and urinary output decreases.
The hormone aldosterone, from the adrenal cortex,
also helps regulate water output. Aldosterone in-
creases the reabsorption of Na ions by the kidney
tubules, and water from the renal ﬁltrate follows the
444
Fluid–Electrolyte and Acid–Base Balance
Metabolic water
Food
Liquids
Input
Output
Urine
Sweat
Exhaled air
Feces
Figure 19–2.
Water intake
and output. See text and
Table 19–1 for description.
QUESTION: On a very hot
day, how might the output
volumes change?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Na ions back to the blood. Aldosterone is secreted
when the Na ion concentration of the blood de-
creases or whenever there is a signiﬁcant decrease in
blood pressure (the renin-angiotensin mechanism).
Several other factors may also contribute to water
loss. These include excessive sweating, hemorrhage,
diarrhea or vomiting, severe burns, and fever. In these
circumstances, the kidneys will conserve water, but
water must also be replaced by increased consump-
tion. Following hemorrhage or during certain disease
states, ﬂuids may also be replaced by intravenous
administration.
A less common occurrence is that of too much
water in the body. This may happen following over-
consumption of ﬂuids. The osmolarity of the blood
decreases, and there is too much water in proportion
to electrolytes (or, the blood is too dilute). This con-
dition may become symptomatic, and is called water
intoxication. Symptoms are dizziness, abdominal
cramps, nausea, and lethargy. Convulsions are possible
in severe cases, and ﬂuids must be restricted until the
kidneys can excrete the excess water. A hormone that
will contribute to that is atrial natriuretic peptide
(ANP), which is secreted by the atria when blood vol-
ume or blood pressure increases. ANP then decreases
the reabsorption of Na ions by the kidneys, which
increases urinary output of sodium and water. Also,
secretion of ADH will diminish, which will contribute
to a greater urinary output that will return the blood
osmolarity to normal.
ELECTROLYTES
Electrolytes are chemicals that dissolve in water and
dissociate into their positive and negative ions. Most
electrolytes are the inorganic salts, acids, and bases
found in all body ﬂuids.
Most organic compounds are non-electrolytes; that
is, they do not ionize when in solution. Glucose, for
example, dissolves in water but does not ionize; it
remains as intact glucose molecules. Some proteins,
however, do form ionic bonds and when in solution
dissociate into ions.
Positive ions are called cations. Examples are Na,
K, Ca2, Mg2, Fe2, and H. Negative ions are
called anions, and examples are Cl, HCO3
, SO4
2
(sulfate), HPO4
2 (phosphate), and protein anions.
Electrolytes help create the osmolarity of body ﬂu-
ids and, therefore, help regulate the osmosis of water
between water compartments. Some electrolytes are
involved in acid–base regulatory mechanisms, or they
are part of structural components of tissues or part of
enzymes.
ELECTROLYTES IN BODY FLUIDS
The three principal ﬂuids in the body are intracellular
ﬂuid and the extracellular ﬂuids plasma and tissue
ﬂuid. The relative concentrations of the most impor-
tant electrolytes in these ﬂuids are depicted in Fig.
19–3. The major differences may be summarized as
follows. In intracellular ﬂuid, the most abundant
cation is K, the most abundant anion is HPO4
2, and
protein anions are also abundant. In both tissue ﬂuid
and plasma, the most abundant cation is Na, and the
most abundant anion is Cl. Protein anions form a
signiﬁcant part of plasma but not of tissue ﬂuid. The
functions of the major electrolytes are described in
Table 19–2.
INTAKE, OUTPUT, AND REGULATION
Electrolytes are part of the food and beverages we
consume, are absorbed by the gastrointestinal tract
into the blood, and become part of body ﬂuids.
Hormones regulate the ECF concentrations of some
electrolytes. Aldosterone increases the reabsorption of
Na ions and the excretion of K ions by the kidneys.
The blood sodium level is thereby raised, and the
blood potassium level is lowered. ANP increases
the excretion of Na ions by the kidneys and lowers
the blood sodium level. Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
and calcitonin regulate the blood levels of calcium and
phosphate. PTH increases the reabsorption of these
minerals from bones, and increases their absorption
from food in the small intestine (vitamin D is also nec-
essary). Calcitonin promotes the removal of calcium
and phosphate from the blood to form bone matrix.
Electrolytes are lost in urine, sweat, and feces.
Urine contains the electrolytes that are not reab-
sorbed by the kidney tubules; the major one of these is
Na ions. Other electrolytes are present in urine when
their concentrations in the blood exceed the body’s
need for them.
The most abundant electrolytes in sweat are Na
ions and Cl ions. Electrolytes lost in feces are those
that are not absorbed in either the small intestine or
colon.
Fluid–Electrolyte and Acid–Base Balance
445
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

446
Fluid–Electrolyte and Acid–Base Balance
Some of the major imbalances of electrolyte levels
are described in Box 19–2: Electrolyte Imbalances.
ACID–BASE BALANCE
You have already learned quite a bit about the regula-
tion of the pH of body ﬂuids in the chapters on chem-
istry (see Chapter 2 for the pH scale), the respiratory
system, and the urinary system. In this section, we will
put all of that information together.
The normal pH range of blood is 7.35 to 7.45. The
pH of tissue ﬂuid is similar but can vary slightly above
or below this range. The intracellular ﬂuid has a pH
range of 6.8 to 7.0. Notice that these ranges of pH are
quite narrow; they must be maintained in order for
enzymatic reactions and other processes to proceed
normally.
Maintenance of acid–base homeostasis is accom-
plished by the buffer systems in body ﬂuids, the rate
and depth of respiration, and the kidneys.
BUFFER SYSTEMS
The purpose of a buffer system is to prevent drastic
changes in the pH of body ﬂuids by chemically react-
ing with strong acids or bases that would otherwise
greatly change the pH. A buffer system consists of a
weak acid and a weak base. These molecules react with
strong acids or bases that may be produced and change
them to substances that do not have a great effect on
pH.
Bicarbonate Buffer System
The two components of this buffer system are carbonic
acid (H2CO3), a weak acid, and sodium bicarbonate
Figure 19–3.
Electrolyte concentrations in intracellular ﬂuid, tissue ﬂuid, and plasma.
Concentrations are expressed in milliequivalents per liter. See text for summary of major
differences among these ﬂuids.
QUESTION: Tissue ﬂuid is most like which of the other ﬂuids? Why did you already know
this?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Fluid–Electrolyte and Acid–Base Balance
447
BOX 19–2
ELECTROLYTE IMBALANCES
Hyperkalemia—a consequence of acute renal fail-
ure or Addison’s disease. Characterized by weak-
ness, abnormal sensations, cardiac arrhythmias, and
possible cardiac arrest.
IMBALANCES OF CALCIUM
Hypocalcemia—a consequence of hypoparathy-
roidism or decreased calcium intake. Characterized
by muscle spasms leading to tetany.
Hypercalcemia—a consequence of hyperparathy-
roidism. Characterized by muscle weakness, bone
fragility, and possible kidney stones.
IMBALANCES OF SODIUM
Hyponatremia—a consequence of excessive
sweating, diarrhea, or vomiting. Characterized by
dizziness, confusion, weakness, low BP, shock.
Hypernatremia—a consequence of excessive
water loss or sodium ingestion. Characterized by
loss of ICF and extreme thirst and agitation.
IMBALANCES OF POTASSIUM
Hypokalemia—a consequence of vomiting, diar-
rhea, or kidney disease. Characterized by fatigue,
confusion, possible cardiac failure.
Table 19–2
MAJOR ELECTROLYTES
Plasma Level
ICF Level
Electrolyte
mEq/L*
mEq/L
Functions
Sodium (Na)
Potassium (K)
Calcium (Ca2)
Magnesium (Mg2)
Chloride (CI)
Bicarbonate (HCO3
)
Phosphate (HPO4
2)
Sulfate (SO4
2)
*The concentration of an ion is often expressed in milliequivalents per liter, abbreviated mEq/L, which is the number of electrical
charges in each liter of solution.
136–142
3.8–5.0
4.6–5.5
1.3–2.1
95–103
28
1.7–2.6
1
10
141
1
58
4
10
75
2
• Creates much of the osmotic pressure of ECF; the most
abundant cation in ECF
• Essential for electrical activity of neurons and muscle cells
• Creates much of the osmotic pressure in ICF; the most
abundant cation in ICF
• Essential for electrical activity of neurons and muscle cells
• Most (98%) is found in bones and teeth
• Maintains normal excitability of neurons and muscle cells
• Essential for blood clotting
• Most (50%) is found in bone
• More abundant in ICF than in ECF
• Essential for ATP production and activity of neurons and
muscle cells
• Most abundant anion in ECF; diffuses easily into and out
of cells; helps regulate osmotic pressure
• Part of HCI in gastric juice
• Part of the bicarbonate buffer system
• Most (85%) is found in bones and teeth
• Primarily an ICF anion
• Part of DNA, RNA, ATP, phospholipids
• Part of phosphate buffer system
• Part of some amino acids and proteins
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

(NaHCO3), a weak base. Each of these molecules par-
ticipates in a speciﬁc type of reaction.
If a potential pH change is created by a strong acid,
the following reaction takes place:
HCl  NaHCO3 →NaCl  H2CO3
(strong acid)
(weak acid)
The strong acid has reacted with the sodium bicar-
bonate to produce a salt (NaCl) that has no effect on
pH and a weak acid that has little effect on pH.
If a potential pH change is created by a strong base,
the following reaction takes place:
NaOH  H2CO3 →H2O  NaHCO3
(strong base)
(weak base)
The strong base has reacted with the carbonic acid
to produce water, which has no effect on pH and a
weak base that has little effect on pH.
The bicarbonate buffer system is important in both
the blood and tissue ﬂuid. During normal metabolism,
these ﬂuids tend to become more acidic, so more
sodium bicarbonate than carbonic acid is needed. The
usual ratio of these molecules to each other is about 20
to 1 (NaHCO3 to H2CO3).
Phosphate Buffer System
The two components of this buffer system are sodium
dihydrogen phosphate (NaH2PO4), a weak acid, and
sodium monohydrogen phosphate (Na2HPO4), a weak
base. Let us use speciﬁc reactions to show how this
buffer system works.
If a potential pH change is created by a strong acid,
the following reaction takes place:
HCl  Na2HPO4 →NaCl  NaH2PO4
(strong acid)
(weak acid)
The strong acid has reacted with the sodium mono-
hydrogen phosphate to produce a salt that has no
effect on pH and a weak acid that has little effect on
pH.
If a potential pH change is created by a strong base,
the following reaction takes place:
NaOH  NaH2PO4 →H2O  Na2HPO4
(strong base)
(weak base)
The strong base has reacted with the sodium dihy-
drogen phosphate to form water, which has no effect
on pH and a weak base that has little effect on pH.
The phosphate buffer system is important in the
regulation of the pH of the blood by the kidneys (see
Fig. 19–4). The cells of the kidney tubules can remove
excess hydrogen ions by forming NaH2PO4, which is
excreted in urine. The retained Na ions are returned
to the blood in the peritubular capillaries, along with
bicarbonate ions.
Protein Buffer System
This buffer system is the most important one in the
intracellular ﬂuid. You may recall from Chapter 15
that hemoglobin buffers the hydrogen ions formed
during CO2 transport. The amino acids that make up
proteins each have a carboxyl group (COOH) and an
amine (or amino) group (NH2) and may act as either
acids or bases.
The carboxyl group may act as an acid because it
can donate a hydrogen ion (H) to the ﬂuid to coun-
teract increasing alkalinity:
The amine group may act as a base because it can
pick up an excess hydrogen ion from the ﬂuid to coun-
teract increasing acidity:
The buffer systems react within a fraction of a sec-
ond to prevent drastic pH changes. However, they
have the least capacity to prevent great changes in pH
because a limited number of molecules of these buffers
are present in body ﬂuids. When an ongoing cause is
disrupting the normal pH, the respiratory and renal
mechanisms will also be needed.
RESPIRATORY MECHANISMS
The respiratory system affects pH because it regulates
the amount of CO2 present in body ﬂuids. As you
COOH     C     NH2
H
R
H
R
COOH     C     NH3+
NH2     C     COOH
NH2     C     COO- + H+
H
R
H
R
448
Fluid–Electrolyte and Acid–Base Balance
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

know, the respiratory system may be the cause of a pH
imbalance or may help correct a pH imbalance from
some other cause.
Respiratory Acidosis and Alkalosis
Respiratory acidosis is caused by anything that
decreases the rate or efficiency of respiration. Severe
pulmonary diseases are possible causes of respiratory
acidosis. When CO2 cannot be exhaled as fast as it
is formed during cell respiration, excess CO2 results
in the formation of excess H ions, as shown in this
reaction:
CO2 H2O →H2CO3 →H  HCO3

The excess H ions lower the pH of body ﬂuids.
Respiratory alkalosis is far less common but is the
result of breathing more rapidly, which increases the
amount of CO2 exhaled. Because there are fewer CO2
molecules in the body ﬂuids, fewer H ions are
formed, and pH tends to rise.
Respiratory Compensation
for Metabolic pH Changes
Changes in pH caused by other than a respiratory dis-
order are called metabolic acidosis or alkalosis. In
either case, the respiratory system may help prevent a
drastic change in pH.
Metabolic acidosis may be caused by kidney dis-
ease, uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, excessive diar-
rhea or vomiting, or the use of some diuretics. When
excess H ions are present in body ﬂuids, pH begins
to decrease, and this stimulates the respiratory centers
in the medulla. The response is to increase the rate of
breathing to exhale more CO2 to decrease H ion for-
mation. This helps raise the pH back toward the nor-
mal range.
Fluid–Electrolyte and Acid–Base Balance
449
Peritubular
capillary
Filtrate
Renal tubule
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na2
HCO3
–
HCO3
–
H+
H+
CO2
H2O
HPO4
H2CO3

+
Blood
Urine
NaH2PO4
HPO4
-2
Na+
Figure 19–4.
The phosphate buffer system.
The reactions are shown in a kidney tubule. See
text for description.
QUESTION: From where does the kidney tubule
cell get a hydrogen ion to excrete?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Metabolic alkalosis is not common, but may be
caused by the overuse of antacid medications or the
vomiting of stomach contents only. As the pH of body
ﬂuids begins to rise, breathing slows and decreases the
amount of CO2 exhaled. The CO2 retained within the
body increases the formation of H ions, which will
help lower the pH back toward the normal range.
The respiratory system responds quickly to prevent
drastic changes in pH, usually within 1 to 3 minutes.
For an ongoing metabolic pH imbalance, however, the
respiratory mechanism does not have the capacity to
fully compensate. In such cases, respiratory compen-
sation is only 50% to 75% effective.
RENAL MECHANISMS
As just discussed in Chapter 18, the kidneys help reg-
ulate the pH of extracellular ﬂuid by excreting or con-
serving H ions and by reabsorbing (or not) Na ions
and HCO3
 ions. One mechanism was depicted in
Fig. 18–6, and another, involving the phosphate buffer
system, is shown in Fig. 19–4.
The kidneys have the greatest capacity to buffer an
ongoing pH change. Although the renal mechanisms
do not become fully functional for several hours to
days, once they do they continue to be effective far
longer than respiratory mechanisms. Let us use as an
example a patient with untreated diabetes mellitus
who is in ketoacidosis, a metabolic acidosis. As acidic
ketones accumulate in the blood, the capacity of the
extracellular ﬂuid (ECF) buffer systems is quickly
exhausted. Breathing rate then increases, and more
CO2 is exhaled to decrease H ion formation and raise
the pH of ECF. There is, however, a limit to how
much the respiratory rate can increase, but the renal
buffering mechanisms will then become effective. At
this time it is the kidneys that are keeping the patient
alive by preventing acidosis from reaching a fatal level.
Even the kidneys have limits, however, and the cause
of the acidosis must be corrected to prevent death.
EFFECTS OF pH CHANGES
A state of acidosis is most detrimental to the central
nervous system, causing depression of impulse trans-
mission at synapses. A person in acidosis becomes con-
fused and disoriented, then lapses into a coma.
Alkalosis has the opposite effect and affects both
the central and peripheral nervous systems. Increased
synaptic transmission, even without stimuli, is ﬁrst
indicated by irritability and muscle twitches. Progres-
sive alkalosis is characterized by severe muscle spasms
and convulsions.
The types of pH changes are summarized in Table
19–3.
AGING AND FLUID
AND pH REGULATION
Changes in ﬂuid balance or pH in elderly people are
often the result of disease or damage to particular
organs. A weak heart (congestive heart failure) that
cannot pump efficiently allows blood to back up in cir-
culation. In turn, this may cause edema, an abnormal
collection of ﬂuid. Edema may be systemic (often
apparent in the lower legs) if the right ventricle is
weak, or pulmonary if the left ventricle is failing.
The sense of thirst may not be as acute in elderly
450
Fluid–Electrolyte and Acid–Base Balance
Table 19–3
pH CHANGES
Change
Possible Causes
Compensation
Metabolic acidosis
Metabolic alkalosis
Respiratory acidosis
Respiratory alkalosis
Kidney disease, ketosis, diarrhea, or vomiting
Overingestion of bicarbonate medications, gastric
suctioning
Decreased rate or efficiency of respiration:
emphysema, asthma, pneumonia, paralysis
of respiratory muscles
Increased rate of respiration: anxiety, high
altitude
• Increased respirations to exhale CO2
• Decreased respirations to retain CO2
• Kidneys excrete H ions and reabsorb
Na ions and HCO3
 ions
• Kidneys retain H ions and excrete
Na ions and HCO3
 ions
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

people, who may become severely dehydrated before
they begin to feel thirsty. An important behavioral
consideration is that elderly people who fear urinary
incontinence may decrease their intake of ﬂuids.
Deﬁciencies of minerals in elderly people may be
the result of poor nutrition or a side effect of some
medications, especially those for hypertension that
increase urinary output. Disturbances in pH may be
caused by chronic pulmonary disease, diabetes, or kid-
ney disease.
Fluid–Electrolyte and Acid–Base Balance
451
STUDY OUTLINE
Fluid–Electrolyte Balance
1. Water makes up 55% to 75% of the total body
weight.
2. Electrolytes are the ions found in body ﬂuids; most
are minerals.
Water Compartments (see Fig. 19–1)
1. Intracellular ﬂuid (ICF)—water within cells; about
two-thirds of total body water.
2. Extracellular ﬂuid (ECF)—water outside cells;
includes plasma, lymph, tissue ﬂuid, and specialized
ﬂuids.
3. Water constantly moves from one compartment
to another. Filtration: plasma becomes tissue ﬂuid.
Osmosis: tissue ﬂuid becomes plasma, or lymph, or
ICF.
4. Osmosis is regulated by the concentration of elec-
trolytes in body ﬂuids (osmolarity). Water will dif-
fuse through membranes to areas of greater
electrolyte concentration.
Water Intake (see Fig. 19–2)
1. Fluids, food, metabolic water—see Table 19–1.
Water Output (see Fig. 19–2)
1. Urine, sweat, exhaled air, feces—see Table 19–1.
2. Any variation in output must be compensated for
by a change in input.
Regulation of Water Intake and Output
1. Hypothalamus contains osmoreceptors that detect
changes in osmolarity of body ﬂuids.
2. Dehydration stimulates the sensation of thirst, and
ﬂuids are consumed to relieve it.
3. ADH released from the posterior pituitary
increases the reabsorption of water by the kidneys.
4. Aldosterone secreted by the adrenal cortex
increases the reabsorption of Na ions by the kid-
neys; water is then reabsorbed by osmosis.
5. If there is too much water in the body, secretion of
ADH decreases, and urinary output increases.
6. If blood volume increases, ANP promotes loss of
Na ions and water in urine.
Electrolytes
1. Chemicals that dissolve in water and dissociate into
ions; most are inorganic.
2. Cations are positive ions such as Na and K.
3. Anions are negative ions such as Cl and HCO3
.
4. By creating osmotic pressure, electrolytes regulate
the osmosis of water between compartments.
Electrolytes in Body Fluids (see Fig. 19–3 and
Table 19–2)
1. ICF—principal cation is K; principal anion is
HPO4
2; protein anions are also abundant.
2. Plasma—principal cation is Na; principal anion is
Cl; protein anions are signiﬁcant.
3. Tissue ﬂuid—same as plasma except that protein
anions are insigniﬁcant.
Intake, Output, and Regulation
1. Intake—electrolytes are part of food and beverages.
2. Output—urine, sweat, feces.
3. Hormones involved: aldosterone—Na and K;
ANP—Na; PTH and calcitonin—Ca2 and
HPO4
2.
Acid–Base Balance
1. Normal pH Ranges—blood: 7.35 to 7.45; ICF: 6.8
to 7.0; tissue ﬂuid: similar to blood.
2. Normal pH of body ﬂuids is maintained by buffer
systems, respirations, and the kidneys.
Buffer Systems
1. Each consists of a weak acid and a weak base; react
with strong acids or bases to change them to sub-
stances that do not greatly affect pH. React within
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

a fraction of a second, but have the least capacity to
prevent pH changes.
2. Bicarbonate buffer system—see text for reactions;
important in both blood and tissue ﬂuid; base to
acid ratio is 20 to 1.
3. Phosphate buffer system—see Fig. 19–4 and text
for reactions; important in ICF and in the kidneys.
4. Protein buffer system—amino acids may act as
either acids or bases. See text for reactions; impor-
tant in ICF.
Respiratory Mechanisms
1. The respiratory system affects pH because it regu-
lates the amount of CO2 in body ﬂuids.
2. May be the cause of a pH change or help compen-
sate for a metabolic pH change—see Table 19–3.
3. Respiratory compensation is rapidly effective
(within a few minutes), but limited in capacity if the
pH imbalance is ongoing.
Renal Mechanisms
1. The kidneys have the greatest capacity to buffer
pH changes, but they may take several hours to
days to become effective (see Table 19–3).
2. Reactions: see Figs. 18–6 and 19–4.
3. Summary of reactions: in response to acidosis, the
kidneys will excrete H ions and retain Na ions
and HCO3
 ions; in response to alkalosis, the kid-
neys will retain H ions and excrete Na ions and
HCO3
 ions.
Effects of pH Changes
1. Acidosis—depresses synaptic transmission in the
CNS; result is confusion, coma, and death.
2. Alkalosis—increases synaptic transmission in the
CNS and PNS; result is irritability, muscle spasms,
and convulsions.
452
Fluid–Electrolyte and Acid–Base Balance
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Name the major water compartments and the
name for water in each of them. Name three spe-
cialized body ﬂuids and state the location of each.
(p. 442)
2. Explain how water moves between compartments;
name the processes. (p. 442)
3. Describe the three sources of water for the body
and the relative amounts of each. (p. 443)
4. Describe the pathways of water output. Which is
the most important? What kinds of variations are
possible in water output? (p. 443)
5. Name the hormones that affect ﬂuid volume, and
state the function of each. (pp. 444)
6. Deﬁne electrolyte, cation, anion, osmosis, and
osmolarity. (pp. 444, 445)
7. Name the major electrolytes in plasma, tissue ﬂuid,
and intracellular ﬂuid, and state their functions.
(pp. 445, 447)
8. Explain how the bicarbonate buffer system will
react to buffer a strong acid. (p. 448)
9. Explain how the phosphate buffer system will
react to buffer a strong acid. (p. 448)
10. Explain why an amino acid may act as either an
acid or a base. (p. 448)
11. Describe the respiratory compensation for
metabolic acidosis and for metabolic alkalosis.
(pp. 449–450)
12. If the body ﬂuids are becoming too acidic, what
ions will the kidneys excrete? What ions will the
kidneys return to the blood? (p. 450)
13. Which of the pH regulatory mechanisms works
most rapidly? Most slowly? Which of these mech-
anisms has the greatest capacity to buffer an
ongoing pH change? Which mechanism has the
least capacity? (pp. 448, 450)
14. Describe the effects of acidosis and alkalosis.
(p. 450)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

1. Men tend to be more watery than women. The rea-
son has to do with two tissues, one of which is more
watery than the other. What are these tissues that
are usually present in different proportions in men
and women? Explain your answer.
2. Mrs. T, age 82, tells her visiting nurse that she has
trouble walking around her house because her feet
and ankles are swollen. The nurse makes a doctor’s
appointment for Mrs. T, and says the problem may
be her heart. Explain.
3. Ms. H, age 18, is on a diet that advises eight 8-
ounce glasses of water a day. Ms. H thinks that if
eight glasses are good, perhaps 12 glasses would be
better, because “water is good for you.” What can
you tell her? Is water always good?
4. Mr. C has what he calls “acid indigestion,” and
takes chewable tablets to try to relieve it. He admits
that the fruit ﬂavors of the tablets often have him
“popping them like candy” all day. He is visiting his
doctor because he says his muscles feel “jumpy.”
What would you expect to ﬁnd for blood pH, res-
pirations per minute, and urine pH? Explain your
answers.
Fluid–Electrolyte and Acid–Base Balance
453
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

454
CHAPTER 20
Chapter Outline
Meiosis
Spermatogenesis
Oogenesis
Male Reproductive System
Testes
Epididymis
Ductus Deferens
Ejaculatory Ducts
Seminal Vesicles
Prostate Gland
Bulbourethral Glands
Urethra—Penis
Semen
Female Reproductive System
Ovaries
Fallopian Tubes
Uterus
Vagina
External Genitals
Mammary Glands
The Menstrual Cycle
Aging and the Reproductive Systems
BOX 20–1
TRISOMY AND DOWN SYNDROME
BOX 20–2
CONTRACEPTION
BOX 20–3
PROSTATIC HYPERTROPHY
BOX 20–4
IN VITRO FERTILIZATION
BOX 20–5
SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASES
BOX 20–6
MAMMOGRAPHY
Student Objectives
• Describe the process of meiosis. Deﬁne diploid
and haploid.
• Describe the differences between spermatogenesis
and oogenesis.
• Name the hormones necessary for the formation
of gametes, and state the function of each.
• Describe the location and functions of the testes.
• Explain the functions of the epididymis, ductus
deferens, ejaculatory duct, and urethra.
• Explain the functions of the seminal vesicles,
prostate gland, and bulbourethral glands.
• Describe the composition of semen, and explain
why its pH must be alkaline.
• Name the parts of a sperm cell, and state the func-
tion of each.
• Describe the functions of the ovaries, fallopian
tubes, uterus, and vagina.
• Describe the structure and function of the
myometrium and endometrium.
• Describe the structure of the mammary glands and
the functions of the hormones involved in lacta-
tion.
• Describe the menstrual cycle in terms of the hor-
mones involved and the changes in the ovaries and
endometrium.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The Reproductive Systems
455
New Terminology
Cervix (SIR-viks)
Ductus deferens (DUK-tus DEF-er-enz)
Endometrium (EN-doh-MEE-tree-uhm)
Fallopian tube (fuh-LOH-pee-an TOOB)
Graaﬁan follicle (GRAF-ee-uhn FAH-li-kuhl)
Inguinal canal (IN-gwi-nuhl ka-NAL)
Menopause (MEN-ah-paws)
Menstrual cycle (MEN-stroo-uhl SIGH-kuhl)
Myometrium (MY-oh-MEE-tree-uhm)
Oogenesis (OH-oh-JEN-e-sis)
Prostate gland (PRAHS-tayt)
Seminiferous tubules (sem-i-NIFF-er-us)
Spermatogenesis (SPER-ma-toh-JEN-e-sis)
Vulva (VUHL-vah)
Zygote (ZYE-goht)
Related Clinical Terminology
Amenorrhea (ay-MEN-uh-REE-ah)
Down syndrome (DOWN SIN-drohm)
Ectopic pregnancy (ek-TOP-ik PREG-nun-see)
In vitro fertilization (IN VEE-troh FER-ti-li-ZAY-
shun)
Mammography (mah-MOG-rah-fee)
Prostatic hypertrophy (prahs-TAT-ik high-PER-
truh-fee)
Trisomy (TRY-suh-mee)
Tubal ligation (TOO-buhl lye-GAY-shun)
Vasectomy (va-SEK-tuh-me)
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The purpose of the male and female reproductive
systems is to continue the human species by the pro-
duction of offspring. How dry and impersonal that
sounds, until we remember that each of us is a contin-
uation of our species and that many of us in turn will
have our own children. Although some other animals
care for their offspring in organized families or soci-
eties, the human species is unique, because of cultural
inﬂuences, in the attention we give to reproduction
and to family life.
Yet like other animals, the actual production and
growth of offspring is a matter of our anatomy and
physiology. The male and female reproductive systems
produce gametes, that is, sperm and egg cells, and
ensure the union of gametes in fertilization following
sexual intercourse. In women, the uterus provides the
site for the developing embryo/fetus until it is suffi-
ciently developed to survive outside the womb.
This chapter will describe the organs of reproduc-
tion and the role of each in the creation of new life or
the functioning of the reproductive system as a whole.
First, however, we will discuss the formation of
gametes.
MEIOSIS
The cell division process of meiosis produces the
gametes—sperm or egg cells. In meiosis, one cell with
the diploid number of chromosomes (46 for humans)
divides twice to form four cells, each with the haploid
number of chromosomes. Haploid means half the usual
diploid number, so for humans the haploid number is
23. Although the process of meiosis is essentially the
same in men and women, there are some important
differences.
SPERMATOGENESIS
Spermatogenesis is the process of meiosis as it takes
place in the testes, the site of sperm production.
Within each testis are seminiferous tubules that
contain spermatogonia, which are stem cells that gen-
erate sperm. A spermatogonium divides by mitosis to
form two cells, one of which will remain in place as a
stem cell, while the other differentiates (specializes) to
become a primary spermatocyte that will undergo
meiosis (Fig. 20–1). As you may recall from Chapter
10, gamete formation is regulated by hormones.
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) from the anterior
pituitary gland initiates sperm production, and testos-
terone, secreted by the testes when stimulated by
luteinizing hormone (LH) from the anterior pituitary,
promotes the maturation of sperm. Inhibin, also pro-
duced by the testes, decreases the secretion of FSH. As
you can see in Fig. 20–1, for each primary spermato-
cyte that undergoes meiosis, four functional sperm
cells are produced.
Sperm production begins at puberty (10 to 14
years of age), and millions of sperm are formed each
day in the testes. Although sperm production dimin-
ishes with advancing age, there is usually no complete
cessation, as there is of egg production in women at
menopause.
OOGENESIS
Oogenesis is the process of meiosis for egg cell for-
mation; it begins in the ovaries and is also regulated by
hormones. FSH initiates the growth of ovarian folli-
cles, each of which contains an oogonium, a stem cell
for egg cell production (Fig. 20–2). This hormone also
stimulates the follicle cells to secrete estrogen, which
promotes the maturation of the ovum. Notice that for
each primary oocyte that undergoes meiosis, only one
functional egg cell is produced. The other three cells
produced are called polar bodies. They have no func-
tion, and will simply deteriorate. A mature ovarian fol-
licle actually contains the secondary oocyte; the
second meiotic division will take place if and when the
egg is fertilized.
The production of ova begins at puberty (10 to 14
years of age) and continues until menopause (45 to 55
years of age), when the ovaries atrophy and no longer
respond to pituitary hormones. During this 30- to 40-
year span, egg production is cyclical, with a mature
ovum being produced approximately every 28 days
(the menstrual cycle is discussed later in this chapter).
Actually, several follicles usually begin to develop
during each cycle. However, the rupturing (ovulation)
of the ﬁrst follicle to mature stops the growth of the
others.
The process of meiosis is like other human proces-
ses in that “mistakes” may sometimes occur. One of
these, trisomy, is discussed in Box 20–1: Trisomy and
Down Syndrome.
The haploid egg and sperm cells produced by
meiosis each have 23 chromosomes. When fertiliza-
456
The Reproductive Systems
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

tion occurs, the nuclei of the egg and sperm merge,
and the fertilized egg (zygote) has 46 chromosomes,
the diploid number. Thus, meiosis maintains the
diploid number of the human species by reducing the
number of chromosomes by half in the formation of
gametes.
MALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
The male reproductive system consists of the testes
and a series of ducts and glands. Sperm are produced
in the testes and are transported through the repro-
ductive ducts: epididymis, ductus deferens, ejaculatory
duct, and urethra (Fig. 20–3). The reproductive glands
produce secretions that become part of semen, the
ﬂuid that is ejaculated from the urethra. These glands
are the seminal vesicles, prostate gland, and bul-
bourethral glands.
TESTES
The testes are located in the scrotum, a sac of skin
between the upper thighs. The temperature within
the scrotum is about 96F, slightly lower than body
temperature, which is necessary for the production
of viable sperm. In the male fetus, the testes develop
near the kidneys, then descend into the scrotum just
before birth. Cryptorchidism is the condition in
which the testes fail to descend, and the result is
sterility unless the testes are surgically placed in the
scrotum.
The Reproductive Systems
457
Mitosis
Spermatogonium
Stem cell
New stem cell
Figure 20–1.
Spermatogene-
sis. The processes of mitosis and
meiosis are shown. For each pri-
mary spermatocyte that under-
goes meiosis, four functional
sperm cells are formed. The struc-
ture of a mature sperm cell is also
shown.
QUESTION: How many chromo-
somes does a sperm cell have,
and where are they located?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Mitosis
Stem cell
Oogonium
New stem cell
Figure 20–2.
Oogenesis. The processes of mitosis and meiosis are shown. For each
primary oocyte that undergoes meiosis, only one functional ovum is formed.
QUESTION: When does the secondary oocyte begin the second meiotic division?
BOX 20–1
TRISOMY AND DOWN SYNDROME
every 5000 live births. Both of these trisomies are
characterized by severe mental and physical retar-
dation, heart defects, deafness, and bone abnor-
malities. Affected infants usually die within their ﬁrst
year.
Down syndrome (Trisomy 21) is the most
common trisomy, with a frequency of about one
per 750 live births. Children with Down syndrome
are mentally retarded, but there is a great range of
mental ability in this group. Physical characteristics
include a skin fold above each eye, short stature,
poor muscle tone, and heart defects. Again, the
degree of severity is highly variable.
Women over the age of 35 are believed to be at
greater risk of having a child with Down syndrome.
The reason may be that as egg cells age the process
of meiosis is more likely to proceed incorrectly.
Trisomy means the presence of three (rather than
the normal two) of a particular chromosome in the
cells of an individual. This may occur because of
non-disjunction (nonseparation) of a chromosome
pair during the second meiotic division, usually in
an egg cell. The egg cell has two of a particular
chromosome, and if fertilized by a sperm, will then
contain three of that chromosome, and a total of
47 chromosomes.
Most trisomies are probably lethal; that is, the
affected embryo will quickly die, even before the
woman realizes she is pregnant. When an embryo-
fetus survives and a child is born with a trisomy,
developmental defects are always present.
The severity of trisomies may be seen in two of
the more rarely occurring ones: Trisomy 13 and
Trisomy 18, each of which occurs about once for
458
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Each testis is about 1.5 inches long by 1 inch wide
(4 cm by 2.5 cm) and is divided internally into lobes
(Fig. 20–4). Each lobe contains several seminiferous
tubules, in which spermatogenesis takes place.
Among the spermatogonia of the seminiferous tubules
are sustentacular (Sertoli) cells, which produce the
hormone inhibin when stimulated by testosterone.
Between the loops of the seminiferous tubules are
interstitial cells, which produce testosterone when
stimulated by luteinizing hormone (LH) from the
anterior pituitary gland. Besides its role in the matu-
ration of sperm, testosterone is also responsible for the
male secondary sex characteristics, which begin to
develop at puberty (Table 20–1).
A sperm cell consists of several parts, which are
shown in Fig. 20–1. The head contains the 23 chro-
mosomes. On the tip of the head is the acrosome,
which is similar to a lysosome and contains enzymes to
digest the membrane of an egg cell. Within the mid-
dle piece are mitochondria that produce ATP. The ﬂa-
gellum provides motility, the capability of the sperm
cell to move. It is the beating of the ﬂagellum that
requires energy from ATP.
Sperm from the seminiferous tubules enter a tubu-
lar network called the rete testis, then enter the epi-
didymis, the ﬁrst of the reproductive ducts.
EPIDIDYMIS
The epididymis (plural: epididymides) is a tube about
20 feet (6 m) long that is coiled on the posterior sur-
face of each testis (see Fig. 20–4). Within the epi-
The Reproductive Systems
459
Symphysis pubis
Sacrum
Ductus deferens
Urinary bladder
Corpus cavernosum
Corpus spongiosum
Cavernous urethra
Glans penis
Prepuce
Scrotum
Testis
Epididymis
Membranous urethra
Anus
Opening of ureter
Rectum
Seminal vesicle
Ejaculatory duct
Prostate gland
Bulbourethral gland
Figure 20–3.
Male reproductive system shown in a midsagittal section through the
pelvic cavity.
QUESTION: Name the duct that carries sperm into the pelvic cavity.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

460
The Reproductive Systems
Spermatic cord
Testicular artery
and veins
Ductus deferens
Nerve
Rete testis
Epididymis
Capillaries
Interstitial cells
Sustentacular cell
Lumen
Seminiferous
tubules
Spermatozoa (sperm cells)
Spermatids
Spermatocytes
Spermatogonia
B
A
Figure 20–4.
(A) Midsagittal section of portion of a testis; the epididymis is on the pos-
terior side of the testis. (B) Cross-section through a seminiferous tubule showing develop-
ment of sperm.
QUESTION: Trace the pathway of sperm from their formation to the ductus deferens.
Table 20–1 HORMONES OF MALE REPRODUCTION
Hormone
Secreted by
Functions
FSH
LH (ICSH)
Testosterone*
Inhibin
* In both sexes, testosterone (from the adrenal cortex in women) contributes to sex drive and muscle-protein synthesis.
Anterior pituitary
Anterior pituitary
Testes (interstitial cells)
Testes (sustentacular cells)
• Initiates production of sperm in the testes
• Stimulates secretion of testosterone by the testes
• Promotes maturation of sperm
• Initiates development of the secondary sex characteristics:
—growth of the reproductive organs
—growth of the larynx
—growth of facial and body hair
—increased protein synthesis, especially in skeletal muscles
• Decreases secretion of FSH to maintain constant rate of spermatogenesis
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

didymis the sperm complete their maturation, and
their ﬂagella become functional. Smooth muscle in
the wall of the epididymis propels the sperm into the
ductus deferens.
DUCTUS DEFERENS
Also called the vas deferens, the ductus deferens
extends from the epididymis in the scrotum on its own
side into the abdominal cavity through the inguinal
canal. This canal is an opening in the abdominal wall
for the spermatic cord, a connective tissue sheath
that contains the ductus deferens, testicular blood
vessels, and nerves. Because the inguinal canal is an
opening in a muscular wall, it is a natural “weak spot,”
and it is the most common site of hernia formation in
men.
Once inside the abdominal cavity, the ductus defer-
ens extends upward over the urinary bladder, then
down the posterior side to join the ejaculatory duct on
its own side (see Fig. 20–3). The smooth muscle layer
of the ductus deferens contracts in waves of peristalsis
as part of ejaculation (see Box 20–2: Contraception).
EJACULATORY DUCTS
Each of the two ejaculatory ducts receives sperm
from the ductus deferens and the secretion of the sem-
inal vesicle on its own side. Both ejaculatory ducts
empty into the single urethra (see Fig. 20–3).
SEMINAL VESICLES
The paired seminal vesicles are posterior to the uri-
nary bladder (see Fig. 20–3). Their secretion contains
fructose to provide an energy source for sperm and is
alkaline to enhance sperm motility. The duct of each
seminal vesicle joins the ductus deferens on that side
to form the ejaculatory duct.
PROSTATE GLAND
A muscular gland just below the urinary bladder, the
prostate gland is about 1.2 inches high by 1.6 inches
wide by 0.8 inch deep (3 cm by 4 cm by 2 cm, about the
size of a walnut). It surrounds the ﬁrst inch of the ure-
thra as it emerges from the bladder (see Fig. 20–3).
The glandular tissue of the prostate secretes an alkaline
The Reproductive Systems
461
BOX 20–2
CONTRACEPTION
Some women report side effects such as headaches,
weight gain, and nausea. Women who use this
method of contraception should not smoke, be-
cause smoking seems to be associated with abnor-
mal clotting and a greater risk of heart attack or
stroke.
Barrier methods—These include the condom,
diaphragm, and cervical cap, which prevent sperm
from reaching the uterus and fallopian tubes. The
use of a spermicide (sperm-killing chemical)
increases the effectiveness of these methods. A con-
dom is a latex or rubber sheath that covers the
penis and collects and contains ejaculated semen.
Leakage is possible, however, and the condom is
considered 80% to 90% effective. This is the only
contraceptive method that decreases the spread of
sexually transmitted diseases.
The diaphragm and cervical cap are plastic struc-
tures that are inserted into the vagina to cover the
cervix. They are about 80% effective. These meth-
ods should not be used, however, by women with
vaginal infections or abnormal Pap smears or by
those who have had toxic shock syndrome.
There are several methods of contraception, or
birth control; some are more effective than others.
Sterilization—Sterilization in men involves a
relatively simple procedure called a vasectomy.
The ductus (vas) deferens is accessible in the scro-
tum, in which a small incision is made on either
side. The ductus is then sutured and cut. Although
sperm are still produced in the testes, they cannot
pass the break in the ductus, and they simply die
and are reabsorbed.
Sterilization in women is usually accomplished
by tubal ligation, the suturing and severing of the
fallopian tubes. Usually this can be done by way of
a small incision in the abdominal wall. Ova cannot
pass the break in the tube, nor can sperm pass from
the uterine side to fertilize an ovum.
When done properly, these forms of surgical ster-
ilization are virtually 100% effective.
Oral contraceptives (“the pill”)—Birth con-
trol pills contain progesterone and estrogen in vary-
ing proportions. They prevent ovulation by
inhibiting the secretion of FSH and LH from the
anterior pituitary gland. When taken according to
schedule, birth control pills are about 98% effective.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

ﬂuid that helps maintain sperm motility. The smooth
muscle of the prostate gland contracts during ejacula-
tion to contribute to the expulsion of semen from the
urethra (see Box 20–3: Prostatic Hypertrophy).
BULBOURETHRAL GLANDS
Also called Cowper’s glands, the bulbourethral
glands are about the size of peas and are located below
the prostate gland; they empty into the urethra. Their
alkaline secretion coats the interior of the urethra just
before ejaculation, which neutralizes any acidic urine
that might be present.
You have probably noticed that the secretions of
the male reproductive glands are alkaline. This is
important because the cavity of the female vagina has
an acidic pH created by the normal ﬂora, the natural
bacterial population of the vagina. The alkalinity of
seminal ﬂuid helps neutralize the acidic vaginal pH
and permits sperm motility in what might otherwise
be an unfavorable environment.
URETHRA—PENIS
The urethra is the last of the ducts through which
semen travels, and its longest portion is enclosed
within the penis. The penis is an external genital
organ; its distal end is called the glans penis and is cov-
ered with a fold of skin called the prepuce or foreskin.
Circumcision is the surgical removal of the foreskin.
This is a common procedure performed on male
infants, and though there is considerable medical
debate as to whether circumcision has a useful pur-
pose, some research studies have found fewer cases of
HIV infection among circumcised men, compared
with men who are uncircumcised.
Within the penis are three masses of cavernous
(erectile) tissue (see Fig. 20–3). Each consists of a
framework of smooth muscle and connective tissue
that contains blood sinuses, which are large, irregular
vascular channels.
When blood ﬂow through these sinuses is minimal,
the penis is ﬂaccid. During sexual stimulation, the
arteries to the penis dilate, the sinuses ﬁll with blood,
and the penis becomes erect and ﬁrm. The dilation of
penile arteries and the resulting erection are brought
about by the localized release of nitric oxide (NO) and
by parasympathetic impulses. The erect penis is capa-
ble of penetrating the female vagina to deposit sperm.
The culmination of sexual stimulation is ejaculation, a
sympathetic response that is brought about by peristal-
sis of all of the reproductive ducts and contraction of
the prostate gland and the muscles of the pelvic ﬂoor.
SEMEN
Semen consists of sperm and the secretions of the
seminal vesicles, prostate gland, and bulbourethral
glands; its average pH is about 7.4. During ejacula-
tion, approximately 2 to 4 mL of semen is expelled.
Each milliliter of semen contains about 100 million
sperm cells.
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
The female reproductive system consists of the paired
ovaries and fallopian tubes, the single uterus and
vagina, and the external genital structures (Fig. 20–5).
Egg cells (ova) are produced in the ovaries and travel
through the fallopian tubes to the uterus. The uterus
is the site for the growth of the embryo-fetus.
OVARIES
The ovaries are a pair of oval structures about 1.5
inches (4 cm) long on either side of the uterus in the
pelvic cavity (Fig. 20–6). The ovarian ligament
extends from the medial side of an ovary to the uter-
ine wall, and the broad ligament is a fold of the peri-
462
The Reproductive Systems
BOX 20–3
PROSTATIC HYPERTROPHY
Prostatic hypertrophy is enlargement of the
prostate gland. Benign prostatic hypertrophy is a
common occurrence in men over the age of 60
years. The enlarged prostate compresses the ure-
thra within it and may make urination difficult or
result in urinary retention. A prostatectomy is the
surgical removal of part or all of the prostate. A
possible consequence is that ejaculation may be
impaired. Newer surgical procedures may pre-
serve sexual function, however, and medications
are available to shrink enlarged prostate tissue.
Cancer of the prostate is the second most
common cancer among men (lung cancer is
ﬁrst). Most cases occur in men over the age of 50
years. Treatment may include surgery to remove
the prostate, radiation therapy, or hormone ther-
apy to reduce the patient’s level of testosterone.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

toneum that covers the ovaries. These ligaments help
keep the ovaries in place.
Within an ovary are several hundred thousand pri-
mary follicles, which are present at birth. During a
woman’s childbearing years, only 300 to 400 of these
follicles will produce mature ova. As with sperm pro-
duction in men, the supply of potential gametes far
exceeds what is actually needed, but this helps ensure
the continuation of the human species.
Each primary ovarian follicle contains an oocyte, a
potential ovum or egg cell. Surrounding the oocyte
are the follicle cells, which secrete estrogen. Matura-
tion of a follicle, requiring FSH and estrogen, was
described previously in the section on oogenesis. A
mature follicle may also be called a graaﬁan follicle,
and the hormone LH from the anterior pituitary
gland causes ovulation, that is, rupture of the mature
follicle with release of the ovum. At this time, other
The Reproductive Systems
463
Fallopian tube
Fimbriae
Ovary
Uterus
Sacrum
Cervix
Rectum
Anus
Symphysis pubis
Urinary bladder
Opening of ureter
Clitoris
Urethra
Labium minor
Labium major
Vagina
Bartholin's gland
Figure 20–5.
Female reproductive system shown in a midsagittal section through the
pelvic cavity.
QUESTION: Where is the uterus with respect to the urinary bladder, and why is this impor-
tant?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

developing follicles begin to deteriorate; these are
called atretic follicles and have no further purpose.
Under the inﬂuence of LH, the ruptured follicle
becomes the corpus luteum and begins to secrete
progesterone as well as estrogen. Hormones produced
in smaller amounts by the corpus luteum are inhibin
and relaxin.
FALLOPIAN TUBES
There are two fallopian tubes (also called uterine
tubes or oviducts); each is about 4 inches (10 cm) long.
The lateral end of a fallopian tube encloses an ovary,
and the medial end opens into the uterus. The end of
the tube that encloses the ovary has ﬁmbriae, fringe-
like projections that create currents in the ﬂuid sur-
rounding the ovary to pull the ovum into the fallopian
tube.
Because the ovum has no means of self-locomotion
(as do sperm), the structure of the fallopian tube
ensures that the ovum will be kept moving toward the
uterus. The smooth muscle layer of the tube contracts
in peristaltic waves that help propel the ovum (or
zygote, as you will see in a moment). The lining
464
The Reproductive Systems
Ovary
Corpus
luteum
Fertilization
of ovum
Fallopian
tube
Fundus
of uterus
Ovarian
ligament
Fimbriae
Mature
follicle
Broad
ligament
Round
ligament
Artery
and vein
Body of uterus
Endometrium
Myometrium
Sperm
Cervix of uterus
Vagina
Rugae
Bartholin's gland
Figure 20–6.
Female reproductive system shown in anterior view. The ovary at the
left of the illustration has been sectioned to show the developing follicles. The fallopian
tube at the left of the illustration has been sectioned to show fertilization. The uterus
and vagina have been sectioned to show internal structures. Arrows indicate the move-
ment of the ovum toward the uterus and the movement of sperm from the vagina
toward the fallopian tube.
QUESTION: Which layer of the uterine wall is thicker? What tissue is it made of?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

(mucosa) is extensively folded and is made of ciliated
epithelial tissue. The sweeping action of the cilia also
moves the ovum toward the uterus.
Fertilization usually takes place in the fallopian
tube. If not fertilized, an ovum dies within 24 to 48
hours and disintegrates, either in the tube or the
uterus. If fertilized, the ovum becomes a zygote and is
swept into the uterus; this takes about 4 to 5 days (see
Box 20–4: In Vitro Fertilization).
Sometimes the zygote will not reach the uterus but
will still continue to develop. This is called an ectopic
pregnancy; ectopic means “in an abnormal site.” The
developing embryo may become implanted in the fal-
lopian tube, the ovary itself, or even elsewhere in the
abdominal cavity. An ectopic pregnancy usually does
not progress very long, because these other sites are
not specialized to provide a placenta or to expand to
accommodate the growth of a fetus, as the uterus is.
The spontaneous termination of an ectopic pregnancy
is usually the result of bleeding in the mother, and sur-
gery may be necessary to prevent maternal death from
circulatory shock. Occasionally an ectopic pregnancy
does go to full term and produces a healthy baby; such
an event is a credit to the adaptability of the human
body and to the advances of medical science.
UTERUS
The uterus is shaped like an upside-down pear, about
3 inches long by 2 inches wide by 1 inch deep (7.5 cm
by 5 cm by 2.5 cm), superior to the urinary bladder
and between the two ovaries in the pelvic cavity
(see Fig. 20–5). The broad ligament also covers the
uterus (see Fig. 20–6). During pregnancy the uterus
increases greatly in size, contains the placenta to nour-
ish the embryo-fetus, and expels the baby at the end of
gestation.
The parts and layers of the uterus are shown in Fig.
20–6. The fundus is the upper portion above the
entry of the fallopian tubes, and the body is the large
central portion. The narrow, lower end of the uterus is
the cervix, which opens into the vagina.
The outermost layer of the uterus, the serosa or
epimetrium, is a fold of the peritoneum. The myome-
trium is the smooth muscle layer; during pregnancy
these cells increase in size to accommodate the grow-
ing fetus and contract for labor and delivery at the end
of pregnancy.
The lining of the uterus is the endometrium,
which itself consists of two layers. The basilar layer,
adjacent to the myometrium, is vascular but very
thin and is a permanent layer. The functional layer
is regenerated and lost during each menstrual cycle.
Under the inﬂuence of estrogen and progesterone
from the ovaries, the growth of blood vessels thick-
ens the functional layer in preparation for a possible
embryo. If fertilization does not occur, the functional
layer sloughs off in menstruation. During pregnancy,
the endometrium forms the maternal portion of the
placenta.
VAGINA
The vagina is a muscular tube about 4 inches (10 cm)
long that extends from the cervix to the vaginal oriﬁce
in the perineum (pelvic ﬂoor). It is posterior to the
The Reproductive Systems
465
BOX 20–4
IN VITRO FERTILIZATION
woman’s fallopian tube. Development then pro-
ceeds as if the ova had been fertilized naturally.
Since the birth of the ﬁrst “test tube baby” in
1978, many thousands of babies have been born
following in vitro fertilization. The techniques are
not always successful, and repeated attempts can
be very expensive.
As an adjunct to IVF, pre-implantation genetic
diagnosis may be done, to test for genetic diseases
and chromosome abnormalities such as the tri-
somies described in Box 20–1. This may be espe-
cially useful for older women trying to conceive and
for couples with a family history of a genetic disease
such as sickle-cell anemia or cystic ﬁbrosis.
In vitro fertilization (IVF) is fertilization outside
the body, usually in a glass dish. A woman who
wishes to conceive by this method is given FSH to
stimulate the simultaneous development of several
ovarian follicles. LH may then be given to stimulate
simultaneous ovulation. The ova are removed by
way of a small incision in the abdominal wall and
are placed in a solution containing the sperm of the
woman’s partner (or an anonymous donor). After
fertilization and the ﬁrst mitotic divisions of cleav-
age, the very early embryo is placed in the woman’s
uterus.
It is also possible to mix the removed ova with
sperm and return them almost immediately to the
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

urethra and anterior to the rectum (see Fig. 20–5).
The vaginal opening is usually partially covered by a
thin membrane called the hymen, which is ruptured
by the ﬁrst sexual intercourse or by the use of tampons
during the menstrual period.
The functions of the vagina are to receive sperm
from the penis during sexual intercourse, to provide
the exit for menstrual blood ﬂow, and to become the
birth canal at the end of pregnancy.
The vaginal mucosa after puberty is stratiﬁed
squamous epithelium, which is relatively resistant to
pathogens. The normal ﬂora (bacteria) of the vagina
creates an acidic pH that helps inhibit the growth
of pathogens (see Box 20–5: Sexually Transmitted
Diseases).
EXTERNAL GENITALS
The female external genital structures may also be
called the vulva (Fig. 20–7), and include the clitoris,
labia majora and minora, and the Bartholin’s glands
(see Fig. 20–5).
The clitoris is a small mass of erectile tissue ante-
rior to the urethral oriﬁce. The only function of the
clitoris is sensory; it responds to sexual stimulation,
and its vascular sinuses become ﬁlled with blood.
The mons pubis is a pad of fat over the pubic sym-
physis, covered with skin and pubic hair. Extending
posteriorly from the mons are the labia majora (lat-
eral) and labia minora (medial), which are paired
folds of skin. The area between the labia minora is
called the vestibule and contains the openings of the
urethra and vagina. The labia cover these openings
and prevent drying of their mucous membranes.
Bartholin’s glands, also called vestibular glands
(see Figs. 20–5 and 20–6), are within the ﬂoor of
the vestibule; their ducts open onto the mucosa at the
vaginal oriﬁce. The secretion of these glands keeps the
mucosa moist and lubricates the vagina during sexual
intercourse.
466
The Reproductive Systems
BOX 20–5
SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASES
simplex (usually type 2). Painful lesions in the geni-
tal area are the primary symptom. Although the
lesions heal within 5 to 9 days, recurrences are pos-
sible, perhaps triggered by physiological stresses
such as illness. Although herpes is not curable at
present, medications have proved useful in sup-
pressing recurrences. It is estimated that 2 million
new cases of genital herpes occur every year.
Neonatal herpes is infection of a newborn dur-
ing passage through the birth canal. The infant’s
immune system is too immature to control the her-
pes virus, and this infection may be fatal or cause
brain damage. A pregnant woman with a history
of genital herpes may choose to have the baby
delivered by cesarean section to avoid this possible
outcome.
Chlamydial infection—caused by the very
simple bacterium Chlamydia trachomatis. This is one
of the most prevalent STDs in the United States,
with estimates of 4 million new cases yearly.
Infected men may have urethritis or epididymitis.
Women often have no symptoms at ﬁrst but may
develop PID, which increases the risk of ectopic
pregnancy. Infants born to infected women may
develop conjunctivitis or pneumonia. Chlamydial
infection can be treated successfully with antibiotics
such as erythromycin or azithromycin.
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) are those
in which the pathogen is acquired during sexual
activity. Most are caused by bacteria or viruses.
Gonorrhea—caused by the bacterium Neisseria
gonorrhoeae. Infected men have urethritis with
painful and frequent urination and pus in the urine.
Women are often asymptomatic, and the bacteria
may spread from the cervix to other reproductive
organs (pelvic inﬂammatory disease [PID]). The use
of antibiotics in the eyes of all newborns has virtu-
ally eliminated neonatal conjunctivitis acquired
from an infected mother. Gonorrhea can be treated
with antibiotics, but resistant strains of the bacteria
complicate treatment. Despite this, the number of
reported cases of gonorrhea has been decreasing in
recent years.
Syphilis—caused by the bacterium Treponema
pallidum. Although syphilis can be cured with peni-
cillin, it is a disease that may be ignored by the per-
son who has it because the symptoms may seem
minor and often do not last long. If untreated, how-
ever, syphilis may cause severe or even fatal dam-
age to the nervous system and heart. In the last few
years the number of reported cases of syphilis has
been decreasing, and the CDC has hopes of eradi-
cating syphilis in the United States.
Genital herpes—caused by the virus herpes
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

MAMMARY GLANDS
The mammary glands are structurally related to the
skin but functionally related to the reproductive sys-
tem because they produce milk for the nourishment of
offspring. Enclosed within the breasts, the mammary
glands are anterior to the pectoralis major muscles;
their structure is shown in Fig. 20–8.
The glandular tissue is surrounded by adipose tis-
sue. The alveolar glands produce milk after preg-
nancy; the milk enters lactiferous ducts that converge
at the nipple. The skin around the nipple is a pig-
mented area called the areola.
The formation of milk is under hormonal control.
During pregnancy, high levels of estrogen and proges-
terone prepare the glands for milk production.
Prolactin from the anterior pituitary gland causes the
actual synthesis of milk after pregnancy. The sucking
of the infant on the nipple stimulates the hypothala-
mus to send nerve impulses to the posterior pituitary
gland, which secretes oxytocin to cause the release of
milk. The effects of these hormones on the mammary
glands are summarized in Table 20–2 (see also Box
20–6: Mammography).
THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE
The menstrual cycle includes the activity of the hor-
mones of the ovaries and anterior pituitary gland and
the resultant changes in the ovaries (ovarian cycle) and
uterus (uterine cycle). These are all incorporated into
Fig. 20–9, which may look complicated at ﬁrst, but
refer to it as you read the following.
Notice ﬁrst the four hormones involved: FSH and
The Reproductive Systems
467
Mons pubis
Labium major
Labium minor
Anus
Vaginal opening
Hymen
Urethral
opening
Clitoris
Figure 20–7.
Female external genitals (vulva)
shown in inferior view of the perineum.
QUESTION: What is the function of the labia majora
and minora?
Skin
Adipose tissue
Areola
Nipple
Lactiferous duct
Lactiferous glands
Intercostal muscles
Pectoralis major muscle
Ribs
Figure 20–8.
Mammary gland shown in a mid-
sagittal section.
QUESTION: Name the hormones that stimulate the
production of milk and release of milk.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

LH from the anterior pituitary gland, estrogen from
the ovarian follicle, and progesterone from the cor-
pus luteum. The ﬂuctuations of these hormones are
shown as they would occur in an average 28-day cycle.
A cycle may be described in terms of three phases:
menstrual phase, follicular phase, and luteal phase.
1. Menstrual phase—The loss of the functional
layer of the endometrium is called menstruation
or the menses. Although this is actually the end of
a menstrual cycle, the onset of menstruation is eas-
ily pinpointed and is, therefore, a useful starting
point. Menstruation may last 2 to 8 days, with an
average of 3 to 6 days. At this time, secretion of
FSH is increasing, and several ovarian follicles
begin to develop.
2. Follicular phase—FSH stimulates growth of
ovarian follicles and secretion of estrogen by the
follicle cells. The secretion of LH is also in-
creasing, but more slowly. FSH and estrogen pro-
mote the growth and maturation of the ovum, and
estrogen stimulates the growth of blood vessels in
the endometrium to regenerate the functional
layer.
This phase ends with ovulation, when a sharp
increase in LH causes rupture of a mature ovarian
follicle.
3. Luteal phase—Under the inﬂuence of LH, the
ruptured follicle becomes the corpus luteum and
begins to secrete progesterone as well as estrogen.
Progesterone stimulates further growth of blood
vessels in the functional layer of the endometrium
and promotes the storage of nutrients such as
glycogen.
As progesterone secretion increases, LH secre-
tion decreases, and if the ovum is not fertilized, the
secretion of progesterone also begins to decrease.
Without progesterone, the endometrium cannot be
maintained and begins to slough off in menstrua-
tion. FSH secretion begins to increase (as estrogen
and progesterone decrease), and the cycle begins
again.
Also secreted by the corpus luteum during a cycle
are the hormones inhibin and relaxin. Inhibin inhibits
the secretion of FSH, and perhaps LH as well, from
the anterior pituitary gland. Relaxin is believed to
inhibit contractions of the myometrium (as does pro-
gesterone), which would help make implantation of
the early embryo successful.
The 28-day cycle shown in Fig. 20–9 is average.
Women may have cycles of anywhere from 23 to 35
days, the normal range. Women who engage in stren-
uous exercise over prolonged periods of time may
experience amenorrhea, that is, cessation of menses.
This seems to be related to reduction of body fat.
Apparently the reproductive cycle ceases if a woman
does not have sufficient reserves of energy for herself
and a developing fetus. The exact mechanism by
which this happens is not completely understood at
present (see Box 17–6). Amenorrhea may also accom-
pany states of physical or emotional stress, anorexia
nervosa, or various endocrine disorders.
The functions of the hormones of female repro-
duction are summarized in Table 20–3.
468
The Reproductive Systems
Table 20–2
HORMONE EFFECTS ON
THE MAMMARY GLANDS
Hormone
Secreted by
Functions
Estrogen
Progesterone
Prolactin
Oxytocin
Ovary (follicle)
Placenta
Ovary (corpus
luteum)
Placenta
Anterior
pituitary
Posterior pitu-
itary (hypo-
thalamus)
• Promotes growth
of duct system
• Promotes growth
of secretory cells
• Promotes pro-
duction of milk
after birth
• Promotes release
of milk
BOX 20–6
MAMMOGRAPHY
Mammography is an x-ray technique that is used
to evaluate breast tissue for abnormalities. By far
the most frequent usage is to detect breast can-
cer, which is one of the most common malig-
nancies in women. If detected early, breast
cancer may be cured through a combination of
surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy. Women
should practice breast self-examination monthly,
but mammography can detect lumps that are
too small to be felt manually. Women in their 30s
may have a mammogram done to serve as a
comparison for mammograms later in life.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

469
Progesterone
Estrogen
FSH
LH
Endometrial changes
during the menstrual cycle
Ovarian
cycle
Hormone levels (relative scale)
Functional
layer
Basilar
layer
Primary
follicle
Secondary
follicles
Graafian
follicle
Corpus
luteum
Corpus
albicans
Ovulation
0
5
10
15
20
25
28
Days
Menstrual
flow
Figure 20–9.
The menstrual cycle. The levels of the important hormones are shown rel-
ative to one another throughout the cycle. Changes in the ovarian follicle are depicted. The
relative thickness of the endometrium is also shown.
QUESTION: Which hormone triggers ovulation? What else does this hormone do to the
follicle?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Anterior pituitary
Anterior pituitary
Ovary (follicle)
Placenta during pregnancy
Ovary (corpus luteum)
Placenta during pregnancy
Ovary (corpus luteum)
Ovary (corpus luteum)
Placenta during pregnancy
• Initiates development of ovarian follicles
• Stimulates secretion of estrogen by follicle cells
• Causes ovulation
• Converts the ruptured ovarian follicle into the corpus luteum
• Stimulates secretion of progesterone by the corpus luteum
• Promotes maturation of ovarian follicles
• Promotes growth of blood vessels in the endometrium
• Initiates development of the secondary sex characteristics:
—growth of the uterus and other reproductive organs
—growth of the mammary ducts and fat deposition in the breasts
—broadening of the pelvic bone
—subcutaneous fat deposition in hips and thighs
• Promotes further growth of blood vessels in the endometrium and
storage of nutrients
• Inhibits contractions of the myometrium
• Inhibits secretion of FSH
• Inhibits contractions of the myometrium to facilitate implantation
• Promotes stretching of ligaments of the pubic symphysis
AGING AND THE
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEMS
For women there is a deﬁnite end to reproductive
capability; this is called the menopause and usually
occurs between the ages of 45 and 55. Estrogen secre-
tion decreases; ovulation and menstrual cycles become
irregular and ﬁnally cease. The decrease in estrogen
has other effects as well. Loss of bone matrix may lead
to osteoporosis and fractures; an increase in blood
cholesterol makes women more likely to develop
coronary artery disease; drying of the vaginal mucosa
increases susceptibility to vaginal infections. Estrogen
replacement therapy may delay some of these conse-
quences of menopause, but there are risks involved,
and women should be fully informed of them before
starting such therapy. The likelihood of breast cancer
also increases with age, and women over age 50 should
consider having a mammogram to serve as a baseline,
then one at least every other year.
For most men, testosterone secretion continues
throughout life, as does sperm production, though
both diminish with advancing age. Perhaps the most
common reproductive problem for older men is pro-
static hypertrophy, enlargement of the prostate gland.
As the urethra is compressed by the growing prostate
gland, urination becomes difficult, and residual urine
in the bladder increases the chance of urinary tract
infection. Prostate hypertrophy is usually benign, but
cancer of the prostate is one of the more common can-
cers in elderly men.
SUMMARY
The production of male or female gametes is a process
that is regulated by hormones. When fertilization of
an ovum by a sperm cell takes place, the zygote, or fer-
tilized egg, has the potential to become a new human
being. The development of the zygote to embryo-
fetus to newborn infant is also dependent on hor-
mones and is the subject of our next chapter.
470
The Reproductive Systems
Table 20–3
HORMONES OF FEMALE REPRODUCTION
Hormone
Secreted by
Functions
FSH
LH
Estrogen*
Progesterone
Inhibin
Relaxin
*Estrogen has effects on organs such as bones and blood vessels in both men and women. Estrogen is produced in fat tissue in
the breasts and hips. In men, testosterone is converted to estrogen in the brain.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Reproductive Systems—purpose is to pro-
duce gametes (egg and sperm), to ensure
fertilization, and in women to provide a site
for the embryo-fetus
Meiosis—the cell division process that pro-
duces gametes
1. One cell with the diploid number of chromosomes
(46) divides twice to form four cells, each with the
haploid number of chromosomes (23).
2. Spermatogenesis takes place in the testes; a contin-
uous process from puberty throughout life; each
primary spermatocyte produces four functional
sperm (see Fig. 20–1). FSH and testosterone are
directly necessary (see Table 20–1).
3. Oogenesis takes place in the ovaries; the process
is cyclical (every 28 days) from puberty until
menopause; each primary oocyte produces one
functional ovum and three non-functional polar
bodies (see Fig. 20–2). FSH, LH, and estrogen are
necessary (see Table 20–3).
Male Reproductive System—consists of the
testes and the ducts and glands that con-
tribute to the formation of semen (see Fig.
20–3)
1. Testes (paired)—located in the scrotum between
the upper thighs; temperature in the scrotum is
96F to permit production of viable sperm. Sperm
are produced in seminiferous tubules (see Fig. 20–4
and Table 20–1). A sperm cell consists of the head,
which contains 23 chromosomes; the middle
piece, which contains mitochondria; the ﬂagellum
for motility; and the acrosome on the tip of the
head to digest the membrane of the egg cell (see
Fig. 20–1).
2. Epididymis (paired)—a long coiled tube on the
posterior surface of each testis (see Fig. 20–4).
Sperm complete their maturation here.
3. Ductus deferens (paired)—extends from the epi-
didymis into the abdominal cavity through the
inguinal canal, over and down behind the urinary
bladder to join the ejaculatory duct (see Fig. 20–3).
Smooth muscle in the wall contracts in waves of
peristalsis.
4. Ejaculatory ducts (paired)—receive sperm from
the ductus deferens and the secretions from the
seminal vesicles (see Fig. 20–3); empty into the ure-
thra.
5. Seminal vesicles (paired)—posterior to urinary
bladder; duct of each opens into ejaculatory duct
(see Fig. 20–3). Secretion contains fructose to
nourish sperm and is alkaline to enhance sperm
motility.
6. Prostate gland (single)—below the urinary bladder,
encloses the ﬁrst inch of the urethra (see Fig.
20–3); secretion is alkaline to maintain sperm
motility; smooth muscle contributes to the force
required for ejaculation.
7. Bulbourethral glands (paired)—below the prostate
gland; empty into the urethra (see Fig. 20–3);
secretion is alkaline to line the urethra prior to
ejaculation.
8. Urethra (single)—within the penis; carries semen
to exterior (see Fig. 20–3). The penis contains
three masses of erectile tissue that have blood
sinuses. Sexual stimulation and parasympathetic
impulses cause dilation of the penile arteries and an
erection. Ejaculation of semen involves peristalsis
of all male ducts and contraction of the prostate
gland and pelvic ﬂoor.
9. Semen—composed of sperm and the secretions
of the seminal vesicles, prostate gland, and bul-
bourethral glands. The alkaline pH (7.4) neutral-
izes the acidic pH of the female vagina.
Female Reproductive System—consists of the
ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, vagina, and
external genitals
1. Ovaries (paired)—located on either side of the
uterus (see Fig. 20–6). Egg cells are produced in
ovarian follicles; each ovum contains 23 chromo-
somes. Ovulation of a graaﬁan follicle is stimulated
by LH (see Table 20–3).
2. Fallopian tubes (paired)—each extends from an
ovary to the uterus (see Fig. 20–6); ﬁmbriae sweep
the ovum into the tube; ciliated epithelial tissue and
peristalsis of smooth muscle propel the ovum
toward the uterus; fertilization usually takes place
in the fallopian tube.
The Reproductive Systems
471
STUDY OUTLINE
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

3. Uterus (single)—superior to the urinary bladder
and between the two ovaries (see Fig. 20–5).
Myometrium is the smooth muscle layer that con-
tracts for delivery (see Fig. 20–6). Endometrium is
the lining which may become the placenta; basilar
layer is permanent; functional layer is lost in men-
struation and regenerated. Parts: upper fundus,
central body, and lower cervix.
4. Vagina (single)—extends from the cervix to the
vaginal oriﬁce (see Figs. 20–5 and 20–6). Receives
sperm during intercourse; serves as exit for men-
strual blood and as the birth canal during delivery.
Normal ﬂora provide an acidic pH that inhibits the
growth of pathogens.
5. External genitals (see Figs. 20–5 and 20–7)—also
called the vulva. The clitoris is a small mass of erec-
tile tissue that responds to sexual stimulation; labia
majora and minora are paired folds of skin that
enclose the vestibule and cover the urethral and
vaginal openings; Bartholin’s glands open into the
vaginal oriﬁce and secrete mucus.
Mammary Glands—anterior to the pectoralis
major muscles, surrounded by adipose tissue
(see Fig. 20–8)
1. Alveolar glands produce milk; lactiferous ducts
converge at the nipple.
2. Hormonal regulation—see Table 20–2.
The Menstrual Cycle—average is 28 days;
includes the hormones FSH, LH, estrogen,
and progesterone, and changes in the
ovaries and endometrium (see Fig. 20–9 and
Table 20–3)
1. Menstrual phase—loss of the endometrium.
2. Follicular phase—several ovarian follicles develop;
ovulation is the rupture of a mature follicle; blood
vessels grow in the endometrium.
3. Luteal phase—the ruptured follicle becomes the
corpus luteum; the endometrium continues to
develop.
4. If fertilization does not occur, decreased proges-
terone results in the loss of the endometrium in
menstruation.
472
The Reproductive Systems
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Describe spermatogenesis and oogenesis in terms
of site, number of functional cells produced by each
cell that undergoes meiosis, and timing of the
process. (p. 456)
2. Describe the functions of FSH, LH, inhibin, and
testosterone in spermatogenesis. Describe the func-
tions of FSH and estrogen in oogenesis. (p. 456)
3. Describe the locations of the testes and epi-
didymides, and explain their functions. (pp. 457,
459, 461)
4. Name all the ducts, in order, that sperm travel
through from the testes to the urethra. (p. 461)
5. Name the male reproductive glands, and state how
each contributes to the formation of semen. (pp.
461–462)
6. Explain how the structure of cavernous tissue per-
mits erection of the penis. Name the structures that
bring about ejaculation. (p. 462)
7. State the function of each part of a sperm cell: head,
middle piece, ﬂagellum, and acrosome. (p. 459)
8. Describe the location of the ovaries, and name the
hormones produced by the ovaries. (pp. 462–464)
9. Explain how an ovum or zygote is kept moving
through the fallopian tube. (pp. 464–465)
10. Describe the function of myometrium, basilar
layer of the endometrium, and functional layer of
the endometrium. Name the hormones necessary
for growth of the endometrium. (p. 465)
11. State the functions of the vagina, labia majora and
minora, and Bartholin’s glands. (p. 466)
12. Name the parts of the mammary glands, and state
the function of each. (p. 467)
13. Name the hormone that has each of these effects
on the mammary glands: (p. 468)
a. Causes release of milk
b. Promotes growth of the ducts
c. Promotes growth of the secretory cells
d. Stimulates milk production
14. Name the phase of the menstrual cycle in which
each of these actions takes place: (p. 468)
a. Rupture of a mature follicle
b. Loss of the endometrium
c. Final development of the endometrium
d. Development of the corpus luteum
e. Development of several ovarian follicles
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

1. Compare meiosis with mitosis in terms of number
of divisions, number of cells produced, number of
chromosomes in each cell, and purpose of the cells
produced.
2. An ovum is released by a mature ovarian follicle,
but the subsequent corpus luteum does not secrete
progesterone. If the ovum is fertilized, is implanta-
tion possible? Is a full-term pregnancy possible?
Explain your answers.
3. A sexually transmitted disease such as gonorrhea is
usually symptomatic for men, but quite often
women do not have symptoms. Explain the conse-
quences of this, and to whom those consequences
apply.
4. Some textbooks or articles speak of the genitouri-
nary system or the urogenital system. Is this termi-
nology correct for everyone? For anyone? If it is
correct for some, describe what the two systems
share anatomically.
5. The reproductive system may seem a bit isolated
from other body systems in that its purpose is to
create new life, not just maintain existing life. But
there are signiﬁcant relationships between the
reproductive system and other body systems.
Name three organ systems that the reproductive
system especially depends upon, and brieﬂy explain
that dependence. Then name two systems whose
anatomy or physiology is inﬂuenced by the hor-
mones of the reproductive system, and describe
these inﬂuences.
The Reproductive Systems
473
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

474
CHAPTER 21
Chapter Outline
Human Development
Fertilization
Implantation
Embryo and Embryonic Membranes
Placenta and Umbilical Cord
Placental hormones
Parturition and Labor
The Infant at Birth
Genetics
Chromosomes and Genes
Genotype and Phenotype
Inheritance: Dominant–Recessive
Inheritance: Multiple Alleles
Inheritance: Sex-Linked Traits
BOX 21–1
TWINS
BOX 21–2
FETAL DIAGNOSIS
BOX 21–3
CONGENITAL FETAL INFECTIONS
BOX 21–4
FETAL ALCOHOL SYNDROME
BOX 21–5
PREMATURE BIRTH
BOX 21–6
APGAR SCORE
BOX 21–7
SOLUTION TO GENETICS QUESTION
Student Objectives
• Describe the process of fertilization and cleavage
to the blastocyst stage.
• Explain when, where, and how implantation of the
embryo occurs.
• Describe the functions of the embryonic mem-
branes.
• Describe the structure and functions of the pla-
centa and umbilical cord.
• Name and explain the functions of the placental
hormones.
• State the length of the average gestation period,
and describe the stages of labor.
• Describe the major changes in the infant at birth.
• Describe some important maternal changes during
pregnancy.
• Explain homologous chromosomes, autosomes,
sex chromosomes, and genes.
• Deﬁne alleles, genotype, phenotype, homozygous,
and heterozygous.
• Explain the following patterns of inheritance:
dominant–recessive, multiple alleles, and sex-
linked traits.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Human Development
and Genetics
475
New Terminology
Alleles (uh-LEELZ)
Amnion (AM-nee-on)
Amniotic ﬂuid (AM-nee-AH-tik FLOO-id)
Autosomes (AW-toh-sohms)
Cleavage (KLEE-vije)
Embryo (EM-bree-oh)
Genotype (JEE-noh-type)
Gestation (jes-TAY-shun)
Heterozygous (HET-er-oh-ZYE-gus)
Homologous pair (hoh-MAHL-ah-gus PAYR)
Homozygous (HOH-moh-ZYE-gus)
Implantation (IM-plan-TAY-shun)
Labor (LAY-ber)
Parturition (PAR-tyoo-RISH-uhn)
Phenotype (FEE-noh-type)
Sex chromosome (SEKS KROH-muh-sohm)
Related Clinical Terminology
Amniocentesis (AM-nee-oh-sen-TEE-sis)
Apgar score (APP-gar SKOR)
Cesarean section (se-SAR-ee-an SEK-shun)
Chorionic villus sampling (KOR-ee-ON-ik
VILL-us)
Congenital (kon-JEN-i-tuhl)
Fetal alcohol syndrome (FEE-tuhl AL-koh-hol)
Teratogen (te-RAH-toh-jen)
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

How often have we heard comments such as “She
has her mother’s eyes” or “That nose is just like his
father’s”—because people cannot resist comparing a
newborn with his or her parents. Although a child may
not resemble either parent, there is a sound basis for
such comparisons, because the genetic makeup and
many of the traits of a child are the result of the chro-
mosomes inherited from mother and father.
In this chapter, we will cover some of the funda-
mentals of genetics and inheritance. First, however,
we will look at the development of a fertilized egg into
a functioning human being.
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
During the 40 weeks of gestation, the embryo-fetus is
protected and nourished in the uterus of the mother.
A human being begins life as one cell, a fertilized egg
called a zygote, which develops into an individual
human being consisting of billions of cells organized
into the body systems with whose functions you are
now quite familiar.
FERTILIZATION
Although millions of sperm are deposited in the
vagina during sexual intercourse, only one will fertil-
ize an ovum. As the sperm swim through the ﬂuid of
the uterus and fallopian tube, they undergo a ﬁnal
metabolic change, called capacitation. This change
involves the acrosome, which becomes more fragile.
When sperm and egg make contact, the acrosomal
enzymes will digest the layers of cells and membrane
around an ovum.
Once a sperm nucleus enters the ovum, changes in
the egg cell membrane block the entry of other sperm.
The nucleus of the ovum completes the second mei-
otic division, and the nuclei of ovum and sperm fuse,
restoring the diploid number of chromosomes in the
zygote.
The human diploid number of 46 chromosomes is
actually 23 pairs of chromosomes; 23 from the sperm
and 23 from the egg. These 23 pairs consist of 22 pairs
of autosomes (designated by the numerals 1 through
22) and one pair of sex chromosomes. Women have
the sex chromosomes XX, and men have the sex chro-
mosomes XY. Figure 21–1 shows the inheritance of
gender. The Y chromosome has a gene that triggers
the development of male gonads in the embryo. In the
absence of the Y chromosome, the embryo will
develop as a female.
IMPLANTATION
Fertilization usually takes place within the fallopian
tube, and the zygote begins to divide even as it is being
swept toward the uterus. These are mitotic divisions
and are called cleavage. Refer to Fig. 21–2 as you read
the following.
The single-cell zygote divides into a two-cell stage,
four-cell stage, eight-cell stage, and so on. Three days
after fertilization there are 16 cells, which continue to
divide to form a solid sphere of cells called a morula
(see Box 21–1: Twins). As mitosis proceeds, this sphere
becomes hollow and is called a blastocyst, which is
still about the same size as the original zygote.
A ﬂuid-ﬁlled blastocyst consists of an outer layer of
cells called the trophoblast and an inner cell mass that
contains the potential embryo. It is the blastocyst stage
that becomes implanted in the uterine wall, about 5 to
8 days after fertilization.
Successful implantation is not simply a matter of the
blastocyst contacting the uterine lining. The endo-
metrium produces carbohydrate “docking” molecules
toward the end of the uterine cycle, and the blastocyst
has a surface protein that ﬁts the docking sites. Once
this “ﬁt” is made, the trophoblast secretes enzymes to
digest the surface of the endometrium, creating a small
crater into which the blastocyst sinks. The trophoblast
will become the chorion, the embryonic membrane
that will form the fetal portion of the placenta.
Following implantation, the inner cell mass will grow
to become the embryo and other membranes.
The cells of the inner cell mass are embryonic stem
cells. In these cells, all of the DNA has the potential
for being switched on, that is, the potential exists for a
cell to develop into any of the 200 kinds of human
cells that will be present at birth. As the cells continue
to divide and become more numerous, some DNA
will be switched off in each cell, genes will become
inactive, and the possibilities for the specialization of
each cell will be narrowed down. The “switches” are
chemicals, few of which are known at present. A great
deal of research is focusing on discovering the stimuli
that turn a stem cell into a muscle cell rather than a
nerve cell or skin cell, and so on.
476
Human Development and Genetics
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

EMBRYO AND EMBRYONIC
MEMBRANES
An embryo is the developing human individual from
the time of implantation until the eighth week of ges-
tation. Several stages of early embryonic development
are shown in Fig. 21–3. At approximately 12 days, the
embryonic disc (the potential person) is simply a
plate of cells within the blastocyst. As cells keep divid-
ing, the plate of cells begins to fold. At 14 days twin-
ning is believed to be no longer possible.
Very soon thereafter, three primary layers, or germ
layers, begin to develop: the ectoderm, mesoderm,
and endoderm. This is a major step in the specializa-
tion of the embryo cells, because different sets of
genes are switched off for each of the three layers,
while the genes appropriate for the layer remain
switched on. Each cell is now committed to a particu-
lar layer and can no longer “go back,” that is, become
a cell of either of the other two layers.
Each primary layer develops further; its cells
become more specialized as more and more genes in
each cell are switched off. With the active genes, those
that remain switched on, the cells in each layer are
thereby committed to develop into speciﬁc organs or
parts of organs. Ecto means “outer”; the epidermis is
derived from ectoderm, and in some of these cells the
gene for producing keratin is active. Meso means “mid-
dle”; the skeletal muscles develop from mesoderm,
and in these cells the genes for producing myosin and
actin are active. Endo means “inner”; the stomach lin-
ing is derived from endoderm, and in these cells, the
gene for producing pepsinogen is active. Table 21–1
lists some other structures derived from each of the
primary germ layers.
At 20 days, the embryonic membranes can be
clearly distinguished from the embryo itself. The yolk
sac does not contain nutrient yolk, as it does for bird
and reptile embryos. It is, however, the site for the for-
mation of the ﬁrst blood cells and the cells that will
become spermatogonia or oogonia. As the embryo
grows, the yolk sac membrane is incorporated into the
umbilical cord.
The amnion is a thin membrane that eventually
surrounds the embryo and contains amniotic ﬂuid.
This ﬂuid provides a cushion for the fetus against
mechanical injury as the mother moves. When the
fetal kidneys become functional, they excrete urine
into the amniotic ﬂuid. Also in this ﬂuid are cells that
have sloughed off the fetus; this is clinically important
Human Development and Genetics
477
22Y
22X
22X
22X
Sperm
44XY
44XX
Male
Female
Egg
(ovum)
Fertilized
egg
Sperm
Figure 21–1.
Inheritance of gen-
der. Each ovum contains 22 auto-
somes and an X chromosome. Each
sperm contains 22 autosomes and
either an X chromosome or a Y
chromosome.
QUESTION: Which parent deter-
mines the sex of the embryo-fetus?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

478
BOX 21–1
TWINS
place, and each inner cell mass may develop into a
complete individual. Twins of this type may be
called monozygotic, meaning that they have come
from one fertilized egg. Identical twins are always of
the same sex, are very much alike in appearance,
and in other respects are genetically identical.
Conjoined twins are the result of the incomplete
separation of a splitting embryo (the splitting be-
lieved to occur 9 to 12 days after fertilization). The
name Siamese twins refers to Chang and Eng
(1811–1874), famous Chinese brothers born in
Siam, now Thailand. Conjoined twins may share
superﬁcial parts such as skin and muscle, or they
may share a vital organ such as a liver. Advances in
microsurgery and reparative surgery have permit-
ted the separation of many sets of conjoined twins.
Fraternal twins are the result of two separate ova
fertilized by separate sperm. This may occur when
two ovarian follicles reach maturity and rupture at
the same time. Fraternal twins may be of the same
sex or different sexes. Even if of the same sex, how-
ever, they are as genetically different as any siblings
might be.
Identical twins are the result of the splitting of
the very early embryo before the cells start to
become specialized (usually within 8 days after fer-
tilization). For example, if a 16-cell stage becomes
separated into two groups of 8 cells each, each
group will usually continue to develop in the usual
way. Another possible cause is the development of
two inner cell masses within the blastocyst. This,
too, is before signiﬁcant specialization has taken
Fertilization
2 cell stage
(36 hours)
4 cell stage
(48 hours)
Morula
Blastocyst
Inner cell mass
Blastocoele
Trophoblast
Implantation
(7–8 days)
Embryonic disc
Endometrium
of uterus
Primary follicles
Maturing follicles
Ovary
Ovulation
Ovum
Corpus luteum
Corpus
albicans
Artery and
vein
Fallopian tube
Sperm
Ovum (enlarged for
greater clarity)
Corona radiata
Zona
pellucida
Figure 21–2.
Ovulation, fertilization, and early embryonic development. Fertilization
takes place in the fallopian tube, and the embryo has reached the blastocyst stage when it
becomes implanted in the endometrium of the uterus.
QUESTION: Find the blastocyst stage. What is the inner cell mass? What kind of cells make
it up?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

in the procedure called amniocentesis (see Box 21–2:
Fetal Diagnosis). The rupture of the amnion (some-
times called the “bag of waters”) is usually an indica-
tion that labor has begun.
The chorion is the name given to the trophoblast
as it develops further. Once the embryo has become
implanted in the uterus, small projections called
chorionic villi begin to grow into the endometrium.
These will contain the fetal blood vessels that become
the fetal portion of the placenta.
At about 4 to 5 weeks of development, the embryo
shows deﬁnite form. The head is apparent, the heart is
Human Development and Genetics
479
Endometrium
Trophoblast
Amnion
Yolk sac
Embryo
Placenta
Chorion
Approximately 20 days
Approximately 14 days
Approximately 12  days
Approximately 4–5 weeks
Umbilical
cord
Chorionic
villi
Head of
embryo
Head of embryo
Limb buds
Embryonic
disc
Embryonic
disc
Figure 21–3.
Embryonic development at 12 days (after fertilization), 14 days, 20 days,
and 4 to 5 weeks. By 5 weeks, the embryo has distinct parts but does not yet look deﬁnitely
human. See text for description of embryonic membranes.
QUESTION: At 14 days, what structures shown will become the fetal portion of the
placenta?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

beating, and limb buds are visible. The period of
embryonic growth continues until the 8th week. At
this time, all of the organ systems have been estab-
lished. They will continue to grow and mature until
the end of gestation. The period of fetal growth
extends from the 9th through the 40th week. Table
21–2 lists some of the major aspects of development in
the growth of the embryo-fetus. The fetus at 16 weeks
is depicted in Fig. 21–4 (see Box 21–3: Congenital
Fetal Infections, and Box 21–4: Fetal Alcohol
Syndrome). Maternal changes during pregnancy are
summarized in Table 21–3.
PLACENTA AND UMBILICAL CORD
The placenta is made of both fetal and maternal tis-
sue. The chorion of the embryo and the endometrium
of the uterus contribute, and the placenta is formed
by the third month of gestation (12 weeks). The
mature placenta is a ﬂat disc about 7 inches (17 cm) in
diameter.
The structure of a small portion of the placenta is
shown in Fig. 21–5. Notice that the fetal blood vessels
are within maternal blood sinuses, but there is no
direct connection between fetal and maternal vessels.
Normally, the blood of the fetus does not mix with
that of the mother. The placenta has two functions: to
be the site of exchanges between maternal and fetal
blood and to produce hormones to maintain preg-
nancy. We will consider the exchanges ﬁrst.
The fetus is dependent upon the mother for oxygen
and nutrients and for the removal of waste products.
The umbilical cord connects the fetus to the pla-
centa. Within the cord are two umbilical arteries that
carry blood from the fetus to the placenta and one
umbilical vein that returns blood from the placenta to
the fetus.
When blood in the umbilical arteries enters the
placenta, CO2 and waste products in the fetal capillar-
ies diffuse into the maternal blood sinuses. Oxygen
diffuses from the maternal blood sinuses into the fetal
capillaries; nutrients enter the fetal blood by diffusion
and active transport mechanisms. This oxygen- and
nutrient-rich blood then ﬂows through the umbilical
vein back to the fetus. Circulation within the fetus was
described in Chapter 13.
When the baby is delivered at the end of gestation,
the umbilical cord is cut. The placenta then detaches
from the uterine wall and is delivered, with the rest of
the umbilical cord, as the afterbirth.
The blood in the remnant of the umbilical cord
contains abundant stem cells, and their potential to
become different kinds of cells is between that of
embryonic stem cells (which may become any human
cell) and adult stem cells (which are more limited).
Umbilical cord stem cells have already been used to
treat newborns with infantile Krabbe’s disease, a neu-
rological disorder that is fatal by the age of 2 years.
Such treatment depends on genetic testing and having
suitable donated cord stem cells available at birth.
Banks of cord blood are being established by some
medical centers (because such donated blood can be
frozen and stored), and the use of cord stem cells may
someday decrease the need for bone marrow trans-
plants.
Placental Hormones
The ﬁrst hormone secreted by the placenta is human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), which is produced
by the chorion of the early embryo. The function of
480
Human Development and Genetics
Table 21–1 STRUCTURES DERIVED FROM
THE PRIMARY GERM LAYERS
Layer
Structures Derived*
Ectoderm
Mesoderm
Endoderm
*These are representative lists, not all-inclusive ones. Keep in
mind also that most organs are combinations of tissues from
each of the three germ layers. Related structures are
grouped together.
• Epidermis; hair and nail follicles; sweat
glands
• Nervous system; pituitary gland; adre-
nal medulla
• Lens and cornea; internal ear
• Mucosa of oral and nasal cavities; sali-
vary glands
• Dermis; bone and cartilage
• Skeletal muscles; cardiac muscle; most
smooth muscle
• Kidneys and adrenal cortex
• Bone marrow and blood; lymphatic tis-
sue; lining of blood vessels
• Mucosa of esophagus, stomach, and
intestines
• Epithelium of respiratory tract, includ-
ing lungs
• Liver and mucosa of gallbladder
• Thyroid gland; pancreas
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

hCG is to stimulate the corpus luteum in the maternal
ovary so that it will continue to secrete estrogen and
progesterone. The secretion of progesterone is partic-
ularly important to prevent contractions of the
myometrium, which would otherwise result in miscar-
riage of the embryo. Once hCG enters maternal cir-
culation, it is excreted in urine, which is the basis for
many pregnancy tests. Tests for hCG in maternal
blood are even more precise and can determine
whether a pregnancy has occurred even before a men-
strual period is missed.
The corpus luteum is a small structure, however,
and cannot secrete sufficient amounts of estrogen and
progesterone to maintain a full-term pregnancy. The
placenta itself begins to secrete estrogen and proges-
terone within a few weeks, and the levels of these hor-
mones increase until birth. As the placenta takes over,
the secretion of hCG decreases, and the corpus
luteum becomes non-functional. During pregnancy,
estrogen and progesterone inhibit the anterior pitu-
itary secretion of FSH and LH, so no other ovarian
follicles develop. These placental hormones also pre-
pare the mammary glands for lactation.
The placenta also secretes relaxin, which helps
inhibit contractions of the myometrium. Relaxin also
permits stretching of the ligaments of the pubic sym-
physis so that this joint will give a little, if necessary,
during birth.
PARTURITION AND LABOR
Parturition is the rather formal term for birth, and
labor is the sequence of events that occur during
birth. The average gestation period is 40 weeks (280
Human Development and Genetics
481
BOX 21–2
FETAL DIAGNOSIS
certain genetic diseases is another reason a preg-
nant woman may wish to have this procedure.
Chorionic Villus Sampling (CVS)
In this procedure, a biopsy catheter is inserted
through the vagina and cervix to collect a small
portion of the chorionic villi. These cells are derived
from the fetus but are not part of the fetus itself.
The information obtained is the same as that for
amniocentesis, but CVS may be performed earlier in
pregnancy, at about 8 weeks. Although there is a
risk that the procedure may cause a miscarriage,
CVS is considered comparable in safety to amnio-
centesis. It is important to remember that no inva-
sive procedure is without risks.
Maternal Blood Tests
Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) is produced by the fetus
and is found in maternal circulation. The level
reaches a peak between 12 and 15 weeks of gesta-
tion, and should then decrease. If AFP is still high
after 16 to 18 weeks, there is a 95% chance that the
fetus has spina biﬁda or anencephaly, malforma-
tions of the central nervous system. Recall from
Chapter 17 that sufficient folic acid during preg-
nancy will greatly reduce the risk to the fetus.
Maternal blood levels of pregnancy-associated
plasma protein A (PAPP-A) and beta hCG can be
measured during the ﬁrst trimester. These tests, in
conjunction with ultrasound, can reliably detect
Down syndrome.
Several procedures are currently available to deter-
mine certain kinds of abnormalities in a fetus or to
monitor development.
Ultrasound (or Fetal Ultrasonography)
This is a non-invasive procedure; high-frequency
sound waves are transmitted through the abdomi-
nal wall into the uterus. The reﬂected sound waves
are converted into an image called a sonogram.
This method is used to conﬁrm multiple pregnan-
cies, fetal age or position, or to detect fetal abnor-
malities such as heart defects or malformations
of other organs. Ultrasound may also be used to
determine the thickness of the fetal neck (nuchal
translucency), which is an indicator of Down syn-
drome.
Amniocentesis
This procedure is usually performed at 16 to 18
weeks of gestation. A hypodermic needle is inserted
through the wall of the abdomen into the amniotic
sac, and about 10 to 20 mL of amniotic ﬂuid is
removed. Within this ﬂuid are fetal cells, which can
be cultured so that their chromosomes may be
examined. Through such examination and bio-
chemical tests, a number of genetic diseases or
chromosome abnormalities may be detected.
Because women over the age of 35 years are
believed to have a greater chance of having a child
with Down syndrome, amniocentesis is often rec-
ommended for this age group. A family history of
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

482
Table 21–2
GROWTH OF THE EMBRYO–FETUS
Month of
Approximate Overall
Gestation (end)
Aspects of Development
Size in Inches
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
• Heart begins to beat; limb buds form; backbone forms; facial fea-
tures not distinct
• Calciﬁcation of bones begins; ﬁngers and toes are apparent on
limbs; facial features more distinct; body systems are established
• Facial features distinct but eyes are still closed; nails develop on ﬁn-
gers and toes; ossiﬁcation of skeleton continues; fetus is distinguish-
able as male or female
• Head still quite large in proportion to body, but the arms and
legs lengthen; hair appears on head; body systems continue to
develop
• Skeletal muscles become active (“quickening” may be felt by the
mother); body grows more rapidly than head; body is covered with
ﬁne hair (lanugo)
• Eyelashes and eyebrows form; eyelids open; skin is quite wrinkled;
pulmonary surfactant is ﬁrst produced
• Head and body approach normal infant proportions; deposition of
subcutaneous fat makes skin less wrinkled
• Testes of male fetus descend into scrotum; more subcutaneous fat is
deposited; production of pulmonary surfactant is sufficient to permit
breathing if birth is premature
• Lanugo is shed; nails are fully developed; cranial bones are ossiﬁed
with fontanels present; lungs are more mature
0.25
1.25–1.5
3
5–7
10–12
11–14
13–17
16–18
19–21
Table 21–3
MATERNAL CHANGES DURING PREGNANCY
Aspect
Change
Weight
Uterus
Thyroid gland
Skin
Circulatory system
Digestive system
Urinary system
Respiratory system
Skeletal system
• Gain of 2–3 pounds for each month of gestation
• Enlarges considerably and displaces abdominal organs upward
• Increases secretion of thyroxine, which increases metabolic rate
• Appearance of striae (stretch marks) on abdomen
• Heart rate increases, as do stroke volume and cardiac output; blood volume increases; vari-
cose veins may develop in the legs and anal canal
• Nausea and vomiting may occur in early pregnancy (morning sickness); constipation may
occur in later pregnancy
• Kidney activity increases; frequency of urination often increases in later pregnancy (bladder is
compressed by uterus)
• Respiratory rate increases; lung capacity decreases as diaphragm is forced upward by com-
pressed abdominal organs in later pregnancy
• Lordosis may occur with increased weight at front of abdomen; sacroiliac joints and pubic
symphysis become more ﬂexible prior to birth
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

BOX 21–3
CONGENITAL FETAL INFECTIONS
Congenital syphilis—syphilis is a sexually trans-
mitted disease caused by a bacterium (Treponema
pallidum). These bacteria may cross the placenta after
the fourth month of gestation. Consequences of
early infection of the fetus are death, malformations
of bones and teeth, or cataracts. If infection occurs
toward the end of gestation, the child may be born
with syphilis. This is most often apparent as a rash on
the skin and mucous membranes. Syphilis in adults
can be cured by penicillin; prevention of congenital
syphilis depends upon good prenatal care for
women who may be infected. The Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention has a goal of eradi-
cating syphilis in the United States, which would
eliminate fetal infection.
Congenital toxoplasmosis—this condition is
caused by the protozoan parasite Toxoplasma
gondii. For most healthy people, toxoplasmosis has
no symptoms at all; it is a harmless infection.
Because cats and some other mammals are hosts
for this parasite, pregnant women may acquire
infection from contact with cat feces or by eating
rare beef or lamb. Consequences for the fetus are
death, mental retardation, or blindness. Retinal
infection may only become apparent during child-
hood or adolescence. Prevention now depends
upon education of pregnant women to avoid
potential sources of infection.
A teratogen is anything that may cause develop-
mental abnormalities in an embryo-fetus. Several
infectious microorganisms are known to be terato-
genic; they may cross the placenta from maternal
blood to fetal blood and damage the fetus.
Congenital rubella syndrome—the virus of
German measles (rubella) is perhaps the best
known of the infectious teratogens. If a woman
acquires rubella during pregnancy, there is a 20%
chance 
that 
her 
fetus 
will 
be 
affected.
Consequences for the fetus may be death (still-
birth), heart defects, deafness, or mental retarda-
tion. Women who have never had rubella should
consider receiving the vaccine before they begin to
have children. In this way, congenital rubella syn-
drome is completely prevented. Use of the rubella
vaccine has made this syndrome rare in the United
States, but many developing nations do not have
extensive vaccination programs.
Congenital varicella syndrome—chickenpox
(herpes zoster) is a viral disease that most people
have during childhood. If a pregnant woman
acquires chickenpox, however, the virus may cross
the placenta. Consequences for the fetus include
malformed limbs, cutaneous scars, blindness, and
mental retardation. This is not a common congeni-
tal syndrome, and the success of the chickenpox
vaccine should make it truly rare.
16 weeks
Placenta
Uterus
Umbilical cord
Cervix
Vagina
Figure 21–4.
Fetal development at 16 weeks.
QUESTION: Name the ﬂuid that surrounds the fetus, and
state its function.
days), with a range of 37 to 42 weeks (see Box 21–5:
Premature Birth). Toward the end of gestation, the
placental secretion of progesterone decreases while
the estrogen level remains high, and the myometrium
begins to contract weakly at irregular intervals. At this
time the fetus is often oriented head down within the
uterus (Fig. 21–6). Labor itself may be divided into
three stages:
First stage—dilation of the cervix. As the uterus con-
tracts, the amniotic sac is forced into the cervix,
which dilates (widens) the cervical opening. At the
end of this stage, the amniotic sac breaks (rupture
of the “bag of waters”) and the ﬂuid leaves through
the vagina, which may now be called the birth
canal. This stage lasts an average of 8 to 12 hours
but may vary considerably.
Second stage—delivery of the infant. More power-
ful contractions of the uterus are brought about
by oxytocin released by the posterior pituitary
gland and perhaps by the placenta itself. This stage
may be prolonged by several factors. If the fetus is
positioned other than head down, delivery may be
483
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

difficult. This is called a breech birth and may
necessitate a cesarean section (C-section), which
is delivery of the fetus through a surgical incision in
the abdominal wall and uterus. For some women,
the central opening in the pelvic bone may be too
small to permit a vaginal delivery. Fetal distress, as
determined by fetal monitoring of heartbeat for
example, may also require a cesarean section.
484
Human Development and Genetics
Maternal
arteriole
Maternal
venule
Chorionic
villus
Maternal blood
sinus
Fetal arteriole
and venule
Umbilical vein
Umbilical cord
Umbilical
arteries
Chorion
(fetal part of
placenta)
(maternal
part of
placenta)
Myometrium
Endometrium
Figure 21–5.
Placenta and umbilical cord. The fetal capillaries in chorionic villi are within
the maternal blood sinuses. Arrows indicate the direction of blood ﬂow in maternal and
fetal vessels.
QUESTION: What substances move from maternal blood to fetal blood?
BOX 21–4
FETAL ALCOHOL SYNDROME
defects, malformation of other organs, and irritabil-
ity and agitation. The infant often grows slowly,
both physically and mentally, and mental retarda-
tion is also a possible outcome.
Because there is no way to reverse the damage
done by intrauterine exposure to alcohol, the best
course is prevention. Education is very important;
women should be aware of the consequences their
consumption of alcohol may have for a fetus.
Fetal alcohol syndrome is the term for a group of
characteristics present in infants who were exposed
to alcohol during their fetal life. Alcohol is a toxin
for adults and even more so for fetal tissues that are
immature and growing rapidly. Either alcohol or its
toxic intermediate product (acetaldehyde) may
pass from maternal to fetal circulation and impair
fetal development.
Consequences for infants include low birth
weight, small head with facial abnormalities, heart
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

485
BOX 21–5
PREMATURE BIRTH
been successfully treated and eventually sent home
with their parents. Whether there will be any long-
term detrimental effects of their very premature
births will only be known in time.
Medical science may have reached its maximum
capability in this area. In a fetus of 20 weeks, the
cells of the alveoli and the cells of the pulmonary
capillaries are just not close enough to each other
to permit gas exchange. At present there is no
medical intervention that can overcome this
anatomic fact.
The lowest birth weight with subsequent sur-
vival is believed to be 244 grams (8.6 oz) in
September 2004. The little girl had a gestational
age of 26 weeks.
A premature birth is the spontaneous delivery of an
infant before the end of the gestation period, or the
intentional delivery (for reasons concerning the
health of the mother or fetus) before that time. A
premature infant may also be deﬁned as one who
weighs less than 2500 grams (5.5 pounds), though
gestation time is more important than birth weight.
In terms of gestation time, an 8-month infant
has a very good chance of surviving if good medical
care is available. Infants of 7 months gestation or
less often have respiratory distress, because their
lungs have not yet produced enough surfactant to
permit inﬂation of the alveoli. This is hyaline mem-
brane disease, which was described in Chapter 15.
Infants as young as 23 weeks of gestation have
Amniotic sac
Amniotic fluid
Placenta
Umbilical cord
Urinary bladder
Symphysis pubis
Vagina
Mucus plug
Cervix
Anus
Rectum
Spine
Figure 21–6.
Full-term fetus positioned head down within the uterus.
QUESTION: Why is it beneﬁcial that the fetus is positioned head down?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Third stage—delivery of the placenta (afterbirth).
Continued contractions of the uterus expel the pla-
centa and membranes, usually within 10 minutes
after delivery of the infant. There is some bleeding
at this time, but the uterus rapidly decreases in size,
and the contractions compress the endometrium to
close the ruptured blood vessels at the former site
of the placenta. This is important to prevent severe
maternal hemorrhage.
THE INFANT AT BIRTH
Immediately after delivery, the umbilical cord is
clamped and cut, and the infant’s nose and mouth are
aspirated to remove any ﬂuid that might interfere with
breathing (see Box 21–6: Apgar Score). Now the
infant is independent of the mother, and the most
rapid changes occur in the respiratory and circulatory
systems.
As the level of CO2 in the baby’s blood increases,
the respiratory center in the medulla is stimulated and
brings about inhalation to expand and inﬂate the
lungs. Full expansion of the lungs may take up to 7
days following birth, and the infant’s respiratory rate
may be very rapid at this time, as high as 40 respira-
tions per minute.
Breathing promotes greater pulmonary circula-
tion, and the increased amount of blood returning
to the left atrium closes the ﬂap of the foramen ovale.
The ductus arteriosus begins to constrict, apparently
in response to the higher blood oxygen level. Full
closure of the ductus arteriosus may take up to 3
months.
The ductus venosus no longer receives blood
from the umbilical vein and begins to constrict within
a few minutes after birth. Within a few weeks the duc-
tus venosus becomes a non-functional ligament.
The infant’s liver is not fully mature at birth and
may be unable to excrete bilirubin efficiently. This
may result in jaundice, which may occur in as many as
half of all newborns. Such jaundice is not considered
serious unless there is another possible cause, such as
Rh incompatibility (see Chapter 11).
GENETICS
Genetics is the study of inheritance. Most, if not vir-
tually all, human characteristics are regulated at least
partially by genes. We will ﬁrst look at what genes are,
then describe some patterns of inheritance.
486
Human Development and Genetics
BOX 21–6
APGAR SCORE
The highest possible score is 10. Infants who score
less than 5 require immediate medical attention.
The Apgar score is an overall assessment of an
infant and is usually made 1 minute after birth (may
be repeated at 5 minutes if the ﬁrst score is low).
Characteristic
Description
Score
Heartbeat
Respiration
Muscle tone
Reﬂex response to stimulation of sole
of the foot
Color
2
1
0
2
1
0
2
1
0
2
1
0
2
1
0
• Over 100 bpm
• Below 100 bpm
• No heartbeat
• Strong, vigorous cry
• Weak cry
• No respiratory effort
• Spontaneous, active motion
• Some motion
• No muscle tone
• A cry in response
• A grimace in response
• No response
• Healthy coloration
• Cyanotic extremities
• Cyanosis of trunk and extremities
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

CHROMOSOMES AND GENES
Each of the cells of an individual (except mature red
blood cells and egg and sperm cells) contains 46 chro-
mosomes, the diploid number. These chromosomes
are in 23 pairs called homologous pairs. One mem-
ber of each pair has come from the egg and is called
maternal, the other member has come from the sperm
and is called paternal. The autosomes are the chromo-
some pairs designated 1 to 22. The sex chromosomes
form the remaining pair. In women these are desig-
nated XX and in men XY.
Chromosomes are made of DNA and protein; the
DNA is the hereditary material. You may wish to refer
to Chapter 3 to review DNA structure. The sequence
of bases in the DNA of chromosomes is the genetic
code for proteins, structural proteins as well as
enzymes. The DNA code for one protein is called a
gene. For example, a speciﬁc region of the DNA of
chromosome 11 is the code for the beta chain of
hemoglobin. Because an individual has two of chro-
mosome 11, he or she will have two genes for this pro-
tein, a maternal gene inherited from the mother and a
paternal gene inherited from the father. This is true
for virtually all of the 20,000 to 25,000 genes estimated
to be found in our chromosomes. In our genetic
makeup, each of us has two genes for each protein.
GENOTYPE AND PHENOTYPE
For each gene of a pair, there may be two or more pos-
sibilities for its “expression,” that is, how it will appear
or how it will affect the individual. These possibilities
are called alleles. A person, therefore, may be said to
have two alleles for each protein or trait; the alleles
may be the same or may be different.
If the two alleles are the same, the person is said to
be homozygous for the trait. If the two alleles are dif-
ferent, the person is said to be heterozygous for the
trait.
The genotype is the actual genetic makeup, that is,
the alleles present. The phenotype is the appearance,
or how the alleles are expressed. When a gene has two
or more alleles, one allele may be dominant over the
other, which is called recessive. For a person who is
heterozygous for a trait, the dominant allele (or gene)
is the one that will appear in the phenotype. The
recessive allele (or gene) is hidden but is not lost, and
may be passed to children. For a recessive trait to be
expressed in the phenotype, the person must be
homozygous recessive, that is, have two recessive al-
leles (genes) for the trait.
An example will be helpful here to put all this
together and is illustrated in Fig. 21–7. When doing
genetics problems, a Punnett square is used to show
the possible combinations of genes in the egg and
sperm for a particular set of parents and their children.
Remember that an egg or sperm has only 23 chromo-
somes and, therefore, has only one gene for each trait.
In this example, the inheritance of eye color has
been simpliﬁed. Although eye color is determined by
many pairs of genes, with many possible phenotypes,
one pair is considered the principal pair, with brown
eyes dominant over blue eyes. A dominant gene is usu-
ally represented by a capital letter, and the correspon-
ding recessive gene is represented by the same letter,
but lowercase. The parents in Fig. 21–7 are both het-
erozygous for eye color. Their genotype consists of a
gene for brown eyes and a gene for blue eyes, but their
phenotype is brown eyes.
Each egg produced by the mother has a 50%
chance of containing the gene for brown eyes, or an
equal 50% chance of containing the gene for blue eyes.
Similarly, each sperm produced by the father has a
50% chance of containing the gene for brown eyes and
a 50% chance of containing the gene for blue eyes.
Now look at the boxes of the Punnett square; these
represent the possibilities for the genetic makeup of
each child. For eye color there are three possibilities:
a 25% (one of four) chance for homozygous brown
eyes, a 50% (two of four) chance for heterozygous
brown eyes, and a 25% (one of four) chance for
homozygous blue eyes. Notice that BB and Bb have
the same phenotype (brown eyes) despite their differ-
ent genotypes, and that the phenotype of blue eyes is
possible only with the genotype bb. Can brown-eyed
parents have a blue-eyed child? Yes; if each parent is
heterozygous for brown eyes, each child has a 25%
chance of inheriting blue eyes. Could these parents
have four children with blue eyes? What is the proba-
bility or chance of this happening? The answers to
these questions will be found in Box 21–7: Solution to
Genetics Question.
INHERITANCE: DOMINANT–RECESSIVE
The inheritance of eye color just described is an exam-
ple of a trait determined by a pair of alleles, one
of which may dominate the other. Another example
is sickle-cell anemia, which was discussed in Chapter
Human Development and Genetics
487
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

11. The gene for the beta chain of hemoglobin is on
chromosome 11; an allele for normal hemoglobin is
dominant, and an allele for sickle-cell hemoglobin is
recessive. An individual who is heterozygous is said to
have sickle-cell trait; an individual who is homozygous
recessive will have sickle-cell anemia. The Punnett
square in Fig. 21–8 shows that if both parents are het-
erozygous, each child has a 25% chance (1 of 4) of
inheriting the two recessive genes. Table 21–4 lists
some other human genetic diseases and their patterns
of inheritance.
It is important to remember that in the terminol-
ogy of genetics, dominant does not mean “common”
or “frequent.” It simply means that one gene is suffi-
cient for the characteristic to appear in the phenotype.
Think back to the ABO blood types. Which type is the
most common in a population? Type O is most com-
mon, followed by type A, then type B. Type AB is the
least common. Here is an instance in which the reces-
sive trait, type O, is most frequent in a group of peo-
ple. Why is type AB the least common, even though A
and B alleles are dominant over an O allele? Because
488
Human Development and Genetics
Gene for brown
eye color
Gene for blue 
eye color
Ova
Sperm
BB 
Genotype: homozygous brown (2 dominant genes)
 
Phenotype: brown
Bb 
Genotype: heterozygous (1 dominant and 1 recessive gene)
 
Phenotype: brown (since brown is dominant)
bb 
Genotype: homozygous blue (2 recessive genes)
 
Phenotype: blue
Key
Figure 21–7.
Inheritance of eye color. Both mother and father are heterozygous for
brown eyes. The Punnett square shows the possible combinations of genes for eye
color for each child of these parents. See text for further description.
QUESTION: If Dad is heterozygous for brown eyes and Mom has blue eyes, what will
be the four possible combinations?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

there are not many B alleles to be found in a popula-
tion; not many people have a B allele. If you look at
Table 21–6 later in this chapter, you will certainly be
able to ﬁnd other dominant traits that are rare.
INHERITANCE: MULTIPLE ALLELES
The best example of this pattern of inheritance is the
human blood type of the ABO group. For each gene
of this blood type, there are three possible alleles: A,
B, or O. A person will have only two of these alleles,
which may be the same or different. O is the recessive
allele; A and B are co-dominant alleles, that is, domi-
nant over O but not over each other.
You already know that in this blood group there are
four possible blood types: O, AB, A, and B. Table 21–5
shows the combinations of alleles for each type.
Notice that for types O and AB there is only one pos-
sible genotype. For types A and B, however, there are
two possible genotypes, because both A and B alleles
are dominant over an O allele.
Let us now use a problem to illustrate the inheri-
tance of blood type. The Punnett square in Fig. 21–9
shows that Mom has type O blood and Dad has type
AB blood. The boxes of the square show the possible
blood types for each child. Each child has a 50%
chance of having type A blood, and a 50% chance of
having type B blood. The genotype, however, will
always be heterozygous. Notice that in this example,
the blood types of the children will not be the same as
those of the parents. (The Rh factor is inherited inde-
pendently of the ABO type, and is of the dominant–
recessive pattern. Rh positive is dominant and Rh
negative is recessive.)
Table 21–6 lists some other human genetic traits,
with the dominant and recessive phenotype for each.
INHERITANCE: SEX-LINKED TRAITS
Sex-linked traits may also be called X-linked traits
because the genes for them are located only on the X
chromosome. The Y does not have corresponding
genes for many of the genes on the X chromosome.
(The Y chromosome is very small and has only about
20 genes. Some of these genes are active only in the
testes and contribute to spermatogenesis. Others are
active in many body cells, but their functions are not
yet known with certainty.)
The genes for sex-linked traits are recessive, but
because there are no corresponding genes on the Y
chromosome to mask them, a man needs only one
gene to express one of these traits in his phenotype. A
Human Development and Genetics
489
H
h
H
HH Hh
h
Hh hh
H
h
H
h
Mom
Has sickle-cell trait
Key:
H
h
Gene for normal hemoglobin
Gene for sickle-cell hemoglobin
Dad
Has sickle-cell
trait
Figure 21–8.
Inheritance of sickle-cell anemia
(dominant–recessive pattern). See text for
description.
QUESTION: If Dad has sickle-cell trait and Mom is
homozygous for normal hemoglobin, can a child
of theirs have sickle-cell anemia?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

woman who has one of these recessive genes on one X
chromosome and a dominant gene for normal func-
tion on the other X chromosome will not express this
trait. She is called a carrier, however, because the gene
is part of her genotype and may be passed to children.
Let us use as an example, red-green color blind-
ness. The Punnett square in Fig. 21–10 shows that
Mom is carrier of this trait and that Dad has normal
color vision. A Punnett square for a sex-linked trait
uses the X and Y chromosomes with a lower case let-
ter on the X to indicate the presence of the recessive
gene. The possibilities for each child are divided
equally into daughters and sons. In this example, each
daughter has a 50% chance of being a carrier and
a 50% chance of not being a carrier. In either case, a
daughter will have normal color vision. Each son has
a 50% chance of being red-green color blind and a
50% chance of having normal color vision. Men can
never be carriers of a trait such as this; they either have
it or do not have it.
The inheritance of other characteristics is often not
as easily depicted as are the examples just discussed.
Height, for example, is a multiple gene characteristic,
meaning that many pairs of genes contribute. Many
pairs of genes result in many possible combinations
for genotype and many possible phenotypes. In
addition, height is a trait that is inﬂuenced by envi-
ronmental factors such as nutrition. These kinds of
circumstances or inﬂuences are probably important in
many other human characteristics.
Of the estimated 20,000 to 25,000 human genes,
almost all have been “mapped.” This means that they
have been precisely located on a particular chromo-
some. There is still much work to be done, however,
and the focus now is on learning what each of these
490
Human Development and Genetics
Table 21–4
HUMAN GENETIC DISEASES
Disease (Pattern
of Inheritance)
Description
Sickle-cell anemia (R)
Cystic ﬁbrosis (R)
Tay-Sachs disease (R)
Phenylketonuria
or PKU (R)
Huntington’s
disease (D)
Hemophilia (X-linked)
Duchenne’s muscular
dystrophy (X-linked)
R  recessive; D  dominant.
• The most common genetic disease among people of African ancestry. Sickle-cell hemoglo-
bin forms rigid crystals that distort and disrupt RBCs; oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood
is diminished.
• The most common genetic disease among people of European ancestry. Production of thick
mucus clogs the bronchial tree and pancreatic ducts. Most severe effects are chronic respira-
tory infections and pulmonary failure.
• The most common genetic disease among people of Jewish ancestry. Degeneration of
neurons and the nervous system results in death by the age of 2 years.
• Lack of an enzyme to metabolize the amino acid phenylalanine leads to severe mental and
physical retardation. These effects may be prevented by the use of a diet (beginning at
birth) that limits phenylalanine.
• Uncontrollable muscle contractions begin between the ages of 30 and 50 years; followed by
loss of memory and personality. There is no treatment that can delay mental deterioration.
• Lack of Factor 8 impairs chemical clotting; may be controlled with Factor 8 from donated
blood.
• Replacement of muscle by adipose or scar tissue, with progressive loss of muscle function;
often fatal before age 20 years due to involvement of cardiac muscle.
Table 21–5
ABO BLOOD TYPES:
GENOTYPES
Blood Type
Possible Genotypes
O
OO
AB
AB
A
AA or OA
B
BB or OB
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

491
O
O
O
O
A
AO AO
B
BO BO
A
B
Dad
Type AB
Mom
Type O
Key:
O
A
B
Gene for neither A nor B antigens
Gene for A antigen
Gene for B antigen
Figure 21–9.
Inheritance of blood type (multiple
alleles pattern). See text for description.
QUESTION: If Dad has type AB blood and Mom is het-
erozygous for type A, is it possible that a child of theirs
will have a blood type that is different from that of both
parents?
XcX
X
Y
X
Y
XcY
XX
XY
Xc
X
Xc X
Mom
Carrier of color blndness
Key:
XX
Y
Xc
Dad
Normal color vision
X chromosome with gene for normal color vision
Y chromosome (has no gene for color vision)
X chromosome with gene for red-green color blindness
Figure 21–10.
Inheritance of red-green
color blindness (sex-linked pattern). See text
for description.
QUESTION: If Dad is color blind and Mom
is not a carrier, what are the possible out-
comes for daughters and for sons?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

genes is for; that is, the protein the gene codes for and
the function of that protein.
Someday it will be possible to cure genetic diseases
by inserting correct copies of malfunctioning genes
into the cells of affected individuals. As of 2006, cer-
tain immune deﬁciencies (which previously would
have been fatal) seem to have been reversed in several
children by supplying correct copies of their faulty
genes. But these early successes have not been repli-
cated, and replication of results is an essential part of
the scientiﬁc method. Research must proceed slowly,
because human beings are the subjects, and so that any
potential risks of such therapy may be assessed and
reduced.
Other diseases that may eventually be cured or
controlled with gene therapy include cystic ﬁbrosis
and hemophilia (for both of which clinical trials are
continuing), Parkinson’s disease, diabetes, muscular
dystrophy, and sickle-cell anemia. Much more
research and careful experimentation remain to be
done before gene replacement becomes the standard
treatment available to everyone with these genetic dis-
eases. This is a good example of how science must
work when results fall short of expectations.
Researchers and clinicians must pause and reevaluate
the underlying principles of their work and the meth-
ods they have chosen, decide what changes are neces-
sary, and try again.
492
Human Development and Genetics
BOX 21–7
SOLUTION TO GENETICS QUESTION
Question:
Can parents who are both heterozygous for brown eyes have four children with blue eyes?
What is the probability or chance of this happening?
Answer:
Yes. For each child, the probability or chance of having blue eyes is 1 in 4 (or 25%). To cal-
culate the probability of all four children having blue eyes, multiply the probability for each
child separately:
1st child        2nd child       3rd child        4th Child
1/4

1/4

1/4

1/4

1/256
The probability is 1 in 256 (or 0.4%).
Table 21–6
HUMAN GENETIC TRAITS
Trait
Dominant Phenotype
Recessive Phenotype
ABO blood type
AB, A, B
O
Rh blood type
Rh positive
Rh negative
Hair color
Dark
Light (blond or red)
Change in hair color
Premature gray
Gray later in life
Hair texture
Curly
Straight
Hairline
Widow’s peak
Straight
Eye color
Dark
Light
Color vision
Normal
Color blind
Visual acuity
Nearsighted or farsighted
Normal
Skin color
Dark
Light
Freckles
Abundant
Few
Dimples
Present
Absent
Cleft chin
Present
Absent
Ear lobes
Unattached
Attached
Number of ﬁngers/toes
Polydactyly (more than 5 digits)
5 per hand or foot
Mid-digital hair
Present
Absent
Double-jointed thumb
Present
Absent
Bent little ﬁnger
Present
Absent
Ability to roll tongue sides up
Able
Unable
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Human Development—growth of a fertilized
egg into a human individual
Fertilization—the union of the nuclei of egg
and sperm; usually takes place in the fallo-
pian tube
1. Sperm undergo ﬁnal maturation (capacitation)
within the female reproductive tract; the acrosome
contains enzymes to digest the membrane of the
ovum.
2. The 23 chromosomes of the sperm join with the 23
chromosomes of the egg to restore the diploid
number of 46 in the zygote.
3. A zygote has 22 pairs of autosomes and one pair of
sex chromosomes; XX in females, XY in males (see
Fig. 21–1).
Implantation (see Fig. 21–2)—5 to 8 days
after fertilization
1. Within the fallopian tube, the zygote begins
mitotic divisions called cleavage to form two-cell,
four-cell, eight-cell stages, and so on.
2. A morula is a solid sphere of cells that divides fur-
ther to form a hollow sphere called a blastocyst.
3. A blastocyst consists of an outer layer of cells called
the trophoblast and an inner cell mass that contains
the potential embryo; the cells are stem cells, not
yet specialized. The trophoblast secretes enzymes
to form a crater in the endometrium into which the
blastocyst sinks.
Embryo—weeks 1 through 8 of gestation
(see Fig. 21–3)
1. In the embryonic disc, three primary germ layers
develop: ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm (see
Table 21–1).
2. By the eighth week of gestation (end of 2 months),
all organ systems are formed (see Table 21–2).
Embryonic Membranes (see Fig. 21–3)
1. The yolk sac forms the ﬁrst blood cells and the cells
that become spermatogonia or oogonia.
2. The amnion surrounds the fetus and contains amni-
otic ﬂuid; this ﬂuid absorbs shock around the fetus.
3. The chorion develops chorionic villi that will con-
tain blood vessels that form the fetal portion of the
placenta.
Fetus—weeks 9 through 40 of gestation (see
Table 21–2)
1. The organ systems grow and mature.
2. The growing fetus brings about structural and
functional changes in the mother (see Table 21–3).
Placenta and Umbilical Cord
1. The placenta is formed by the chorion of the
embryo and the endometrium of the uterus;
the umbilical cord connects the fetus to the pla-
centa.
2. Fetal blood does not mix with maternal blood; fetal
capillaries are within maternal blood sinuses (see
Fig. 21–5); this is the site of exchanges between
maternal and fetal blood.
3. Two umbilical arteries carry blood from the fetus
to the placenta; fetal CO2 and waste products dif-
fuse into maternal blood; oxygen and nutrients
enter fetal blood.
4. Umbilical vein returns blood from placenta to fetus.
5. The placenta is delivered after the baby and is
called the afterbirth.
Placental Hormones
1. hCG—secreted by the chorion; maintains the
corpus luteum so that it secretes estrogen and
progesterone during the ﬁrst few months of gesta-
tion. The corpus luteum is too small to secrete
sufficient hormones to maintain a full-term preg-
nancy.
2. Estrogen and progesterone secretion begins within
4 to 6 weeks and continues until birth in amounts
great enough to sustain pregnancy.
3. Estrogen and progesterone inhibit FSH and LH
secretion during pregnancy and prepare the mam-
mary glands for lactation.
4. Progesterone 
inhibits 
contractions 
of 
the
myometrium until just before birth, when proges-
terone secretion begins to decrease.
5. Relaxin inhibits contractions of the myometrium
and permits stretching of the pubic symphysis.
Parturition and Labor
1. Gestation period ranges from 37 to 42 weeks; the
average is 40 weeks.
2. Labor: ﬁrst stage—dilation of the cervix; uterine
contractions force the amniotic sac into the cervix;
amniotic sac ruptures and ﬂuid escapes.
Human Development and Genetics
493
STUDY OUTLINE
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

1. Where does fertilization usually take place? How
many chromosomes are present in a human
zygote? Explain what happens during cleavage, and
describe the blastocyst stage. (p. 476)
2. Describe the process of implantation, and state
where this takes place. (p. 476)
3. How long is the period of embryonic growth?
How long is the period of fetal growth?
(p. 480)
4. Name two body structures derived from ectoderm,
mesoderm, and endoderm. (p. 477)
5. Name the embryonic membrane with each of these
functions: (pp. 477, 479)
a. Forms the fetal portion of the placenta
b. Contains ﬂuid to cushion the embryo
c. Forms the ﬁrst blood cells for the embryo
6. Explain the function of: placenta, umbilical arter-
ies, and umbilical vein. (p. 480)
7. Explain the functions of the placental hormones:
hCG, progesterone, and estrogen and proges-
terone (together). (pp. 480–481)
8. Describe the three stages of labor, and name the
important hormone. (pp. 483–485)
3. Labor: second stage—delivery of the infant; oxy-
tocin causes more powerful contractions of the
myometrium. If a vaginal delivery is not possible, a
cesarean section may be performed.
4. Labor: third stage—delivery of the placenta; the
uterus continues to contract to expel the placenta,
then contracts further, decreases in size, and com-
presses endometrial blood vessels.
The Infant at Birth (see Box 21–6)
1. Umbilical cord is clamped and severed; increased
CO2 stimulates breathing, and lungs are inﬂated.
2. Foramen ovale closes, and ductus arteriosus con-
stricts; ductus venosus constricts; normal circula-
tory pathways are established.
3. Jaundice may be present if the infant’s immature
liver cannot rapidly excrete bilirubin.
Genetics—the study of inheritance; chromo-
somes—46 per human cell, in 23 homolo-
gous pairs
1. A homologous pair consists of a maternal and a
paternal chromosome of the same type (1 or 2,
etc.).
2. There are 22 pairs of autosomes and one pair of sex
chromosomes (XX or XY).
3. DNA—the hereditary material of chromosomes.
4. Gene—the genetic code for one protein; an indi-
vidual has two genes for each protein or trait, one
maternal and one paternal.
5. Alleles—the possibilities for how a gene may be
expressed.
Genotype—the alleles present in the genetic
makeup
1. Homozygous—having two similar alleles (genes).
2. Heterozygous—having two different alleles.
Phenotype—the appearance or expression of
the alleles present
1. Depends on the dominance or recessiveness of alle-
les or the particular pattern of inheritance involved.
Inheritance—dominant–recessive
1. A dominant gene will appear in the phenotype of a
heterozygous individual (who has only one domi-
nant gene). A recessive gene will appear in the phe-
notype only if the individual is homozygous, that is,
has two recessive genes.
2. See Figs. 21–7 and 21–8 for Punnett squares.
Inheritance—multiple alleles
1. More than two possible alleles for each gene:
human ABO blood type.
2. An individual will have only two of the alleles (same
or different).
3. See Table 21–5 and Fig. 21–9.
Inheritance—sex-linked traits
1. Genes are recessive and found only on the X chro-
mosome; there are no corresponding genes on the
Y chromosome.
2. Women with one gene (and one gene for normal
functioning) are called carriers of the trait.
3. Men cannot be carriers; they either have the trait
or do not have it.
4. See Fig. 21–10.
494
Human Development and Genetics
REVIEW QUESTIONS
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Human Development and Genetics
495
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
1. Look at Table 21–1, and for each structure derived
from each of the three primary germ layers, try to
name a gene or set of genes that will be switched
on. The gene or genes may be for a protein or a
structure. Then try to name three genes that will
be active in all of these different types of cells.
2. Women who smoke cigarettes should make spe-
cial efforts to stop if they wish to have children, in
part because nicotine causes vasoconstriction.
Describe how maternal smoking would affect a
fetus.
3. The use of fertility drugs may lead to multiple fer-
tilizations and embryos. With six embryos, or even
ﬁve, what problems will there be in the maternal
uterus?
4. Sometimes during a pregnancy the placenta will
become detached. Total detachment is a medical
emergency. If detachment is only partial, even a lit-
tle, there may still be problems for the fetus and the
mother. Describe these.
5. Mr. and Mrs. Brown want to have children, but Mr.
Brown is hesitant. He had an older brother who
died of Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy, and he is
worried that he may have a gene that can be passed
on. “It’s recessive,” he tells you, “and doesn’t always
show up; it can skip a generation.” What can you
tell the Browns?
6. Mr. and Mrs. Gray have 6 children: 3 have type A
blood and 3 have type B blood. Can we say with
certainty what the two blood types of the parents
are? Can we list possible pairs? Can we say with
certainty what the parents’ blood types are not?
(For example, Mr. and Mrs. Gray cannot both be
type O.) Make a list of possible pairs, and a list of
pairs that are not possible.
7. Your friends, the Kalliomaa family, are of Finnish
descent, and they are having a family reunion.
Another friend asks you how all of these people in
three generations can have blond hair and blue
eyes, because these are recessive traits, and dark
hair and eyes are dominant. What can you tell your
friend to explain this?
9. Describe the major pulmonary and circulatory
changes that occur in the infant after birth.
(p. 486)
10. What is the genetic material of chromosomes?
Explain what a gene is. Explain why a person has
two genes for each protein or trait. (p. 487)
11. Deﬁne homologous chromosomes, autosomes,
and sex chromosomes. (p. 487)
12. Deﬁne allele, homozygous, heterozygous, geno-
type, and phenotype. (p. 487)
13. Genetics Problem: Mom is heterozygous for
brown eyes, and Dad has blue eyes. What is the %
chance that a child will have blue eyes? Brown
eyes? (pp. 487–488)
14. Genetics Problem: Mom is homozygous for type
A blood, and Dad is heterozygous for type B
blood. What is the % chance that a child will
have type AB blood? Type A? Type B? Type O?
(p. 489)
15. Genetics Problem: Mom is red-green color blind,
and Dad has normal color vision. What is the %
chance that a son will be color blind? That a
daughter will be color blind? That a daughter will
be a carrier? (pp. 490–491)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

496
CHAPTER 22
Chapter Outline
Classiﬁcation of Microorganisms
Binomial Nomenclature
Normal Flora
Infectious Disease
Course of an Infectious Disease
Types of Infection
Epidemiology
Portals of Entry and Exit
Reservoirs of Infection
Spread of Infection
Methods of Control of Microbes
Antiseptics, Disinfectants, and Sterilization
Public Health Measures
Food
Water
Emerging diseases and biological weapons
The Pathogens
Bacteria
The Gram stain
Special characteristics
Rickettsias and chlamydias
Antibiotics
Viruses
Antiviral medications
Fungi
Antifungal medications
Protozoa
Worms (Helminths)
Arthropods
BOX 22–1
THE GOLDEN AGE OF MICROBIOLOGY
BOX 22–2
MICROBIOLOGY IN THE 20TH CENTURY
BOX 22–3
MICROBIOLOGY IN THE 21ST CENTURY
Student Objectives
• Explain how microorganisms are classiﬁed and
named.
• Describe the distribution of and beneﬁts provided
by normal ﬂora.
• Explain what is meant by an infectious disease, and
describe the different types of infection.
• Describe the ways in which infectious diseases may
be spread.
• Explain how the growth of microorganisms may
be controlled and the importance of this to public
health.
• Describe the general structure of bacteria, viruses,
fungi, and protozoa and the diseases they cause.
• Name the common worm infestations, and name
the arthropods that are vectors of disease.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

An Introduction to Microbiology
and Human Disease
497
New Terminology
Bacillus (buh-SILL-us)
Coccus (KOK-us)
Communicable (kuhm-YOO-ni-kah-b’l)
Contagious (kun-TAY-jus)
Epidemiology (EP-i-DEE-mee-AH-luh-jee)
Gram stain (GRAM STAYN)
Infestation (in-fess-TAY-shun)
Mycosis (my-KOH-sis)
Noncommunicable (NON-kuhm-YOO-ni-kah-b’l)
Portal of entry (POR-tuhl of EN-tree)
Portal of exit (POR-tuhl of EG-zit)
Reservoir (REZ-er-vwor)
Spirillum (spih-RILL-uhm)
Spirochete (SPY-roh-keet)
Vector (VEK-ter)
Zoonoses (ZOH-oh-NOH-seez)
Related Clinical Terminology
Antitoxin (AN-tee-TAHK-sin)
Broad spectrum (BRAWD SPEK-trum)
Culture and sensitivity testing (KUL-chur and
SEN-si-TIV-i-tee)
Endotoxin (EN-doh-TAHK-sin)
Incubation period (IN-kew-BAY-shun)
Narrow spectrum (NAR-oh SPEK-trum)
Nosocomial infection (no-zoh-KOH-mee-uhl)
Opportunistic infection (OP-er-too-NIS-tik)
Secondary infection (SEK-un-dery)
Subclinical infection (sub-KLIN-i-kuhl)
Terms that appear in bold type in the chapter text are deﬁned in the glossary, which begins on page 547.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Awakening with sniffles and a runny nose . . . ﬁnd-
ing a moldy surprise in the refrigerator behind the milk
carton . . . wondering if that milk has gone sour. No
matter that we cannot see them, the microbes, includ-
ing viruses, fungi, and bacteria, are always with us.
Microbiology is the study of microorganisms (also
called microbes) and of their place or role in their
environment. Sometimes, the environment of mi-
crobes is us, people, and that will be our focus.
Although there are many perspectives in the ﬁeld of
microbiology, we will concentrate on the microorgan-
isms that affect the functioning of the human body.
These microbes include our normal ﬂora and those
that are capable of causing human disease. A disease is
any disruption of normal body functioning. Many dis-
eases are not caused by microorganisms, but those that
are may be called infectious diseases. The microor-
ganisms that cause infectious diseases are called
pathogens.
Pathogens may also be called parasites, that is, they
live on another living organism called a host and
cause harm to the host. Some parasites cause diseases
that are fatal to the host, but many others live in a more
balanced way with their hosts. These cause illnesses
from which the host recovers, and the parasite often
survives long enough to be spread to other hosts.
Our introduction to microbiology will begin with a
brief description of the classiﬁcation and naming of
microorganisms, followed by a discussion of normal
ﬂora. We will then consider infectious diseases, types
of infection, and the spread and control of infection.
Last, we will describe the types of pathogens in more
detail and include the methods we have to treat and
control the diseases they cause. For a historical per-
spective on microbiology, see Box 22–1: The Golden
Age of Microbiology, and Box 22–2: Microbiology in
the 20th Century.
CLASSIFICATION OF
MICROORGANISMS
Bacteria are very simple, single-celled organisms that
are found virtually everywhere. The natural habitats
of bacteria include freshwater, saltwater, soil, and
other living organisms. Most bacteria are not harmful
to us, and within their normal environments, they
have the vital role of decomposing dead organic mate-
rial and recycling their nutrients. However, a number
of bacteria cause human diseases, including strep
throat, pneumonia, and meningitis.
Viruses are not cells; they are even smaller and
498
An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
BOX 22–1
THE GOLDEN AGE OF MICROBIOLOGY
1881 Discovery that staphylococci cause infections.
1882 The cause of tuberculosis is found to be a
bacterium.
1883 Diphtheria is found to be caused by a bac-
terium.
1884 The bacteria that cause tetanus, typhoid
fever, and cholera are each isolated.
The ﬁrst description of phagocytosis by white
blood cells is published.
1885 Louis Pasteur ﬁrst uses his vaccine for rabies.
1890 Development of antitoxins to treat tetanus and
diphtheria.
1892 Discovery and demonstration of a virus.
1894 The bacterium that causes plague is discovered.
1897 Discovery of the cause of botulism.
Rat ﬂeas are found to be vectors of plague.
1900 Walter Reed and his associates demonstrate
that yellow fever is caused by a virus and that
the vector is a mosquito.
Microorganisms were ﬁrst seen in the 17th century
when simple microscopes were developed. The
roles of microorganisms, however, especially in rela-
tion to disease, were to remain largely unknown for
another two centuries. The years between 1875
and 1900 are sometimes called “The Golden Age of
Microbiology” because of the number and signiﬁ-
cance of the discoveries that were made during this
time. The following is only a partial list.
1877 Robert Koch proves that anthrax is caused by a
bacterium.
1878 Joseph Lister ﬁrst grows bacteria in pure cul-
ture.
The oil immersion lens for microscopes is
developed.
1879 The bacterium that causes gonorrhea is discov-
ered.
1880 Louis Pasteur develops a vaccine for chicken
cholera.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

simpler in structure than the bacteria. All viruses are
parasites because they can reproduce only within the
living cells of a host. Therefore, all viruses cause dis-
ease. Common human viral diseases are inﬂuenza, the
common cold, and chickenpox.
Protozoa are single-celled animals such as amoe-
bas. Most protozoa are free living in freshwater or
saltwater, where they consume bacteria, fungi, and one
another. Human protozoan parasites include those
that cause malaria, amebic dysentery, and giardiasis,
another intestinal infection.
Fungi may be unicellular or multicellular. Molds
and mushrooms are familiar fungi. They decompose
organic matter in the soil and freshwater and help
recycle nutrients. Fungal diseases of people include
yeast infections, ringworm, and more serious diseases
such as a type of meningitis.
Worms are multicellular animals. Most are free liv-
ing and non-pathogenic; within the soil they consume
dead organic matter or smaller living things. Worm
infestations of people include trichinosis, hookworm
disease, and tapeworms.
Arthropods (the name means “jointed legs”) are
multicellular animals such as lobsters, shrimp, the
insects, ticks, and mites. Some insects (such as mos-
quitoes and ﬂeas) are vectors of disease; that is, they
spread pathogens from host to host when they bite to
obtain blood. Ticks are also vectors of certain diseases,
and some mites may cause infestations of the skin.
BINOMIAL NOMENCLATURE
We refer to bacteria and all other living things using
two names (binomial nomenclature), the genus and
the species. The genus name is placed ﬁrst, is always
capitalized, and is the larger category. The species
name is second, is not capitalized, and is the smaller
category. Let us use as examples Staphylococcus aureus
and Staphylococcus epidermidis. These two bacteria are
in the same genus, Staphylococcus, which tells us that
they are related or similar to one another. Yet they are
different enough to be given their own species names:
aureus or epidermidis. It may be helpful here to think
of our own names. Each of us has a family name,
which indicates that we are related to other members
of our families, and each of us has a ﬁrst name indi-
cating that we are individuals in this related group. If
we wrote our own names using the method of bino-
mial nomenclature, we would write Smith Mary and
Smith John.
In scientiﬁc articles and books, for the sake of con-
venience, the genus name is often abbreviated with its
ﬁrst letter. We might read of S. aureus as a cause of a
food poisoning outbreak or see E. coli (E. for
An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
499
BOX 22–2
MICROBIOLOGY IN THE 20TH CENTURY
1962 The Sabin polio vaccine is marketed in the
United States.
1963 The measles vaccine becomes available.
1969 A vaccine for rubella is developed.
1976 Legionnaire’s disease is discovered and des-
cribed.
1980 Genetically engineered bacteria produce the
hormone insulin.
1981 The ﬁrst cases of AIDS are described.
1982 The ﬁrst vaccine for hepatitis B is licensed.
1986 Genetically engineered yeast are used to pro-
duce a more effective vaccine for hepatitis B.
Genetically engineered bacteria produce
human growth hormone.
1997 Avian ﬂu H5N1 infects 18 people in Hong
Kong; then the virus seems to disappear until
2003.
1999 West Nile encephalitis virus is ﬁrst reported in
North America, in New York City.
Just a few of the advances made in microbiology
during the 20th century are listed below. Many of
them concerned diagnosis, prevention, or treat-
ment of infectious diseases, and some involved
using microorganisms and the new genetic tech-
nologies.
1928 Discovery of penicillin by Alexander Fleming.
1935 The ﬁrst of the sulfa drugs is found to be
effective against staphylococcal infections.
1938 Penicillin is puriﬁed and produced in large
quantities.
1941 The ﬂuorescent antibody test is developed.
1943 Streptomycin is discovered and is the ﬁrst
effective drug in the treatment of tuberculo-
sis.
1953 Watson and Crick describe the structure of
DNA.
1955 The Salk polio vaccine is ﬁrst used.
1957 Interferon is discovered.
1959 A vaccine for whooping cough is available.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Escherichia) on a lab report as the cause of a patient’s
urinary tract infection. Therefore, it is important to
learn both genus and species names of important
pathogens.
NORMAL FLORA
Each of us has a natural population of microorganisms
living on and within us. This is our normal ﬂora.
These microbes may be further categorized as resi-
dents or transients. Resident ﬂora are those species
that live on or in nearly everyone almost all the time.
These residents live in speciﬁc sites, and we provide a
very favorable environment for them. Some, such as
Staphylococcus epidermidis, live on the skin. Others, such
as E. coli, live in the colon and small intestine. When
in their natural sites, resident ﬂora do not cause harm
to healthy tissue, and some are even beneﬁcial to us.
However, residents may become pathogenic if they
are introduced into abnormal sites. If E. coli, for exam-
ple, gains access to the urinary bladder, it causes an
infection called cystitis. In this situation, E. coli is con-
sidered an opportunist, which is a normally harmless
species that has become a pathogen in special circum-
stances.
Transient ﬂora are those species that are found
periodically on or in the body; they are not as well
adapted to us as are the resident ﬂora. Streptococcus
pneumoniae, for example, is a transient in the upper res-
piratory tract, where it usually does not cause harm in
healthy people. However, transients may become path-
ogenic when the host’s resistance is lowered. In an eld-
erly person with inﬂuenza, S. pneumoniae may invade
the lower respiratory tract and cause a serious or even
fatal pneumonia.
The distribution of our normal ﬂora is summarized
in Table 22–1. You can see that an important function
of normal ﬂora is to inhibit the growth of pathogens
in the oral cavity, intestines, and in women, the vagina.
The resident bacteria are believed to do this by pro-
ducing antibacterial chemicals but also by simply
being there and providing competition that makes it
difficult for pathogens to establish themselves. An
example may be helpful here. Let us use botulism.
Typical food-borne botulism is acquired by ingesting
the bacterial toxin that has been produced in food.
Infants, however, may acquire botulism by ingesting
the spores (dormant forms) of the botulism bacteria
on foods such as honey or raw vegetables. The infant’s
colon ﬂora is not yet abundant, and the botulism
spores may be able to germinate into active cells that
produce toxin in the baby’s own intestine. For older
children or adults, botulism spores are harmless if
ingested, because the normal colon ﬂora prevents the
growth of these bacteria.
Recent research suggests that some speciﬁc bacte-
ria in our colon ﬂora are even more important than we
thought. One species, Bacteroides fragilis, produces a
polysaccharide, Psac, that may be necessary for the
normal development of certain aspects of the human
immune system: production of normal T cells by the
thymus gland and the proper functioning of the
spleen. We have much more to learn about our rela-
tionship with our resident ﬂora.
Resident ﬂora may be diminished by the use of
antibiotics to treat bacterial infections. An antibiotic
does not distinguish between the pathogen and the
resident bacteria. In such circumstances, without the
usual competition, yeasts or pathogenic bacteria may
be able to overgrow and create new infections. This is
most likely to occur on mucous membranes such as
those of the oral cavity and vagina.
INFECTIOUS DISEASE
An infectious disease is one that is caused by microor-
ganisms or by the products (toxins) of microorganisms.
To cause an infection, a microorganism must enter and
establish itself in a host and begin reproducing.
Several factors determine whether a person will
develop an infection when exposed to a pathogen.
These include the virulence of the pathogen and the
resistance of the host. Virulence is the ability of the
pathogen to cause disease. Host resistance is the total
of the body’s defenses against pathogens. Our defenses
include aspects of innate immunity such as intact skin
and mucous membranes, and the sweeping of cilia to
clear the respiratory tract, as well as adequate nutri-
tion, and the adaptive immune responses of our lym-
phocytes and macrophages (see Chapter 14).
To illustrate these concepts, let us compare the
measles virus and rhinoviruses (common cold). The
measles virus has at least a 90% infectivity rate, mean-
ing that for every 100 non-immune people exposed,
at least 90 will develop clinical measles. Thus, the
measles virus is considered highly virulent, even
for healthy people. However, people who have recov-
ered from measles or who have received the measles
vaccine have developed an active immunity that
increases their resistance to measles. Even if exposed
500
An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

many times, such people probably will not develop
clinical measles.
In contrast, the rhinoviruses that cause the com-
mon cold are not considered virulent pathogens, and
healthy people may have them in their upper respira-
tory tracts without developing illness. However,
fatigue, malnutrition, and other physiological stresses
may lower a person’s resistance and increase the like-
lihood of developing a cold upon exposure to these
viruses.
Once infected, a person may have a clinical
(apparent or symptomatic) infection, in which symp-
toms appear. Symptoms are observable or measurable
changes that indicate illness. For some diseases, sub-
clinical (inapparent or asymptomatic) infections are
possible, in which the person shows no symptoms.
Women with the sexually transmitted disease gonor-
rhea, for example, may have subclinical infections, that
is, no symptoms at all. It is important to remember
that such people are still reservoirs (sources) of the
pathogen for others, who may then develop clinical
infections.
COURSE OF AN INFECTIOUS DISEASE
When a pathogen establishes itself in a host, there is a
period of time before symptoms appear. This is called
the incubation period. Most infectious diseases have
rather speciﬁc incubation periods (Table 22–2). Some
diseases, however, have more variable incubation peri-
ods (see hepatitis in Table 22–2), which may make it
difficult to predict the onset of illness after exposure
or to trace outbreaks of a disease.
A short time called the prodromal period may
follow the incubation period. During this time, vague,
non-speciﬁc symptoms may begin. These include
An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
501
Table 22–1 DISTRIBUTION OF NORMAL FLORA IN THE HUMAN BODY
Body Site
Description of Flora
Skin
Nasal cavities
Trachea, bronchi,
and lungs
Oral cavity
Esophagus
Stomach
Small intestine
Large intestine
Urinary bladder
Vagina
Tissue ﬂuid
Blood
Exposed to the environment; therefore has a large bacterial population and small numbers of
fungi, especially where the skin is often moist. Flora are kept in check by the continual loss
of dead cells from the stratum corneum.
Bacteria, mold spores, and viruses constantly enter with inhaled air; the ciliated epithelium limits
the microbial population by continuously sweeping mucus and trapped pathogens to the
pharynx, where they are swallowed.
The cilia of the trachea and large bronchial tubes sweep mucus and microbes upward toward the
pharynx, where they are swallowed. Very few pathogens reach the lungs, and most of these
are destroyed by alveolar macrophages.
Large bacterial population and small numbers of yeasts and protozoa. Kept in check by lysozyme,
the enzyme in saliva that inhibits bacterial reproduction. The resident ﬂora help prevent the
growth of pathogens.
Contains the microorganisms swallowed with saliva or food.
The hydrochloric acid in gastric juice kills most bacteria. This may not be effective if large num-
bers of a pathogen or bacterial toxins are present in contaminated food.
The ileum, adjacent to the colon, has the largest bacterial population. The duodenum, adjacent
to the stomach, has the smallest.
Contains an enormous population of bacteria, which inhibits the growth of pathogens and pro-
duces vitamins. The vitamins are absorbed as the colon absorbs water. Vitamin K is obtained in
amounts usually sufficient to meet a person’s daily need. Smaller amounts of folic acid,
riboﬂavin, and other vitamins are also obtained from colon ﬂora.
Is virtually free of bacteria, as is the upper urethra. The lower urethra, especially in women, has a
ﬂora similar to that of the skin.
A large bacterial population creates an acidic pH that inhibits the growth of pathogens.
Small numbers of bacteria and viruses penetrate mucous membranes or get through breaks in the
skin. Most are destroyed in lymph nodules or lymph nodes or by wandering macrophages in
tissue ﬂuid.
Should be free of microorganisms.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

generalized muscle aches, lethargy, and fatigue, or a
feeling that “I’m coming down with something.”
During the invasion period, the speciﬁc symptoms
of the illness appear. These might include a high fever,
rash, swollen lymph nodes, cough, diarrhea, or such
things as the gradual paralysis of botulism. The acme
is the worst stage of the disease, and this is followed by
the recovery or death of the host.
Some diseases are self-limiting; that is, they typi-
cally last a certain length of time and are usually fol-
lowed by recovery. The common cold, chickenpox, and
mumps are illnesses that are considered self-limiting.
TYPES OF INFECTION
The terminology of infection may refer to the location
of the pathogens in the body, to the general nature of
the disease, or to how or where the pathogen was
acquired.
A localized infection is one that is conﬁned to one
area of the body. Examples are the common cold of
the upper respiratory tract, boils of the skin, and sal-
monella food poisoning that affects the intestines.
In a systemic infection, the pathogen is spread
throughout the body by way of the lymph or blood.
Typhoid fever, for example, begins as an intestinal
infection, but the bacteria eventually spread to the
liver, gallbladder, kidneys, and other organs. Bubonic
plague is an infection that begins in lymph nodes, but
again the bacteria are carried throughout the body,
and fatal plague is the result of pneumonia.
Bacteremia and septicemia are terms that are
often used interchangeably in clinical practice,
although technically they have different meanings.
Bacteremia means that bacteria are present in the
blood; septicemia means that the bacteria present are
multiplying rapidly. Septicemia is always serious,
because it means that the immune defenses have been
completely overwhelmed and are unable to stop the
spread of the pathogen.
With respect to timing and duration, some infec-
tions may be called acute or chronic. An acute infec-
tion is one that usually begins abruptly and is severe.
In contrast, a chronic infection often progresses
slowly and may last for a long time.
A secondary infection is one that is made possible
by a primary infection that has lowered the host’s
resistance. Inﬂuenza in an elderly person, for example,
may be followed by bacterial pneumonia. This sec-
ondary bacterial infection might not have occurred
had not the person ﬁrst been ill with the ﬂu.
Nosocomial infections are those that are acquired
in hospitals or other institutions such as nursing
homes. The hospital population includes newborns,
the elderly, postoperative patients, people with serious
chronic diseases, cancer patients receiving chemother-
apy, and others whose resistance to disease is lowered.
Some hospital-acquired pathogens, such as Staphylo-
coccus aureus, are transmitted from patient to patient by
healthy hospital personnel. These staff members are
reservoirs for S. aureus and carry it on their skin or in
their upper respiratory tracts. For this reason, proper
hand washing is of critical importance for all hospital
staff.
Other nosocomial infections, however, are caused
by the patient’s own normal ﬂora that has been inad-
vertently introduced into an abnormal body site. Such
infections may be called endogenous, which literally
means “generated from within.” Intestinal bacilli such
as E. coli are also an important cause of nosocomial
infections. Without very careful aseptic technique
(and sometimes in spite of it), the patient’s own intes-
tinal bacteria may contaminate urinary catheters,
decubitus ulcers, surgical incisions, chest tubes, and
502
An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
Table 22–2
INCUBATION PERIODS OF
SOME INFECTIOUS DISEASES
Disease
Incubation Period
Chickenpox
14–16 days
Cholera
1–3 days
Diphtheria
2–6 days
Gas gangrene
1–5 days
Gonorrhea
3–5 days
Hepatitis A
2 weeks–2 months
Hepatitis B
6 weeks–6 months
Hepatitis C
2 weeks–6 months
Herpes simplex
4 days
Inﬂuenza
1–3 days
Leprosy
3 months–20 years
Measles
10–12 days
Meningitis (bacterial)
1–7 days
Mumps
2–3 weeks
Pertussis
5 days–3 weeks
Pinworm
2–6 weeks
Plague
2–6 days
Polio
7–14 days
Rabies
2 weeks–2 months
(up to 1 year)
Salmonella food poisoning
12–72 hours
Staphylococcus food poisoning
1–8 hours
Syphilis
10 days–3 months
Tetanus
3 days–5 weeks
Tuberculosis
2–10 weeks
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

intravenous lines. Such infections are a signiﬁcant
problem in hospitals, and all those involved in any
aspect of patient care should be aware of this.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Epidemiology is the study of the patterns and spread
of disease within a population. This term is related to
epidemic, which is an outbreak of disease, that is,
more than the usual number of cases in a given time
period. An endemic disease is one that is present in a
population, with an expected or usual number of cases
in a given time. Inﬂuenza, for example, is endemic in
large cities during the winter, and public health per-
sonnel expect a certain number of cases. In some win-
ters, however, the number of cases of inﬂuenza
increases, often markedly, and this is an epidemic.
A pandemic is an epidemic that has spread
throughout several countries. The bubonic plague
pandemic of the 14th century affected nearly all of
Europe and killed one-fourth of the population. Just
after World War I, from 1918 to 1920, an especially
virulent strain of the inﬂuenza virus spread around the
world and caused at least 20 million deaths. More
recently, an epidemic of cholera began in Peru in
January 1991, but soon became a pandemic as cholera
spread to neighboring South American countries.
To understand the epidemiology of a disease, we
must know several things about the pathogen. These
include where it lives in a host, the kinds of hosts it can
infect, and whether it can survive outside of hosts.
PORTALS OF ENTRY AND EXIT
The portal of entry is the way the pathogen enters a
host (Fig. 22–1). Breaks in the skin, even very small
ones, are potential portals of entry, as are the natural
body openings. Pathogens may be inhaled, consumed
with food and water, or acquired during sexual activ-
ity. Most pathogens that enter the body by way of
these natural routes are destroyed by the white blood
cells found in and below the skin and mucous mem-
branes, but some may be able to establish themselves
and cause disease. You may wonder if the eye can be a
portal of entry for other than eye infections, or you
may already know that it is a portal for many respira-
tory viruses. People may pick up cold or ﬂu viruses on
their hands and then rub their eyes; the viruses are
then washed by tears into the nasal cavities, their pre-
ferred site of infection.
Insects such as mosquitoes, ﬂeas, and lice, and other
arthropods, such as ticks, are vectors of disease. They
spread pathogens when they bite to obtain a host’s
blood. Mosquitoes, for example, are vectors of malaria,
yellow fever, and encephalitis. Ticks are vectors of
Lyme disease and Rocky Mountain spotted fever.
As mentioned previously, it is important to keep in
mind that many hospital procedures may provide por-
tals of entry for pathogens. Any invasive procedure,
whether it involves the skin or the mucous mem-
An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
503
Mouth
(water or
food)
Bites of
vectors
Skin
breaks
Urinary or
reproductive
tract
Urine Reproductive
tract
Feces
Skin
contact
Blood
Respiratory droplets
Eye
Nose
A
B
Figure 22–1.
(A) Portals of entry.
(B) Portals of exit.
QUESTION: Are there any portals of
entry that are unlikely portals of exit?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

branes, may allow pathogens to enter the body. Thus
it is essential that all healthcare workers follow aseptic
technique for such procedures.
The portal of exit (see Fig. 22–1) is the way
the pathogen leaves the body or is shed from the
host. Skin lesions, such as those of chickenpox, con-
tain pathogens that may be transmitted to others by
cutaneous contact. Intestinal pathogens such as the
hepatitis A virus and the cholera bacteria are excreted
in the host’s feces, which may contaminate food
or water and be ingested by another host (this is called
the fecal–oral route of transmission). Respiratory
pathogens such as inﬂuenza and measles viruses
are shed in respiratory droplets from the mouth and
nose and may be inhaled by another person. The
pathogens of the reproductive tract, such as the bacte-
ria that cause syphilis and gonorrhea, are transmitted
to others by sexual contact. Notice that with respect to
epidemiology, the pathogen travels from one host’s
portal of exit to another host’s portal of entry.
RESERVOIRS OF INFECTION
Some pathogens cause disease only in people. Measles,
whooping cough, syphilis, and bacterial meningitis are
strictly human diseases. To acquire such a disease, a
person must be exposed to someone who has the
illness.
Also of importance is that upon recovery from
some diseases, the host may continue to harbor the
pathogen and thus be a reservoir of it for others. Such
a person is called a carrier. Diseases for which the car-
rier state is possible include typhoid, diphtheria, and
hepatitis B.
Many other diseases, however, are really animal
diseases that people acquire in certain circumstances.
These diseases are called zoonoses (singular: zoono-
sis) and include plague, Lyme disease, encephalitis,
and Rocky Mountain spotted fever, which are spread
from animal to person by vectors such as ticks or ﬂeas.
Rabies is acquired by contact with infected animal
saliva or infected tissue, the virus entering the new
host through breaks in the skin. Salmonellosis is a type
of food poisoning caused by the intestinal bacilli of
animals that contaminate meats such as chicken and
turkey. Prevention of such diseases depends upon
knowledge of how they are spread. For example, peo-
ple who live in areas where Lyme disease is endemic
should be aware that the disease is acquired by way of
a tick bite. If children and pets are examined for ticks
after they have been out of doors, the chance of
acquiring Lyme disease is greatly diminished.
Some bacteria are pathogenic only by accident, for
their natural habitat is soil or water, where they act as
decomposers. The bacteria that cause gas gangrene,
tetanus, and botulism are normal soil ﬂora and cause
disease when they (or their toxins) contaminate a skin
wound, or, in the case of botulism, the toxin is present
in food.
SPREAD OF INFECTION
Based on our knowledge thus far, we can classify infec-
tious diseases as noncommunicable or communicable.
A noncommunicable disease is one in which a resi-
dent species causes disease under certain conditions or
in which a non-resident species causes disease when it
enters the body. Such diseases cannot be transmitted
directly or indirectly from host to host. Cystitis caused
by E. coli in a hospital patient, for example, is not com-
municable to the nurses who care for that patient.
Similarly, a nurse caring for a patient with tetanus or
botulism need not worry about acquiring these dis-
eases; both are noncommunicable.
A communicable disease is one in which the
pathogen may be transmitted directly or indirectly
from host to host. Direct spread of infection is by way
of cutaneous contact (including sexual contact), respi-
ratory droplets, contaminated blood, or placental
transmission from mother to fetus. Indirect spread
is by way of contaminated food or water, or vectors,
or fomites, which are inanimate objects that carry
the pathogen. Inﬂuenza and cold viruses, for example,
can survive outside their hosts for a time, so that
objects such as eating utensils, door knobs, or chil-
dren’s toys may be vehicles of transmission for these
pathogens.
Some communicable diseases may also be called
contagious, which means that they are easily spread
from person to person by casual cutaneous contact or
by respiratory droplets. Chickenpox, measles, and
inﬂuenza are contagious diseases. In contrast, AIDS is
not contagious, because sexual contact, blood contact,
or placental transmission is necessary to acquire the
virus (HIV). HIV is not spread by cutaneous contact
or by respiratory droplets.
METHODS OF CONTROL
OF MICROBES
Microorganisms are everywhere in our environment,
and although we need not always be aware of their
presence, there are times when we must try to dimin-
504
An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

ish or even eliminate them. These situations include
the use of chemicals for disinfection, especially in
hospitals, and the protection of our food and water
supplies.
ANTISEPTICS, DISINFECTANTS,
AND STERILIZATION
We are all familiar with the practice of applying iodine,
hydrogen peroxide, or alcohol to minor cuts in the
skin, and we know the purpose of this: to prevent bac-
terial infection. The use of such chemicals does indeed
destroy many harmful bacteria, although it has no
effect on bacterial spores. The chemicals used to pre-
vent infection may be called antiseptics or disinfec-
tants. An antiseptic (anti  against; septic  infection)
is a chemical that destroys bacteria or inhibits their
growth on a living being. The chemicals named above
are antiseptics on skin surfaces. A disinfectant is a
chemical that is used on inanimate objects. Chemicals
with antibacterial effects may be further classiﬁed as
bactericidal or bacteriostatic. Bactericides kill bacteria
by 
disrupting 
important 
metabolic 
processes.
Bacteriostatic chemicals do not destroy bacteria, but
rather inhibit their reproduction and slow their
growth. Alcohol, for example, is a bactericide that is
both an antiseptic and a disinfectant, depending upon
the particular surface on which it is used.
Some chemicals are not suitable for use on human
skin because they are irritating or damaging, but they
may be used on environmental surfaces as disinfec-
tants. Bleach, such as Clorox, and cresols, such as
Lysol, may be used in bathrooms, on ﬂoors or coun-
tertops, and even on dishes and eating utensils (if
rinsed thoroughly). These bactericides will also des-
troy certain viruses, such as those that cause inﬂuenza.
A dilute (10%) bleach solution will inactivate HIV, the
virus that causes AIDS.
In hospitals, environmental surfaces are disinfected,
but materials such as surgical instruments, sutures,
and dressings must be sterilized. Sterilization is a
process that destroys all living organisms. Most med-
ical and laboratory products are sterilized by autoclav-
ing. An autoclave is a chamber in which steam is
generated under pressure. This pressurized steam
penetrates the contents of the chamber and kills all
microorganisms present, including bacterial spores.
Materials such as disposable plastics that might be
damaged by autoclaving are often sterilized by expo-
sure to ionizing radiation. Foods such as meats may
also be sterilized by this method. Such food products
have a very long shelf life (equivalent to canned food),
and this procedure is used for preparing some military
ﬁeld rations.
PUBLIC HEALTH MEASURES
Each of us is rightfully concerned with our own health
and the health of our families. People who work in the
public health professions, however, consider the
health of all of us, that is, the health of a population.
Two traditional aspects of public health are ensuring
safe food and safe drinking water. Two more recent
aspects are tracking and learning about emerging dis-
eases, and preparing defenses against the possible use
of biological weapons.
Food
The safety of our food depends on a number of
factors. Most cities have certain standards and prac-
tices that must be followed by supermarkets and
restaurants, and inspections are conducted on a regu-
lar basis.
Food companies prepare their products by using
speciﬁc methods to prevent the growth of microor-
ganisms. Naturally, it is in the best interests of these
companies to do so, for they would soon be out of
business if their products made people ill. Also of
importance is the willingness of companies to recall
products that are only suspected of being contami-
nated. This is all to the beneﬁt of consumers. For
example, since 1925 in the United States, only ﬁve
fatal cases of botulism have been traced to commer-
cially canned food. If we consider that billions of cans
of food have been consumed during this time, we can
appreciate the high standards the food industry has
maintained.
Milk and milk products provide ideal environments
for the growth of bacteria because they contain both
protein and sugar (lactose) as food sources. For this
reason, milk must be pasteurized, that is, heated to
145F (62.9C) for 30 minutes. Newer methods of
pasteurization use higher temperatures for shorter
periods of time, but the result is the same: The
pathogens that may be present in milk are killed,
although not all bacteria are totally destroyed. Milk
products such as cheese and ice cream are also pas-
teurized, or are made from pasteurized milk.
When a food-related outbreak of disease does take
place, public health workers try to trace the outbreak
to its source. This stops the immediate spread of dis-
ease by preventing access to the contaminated food,
and the ensuing publicity on television or in the news-
An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
505
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

papers may help remind everyone of the need for care-
ful monitoring of food preparation.
Some foods meant to be eaten raw or brieﬂy
cooked, such as fruit or rare beef, do carry a small risk.
Consumers should realize that food is not sterile, that
meat, for example, is contaminated with the animals’
intestinal bacteria during slaughtering. Meat should
be thoroughly cooked. Fruit and vegetables should be
washed or peeled before being eaten raw. (Food-borne
diseases, also called food poisoning, are included in
the tables of diseases that appear at the end of this
chapter.)
Finally, the safety of our food may depend on some-
thing we often take for granted: our refrigerators. For
example, a Thanksgiving turkey that was carved for
dinner at 3 P.M. and left on the kitchen counter until
midnight probably should not be used for turkey sand-
wiches the next day. Although we have to rely on oth-
ers to ensure that commercially prepared food will be
safe, once food reaches our homes, all we really need
(besides the refrigerator) is our common sense.
Water
When we turn on a faucet to get a glass of water, we
usually do not wonder whether the water is safe to
drink. It usually is. Having a reliable supply of clean
drinking water depends on two things: diverting
human sewage away from water supplies and chlori-
nating water intended for human consumption.
Large cities have sewer systems for the collection of
wastewater and its subsequent treatment in sewage
plants. Once treated, however, the sludge (solid, par-
ticulate matter) from these plants must be disposed of.
This is becoming more of a problem simply because
there is so much sewage sludge (because there are so
many of us). Although the sludge is largely free of
pathogens, it ought not to be put in landﬁlls, and
because ocean dumping is being prohibited in many
coastal areas, this is a problem that will be with us for
a long time.
Drinking water for cities and towns is usually chlo-
rinated. The added chlorine kills virtually all bacteria
that may be present. The importance of chlorination
is shown by a 1978 outbreak of enteritis (diarrhea)
in a Vermont town of 10,000 people. The chlorina-
tion process malfunctioned for 2 days, and 2000 of the
town’s inhabitants became ill. (The bacterium
was Campylobacter, a common intestinal inhabitant of
animals.)
You may now be wondering if all those bottled
spring waters are safe to drink. The answer, in general,
is yes, because the bottling companies do not wish to
make people ill and put themselves out of business.
Some bottled waters, however, do have higher mold
spore counts than does chlorinated tap water. Usually
these molds are not harmful when ingested; they are
destroyed by the hydrochloric acid in gastric juice.
In much of North America, nearly everyone has
easy access to safe drinking water. We might remind
ourselves once in a while that our water will not give
us typhoid, dysentery, or cholera. These diseases are
still very common in other parts of the world, where
the nearest river or stream is the laundry, the sewer,
and the source of drinking water. The World Health
Organization (WHO) estimates that more than 2.5
billion people do not have basic sanitation, and more
than 1 billion do not have dependable access to clean
water to drink.
Emerging Diseases
and Biological Weapons
The term emerging diseases may be a bit misleading,
because some of the pathogens are not really new.
What has happened is that we have become aware of
them. A good example of this is Lyme disease. Lyme
disease in the United States was named for the town in
Connecticut where a cluster of cases was discovered in
the 1970s. When the causative bacteria were later
found and the disease fully characterized, health offi-
cials realized that the disease had been described in
Scandinavia in the early years of the 20th century.
Lyme disease was not a new disease after all, merely a
newly encountered disease for Americans.
Other emerging diseases are those caused by the
Ebola and Marburg viruses, by Hantavirus, West Nile
virus, and the SARS (severe acute respiratory syn-
drome) virus, by certain strains of E. coli, and by antibi-
otic-resistant strains of enterococci. The tasks of public
health officials are to keep track of all cases of these
diseases and to educate medical personnel about them.
Anthrax is no longer in the news, as it was in the
autumn of 2001 when spores were sent through the
U.S. mail. As of 2006, no other instances of the use of
biological weapons have been reported, though use of
the smallpox virus as a weapon remains a concern.
Public health officials had hoped that improvements
to public health policies and procedures that were
spurred by the use of anthrax as a weapon would not
506
An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

be wasted but would be applicable to the emerging
diseases as well. Unfortunately, that has not proven
true, because as of 2006 most nations were not at all
prepared for a possible pandemic of avian ﬂu.
Avian inﬂuenza A (H5N1) is truly an emerging dis-
ease. The virus is a natural parasite of wild birds
and has infected domestic ﬂocks in Asia, Europe, and
Africa. Although not a frequent event, people have
caught the virus from infected chickens or ducks,
and the human mortality rate has been 50% (though
with a relatively small number of cases, fewer than 500,
this may not be accurate). The great concern is that
the virus will mutate and become contagious for peo-
ple, that is, easily transmissible from person to person.
By way of plane travel, the virus could be spread
throughout the world in a matter of weeks. The avian
ﬂu virus H5N1 may never mutate into a “people”
virus, but we have to be prepared for just that. As of
2006 we have no vaccine for this virus (some are in the
testing stages) and only one antiviral medication that is
even somewhat effective. Because this would be a
“new” disease for people, it is possible that no group of
people will have evolved any kind of resistance to it.
Bird ﬂu may be for us what measles was to the
Hawaiian islanders in the 18th and 19th centuries. The
measles virus was brought to the islands by Europeans
(for whom it was usually not fatal, reﬂecting thousands
of years of coexistence) and nearly wiped out the native
population, for whom it was a new virus.
However, this is by no means certain. It may be that
milder cases of human avian ﬂu have been overlooked
thus far, that H5N1 causes a wide spectrum of disease
in people, from mild to fatal. It may even be possible
that some human cases are asymptomatic (antibody
studies would be needed to determine that). We have
much to learn.
See also Box 22–3: Microbiology in the 21st
Century; you may be able to add to it.
THE PATHOGENS
In the sections that follow, each group of pathogens
will be described with a summary of important char-
acteristics. Examples of speciﬁc pathogens will be
given to help you become familiar with them. Tables
An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
507
BOX 22–3
MICROBIOLOGY IN THE 21ST CENTURY
2004 SARS vaccines are tested, but the human
SARS virus seems to disappear.
Avian inﬂuenza A (H5N1) causes sporadic
cases in people in East Asia.
A vaccine for the human papillomaviruses
that cause most cases of cervical cancer
proves to be very effective.
The incidence of whooping cough in the
United States rises markedly.
2005 A U.S. teenager becomes the ﬁrst person to
survive rabies without having received the
rabies vaccine.
Avian ﬂu is recognized as a pathogen with
the potential to cause a human pandemic.
Vaccines for the Ebola and Marburg viruses
are successful in monkeys.
A vaccine for shingles is effective in adults.
A more effective tuberculosis vaccine is in the
testing stages.
The 21st century has just begun; here is a micro-
biological perspective.
2001 In sub-Saharan Africa, more than 25 million
people have AIDS or are HIV positive.
Anthrax spores are sent through the U.S.
mail, causing 22 cases of the disease, with 5
fatalities.
2002 In China, the number of AIDS cases increases
ever more rapidly.
Multidrug-resistant strains of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis proliferate throughout the world.
A strain of Staphylococcus aureus is found that
is fully resistant to the antibiotic vancomycin.
2003 Cases of SARS are reported by China (after a
delay of 4 months—the disease was ﬁrst
found in November 2002), and the disease
spreads to Europe and North America, affect-
ing more than 8000 people.
The ﬁrst cases of mad cow disease are
reported in Canada and the United States.
In the United States, 35 human cases of
monkeypox are acquired from prairie dogs.
Donated blood and organs are screened for
the West Nile virus.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

of important human diseases caused by each group of
pathogens are found at the end of this chapter.
BACTERIA (SEE TABLE 22–3)
Bacteria are very simple unicellular organisms. All are
microscopic in size, and a magniﬁcation of 1000 times
is usually necessary to see them clearly. A bacterial cell
consists of watery cytoplasm and a single chromosome
(made of DNA) surrounded by a cell membrane.
Enclosing all of these structures is a cell wall, which is
strong and often rigid, giving the bacterium its char-
acteristic shape.
Based on shape, bacteria are classiﬁed as one of
three groups: coccus, bacillus, or spirillum (Fig. 22–2).
A coccus (plural: cocci) is a sphere; under the micro-
scope, cocci appear round. Certain preﬁxes may be
used to describe the arrangement of spheres. Staphylo
means clusters, strepto refers to chains of cells, and
diplo means pairs of cells.
A bacillus (plural: bacilli) is a rod-shaped bac-
terium; rods may vary in length depending on the
genus. A spirillum (plural: spirilla) is a long cell with
one or more curves or coils. Some spirilla, such as
those that cause syphilis and Lyme disease, are called
spirochetes. Many of the bacilli and spirilla are capa-
ble of movement because they have ﬂagella. These
are long, thread-like structures that project from the
cell and beat rhythmically.
Bacteria reproduce by the process of binary ﬁs-
sion, in which the chromosome duplicates itself, and
the original cell divides into two identical cells. The
presence or absence of oxygen may be important for
bacterial reproduction. Aerobic bacteria can repro-
duce only in the presence of oxygen, and anaerobic
bacteria can reproduce only in the absence of oxygen.
Facultatively anaerobic bacteria are not inhibited in
either situation; they are able to reproduce in either
the presence or absence of oxygen. This is obviously
an advantage for the bacteria, and many pathogens
and potential pathogens are facultative anaerobes.
The Gram Stain
Based on the chemicals in their cell walls, most bacte-
ria can be put into one of two groups, called gram
positive or gram negative. A simple laboratory pro-
cedure called the Gram stain (see Fig. 22–2) shows us
the shape of the bacteria and their gram reactions.
Gram-positive bacteria appear purple or blue, and
gram-negative bacteria appear pink or red. Some bac-
teria do not stain with the Gram method (many spir-
illa and spirochetes do not), but for those that do, each
genus is either gram positive or gram negative. This
does not change, just as the characteristic shape of the
bacteria does not change. The genus Streptococcus, for
example, is always a gram-positive coccus; the genus
Escherichia is always a gram-negative bacillus. If a
Gram stain is done on a sputum specimen from a
patient with pneumonia, and a gram-positive coccus is
found, this eliminates all of the gram-negative cocci
and bacilli that may also cause pneumonia. The Gram
stain, therefore, is often an important ﬁrst step in the
identiﬁcation of the pathogen that is causing a partic-
ular infection. In Table 22–3 (at the end of this chap-
ter), the gram reaction (where applicable) and shape
are included for each pathogen.
Special Characteristics
Although bacteria are simple cells, many have special
structural or functional characteristics that help them
to survive. Some bacilli and cocci have capsules (see
Fig. 22–2); a capsule is a gelatinous sheath that enclo-
ses the entire cell. Capsules are beneﬁcial to the bac-
teria because they inhibit phagocytosis by the host’s
white blood cells. This gives the bacteria time to
reproduce and possibly establish themselves in the
host. This is not beneﬁcial from our point of view
(remember that we are the hosts), but bacterial cap-
sules are also antigenic, which means that they stim-
ulate antibody production by our lymphocytes. This
starts the destruction of bacteria by our immune
responses. We take advantage of this by using bacter-
ial capsules in some of our vaccines, such as those used
to prevent pneumonia and meningitis.
Some bacilli are able to survive unfavorable envi-
ronments by forming spores. A spore is a dormant
(inactive) stage that consists of the chromosome and a
small amount of cytoplasm surrounded by a thick wall.
Spores can survive conditions such as heat (even boil-
ing), freezing, or dehydration, which would kill the
vegetative (active) forms of the bacterial cells.
Fortunately for us, most pathogens are unable to form
spores, but some that do are the causative agents of gas
gangrene, botulism, tetanus, and anthrax. These bac-
teria are decomposers in the soil environment, and
their spore-forming ability enables them to survive the
extremes of temperature and lack of water that may
occur in the soil.
Many bacteria cause disease because they produce
toxins, which are chemicals that are harmful to host
tissues. Often these toxins are the equivalent of our
508
An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
509
G
I
H
J
A
D
B
E
C
F
Spirillum
Bacterial spores
Bacillus
E
Flagella
Coccus
Bacterial capsules
Figure 22–2.
(A–F) Bacterial
shapes and specialized structures
(magniﬁcation x 2000) (G) Gram-
positive Staphylococcus aureus (x
1000). (H) Gram-negative Neisseria
gonorrhoeae in WBCs (x 1000). (I)
Gram-negative Campylobacter jejuni
(x 1000). (J) Salmonella enteritidis
growing on agar in a Petri dish. The
black colonies indicate production
of hydrogen sulﬁde gas. (G–J from
Sacher, RA, and McPherson, RA:
Widmann’s Clinical Interpretation of
Laboratory Tests. ed 11, FA Davis,
Philadelphia, 2000, color plates 58,
59, 60 and 92, with permission.)
QUESTION: In parts A–F, most of
the bacteria are blue or pink. What
do these colors indicate? The spiril-
lum, C, is neither color. What does
this tell us?
digestive enzymes, which break down the food we eat.
Some bacterial toxins such as hemolysins and pro-
teases literally digest host tissues such as red blood
cells and proteins. The bacteria then absorb the
digested nutrients.
The toxins of other bacteria have very speciﬁc
effects on certain cells of the host. Botulism and
tetanus toxins, for example, are neurotoxins that
disrupt the functioning of nerve cells, leading to the
characteristic symptoms of each disease. The diph-
theria toxin causes heart failure, the pertussis (whoop-
ing cough) toxin immobilizes the cilia of the
respiratory tract, and the cholera enterotoxin causes
diarrhea.
The cell walls of gram-negative bacteria are made
of chemicals called endotoxins. Endotoxins all have
the same effects on the host: They cause fever and cir-
culatory shock (low blood pressure and heart failure).
Endotoxin shock (also called gram-negative shock)
is a life-threatening condition that may accompany
any serious infection with gram-negative bacteria.
Rickettsias and Chlamydias
These two groups of bacteria differ from most other
bacteria in that they are obligate intracellular para-
sites. This means that they can reproduce only within
the living cells of a host.
Image/text rights not available.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

The rickettsias (also: rickettsiae) are parasites of
mammals (including people) and are often spread by
arthropod vectors. In the United States, the most
common rickettsial disease is Rocky Mountain spotted
fever, which is spread by ticks. In other parts of the
world, epidemic typhus, which is spread by body lice,
is still an important disease. From a historical per-
spective, until World War I, more people died of epi-
demic typhus during times of war than were killed by
weapons.
The chlamydias (also: chlamydiae) cause several
human diseases, including ornithosis (parrot fever)
and trachoma, which is the leading cause of blindness
throughout the world. In the United States, chlamy-
dial infection of the genitourinary tract has become
one of the most prevalent sexually transmitted dis-
eases, with estimates of 4 million new cases each year.
Both rickettsial and chlamydial infections can be
treated with antibiotics.
Antibiotics
Antibiotics are chemicals that are used to treat bacter-
ial infections. A broad-spectrum antibiotic is one that
affects many different kinds of bacteria; a narrow-
spectrum antibiotic affects just a few kinds of bacteria.
The use of antibiotics is based on a very simple
principle: Certain chemicals can disrupt or inhibit the
chemical reactions that bacteria must carry out to sur-
vive. An antibiotic such as penicillin blocks the forma-
tion of bacterial cell walls; without their cell walls,
bacteria will die. Other antibiotics inhibit DNA syn-
thesis or protein synthesis. These are vital activities
for the bacteria, and without them bacteria cannot
reproduce and will die.
It is very important to remember that our own cells
carry out chemical reactions that are very similar to
some of those found in bacteria. For this reason, our
own cells may be damaged by antibiotics. This is why
some antibiotics have harmful side effects. The most
serious side effects are liver and kidney damage or
depression of the red bone marrow. The liver is
responsible for detoxifying the medication, which may
accumulate and damage liver cells. Similar damage
may occur in the kidneys, which are responsible for
excreting the medication. The red bone marrow is a
very active tissue, with constant mitosis and protein
synthesis to produce RBCs, WBCs, and platelets. Any
antibiotic that interferes with these processes may
decrease production of all of these blood cells.
Patients who are receiving any of the potentially toxic
antibiotics should be monitored with periodic tests of
liver and kidney function or with blood counts to
assess the state of the red bone marrow.
Another problem with the use of antibiotics is that
bacteria may become resistant to them, and so be
unaffected. Bacterial resistance means that the bacte-
ria are able to produce an enzyme that destroys the
antibiotic, rendering it useless. This is a genetic capa-
bility on the part of bacteria, and it is, therefore,
passed to new generations of bacterial cells.
Let us use an example with small numbers and say
that, of 1000 bacterial cells, 998 are killed by a certain
antibiotic. The remaining two bacteria have the gene
for an enzyme that breaks the antibiotic molecule, so
they survive. What will these two bacteria do? Each
will divide by binary ﬁssion, becoming two cells, four
cells, eight cells, and so on. At the end of 20 divisions
(which under optimum conditions may take less than
24 hours) each bacterium has become more than a
million bacteria. And what is true of all of these bacte-
ria? They all have the gene for resistance to that par-
ticular antibiotic.
This is exactly what has happened with Staphylo-
coccus aureus, most strains of which are resistant to
penicillin, and some strains of which are resistant
to many other antibiotics as well. Most of the gram-
negative intestinal bacilli are resistant to a great vari-
ety of antibiotics. This is why culture and sensitivity
testing is so important before an antibiotic is chosen
to treat these infections.
Education is also important, and healthcare person-
nel must help educate the general public not to
demand antibiotics for colds or the ﬂu. These are viral
diseases for which antibiotics are useless. What hap-
pens is that the antibiotic kills all susceptible bacteria
(even beneﬁcial ones) and leaves resistant bacteria to
become the most numerous, perhaps to cause serious
disease in the future.
To counteract bacterial resistance, new antibiotics
are produced that are not inactivated by the destruc-
tive bacterial enzymes. Within a few years, however,
the usefulness of these new antibiotics will probably
diminish as bacteria mutate and develop resistance.
This is not a battle that we can ever truly win, because
bacteria are living organisms that evolve as their envi-
ronment changes. We must never underestimate the
ability of bacteria to evolve ways to neutralize the
antibiotics we use to kill them. The development of
new antibiotics is crucial if we are to stay a step ahead
of these remarkably adaptable microorganisms.
Antibiotics have changed our lives, although
510
An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

we may not always realize that. A child’s strep throat
will probably not progress to meningitis, and bacterial
pneumonia does not have the very high fatality rate
that it once did. But, we must keep in mind that antibi-
otics are not a “cure” for any disease. An infection,
especially a serious one, means that the immune sys-
tem has been overwhelmed by the pathogen. An
antibiotic diminishes the number of bacteria to a level
with which the immune system can cope. Ultimately,
however, the body’s own white blood cells must elim-
inate the very last of the bacteria.
VIRUSES (SEE TABLE 22–4)
Viruses are not cells; their structure is even simpler
than that of bacteria, which are the simplest cells. A
virus consists of either DNA or RNA surrounded by a
protein shell. The protein shell has a shape that is
characteristic for each virus (Fig. 22–3). There are no
enzymes, cytoplasm, cell membranes, or cell walls in
viruses, and they can reproduce only when inside the
living cells of a host. Therefore, all viruses are obligate
intracellular parasites, and they cause disease when
they reproduce inside cells. When a virus enters a host
cell, it uses the cell’s chromosomes, RNA, and enzymes
to make new viruses. Several hundred new viruses may
be produced from just one virus. The host cell rup-
tures and dies, releasing the new viruses, which then
enter other cells and reproduce.
The severity of a viral disease depends upon the
types of cells infected. If the virus affects skin cells, for
example, the disease is usually mild and self-limiting,
such as chickenpox. Small numbers of skin cells are
not crucial to our survival, and these cells can be
replaced by mitosis. If, however, the virus affects nerve
cells, the disease is more serious and may be fatal.
Rabies is such as disease. Neurons are much more vital
to us, and they cannot be replaced once they die.
Some viruses, such as those that cause German
measles (rubella) and chickenpox, are able to cross the
placenta, that is, pass from maternal circulation to
fetal circulation. Although the disease may be very
mild for the pregnant woman, the virus may severely
damage developing fetal organs and cause congenital
birth defects such as blindness, heart malformations,
and mental retardation. In the most serious cases, fetal
infection may result in miscarriage or stillbirth.
Some viruses cause an initial infection, become
dormant, then are reactivated, causing another infec-
tion months or years later. The herpes viruses that
cause cold sores “hide out” in nerves of the face fol-
lowing the initial skin lesion. At some later time when
the host’s resistance is lowered, the viruses emerge
from the nerves and cause another cold sore. The
chickenpox virus, which most of us acquire as chil-
dren, is a herpes virus that may become dormant in
nerves for years, and then be reactivated and cause
shingles when we are adults.
A few human viruses are known to be tumor
viruses, that is, they cause cells to develop abnormally
and form tumors. The Epstein-Barr virus, which
causes mononucleosis in North America, is associated
with Burkitt’s lymphoma in Africa and with nasopha-
ryngeal carcinoma in China. There are environmental
factors, as yet unknown, that contribute to the devel-
opment of these cancers in speciﬁc parts of the world.
An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
511
Figure 22–3.
Viruses: rep-
resentative shapes and relative
sizes.
QUESTION:
The influenza
virus shows the two parts of a
virus. What are these two
parts?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Several of the human papillomaviruses have also been
associated with cancers of the mouth or larynx, and
three of these viruses are found in 90% of cervical car-
cinomas in women.
Important viral diseases are described in Table 22–4
at the end of this chapter.
Antiviral Medications
The treatment of viral diseases with chemicals poses
some formidable challenges. First, viruses are active
(reproducing) only within cells, so the medication
must be able to enter infected cells to be effective.
Second, viruses are such simple structures that the
choice of which of their chemical processes to attempt
to disrupt is limited. Third, viruses use the host cell’s
DNA and enzymes for self-replication, and a medica-
tion that interferes with DNA or enzymes may kill the
host cell even as it kills the virus.
These problems are illustrated by zidovudine
(AZT), the ﬁrst medication that was effective against
HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. Zidovudine works by
interfering with DNA synthesis, which the virus must
carry out to reproduce. The side effects of zidovudine,
which are experienced by a signiﬁcant number of
AIDS patients, are caused by the disruption of DNA
synthesis in the person’s own cells.
Despite these obstacles, successful antiviral drugs
have been developed. Acyclovir, for example, has
proved to be useful in the control (not cure) of herpes
viruses. Ribavirin has been quite effective in the treat-
ment of respiratory syncytial virus pneumonia in
infants and young children. This is an area of intensive
research, and more antiviral medications will
undoubtedly be found within the next decade.
We must be aware, however, that many viruses
undergo mutations with great frequency. Inﬂuenza
viruses do (this is the reason we need a new ﬂu vaccine
every year), and it was perhaps inevitable that ﬂu virus
mutations would provide them with resistance to
antiviral medications. In January 2006 the CDC
advised physicians not to prescribe amantadine and
rimantadine for patients with inﬂuenza, because more
than 90% of the strains of inﬂuenza A virus had devel-
oped resistance to both drugs. Staying one step ahead
of such viruses may prove to be difficult.
FUNGI (SEE TABLE 22–5)
Fungi may be unicellular, such as yeasts, or multicel-
lular, such as the familiar molds and mushrooms. Most
fungi are saprophytes (also called saprobes); that is,
they live on dead organic matter and decompose it to
recycle the chemicals as nutrients. The pathogenic
fungi cause infections that are called mycoses (singu-
lar: mycosis), which may be superﬁcial or systemic.
Yeasts (Fig. 22–4) have been used by people for
thousands of years in baking and brewing. In small
numbers, yeasts such as Candida albicans are part of the
resident ﬂora of the skin, mouth, intestines, and
vagina. In larger numbers, however, yeasts may cause
superﬁcial infections of mucous membranes or the
skin, or very serious systemic infections of internal
organs. An all-too-common trigger for oral or vaginal
yeast infections is the use of an antibiotic to treat a
bacterial infection. The antibiotic diminishes the nor-
mal bacterial ﬂora, thereby removing competition for
the yeasts, which are then able to overgrow. Yeasts may
also cause skin infections in diabetics, or in obese peo-
ple who have skin folds that are always moist. In recent
years, Candida has become an important cause of noso-
comial infections. The resistance of hospital patients is
often lowered because of their diseases or treatments,
and they are more susceptible to systemic yeast infec-
tions in the form of pneumonia or endocarditis.
Another superﬁcial mycosis is ringworm (tinea),
which may be caused by several species of fungi (see
Table 22–5 at the end of this chapter). The name
ringworm is misleading, because there are no worms
involved. It is believed to have come from the appear-
ance of the lesions: circular, scaly patches with red
dened edges; the center clears as the lesion grows.
Athlete’s foot, which is probably a bacterial-fungal
infection, is perhaps the most common form of ring-
worm.
The systemic mycoses are more serious diseases
that occur when spores of some fungi gain access to
the interior of the body. Most of these fungi grow in a
mold-like pattern. The molds we sometimes see on
stale bread or overripe fruit look ﬂuffy or fuzzy. The
ﬂuff is called a mycelium and is made of many thread-
like cellular structures called hyphae. The color of a
mold is due to the spore cases (sporangia) in which the
reproductive spores are produced (see Fig. 22–4).
Each spore may be carried by the air to another site,
where it germinates and forms another mycelium.
Because spores of these fungi are common in the
environment, they are often inhaled. The immune
responses are usually able to prevent infection and
healthy people are usually not susceptible to systemic
mycoses. Elderly people and those with chronic pul-
monary diseases are much more susceptible, however,
and they may develop lung infections. The impor-
512
An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

tance of the immune system is clearly evident if we
consider people with AIDS. Without the normal
immune responses, AIDS patients are very susceptible
to invasive fungal diseases, including meningitis
caused by Cryptococcus. Pneumocystis jiroveci (formerly P.
carinii and classiﬁed with the protozoa, its DNA
sequences suggest it is closer to the fungi) is an impor-
tant cause of pneumonia in people with AIDS. This
species is usually not pathogenic, because the healthy
immune system can easily control it. For AIDS
patients, however, this form of pneumonia is often the
cause of death.
Antifungal Medications
One of the most effective drugs used to treat serious,
systemic mycoses, amphotericin B, has great potential
to cause serious side effects. Patients receiving this
medication should have periodic tests of liver and kid-
ney function. Newer medications include ketocona-
zole, ﬂuconazole, and caspofungin, which are less
toxic to the recipient and may prove to be as effective
as amphotericin B.
Superﬁcial mycoses such as ringworm may be
treated with certain oral medications. Taken orally, the
drug is incorporated into living epidermal cells. When
these cells die and reach the stratum corneum, they are
resistant to the digestive action of the ringworm fungi.
An effective topical spray has also been developed.
There are several effective medications for mucosal
yeast infections, but it is important that the trigger for
the infection (such as antibiotic therapy) be resolved as
well. If it is not, the yeast infection may recur when
the medication is stopped.
PROTOZOA (SEE TABLE 22–6)
Protozoa are unicellular animals, single cells that are
adapted to life in freshwater (including soil) and salt-
water. Some are human pathogens and are able to
form cysts, which are resistant, dormant cells that are
able to survive passage from host to host.
Intestinal protozoan parasites of people include
Entamoeba histolytica, which causes amebic dysentery,
and Giardia lamblia, which causes diarrhea called giar-
diasis (Fig. 22–5 and Table 22–6). People acquire these
by ingesting food or water contaminated with the
cysts of these species. Giardiasis can become a prob-
lem in daycare centers if the staff is not careful con-
cerning hand washing and food preparation.
Plasmodium, the genus that causes malaria, affects
hundreds of millions of people throughout the world
(causing 2 to 3 millions deaths each year) and is prob-
ably the most important protozoan parasite. The
An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
513
F
Pneumocystis jiroveci
(x 1200)
E
Cryptococcus (x 500)
C
Aspergillis (x 40)
B
Rhizopus (x 40)
D
Ringworm (x 750)
A
Yeast (x 750)
Figure 22–4.
Fungi.
QUESTION:
Which of
the fungi shown have a
mycelium?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Plasmodium species are becoming increasingly resist-
ant to the standard antimalarial drugs, which are used
to prevent disease as well as cure it. Work is progress-
ing on several malaria vaccines, and some have shown
promise.
Medications are available that can treat most proto-
zoan infections. Intestinal protozoa, for example, may
be treated with metronidazole or furazolidone.
WORMS (HELMINTHS)
(SEE TABLE 22–7)
Most worms are simple multicellular animals. The
parasitic worms are even simpler than the familiar
earthworm, because they live within hosts and use the
host’s blood or nutrients as food. Many of the parasitic
worms have complex life cycles that involve two or
more different host species.
The ﬂukes are ﬂatworms that are rare in most of
North America but very common in parts of Africa
and Asia. People acquire these species by eating
aquatic plants or raw ﬁsh in which the larval worms
have encysted. Within the person, each species lives in
a speciﬁc site: the intestine, bile ducts, or even certain
veins. Although rarely fatal, these chronic worm infes-
tations are often debilitating, and the host person is a
source of the eggs of the ﬂuke, which may then infect
others.
Tapeworms are also ﬂatworms (Fig. 22–6). Some
are 10 to 15 feet long, and the ﬁsh tapeworm can be as
long as 60 feet. They are as ﬂat as a ribbon, however,
and one could easily be held in the palm of the hand.
The tapeworm holds on to the lining of a host’s small
intestine with the suckers and hooks on its scolex
(front end). The segments, called proglottids, are
produced continuously in most species and absorb
nutrients from the host’s digested food. The only
function of the proglottids is reproduction: Eggs in
one segment are fertilized by sperm from another
segment. Mature proglottids containing fertilized
eggs break off and are excreted in the host’s feces. An
intermediate host such as a cow or pig eats food con-
taminated with human feces, and the eggs hatch
within this animal and grow into larval worms that
encyst in the animal’s muscle tissue. People become
infected by eating poorly cooked beef or pork that
contains cysts.
Parasitic roundworms of people include hook-
worm, pinworm, Ascaris, and Trichinella (see Table
22–7 at the end of this chapter). Medications are avail-
able that can eliminate worm infestations. In endemic
areas, however, reinfestation is quite common.
ARTHROPODS (SEE TABLE 22–8)
Arthropods such as the scabies mite and head lice are
ectoparasites that live on the surface of the body.
The infestations they cause are very itchy and uncom-
fortable but not debilitating or life threatening
(Fig. 22–7). Of greater importance are the arthropods
514
An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
F      Babesia microti
         (x 1200)
F
Babesia microti
(x 1000)
E
Toxoplasma gondii
(x 1200)
D
Plasmodium
(x 500)
A
Entamoeba histolytica
(x 800)
B
Giardia lamblia
(x 1200)
C
Trypanosoma
(x 500)
Red blood
cells
Red blood
cells
Figure 22–5.
Protozoa.
QUESTION: In which human
organ system do Entamoeba
and Giardia live?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

that are vectors of disease. These are listed in Table
22–8. Mosquitoes, ﬂeas, lice, and ﬂies are all insects.
Ticks are not insects but are more closely related to
spiders.
SUMMARY
The preceding discussion is an introduction to
microorganisms and human disease, and is only part of
the story. The rest of this story is the remarkable abil-
ity of the human body to resist infection. Although we
are surrounded and invaded by potential pathogens,
most of us remain healthy most of the time. The
immune responses that destroy pathogens and enable
us to remain healthy are described in Chapter 14. Also
in that chapter are discussions of vaccines. The devel-
opment of vaccines represents the practical applica-
tion of our knowledge of pathogens and of immunity,
and it enables us to prevent many diseases. The avail-
ability of speciﬁc vaccines is noted in the tables of bac-
terial and viral diseases that follow.
An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
515
Scolex head (x20)
Hooks
Sucker
Tapeworm (actual size)
Fluke (x4)
Muscle tissue
Hookworm (x3)
Pinworm (x2)
Trichinella (x100)
A
B
C
D
E
Figure 22–6.
Worms.
QUESTION: Which human organ
system is infested by worms A–D?
A
B
C
D
E
F
Louse (x15)
Flea (x15)
Mosquito (x5)
Larva
Nymph
Deer tick (x12)
Wood tick (x4)
Scabies mite (x100)
Figure 22–7.
Arthropods.
QUESTION: Which of these arthro-
pods are not insects (an old name
for insects is hexapods)?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

516
Table 22–3
DISEASES CAUSED BY BACTERIA
Bacterial Species
Discussion/Disease(s) Caused
Staphylococcus aureus
gram () coccus
Staphylococcus epidermidis
gram () coccus
Streptococcus pyogenes
(Group A streptococci)
gram () coccus
Streptococcus Group B
gram () coccus
Streptococcus pneumoniae
gram () coccus
Enterococcus faecalis
and other species
gram () coccus
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
gram () coccus
Neisseria meningitidis
gram () coccus
Moraxella catarrhalis
gram () coccobacillus
Bacillus anthracis
gram () bacillus
(spore-forming)
Clostridium perfringens
and other species
gram () bacillus
(spore-forming)
Skin infections such as boils, pneumonia, toxic shock syndrome, osteomyelitis, sep-
ticemia. Most strains resistant to penicillin and many strains to related antibiotics as
well. An important cause of nosocomial infections, carried on the hands or in the
nasal cavities of healthcare personnel. Food poisoning characterized by rapid onset
(1–8 hours) and vomiting. No vaccine.
Normal skin ﬂora; potential pathogen for those with artiﬁcial internal prostheses such as
heart valves and joints.
Strep throat, otitis media, scarlet fever, endocarditis, puerperal sepsis; possible immuno-
logic complications are rheumatic fever (transient arthritis and permanent damage to
heart valves) and glomerulonephritis (transient kidney damage, usually with com-
plete recovery). Rare strains cause necrotizing fasciitis, a potentially fatal hemolytic
gangrene. Several vaccines are in the testing stages.
An important cause of neonatal infection, the bacteria are acquired from the mother
during childbirth; risk factors are premature birth and intrapartum fever. May result
in pneumonia, meningitis, or septicemia. May be prevented by testing pregnant
women for Group B strep colonization and, if present, administering ampicillin. No
vaccine.
Pneumonia: accumulation of ﬂuids and white blood cells in the alveoli. The vaccine con-
tains capsules of the most common strains; recommended for the elderly, and for
infants to prevent invasive disease. Possible cause of meningitis in adults with predis-
posing factors such as sickle-cell anemia, alcoholism, asplenism, or head trauma.
Normal colon ﬂora. Has become an important cause of nosocomial infections of the uri-
nary tract. No vaccine. Other species (E. faecium) may be acquired from animals.
Some strains are resistant to many antibiotics.
Gonorrhea: inﬂammation of the mucous membranes of the reproductive and urinary
tracts. May cause scarring of reproductive ducts and subsequent sterility; in women
may cause pelvic inﬂammatory disease. Infants of infected women may acquire the
bacteria during birth; this is ophthalmia neonatorum and is prevented by antibiotic
eyedrops. No vaccine.
Meningitis: inﬂammation and edema of the meninges; pressure on the brain may cause
death or permanent brain damage. Also causes internal hemorrhages, DIC, and gan-
grene. Most common in older children and young adults, many of whom are asymp-
tomatic carriers. Most cases are sporadic, not part of epidemics. The vaccine is given
to military recruits and is strongly recommended for children ages 11–12, summer
campers, high school freshman, and college freshmen living in dorms; the vaccine
also prevents the carrier state. Post-exposure prophylaxis (prevention) involves antibi-
otics.
Otitis media and upper respiratory infection in children; pneumonia in adults, especially
the immunocompromised or elderly. No vaccine.
Anthrax: spores in soil may be acquired by cattle or sheep. People acquire disease from
these animals or from animal products such as wool or leather. The three forms are
pulmonary, cutaneous, and gastrointestinal, reﬂecting the portal of entry. The toxin
causes death of tissue, and the pulmonary form may be fatal. Rare in the U.S.,
because grazing animals are vaccinated. The vaccine for people was reserved for the
military, but has been offered to people thought to be exposed to spores. Anthrax is
a potential biological weapon.
Gas gangrene: normal soil ﬂora may contaminate wounds; spores require anaerobic
environment (dead tissue); toxins destroy more tissue, permitting the bacteria to
spread; gas produced collects as bubbles in dead tissue. Food poisoning: from con-
taminated meat, self-limiting diarrhea. Some species have contaminated human tis-
sue (ligament, tendon) used for transplants. No vaccine.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

517
Table 22–3
DISEASES CAUSED BY BACTERIA (Continued)
Bacterial Species
Discussion/Disease(s) Caused
Clostridium tetani
gram () bacillus
(spore-forming)
Clostridium botulinum
gram () bacillus
(spore-forming)
Clostridium difficile
gram () bacillus
(spore-forming)
Corynebacterium
diphtheriae
gram () bacillus
Listeria monocytogenes
gram () bacillus
Salmonella typhi
gram () bacillus
Salmonella enteritidis
and other species
gram () bacillus
Shigella species
gram () bacillus
Escherichia coli, Serratia
marcescens, Proteus
vulgaris, and other
genera of gram () bacilli
Escherichia coli 0157:H7
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
gram () bacillus
Burkholderia cepacia
gram () bacillus
Yersinia pestis
gram () bacillus
Francisella tularensis
gram () bacillus
Tetanus: normal soil ﬂora may contaminate wounds; spores require anaerobic condi-
tions. The toxin prevents muscle relaxation, resulting in muscle spasms. May be fatal
if respiratory muscles are affected. The vaccine contains the toxoid (inactivated toxin)
and has made this a rare disease in the U.S. Boosters are strongly recommended for
older adults.
Botulism: normal soil ﬂora; spores present in anaerobic food containers germinate and
produce the toxin, which causes paralysis. Respiratory paralysis may be fatal without
assisted ventilation. May cause infant botulism in children less than 2 years of age
who have ingested spores. No vaccine. Treatment is antitoxin (antibodies).
Diarrhea: the most common identiﬁable cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhea
(pseudomembranous enterocolitis); has become a signiﬁcant nosocomial pathogen.
No vaccine.
Diphtheria: toxin causes heart failure and paralysis; a pseudomembrane that grows in
the pharynx may cover the larynx and cause suffocation. Vaccination of infants (DTP)
has made this a very rare disease in the U.S. Older adults should receive boosters
(combined with tetanus: DT).
Listeriosis: septicemia and meningitis in the elderly, infants, and unborn; may cause mis-
carriage or stillbirth. The bacteria are found in soil and in animals such as cattle. In
the U.S., food poisoning outbreaks traced to contaminated milk or milk products.
Sporadic cases traced to undercooked hot dogs or chicken or to cold cuts from deli-
catessen counters. No vaccine.
Typhoid fever: intestinal infection with erosion and septicemia; subsequent infection of
liver, gallbladder, or kidneys. Upon recovery, the carrier state (bacteria in gallbladder)
may occur. Rare in the U.S. because of chlorination of drinking water. The vaccine is
used in endemic areas of the world such as Asia.
Salmonellosis: food poisoning following consumption of contaminated animal products
such as poultry or eggs. Diarrhea is usually self-limiting, but it may be fatal for the
elderly. In the U.S. estimates are 4 million cases per year. No vaccine.
Bacillary dysentery: mild to severe diarrhea; may be fatal because of dehydration and
circulatory shock. Usually transmitted by food prepared by people with mild cases.
No vaccine. An important cause of illness in daycare centers.
Normal colon ﬂora; cause opportunistic infections when introduced into any other part
of the body. This group is one of the most common causes of nosocomial infections
(urinary tract, pneumonia, skin infections).
Hemorrhagic colitis and hemolytic uremic syndrome, potentially fatal. The bacteria may
survive in undercooked meat, especially ground beef. A vaccine is in the research
stage.
Normal soil and water ﬂora; also transient in human intestines. A serious potential
pathogen for patients with severe burns, cystic ﬁbrosis (causes pneumonia), or can-
cer. May even survive in disinfectant solutions. No vaccine.
Pneumonia: especially in people with cystic ﬁbrosis or those with compromised immune
systems. No vaccine. (Former genus name: Pseudomonas.)
Bubonic plague: swollen lymph nodes, septicemia, and hemorrhagic pneumonia; often
fatal. Animal reservoirs are prairie dogs, ground squirrels, and other rodents. Rats and
people are infected by ﬂeas (the vector). In the U.S., the few cases each year occur in
the Southwest. The vaccine is no longer available.
Tularemia (rabbit fever): septicemia and pneumonia; not often fatal but very debilitat-
ing. Reservoirs are wild animals and birds. People are infected by vectors (ticks, lice,
and biting ﬂies), by ingestion of contaminated animal meat, or by inhalation. No
vaccine. Tularemia is a potential biological weapon.
(Continued on following page)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

518
Table 22–3
DISEASES CAUSED BY BACTERIA (Continued)
Bacterial Species
Discussion/Disease(s) Caused
Brucella species
gram () bacillus
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae
gram () bacillus
Haemophilus aegyptius
gram () bacillus
Bordetella pertussis
gram () bacillus
Vibrio cholerae
gram () bacillus
(comma shaped)
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
gram () bacillus
(comma shaped)
Vibrio vulniﬁcus
gram () bacillus
(comma shaped)
Campylobacter jejuni
gram () helical bacillus
Helicobacter pylori
gram () helical bacillus
Legionella pneumophila
gram () bacillus
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
acid-fast bacillus
Brucellosis (undulant fever): extreme weakness and fatigue, anorexia, a fever that rises
and falls. Reservoirs are cattle, sheep, goats, and pigs; people acquire infection by
contact with contaminated animal products. In the U.S., this is an occupational dis-
ease: meat processing workers, vets, farmers. Vaccines are available for animals.
Meningitis in children, especially those less than 2 years of age. Older people may have
mild upper respiratory infections or a potentially fatal epiglottitis. The vaccine (Hib)
contains the capsules of the bacteria and is recommended for infants beginning at
age 2 months. This was the most common cause of meningitis in the U.S., approxi-
mately 20,000 cases per year. The vaccine has provided a 90% reduction.
Conjunctivitis: painful inﬂammation of the conjunctiva; spread by direct contact or
fomites; may occur in epidemics among groups of children. No vaccine.
Whooping cough (pertussis): paroxysms of violent coughing that may last for several
weeks. Adults may have less severe coughing and go undiagnosed. Pneumonia is a
complication that may be fatal, especially for children less than 1 year of age. People
are the only host. Concern about the safety of the original vaccine has prompted the
development of newer vaccines, but in the U.S. the number of cases has increased
sharply, in part because of parental complacency.
Cholera: profuse watery diarrhea; infection ranges from mild to fatal. Spread of infection
is usually by way of water contaminated with human feces. Rare in the U.S.; epi-
demic in Asia, Africa, and South America. A new oral vaccine seems very effective.
Enteritis: diarrhea and nausea. Acquired by ingestion of raw or lightly cooked seafood;
usually self-limiting.
Gangrene and septicemia: acquired from ocean water that contaminates a wound or by
the ingestion of raw shellﬁsh. Illness is often severe and protracted, and it may be
fatal, especially for people who are immunosuppressed or who have liver disease. No
vaccine.
Enteritis: diarrhea that is often self-limiting but may be severe in the elderly or very
young. Reservoirs are animals such as poultry; people acquire infection from contam-
inated meat. In the U.S., estimates are 2 million cases per year. No vaccine.
Gastric ulcers: most are caused by H. pylori, which has also been implicated in cancer of
the stomach.
Legionellosis, which occurs in two forms: Legionnaire’s disease is a pneumonia that may
be fatal; Pontiac fever is a mild upper respiratory infection that is usually self-limiting.
The bacteria are found in natural water, including soil, and may contaminate air con-
ditioning systems or water supplies. Person-to-person transmission does not seem to
occur. Has become an important cause of nosocomial pneumonia. No vaccine.
Tuberculosis (TB): formation of tubercles containing bacteria and white blood cells, usu-
ally in the lung. Lung tissue is destroyed (caseation necrosis) and is removed by
macrophages, leaving large cavities. The bacteria are spread by respiratory droplets
from people with active cases. Many people acquire a primary infection that
becomes dormant and is without symptoms, yet may be triggered later into an
active secondary infection. The BCG vaccine is not used in the U.S., but is in other
parts of the world. In the U.S., TB cases are frequent among homeless people, those
with AIDS, and in closed populations such as prisons. Worldwide, the WHO estimates
that there are 7–8 million new infections each year and 3 million deaths; 30% of the
world’s people are infected with active or latent TB. Strains of the bacteria resistant
to the standard TB medications are becoming much more common and pose a diffi-
cult treatment problem. New vaccines are being tested.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

519
Table 22–3
DISEASES CAUSED BY BACTERIA (Continued)
Bacterial Species
Discussion/Disease(s) Caused
Mycobacterium species
acid-fast bacillus
Mycobacterium leprae
acid-fast bacillus
Treponema pallidum
spirochete
Leptospira interrogans
spirochete
Borrelia burgdorferi
spirochete
Borrelia vincentii
spirochete
Rickettsia prowazekii
rickettsia
Rickettsia typhi
rickettsia
Rickettsia rickettsii
rickettsia
Chlamydia trachomatis
(serogroups D–K)
chlamydia
Chlamydia trachomatis
(serogroups A–C)
chlamydia
Chlamydia pneumoniae
chlamydia
Chlamydia psittaci
chlamydia
Atypical mycobacterial infections: clinically similar to TB; usually in the lungs. These bacteria
are pathogenic for people with AIDS or other forms of immunosuppression, and for those
with chronic pulmonary diseases.
Leprosy (Hansen’s disease): chronic disease characterized by disﬁguring skin lesions and
nerve damage that may cause paralysis or loss of sensation. The bacteria are acquired by
cutaneous contact or respiratory droplets. The incubation period may be several years;
children develop clinical disease more rapidly than do adults. A vaccine is in the testing
stage.
Syphilis: a sexually transmitted disease that progresses in three stages. Primary syphilis: a
painless, hard chancre at the site of entry on skin or mucous membrane. Secondary
syphilis: a rash on the skin and mucous membranes (indicates systemic infection). Tertiary
syphilis (5–40 years later): necrotic lesions (gummas) in the brain, heart valves, aorta,
spinal cord, skin, or other organs. Congenital syphilis (the bacteria can cross the placenta)
may cause bone and teeth defects, and mental retardation. The WHO estimates that
more than 12 million new cases occur worldwide every year, a serious public health prob-
lem. No vaccine.
Leptospirosis: a disease of wild or domestic animals that excrete the bacteria in urine. People
acquire the bacteria by contact with contaminated water. Disease is usually mild, resem-
bling intestinal virus infection. Weil’s disease is the serious form, with hemorrhages in the
liver and kidneys, and jaundice always present, indicating severe liver damage. A vaccine
is available for dogs.
Lyme disease: begins as a ﬂu-like illness, often with a bull’s-eye rash at the site of the tick
bite. May be followed by cardiac arrhythmias, self-limiting meningitis, or arthritis. Animal
reservoirs are deer and ﬁeld mice; the vector is the deer tick (genus Ixodes). The vaccine
was taken off the market because of poor sales.
Trench mouth (Vincent’s gingivitis): an ulcerative infection of the gums and pharynx caused
by overgrowth of Borrelia and other normal oral ﬂora. Triggered by poor oral hygiene or
oral infection, which must be corrected to make antibiotic therapy effective.
Epidemic typhus: high fever and delirium, hemorrhagic rash; 40% fatality rate. Vector is the
human body louse. Very rare in the U.S. but still endemic in other parts of the world.
Endemic typhus: similar to epidemic typhus but milder; 2% fatality rate. Reservoirs are rats
and wild rodents; vectors are ﬂeas. The few cases in the U.S. each year usually occur in
the Southeast.
Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF): high fever, hemorrhagic rash, and pneumonia; 20%
fatality rate. Reservoirs are wild rodents and dogs; vectors are ticks. Despite its name,
RMSF in the U.S. is most prevalent in the Southeast coastal states (North Carolina, South
Carolina) and in Oklahoma.
Genitourinary infection (nongonococcal urethritis): in men, urethritis or epididymitis; in
women, cervicitis, although many women are asymptomatic. Complications in women
include pelvic inﬂammatory disease, ectopic pregnancy, and miscarriage. Newborns of
infected women may develop conjunctivitis or pneumonia. This is one of the most preva-
lent sexually transmitted diseases in the U.S. No vaccine.
Trachoma: conjunctivitis involving growth of papillae; vascular invasion of the cornea leading
to scarring and blindness. Spread by direct contact and fomites. The leading cause of
blindness throughout the world, especially in dry, dusty environments.
Pneumonia, usually community-acquired and mild enough to be called “walking pneumo-
nia,” with fever, cough, and hoarseness. No vaccine. C. pneumoniae as a factor in coro-
nary artery disease has not yet been demonstrated conclusively.
Psittacosis, also called ornithosis or parrot fever. Reservoirs are wild and domestic birds,
which shed the pathogen in feces. Acquired by people by inhalation of fecal dust. Disease
ranges from mild upper respiratory infection to a more serious pneumonia. No vaccine.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

520
Table 22–4
DISEASES CAUSED BY VIRUSES
Virus
Discussion/Disease(s) Caused
Herpes simplex
Herpes varicella-
zoster
Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV)
Cytomegalovirus
(CMV)
Human herpes-
virus 6 (HHV-6)
Human herpes-
virus 8 (HHV-8)
Human papilloma
viruses (HPV)
Adenoviruses
Rhinoviruses
Inﬂuenza viruses
Respiratory
syncytial
virus (RSV)
Human meta-
pneumovirus
Hantaviruses
Measles virus
Type 1: fever blisters (cold sores) on the lip or in oral cavity; the virus is dormant in nerves of the
face between attacks. Spread in saliva; may cause eye infections (self-inoculation).
Type 2: genital herpes; painful lesions in the genital area; a sexually transmitted disease. Many
people have few or no symptoms but may still spread the virus to sexual partners. Several vac-
cines are being developed.
Either type may be oral or genital, and may cause systemic infection and herpes encephalitis in
newborns, whose immune systems cannot contain the virus.
Chickenpox: the disease of the ﬁrst exposure; vesicular rash; pneumonia is a possible complica-
tion, especially in adults. The virus then becomes dormant in nerves. Shingles: painful, raised
lesions on the skin above the affected nerves following reactivation of the dormant virus.
Usually occurs in adults. The (HVZ) chickenpox vaccine is recommended for children. A shin-
gles vaccine has been approved for adults.
Mononucleosis: swollen lymph nodes, fatigue, fever, possible spleen or liver enlargement. Spread
by saliva. Has been statistically implicated as a contributing factor to the onset of multiple
sclerosis. EBV is linked to Burkitt’s lymphoma in Africa and to nasopharyngeal carcinoma in
China. No vaccine.
Most people have asymptomatic infection; the virus does no harm but remains in the body. Fetal
infection may result in mental retardation, blindness, or deafness. CMV is the most frequent
viral infection following organ transplants, and may cause a serious pneumonia. A cause of
blindness in people with AIDS. No vaccine.
Sixth disease (the 6th childhood illness that includes a rash, also called roseola or exanthema
subitum): high fever and a rash predominantly on the trunk. Most common in infants, and
most infections are mild. The virus remains dormant in T lymphocytes, may be reactivated
and spread by saliva. No vaccine.
Kaposi’s sarcoma: a malignancy of blood vessels often seen in people with AIDS; the virus is sexu-
ally transmitted. No vaccine.
More than 100 types, some of which cause genital warts. Several stimulate abnormal growth of
cells and cause cervical cancer in women. A vaccine for HPV-16 and HPV-18 (the causes of
approximately 70% of all cervical cancers) has had excellent results.
Many different types: some cause acute respiratory disease (ARD) similar to the common cold;
others cause pharyngoconjunctival fever and may occur in epidemics related to swimming
pools. The ARD vaccine is used only in the military.
Common cold: sore throat, runny nose, low fever; usually self-limiting. No vaccine, though sev-
eral are in the research stage (there are more than 100 types of rhinoviruses).
Inﬂuenza: muscle aches, fever, fatigue, spread in respiratory droplets. Three types: A, B, and
C. Type A is responsible for most epidemics. These are mutating viruses, and new vaccines
are needed as the virus changes. The most serious complication is secondary bacterial pneu-
monia.
Pneumonia: especially at risk are infants and young children, esp. those who must be hospital-
ized. Decades of work have yet to produce an effective vaccine.
Lower respiratory tract infection: bronchiolitis and pneumonia, especially in infants and probably
in elderly adults. Most infections occur during the winter. This is a newly discovered
pathogen, related to RSV, and much remains to be learned. No vaccine.
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome: fever, cough, pulmonary edema, hypotension. Mortality rate is
40%–50%. Acquired by contact with rodent feces or urine, or inhalation of virus in rodent-
infested areas. No vaccine.
Measles (rubeola): fever, sore throat, Koplik’s spots (white) on lining of mouth, rash.
Complications are ear infections, pneumonia, and measles encephalitis, which may be fatal.
The vaccine is given to infants in combination with mumps and rubella (MMR).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

(Continued on following page)
521
Table 22–4
DISEASES CAUSED BY VIRUSES (Continued)
Virus
Discussion/Disease(s) Caused
Rubella virus
Parvovirus B19
Mumps virus
Polio viruses
Coxsackie viruses
(29 types)
Rabies virus
Encephalitis
viruses
West Nile virus
Dengue virus
(4 serotypes)
Rotaviruses
Norwalk viruses
Ebola viruses
Marburg virus
Yellow fever virus
German measles: mild upper respiratory symptoms; a rash may or may not be present. The virus
may cross the placenta and cause congenital rubella syndrome (CRS): blindness, deafness,
heart defects, mental retardation, or miscarriage. CRS is most likely to occur if the fetus is
infected during the ﬁrst trimester. The vaccine is given to infants (MMR).
Fifth disease: a childhood illness characterized by a rash on the cheeks and limbs. Adults may
develop transitory arthritis; anemia may occur in immunocompromised people or those with
sickle-cell anemia. The virus can cross the placenta and may cause miscarriage or severe dam-
age to the fetal liver. No vaccine yet for human disease (as there are for animal parvoviruses)
because development of one is not seen as commercially proﬁtable.
Mumps: fever, swelling of the parotid salivary glands and perhaps the others (asymptomatic
infections do occur); the virus is spread in saliva. Complications are rare in children but
include pancreatitis, nerve deafness, and mumps encephalitis. Adult men may develop orchi-
tis, inﬂammation of the testes. Adult women may develop oophoritis, inﬂammation of the
ovaries. The vaccine is given to infants.
Polio: most infections are asymptomatic or mild; major infection may result in paralysis. Two vac-
cines: IPV (Salk) contains a killed virus and cannot cause polio; booster injections are needed.
OPV (Sabin) contains an attenuated virus, is given orally, and carries a very small risk of caus-
ing polio. In the U.S., polio cases are vaccine related; polio is still endemic in other parts of
the world. The WHO has set 2007 as the revised goal for the eradication of polio.
Hand, foot, and mouth disease: fever, blisters on the palms, soles, tongue, and throat; most com-
mon among children. May also cause conjunctivitis, myositis, and myocarditis. Highly conta-
gious, spread by the fecal–oral route and by respiratory droplets. No vaccine.
Rabies: headache, nausea, fever, spasms of the swallowing muscles; seizures; fatal because of
respiratory or heart failure; virtually 100% fatal. Reservoirs are wild animals; the virus is pres-
ent in their saliva. Post-exposure prevention requires Human Rabies Immune Globulin (HRIG-
antibodies) and the rabies vaccine.
Encephalitis: most infections are mild; CNS involvement is indicated by confusion, lethargy, or
coma. Several types of these viruses occur in the U.S. Reservoirs are wild birds and small
mammals; vectors are mosquitoes. Vaccines are available for horses and for people whose
occupations put them at risk.
West Nile encephalitis: ﬁrst found in North America in New York City in 1999 (well known in
Africa and the Middle East). Natural reservoirs are birds; several species of mosquitoes are vec-
tors. Symptoms include headache and confusion, but most infections are mild or asympto-
matic; fatalities are not common. No vaccine.
Dengue fever: an inﬂuenza-like illness (break-bone fever), and dengue hemorrhagic fever charac-
terized by vascular leakage and defective clotting. Vectors are species of mosquitos in the
genus Aedes. Endemic in the tropics and subtropics, with an estimated 100 million cases per
year and 25,000 fatalities, and is moving north. Vaccines are in the testing stages.
Enteritis: worldwide the leading cause of diarrhea and potentially fatal dehydration in infants and
children. Two vaccines have passed clinical tests.
Gastroenteritis: vomiting; called by many “stomach ﬂu.” Acquired from food such as shellﬁsh, or
from food handled by people with mild cases. No vaccine.
Hemorrhagic fever: high fever, systemic hemorrhages, necrosis of the liver; mortality rate
25%–90%. The viruses also affect monkeys, which may be reservoirs of infection. Vaccines are
in the testing stage.
Hemorrhagic fever similar to that caused by Ebola virus. A vaccine is in the testing stage.
Yellow fever: hemorrhages in the liver, spleen, kidneys, and other organs. The vector is a mos-
quito. The vaccine is recommended for travelers to endemic areas: Central and South America
and Africa.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

522
Table 22–4
DISEASES CAUSED BY VIRUSES (Continued)
Virus
Discussion/Disease(s) Caused
Hepatitis viruses:
types A,B, and C
Human immuno-
deﬁciency
virus (HIV)
Variola major
SARS virus
Hepatitis: anorexia, nausea, fatigue, jaundice (may not be present in mild cases). HAV is spread
by the fecal–oral route; contaminated shellﬁsh or food prepared by people with mild cases.
No carriers after recovery. HBV is spread by sexual activity or contact with blood or other
body ﬂuids. Carrier state is possible; may lead to liver cancer or cirrhosis. HCV transmission is
similar to that of HBV. Carrier state is possible. There are vaccines for hepatitis A and B. Other
hepatitis viruses are designated D, E, F, and G.
AIDS: destruction of helper T cells and suppression of the immune system; opportunistic infec-
tions; invariably fatal, often after many years. HIV is spread by sexual activity, contact with
blood, or placental transmission. No vaccine.
Smallpox: declared eradicated in the wild by the WHO in 1980. Is a potential biological weapon.
A contagious disease characterized by a hemorrhagic rash and internal hemorrhages. Fatality
rate is 30%–50%. In the U.S., childhood vaccination was stopped in 1982.
Severe acute respiratory syndrome: a pneumonia in which the lungs ﬁll with ﬂuid. The reservoir
of the virus is the horseshoe bat of China. The ﬁrst cases of SARS were in China in 2002; the
virus mutated and spread easily among people. Plane travel carried the virus to Europe and
North America. From 2002 through 2003, there were approximately 8000 cases, which
resulted in 800 deaths; then the human form of the virus disappeared. Vaccines are in the
development stage.
Table 22–5
DISEASES CAUSED BY FUNGI
Fungus Genus
Discussion/Disease(s) Caused
Microsporum, Trichophyton,
Epidermophyton
Candida albicans (and other
species)
Cryptococcus
Histoplasma
Coccidioides
Rhizopus
Aspergillus
Pneumocystis jiroveci
Ringworm (tinea): scaly red patches on the skin or scalp; loss of hair. Tinea pedis is ath-
lete’s foot. May also infect damaged nails. Spores of these fungi are acquired from
people or animals.
Yeast infections: mucosal infections are called thrush; may be oral or vaginal; yeasts have
come from resident ﬂora. Systemic infections include pneumonia and endocarditis.
Important nosocomial pathogens.
Cryptococcosis: pulmonary infection that may progress to meningitis, especially in AIDS
patients. Spores are carried in the air from soil or pigeon droppings.
Histoplasmosis: pulmonary infection that is often self-limiting. Progressive disease
involves ulcerations of the liver, spleen, and lymph nodes; usually fatal. Spores are car-
ried by the air from soil.
Coccidioidomycosis: pulmonary infection that is often self-limiting. Progressive disease
involves the meninges, bones, skin, and other organs; high mortality rate. Spores are
carried by the air.
Common bread mold that is harmless to most people, but may cause invasive disease in
those with compromised immune systems or poorly controlled diabetes. The spores
may be inhaled or ingested and establish themselves in tissues, leading to systemic
infection characterized by clotting and necrosis. Also causes digestive disease in cattle
and pigs.
A common mold found on fruits, harmless to healthy people. In those who are immuno-
compromised it may cause sinusitis, otitis, pneumonia, or more invasive disease.
Pneumonia: only in very debilitated or immunosuppressed persons, such as people with
AIDS. Although its antibiotic susceptibility is that of a protozoan, its DNA sequences
are more similar to those of fungi. Many people become infected during childhood,
but a normal immune system prevents any damage. Such a latent infection may
become symptomatic and very serious when cell-mediated immunity is impaired.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

523
Table 22–6
DISEASES CAUSED BY PROTOZOA
Protozoan
Discussion/Disease(s) Caused
Entamoeba histolytica
Naegleria species
Balantidium coli
Giardia lamblia
Trichomonas vaginalis
Trypanosoma species
Plasmodium species
Toxoplasma gondii
Cryptosporidium
species
Babesia microti and
other species
Amebic dysentery; ulcerative lesions in the colon, bloody diarrhea; abscesses may form in the
liver, lungs, or brain. Spread by the fecal–oral route in water or food.
Amebic meningoencephalitis: inﬂammation of the meninges and brain; uncommon in the
U.S. but almost always fatal. Amoebas in fresh water are acquired when swimmers sniff
water into the nasal cavities; the amoebas move along the olfactory nerves into the brain.
Balantidiasis: abdominal discomfort and diarrhea; often mild. Reservoirs are pigs and other
domestic animals; spread by the fecal–oral route.
Giardiasis: fatty diarrhea; may be mild. Reservoirs are wild and domestic animals and people.
Spread by the fecal–oral route in water or food prepared by people with mild cases. An
important cause of diarrhea in daycare centers.
Trichomoniasis: a sexually transmitted disease. Women: causes cervicitis and vaginitis; men are
often asymptomatic.
African sleeping sickness: lethargy progressing to coma and death. Reservoirs are wild and
domestic animals; vector is the tsetse ﬂy. No vaccine.
Malaria: the protozoa reproduce in red blood cells, causing hemolysis and anemia. The vector
is the Anopheles mosquito. Cerebral malaria is the most severe form, and it is often fatal for
children. The WHO estimates that at least 500 million people are affected, and 3 million
people die each year of malaria. Several promising vaccines are in the testing stages.
Toxoplasmosis: asymptomatic infection in healthy people. Congenital infection: miscarriage or
mental retardation, blindness. Reservoirs are cats and grazing animals. Pregnant women
may acquire cysts from cat feces or from ingestion of rare beef or lamb.
Diarrhea: ranges from mild to severe; spread by the fecal–oral route. An important cause of
diarrhea in daycare centers and in AIDS patients. Is very resistant to chlorine, may contam-
inate municipal water supplies or swimming pools and cause extensive epidemics.
Babesiosis: ﬁrst symptoms similar to inﬂuenza; the protozoa reproduce in and destroy RBCs. In
severe cases the hemolytic anemia may lead to renal failure. The vectors are Ixodes ticks.
No vaccine.
Table 22–7
INFESTATIONS CAUSED BY WORMS
Worm (Genus)
Discussion/Disease(s) Caused
Chinese liver ﬂuke
(Clonorchis)
Tapeworms (Taenia,
Diphyllobothrium)
Pinworm (Enterobius)
Hookworm (Necator)
Ascaris
Trichinella spiralis
Abdominal discomfort; cirrhosis after many years. Adult worms (1/2 inch) live in bile ducts.
Acquired by people from ingestion of raw ﬁsh that contains worm cysts.
Bloating and abdominal discomfort; constipation or diarrhea. People acquire the worms by eat-
ing poorly cooked beef, pork, or ﬁsh (the alternate hosts) that contain worm cysts.
Adult worms (1/8 inch) live in colon; females lay eggs on perianal skin while host is asleep,
causing irritation and itching of skin. Eggs are spread to family members on hands and bed
linens. In the U.S., this is probably the most common worm infestation.
Adult worms (1/2 inch) live in the small intestine; their food is blood. Heavy infestations cause
anemia and fatigue. Eggs are excreted in feces; larval worms burrow through the skin of a
bare foot and migrate to the intestine. Worldwide, in tropical and subtropical regions, an
estimated 800 million people are infested. Hookworm is now rare in North America.
Adults are 10–12 inches long, and live in the small intestine. Large numbers of worms may
cause intestinal obstruction. Eggs are excreted in feces and are spread to others on hands or
vegetation contaminated by human feces.
Trichinosis: severe muscle pain as migrating worms form cysts that become calciﬁed. Acquired
by eating poorly cooked pork (or wild animals) that contains cysts.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

524
An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
Table 22–8
ARTHROPOD VECTORS
Arthropod
Disease (Type of Pathogen)*
Mosquito
Flea
Body louse
Tick
Tsetse ﬂy
Deer ﬂy,
horse ﬂy
*These diseases are described in previous tables.
Malaria (protozoan)
Encephalitis (virus)
Yellow fever (virus)
Plague (bacterium)
Endemic typhus (rickettsia)
Epidemic typhus (rickettsia)
Tularemia (bacterium)
Relapsing fever (bacterium)
Lyme disease (bacterium)
Rocky Mountain spotted fever (rickettsia)
Tularemia (bacterium)
African sleeping sickness (protozoan)
Tularemia (bacterium)
Classiﬁcation of Microorganisms
1. Bacteria—unicellular; some are pathogens.
2. Viruses—not cells; all are parasites.
3. Protozoa—unicellular animals; some are pathogens.
4. Fungi—unicellular 
(yeasts) 
or 
multicellular
(molds); most are decomposers.
5. Worms—multicellular animals; a few are parasites.
6. Arthropods—insects, ticks, or mites that are vec-
tors of disease or cause infestations.
• Binomial nomenclature—the genus and species
names.
Normal Flora—see Table 22–1
1. Resident ﬂora—the microorganisms that live on or
in nearly everyone, in speciﬁc body sites; cause no
harm when in their usual sites.
2. Transient ﬂora—the microorganisms that periodi-
cally inhabit the body and usually cause no harm
unless the host’s resistance is lowered.
Infectious Disease
1. Caused by microorganisms or their toxins.
2. Clinical infections are characterized by symptoms;
in a subclinical infection, the person shows no
symptoms.
3. Course of an infectious disease: Incubation
period—the time between the entry of the
pathogen and the onset of symptoms. The acme is
the worst stage of the disease, followed by recovery
or death. A self-limiting disease typically lasts a cer-
tain period of time and is followed by recovery.
4. Types of Infection
• Localized—the pathogen is in one area of the
body.
• Systemic—the pathogen is spread throughout
the body by the blood or lymph.
• Septicemia (bacteremia)—bacteria in the blood.
• Acute—usually severe or of abrupt onset.
• Chronic—progresses slowly or is prolonged.
• Secondary—made possible by a primary infec-
tion that lowered host resistance.
• Nosocomial—a hospital-acquired infection.
• Endogenous—caused by the person’s own nor-
mal ﬂora in an abnormal site.
Epidemiology—see Fig. 22–1
1. The study of the patterns and spread of disease.
2. Portal of entry—the way a pathogen enters a
host.
3. Portal of exit—the way a pathogen leaves a host.
STUDY OUTLINE
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
525
4. Reservoirs—persons with the disease, carriers after
recovery, or animal hosts (for zoonoses).
5. Noncommunicable disease—cannot be directly or
indirectly transmitted from host to host.
6. Communicable disease—may be transmitted
directly from host to host by respiratory droplets,
cutaneous or sexual contact, placental transmission,
or blood contact. May be transmitted indirectly by
food or water, vectors, or fomites.
7. Contagious disease—easily spread from person to
person by casual cutaneous contact or respiratory
droplets.
Methods of Control of Microbes
1. Antiseptics—chemicals that destroy or inhibit bac-
teria on a living being.
2. Disinfectants—chemicals that destroy or inhibit
bacteria on inanimate objects.
3. Sterilization—a process that destroys all living
organisms.
4. Public health measures include laws and regula-
tions to ensure safe food and water.
Bacteria—see Fig. 22–2
1. Shapes: coccus, bacillus, and spirillum.
2. Flagella provide motility for some bacilli and spir-
illa.
3. Aerobes require oxygen; anaerobes are inhibited by
oxygen; facultative anaerobes grow in the presence
or absence of oxygen.
4. The gram reaction (positive or negative) is based
on the chemistry of the cell wall. The Gram stain is
a laboratory procedure used in the identiﬁcation of
bacteria.
5. Capsules inhibit phagocytosis by white blood cells.
Spores are dormant forms that are resistant to envi-
ronmental extremes.
6. Toxins are chemicals produced by bacteria that are
poisonous to host cells.
7. Rickettsias and chlamydias differ from other bacte-
ria in that they must be inside living cells to repro-
duce.
8. Antibiotics are chemicals used in the treatment of
bacterial diseases. Broad-spectrum: affects many
kinds of bacteria. Narrow-spectrum: affects only a
few kinds of bacteria.
9. Bacteria may become resistant to certain antibi-
otics, which are then of no use in treatment.
Resistance is a genetic trait, and will be passed to
future generations. Culture and sensitivity testing
may be necessary before an antibiotic is chosen to
treat an infection.
10. Diseases—see Table 22–3.
Viruses—see Fig. 22–3
1. Not cells; a virus consists of either DNA or RNA
surrounded by a protein shell.
2. Must be inside living cells to reproduce, which
causes death of the host cell.
3. Severity of disease depends on the types of cells
infected; some viruses may cross the placenta and
infect a fetus.
4. Antiviral medications must interfere with viral
reproduction without harming host cells.
5. Diseases—see Table 22–4.
Fungi—see Fig. 22–4
1. Most are saprophytes, decomposers of dead
organic matter. May be unicellular yeasts or multi-
cellular molds.
2. Mycoses may be superﬁcial, involving the skin or
mucous membranes, or systemic, involving internal
organs such as the lungs or meninges.
3. Effective antifungal medications are available, but
some are highly toxic.
4. Diseases—see Table 22–5.
Protozoa—see Fig. 22–5
1. Unicellular animals; some are pathogens.
2. Some are spread by vectors, others by fecal con-
tamination of food or water.
3. Effective medications are available for most dis-
eases.
4. Diseases—see Table 22–6.
Worms—see Fig. 22–6
1. Simple multicellular animals; the parasites are
ﬂukes, tapeworms, and some roundworms.
2. May have life cycles that involve other animal hosts
as well as people.
3. Effective medications are available for most worm
infestations.
4. Diseases—see Table 22–7.
Arthropods—see Fig. 22–7
1. Some cause superﬁcial infestations.
2. Others are vectors of disease—see Table 22–8.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

526
An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Deﬁne resident ﬂora, and explain its importance.
(p. 500)
2. State the term described by each statement:
(pp. 501–504, 508)
a. An infection in which the person shows no
symptoms
b. Bacteria that are inhibited by oxygen
c. A disease that lasts a certain length of time and
is followed by recovery
d. A disease that is usually present in a given pop-
ulation
e. The presence of bacteria in the blood
f. An infection made possible by a primary infec-
tion that lowers host resistance
g. A disease of animals that may be acquired by
people
h. Bacteria that are spherical in shape
3. Name these parts of bacterial cell: (pp. 508–509)
a. Inhibits phagocytosis by white blood cells
b. Provides motility
c. The basis for the gram reaction or Gram stain
d. A form resistant to heat and drying
e. Chemicals produced that are poisonous to host
cells
4. Explain what is meant by a nosocomial infection,
and describe the two general kinds with respect to
sources of the pathogen. (p. 502)
5. Name five potential portals of entry for
pathogens. (p. 503)
6. Name ﬁve potential portals of exit for pathogens.
(p. 504)
7. Explain the difference between a communicable
disease and a contagious disease. (p. 504)
8. Explain the difference between pasteurization and
sterilization. (p. 505)
9. Describe the structure of a virus, and explain how
viruses cause disease. (p. 511)
10. Describe the differences between yeasts and
molds. (p. 512)
11. Describe the difference between superﬁcial and
systemic mycoses. (p. 512)
12. Name some diseases that are spread by vectors,
and name the vector for each. (p. 524)
FOR FURTHER THOUGHT
1. Smallpox has been eradicated (in the wild). Polio
is the next target of world health officials,
then measles. What characteristics must a dis-
ease or its pathogen have that would allow us even
to consider trying to eradicate it? Try to think
of ﬁve.
2. To understand the epidemiology of a disease, we
must know several things about the disease or its
agent (pathogen). Again, try to think of ﬁve.
3. Many working mothers depend on daycare centers
to care for their children. What pathogens
are likely to ﬂourish in a daycare center if proper
precautions are not taken? There are two general
kinds. Besides being sure that all children have
the proper vaccinations, what do you think is
the most important proper precaution (think:
lunchtime)?
4. We’re still at the daycare center. Name three dis-
eases that all 2-year-olds should have been vacci-
nated against. There may be a 6-month-old child
in the group who has not yet received certain vac-
cinations, yet this child may be protected by what
we call “herd immunity.” Describe what is meant
by herd immunity.
5. Explain why leptospirosis may be misdiagnosed as
hepatitis (compare the descriptions in the tables of
pathogens). Explain the consequences for the
patient (notice what kind of pathogen causes each).
What does this suggest to us about rare diseases, or
the study of rare diseases?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

An Introduction to Microbiology and Human Disease
527
6. Ms. D has had second thoughts about her eyebrow
ring, so she has taken it out and now wants the hole
to close. She comes to the clinic on campus because
the pierced site is not healing, has become inﬂamed,
red, and painful. Ms. D claims that she keeps the
site very clean by applying hydrogen peroxide sev-
eral times a day. What do you tell her to do?
7. West Nile virus encephalitis was new to North
America in 1999. Less than a year later, public
health officials could say that most infections were
asymptomatic or mild, and only a very small per-
centage were serious or fatal. How do you think
they discovered this?
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

528
APPENDIX A
Units of Measure
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Units of Measure
529
UNITS OF LENGTH
mm
cm
in
ft
yd
M
1 millimeter 
1.0
0.1
0.04
0.003
0.001
0.001
1 centimeter 
10.0
1.0
0.39
0.032
0.011
0.01
1 inch 
25.4
2.54
1.0
0.083
0.028
0.025
1 foot 
304.8
30.48
12.0
1.0
0.33
0.305
1 yard 
914.4
91.44
36.0
3.0
1.0
0.914
1 meter 
1000.0
100.0
39.37
3.28
1.09
1.0
1   1 mu  1 micrometer (micron)  0.001 mm  0.00004 in. 
mm  millimeters; cm  centimeters; in  inches; ft  feet; yd  yards; M  meters.
UNITS OF WEIGHT
mg
g
oz
lb
kg
1 milligram 
1.0
0.001
0.00004
0.000002
0.000001
1 gram 
1000.0
1.0
0.035
0.002
0.001
1 ounce 
28,380
28.4
1.0
0.06
0.028
1 pound 
454,000
454.0
16
1.0
0.454
1 kilogram 
1,000,000
1000.0
35.2
2.2
1.0
mg  milligrams; g  grams; oz  ounces; lb  pounds; kg  kilograms.
UNITS OF VOLUME
mL
in3
oz
qt
L
1 milliliter 
1.0
0.06
0.034
0.001
0.001
1 cubic inch 
16.4
1.0
0.55
0.017
0.016
1 ounce 
29.6
1.8
1.0
0.03
0.029
1 quart 
946.3
57.8
32.0
1.0
0.946
1 liter 
1000.0
61.0
33.8
1.06
1.0
ml  milliliters; in3  cubic inches; oz  ounces; qt  quarts; L  liters.
TEMPERATURE: CELSIUS AND FAHRENHEIT
C  F
C  F
C  F
C  F
C  F
C  F
0C
32F
10C
50F
20C
68F
30C
86F
40C
104F
50C
122F
5C
41F
15C
59F
25C
77F
35C
95F
45C
113F
55C
131F
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

530
APPENDIX B
Abbreviations
The use of abbreviations for medical and scientiﬁc terms is timesaving and often standard practice. Some of the
most frequently used abbreviations have been listed here. Notice that some have more than one interpretation.
It is important to know the abbreviations approved by your institution, use only those, and never make up your
own abbreviations. If there is any chance of confusion, write out the words.
ABC
airway, breathing, circulation
ABG
arterial blood gas
ABX
antibiotics
ACh
acetylcholine
ACTH
adrenocorticotropic hormone
AD
Alzheimer’s disease
ADH
antidiuretic hormone
AIDS
acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome
ALS
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
ANS
autonomic nervous system
ARDS
acute respiratory distress syndrome
ARF
acute renal failure (acute respiratory
failure)
ATP
adenosine triphosphate
AV
atrioventricular
BAL
blood alcohol level
BBB
blood-brain barrier
BMR
basal metabolic rate
BP
blood pressure
BPH
benign prostatic hypertrophy
(hyperplasia)
BPM
beats per minute
BS
blood sugar (bowel sounds, breath sounds)
BUN
blood urea nitrogen
CA
cancer
CAD
coronary artery disease
CAPD
continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis
CBC
complete blood count
CC
creatinine clearance (critical condition, 
chief complaint)
CCCC
closed-chest cardiac compression
CF
cystic ﬁbrosis (cardiac failure)
CHD
coronary heart disease (congenital heart
disease)
CHF
congestive heart failure
CI
cardiac insufficiency (cerebral infarction)
CNS
central nervous system
CO
cardiac output; carbon monoxide
COPD
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
CP
cerebral palsy
CPR
cardiopulmonary resuscitation
CRF
chronic renal failure
C-section
cesarean section
CSF
cerebrospinal ﬂuid
CT (CAT)
computed (axial) tomography
CVA
cerebrovascular accident
CVP
central venous pressure
CVS
chorionic villus sampling
D & C
dilation and curettage
DM
diabetes mellitus (diastolic murmur)
DMD
Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy
DNA
deoxyribonucleic acid
DNR
do not resuscitate
DOA
date of admission (dead on arrival)
DRG
diagnosis-related group
Dx
diagnosis
EBV
Epstein-Barr virus
ECF
extracellular ﬂuid (extended care facility)
ECG (EKG)
electrocardiogram
EDV
end-diastolic volume
EEG
electroencephalogram
EFM
electronic fetal monitoring
EP
ectopic pregnancy
ER
endoplasmic reticulum
ERT
estrogen replacement therapy
ESR
erythrocyte sedimentation rate
ESRD
end-stage renal disease
ESV
end-systolic volume
FAS
fetal alcohol syndrome
FBG
fasting blood glucose
FOBT
fecal occult blood testing
FSH
follicle-stimulating hormone
FUO
fever of unknown origin
Fx
fracture
GB
gallbladder
GFR
glomerular ﬁltration rate
GH
growth hormone
GI
gastrointestinal
HAV
hepatitis A virus
Hb
hemoglobin
HBV
hepatitis B virus
HCG
human chorionic gonadotropin
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Abbreviations
531
Hct
hematocrit
HCV
hepatitis C virus
HDL
high-density lipoprotein
HLA
human leukocyte antigen
HR
heart rate
HRT
hormone replacement therapy
HSV
herpes simplex virus
HTN
hypertension
Hx
history
IBD
inﬂammatory bowel disease
IBS
irritable bowel syndrome
ICF
intracellular ﬂuid
ICP
intracranial pressure
ICU
intensive care unit
ID
intradermal
IDDM
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
Ig  
immunoglobulin
IM
intramuscular
IV
intravenous
LA
left atrium
LDL
low-density lipoprotein
LH
luteinizing hormone
LLQ
left lower quadrant
LUQ
left upper quadrant
LV
left ventricle
mEq/L
milliequivalents per liter
MG
myasthenia gravis
MI
myocardial infarction
mL
milliliter
mm3
cubic millimeter
mmHg
millimeters of mercury
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
MS
multiple sclerosis
MSOF
multisystem organ failure
MVP
mitral valve prolapse
NGU
non-gonococcal urethritis
NIDDM
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
NPN
non-protein nitrogen
OC
oral contraceptive
OTC
over the counter
PE
pulmonary embolism
PET
positron emission tomography
PG
prostaglandin
PID
pelvic inﬂammatory disease
PKU
phenylketonuria
PMN
polymorphonuclear leukocyte
PMS
premenstrual syndrome
PNS
peripheral nervous system
PT
prothrombin time (patient, patient
teaching, physical therapy)
PTH
parathyroid hormone
PTT
partial thromboplastin time
PVC
premature ventricular contraction
RA
right atrium
RBC
red blood cell
RBM
red bone marrow
RDA
recommended daily allowance
RDS
respiratory distress syndrome
REM
rapid eye movement
RE(S)
reticuloendothelial (system)
Rh
Rhesus
RIA
radioimmunoassay
RLQ
right lower quadrant
RNA
ribonucleic acid
RUQ
right upper quadrant
RV
right ventricle
Rx
prescription
SA
sinoatrial
SC
subcutaneous
SCID
severe combined immunodeﬁciency
SF
synovial ﬂuid
SIDS
sudden infant death syndrome
SLE
systemic lupus erythematosus
SPF
sun protection factor
S/S (sx)
signs and symptoms
STD
sexually transmitted disease
SV
stroke volume
T3
triiodothyronine
T4
thyroxine
TIA
transient ischemic attack
TMJ
temporomandibular joint
t-PA
tissue plasminogen activator
TPN
total parenteral nutrition
TSH
thyroid-stimulating hormone
TSS
toxic shock syndrome
Tx
treatment
UA
urinalysis
URI
upper respiratory infection
US
ultrasound
UTI
urinary tract infection
UV
ultraviolet
VPC
ventricular premature contraction
VD
venereal disease
VS
vital signs
WBC
white blood cell
WNL
within normal limits
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

532
APPENDIX C
Normal Values for Some
Commonly Used Blood Tests
Test
Normal Value
Clinical Signiﬁcance of Variations
Albumin
Bilirubin—Total
Direct
Indirect
Calcium
Chloride
Cholesterol
HDL cholesterol
LDL cholesterol
Clotting time
Creatinine
Globulins
Glucose
Hematocrit
Hemoglobin
Pco2
pH
Po2
Phosphorus
Platelet count
Potassium
Prothrombin time
Red blood cell count
Reticulocyte count
Sodium
Urea nitrogen (BUN)
Uric acid
White blood cell count
3.5–5.5 g/100 mL
0.3–1.4 mg/100 mL
0.1–0.4 mg/100 mL
0.2–1.0 mg/100 mL
4.3–5.3 mEq/liter
95–108 mEq/liter
140–199 mg/100 mL
29–77 mg/100 mL
130 mg/100 mL
5–10 minutes
0.6–1.5 mg/100 mL
2.3–3.5 g/100 mL
70–110 mg/100 mL
38%–48%
12–18 g/100 mL
35–45 mmHg
7.35–7.45
75–100 mmHg
1.8–4.1 mEq/liter
150,000–300,000/L
3.5–5.0 mEq/liter
11–15 seconds
4.5–6.0 million/L
0.5%–1.5%
136–142 mEq/liter
8–25 mg/100 mL
3.0–7.0 mg/100 mL
5000–10,000/L
• Decreases: kidney disease, severe burns
• Increases: liver disease, rapid RBC destruction, biliary obstruction
• Increases: hyperparathyroidism
• Decreases: hypoparathyroidism, severe diarrhea, malnutrition
• Decreases: severe diarrhea, severe burns, ketoacidosis
• Increases: hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus
• Increases: liver disease
• Increases: kidney disease
• Increases: chronic infections
• Increases: diabetes mellitus, liver disease, hyperthyroidism, pregnancy
• Increases: dehydration, polycythemia
• Decreases: anemia, hemorrhage
• Increases: polycythemia, high altitude, chronic pulmonary disease
• Decreases: anemia, hemorrhage
• Increases: pulmonary disease
• Decreases: acidosis, diarrhea, kidney disease
• Increases: hyperventilation, metabolic alkalosis
• Decreases: ketoacidosis, severe diarrhea, hypoventilation
• Decreases: anemia, pulmonary disease
• Increases: kidney disease, hypoparathyroidism
• Decreases: hyperparathyroidism
• Decreases: leukemia, aplastic anemia
• Increases: severe cellular destruction
• Decreases: diarrhea, kidney disease
• Increases: liver disease, vitamin K deﬁciency
• Increases: polycythemia, dehydration
• Decreases: anemia, hemorrhage, leukemia
• Increases: anemia, following hemorrhage
• Increases: dehydration
• Decreases: kidney disease, diarrhea, severe burns
• Increases: kidney disease, high-protein diet
• Increases: kidney disease, gout, leukemia
• Increases: acute infection, leukemia
• Decreases: aplastic anemia, radiation sickness
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

533
APPENDIX D
Normal Values for Some
Commonly Used Urine Tests
Test
Normal Value
Clinical Signiﬁcance of Variations
Acetone and acetoacetic
acid (ketones)
Albumin
Bilirubin
Calcium
Creatinine
Glucose
pH
Protein
Speciﬁc gravity
Urea
Uric acid
Urobilinogen
0
0–trace
0
less than 250 mg/24 hrs
1.0–2.0 g/24 hrs
0
4.5–8.0
0
1.010–1.025
25–35 g/24 hrs
0.4–1.0 g/24 hrs
0–4 mg/24 hrs
• Increases: ketoacidosis, starvation
• Increases: kidney disease, hypertension
• Increases: biliary obstruction
• Increases: hyperparathyroidism
• Decreases: hypoparathyroidism
• Increases: infection
• Decreases: kidney disease, muscle atrophy
• Increases: diabetes mellitus
• Increases: urinary tract infection, alkalosis, vegetarian diet
• Decreases: acidosis, starvation, high-protein diet
• Increases: kidney disease, extensive trauma, hypertension
• Increases: dehydration
• Decreases: excessive ﬂuid intake, alcohol intake, severe
kidney damage
• Increases: high-protein diet; excessive tissue breakdown
• Decreases: kidney disease
• Increases: gout, liver disease
• Decreases: kidney disease
• Increases: liver disease, hemolytic anemia
• Decreases: biliary obstruction
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

534
APPENDIX E
Eponymous Terms
An eponym is a person for whom something is named, and an eponymous term is a term that uses that name or
eponym. For example, fallopian tube is named for Gabriele Fallopio, an Italian anatomist of the 16th century.
In recent years it has been suggested that eponymous terms be avoided because they are not descriptive and
that they be replaced with more informative terms. Such changes, however, occur slowly, because the older terms
are so familiar to those of us who teach. Some of us may even use them as opportunities to impart a little history,
also known as “telling stories.”
In this edition, the most familiar eponymous terms have been retained, with the newer term in parentheses
after the ﬁrst usages. The list below is provided to show the extent of reclassiﬁcation of eponymous terms as
related to basic anatomy and physiology.
Eponymous Term
New Term
Achilles reﬂex
plantar reﬂex
Achilles tendon
calcaneal tendon
Adam’s apple
thyroid cartilage
ampulla of Vater
hepatopancreatic ampulla
aqueduct of Sylvius
cerebral aqueduct
Auerbach’s plexus
myenteric plexus
Bartholin’s glands
greater vestibular glands
Bowman’s capsule
glomerular capsule
Broca’s area
Broca’s speech area
Brunner’s glands
duodenal submucosal glands
bundle of His
atrioventricular bundle
canal of Schlemm
scleral venous sinus
circle of Willis
cerebral arterial circle
Cowper’s glands
bulbourethral glands
crypts of Lieberkuhn
intestinal glands
duct of Santorini
accessory pancreatic duct
duct of Wirsung
pancreatic duct
eustachian tube
auditory tube
fallopian tube
uterine tube
ﬁssure of Rolando
central sulcus
ﬁssure of Sylvius
lateral cerebral sulcus
graaﬁan follicle
vesicular ovarian follicle
Graves’ disease
hyperthyroidism
haversian canal
central canal
haversian system
osteon
Heimlich maneuver
abdominal thrust maneuver
islet of Langerhans
pancreatic islet
Krebs cycle
citric acid cycle
Kupffer cells
stellate reticuloendothelial cells
Langerhans cell
non-pigmented granular den-
drocyte
Leydig cells
interstitial cells
loop of Henle
loop of the nephron
Meissner’s corpuscles
tactile corpuscles
Meissner’s plexus
submucosal plexus
nodes of Ranvier
neuroﬁbril nodes
organ of Corti
spiral organ
Pacinican corpuscle
lamellated corpuscle
Peyer’s patches
aggregated lymph nodules
Purkinje ﬁbers
cardiac conducting myoﬁbers
Schwann cell
neurolemmocyte
Sertoli cells
sustentacular cells
sphincter of Boyden
sphincter of the common
bile duct
sphincter of Oddi
sphincter of the hepatopancre-
atic ampulla
Stensen’s ducts
parotid ducts
Volkmann’s canal
perforating canal, nutrient
canal
Wernicke’s area
posterior speech area
Wharton’s duct
submandibular duct
Wormian bone
sutural bone
Eponymous Term
New Term
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

535
APPENDIX F
Preﬁxes, Combining Word Roots, and
Suffixes Used in Medical Terminology
PREFIXES AND COMBINING
WORD ROOTS
a-, an- absent, without (amenorrhea: absence of menstrua-
tion)
ab- away from (abduct: move away from the midline)
abdomin/o- abdomen (abdominal aorta: the portion of the
aorta in the abdomen)
acou- hearing (acoustic nerve: the cranial nerve for hearing)
ad- toward, near, to (adduct: move toward the midline)
aden/o- gland (adenohypophysis: the glandular part of the
pituitary gland)
af- to, toward (afferent: toward a center)
alba- white (albino: an animal lacking coloration)
alg- pain (myalgia: muscle pain)
ana- up, back (anabolism: the constructive phase of metab-
olism)
angi/o- vessel (angiogram: imaging of blood vessels, as in
the heart)
ante- before (antenatal: before birth)
anti- against (antiemetic: an agent that prevents vomiting)
arthr/o- joint (arthritis: inﬂammation of a joint)
atel- imperfect, incomplete (atelectasis: incomplete expan-
sion of a lung)
auto- self (autoimmune disease: a disease in which immune
reactions are directed against part of one’s own body)
bi- two, twice (biconcave: concave on each side, as a red
blood cell)
bio- life (biochemistry: the chemistry of living organisms)
blasto- growth, budding (blastocyst: a rapidly growing
embryonic stage)
brachi/o- arm (brachial artery: the artery that passes
through the upper arm)
brachy- short (brachydactyly: abnormally short ﬁngers or
toes)
brady- slow (bradycardia: slow heart rate)
bronch- air passage (bronchioles: small air passages in the
lungs)
carcin/o- cancer (carcinogen: cancer-causing substance)
cardi/o- heart (cardiopathy: heart disease)
carp/o- wrist (carpals: bones of the wrist)
cata- down (catabolism: the breaking down phase of metab-
olism)
caud- tail (cauda equina: the spinal nerves that hang below
the end of the spinal cord and resemble a horse’s tail)
celi/o- abdomen (celiac artery: a large artery that supplies
abdominal organs)
cephal/o- head (cephaledema: swelling of the head)
cerebr/o- brain (cerebrum: the largest part of the human
brain)
cervic- neck (cervical nerves: the spinal nerves from the
neck portion of the spinal cord)
chem/o- chemical (chemotherapy: the use of chemicals to
treat disease)
chondr/o- cartilage (chondrocyte: cartilage cell)
circum- around (circumoral: around the mouth)
co-, com-, with, together (congenital: born with)
con-, contra- opposite, against (contraception: the preven-
tion of conception)
cost/o- ribs (intercostal muscles: muscles between the
ribs)
crani/o- skull, head (cranial nerves: the nerves that arise
from the brain)
cut- skin (cutaneous: pertaining to the skin)
cyan/o- blue (cyanosis: bluish discoloration of the skin due
to lack of oxygen)
cyst- bladder, sac (cystic duct: duct of the gallbladder)
cyt/o- cell (hepatocyte: cell of the liver)
dactyl/o- digits, ﬁngers or toes (polydactyly: more than ﬁve
ﬁngers or toes)
de- down, from (dehydration: loss of water)
derm- skin (dermatologist: a specialist in diseases of the
skin)
di- two, twice (disaccharide: a sugar made of two monosac-
charides)
diplo- double (diplopia: double vision)
dis- apart, away from (dissect: to cut apart)
duct- lead, conduct (ductus arteriosus: a fetal artery)
dys- difficult, diseased (dyspnea: difficult breathing)
ecto- outside (ectoparasite: a parasite that lives on the body
surface)
edem- swelling (edematous: affected with swelling)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

536
Preﬁxes, Combining Word Roots, and Suffixes Used in Medical Terminology
endo- within (endocardium: the innermost layer of the
heart wall)
enter/o- intestine (enterotoxin: a toxin that affects the intes-
tine and causes diarrhea)
epi- on, over, upon (epidermis: the outer layer of the
skin)
erythr/o- red (erythrocyte: red blood cell)
eu- normal, good (eupnea: normal breathing)
ex- out of (excise: to cut out or remove surgically)
exo- without, outside of (exophthalmia: protrusion of the
eyeballs)
extra- outside of, in addition to, beyond (extraembryonic
membranes: the membranes that surround the embryo-
fetus)
fasci- band (fascia: a ﬁbrous connective tissue membrane)
fore- before, in front (forehead: the front of the head)
gastro/o- stomach (gastric juice: the digestive secretions of
the stomach lining)
gluco-, glyco- sugar (glycosuria: glucose in the urine)
gyn/o-, gyne/co- woman, female (gynecology: study of the
female reproductive organs)
haplo- single, simple (haploid: a single set, as of chromo-
somes)
hema-, hemato-, hemo- blood (hemoglobin: the protein of
red blood cells)
hemi- half (cerebral hemisphere: the right or left half of the
cerebrum)
hepat/o- liver (hepatic duct: the duct that takes bile out of
the liver)
hetero- different (heterozygous: having two different genes
for a trait)
hist/o- tissue (histology: the study of tissues)
homeo- unchanged (homeostasis: the state of body stability)
homo- same (homozygous: having two similar genes for a
trait)
hydr/o- water (hydrophobia: fear of water)
hyper- excessive, above (hyperglycemia: high blood glucose
level)
hypo- beneath, under, deﬁcient (hypodermic: below the
skin)
idio- distinct, peculiar to the individual (idiopathic: of
unknown cause, as a disease)
inter- between, among (interventricular septum: the wall
between the ventricles of the heart)
intra- within (intracellular: within cells)
is/o- equal, the same (isothermal: having the same tempera-
ture)
kinesi/o- movement (kinesthetic sense: muscle sense)
labi- lip (herpes labialis: cold sores of the lips)
lacri- tears (lacrimal glands: tear-producing glands)
lact/o- milk (lactation: milk production)
leuc/o, leuk/o- white (leukocyte: white blood cell)
lip/o- fat (liposuction: removal of fat with a suctioning
instrument)
macr/o- large (macromolecule: a large molecule such as a
protein)
mal- poor, bad (malnutrition: poor nutrition)
medi- middle (mediastinum: a middle cavity, as in the chest)
mega- large (megacolon: abnormally dilated colon)
meta- next to, beyond (metatarsal: bone of the foot next to
the ankle)
micr/o- small (microcephaly: small head)
mon/o- one (monozygotic twins: identical twins, from one
egg)
morph/o- shape, form (amorphous: without deﬁnite shape)
multi- many (multicellular: made of many cells)
my/o- muscle (myocardium: heart muscle)
narco- sleep (narcotic: a drug that produces sleep)
nat/a- birth (neonate: a newborn infant)
neo- new (neoplasty: surgical restoration of parts)
nephr/o- kidney (nephrectomy: removal of a kidney)
neur/o- nerve (neuron: nerve cell)
non- not (non-communicable: unable to spread)
ocul/o- eye (oculomotor nerve: a cranial nerve for eye
movement)
olig/o- few, scanty (oliguria: diminished amount of urine)
oo- egg (oogenesis: production of an egg cell)
ophthalmo- eye (ophthalmoscope: instrument to examine
the eye)
orth/o- straight, normal, correct (orthostatic: related to
standing upright)
oste/o- bone (osteocyte: bone cell)
ot/o- ear (otitis media: inﬂammation of the middle ear)
ovi-, ovo- egg (oviduct: duct for passage of an egg cell, fal-
lopian tube)
path/o- disease (pathology: the study of disease)
ped/ia- child (pediatric: concerning the care of children)
per- through (permeate: to pass through)
peri- around (pericardium: membranes that surround the
heart)
phag/o- eat (phagocyte: a cell that engulfs pariculate matter)
phleb/o- vein (phlebitis: inﬂammation of a vein)
pleuro-, pleura- rib (pleurisy: inﬂammation of the pleural
membranes of the chest cavity)
pneumo- lung (pneumonia: lung infection)
pod- foot (pseudopod: false foot, as in ameboid movement)
poly- many (polysaccharide: a carbohydrate made of many
monosaccharides)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Preﬁxes, Combining Word Roots, and Suffixes Used in Medical Terminology
537
post- after (postpartum: after delivery of a baby)
pre- before (precancerous: a growth that probably will
become malignant)
pro- before, in front of (progeria: premature old age, before
its time)
pseudo- false (pseudomembrane: false membrane)
py/o- pus (pyogenic: pus producing)
pyel/o- renal pelvis (pyelogram: an x-ray of the renal pelvis
and ureter)
quadr/i- four (quadriceps femoris: a thigh muscle with four
parts)
retro- behind, backward (retroperitoneal: located behind
the peritoneum)
rhin/o- nose (rhinoviruses that cause the common cold)
salping/o- fallopian tube (salpingitis: inﬂammation of a fal-
lopian tube)
sarc/o- ﬂesh, muscle (sarcolemma: membrane of a muscle
cell)
sclero- hard (sclerosis: deterioration of tissue with loss of
function)
semi- half (semilunar valve: a valve shaped like a half-moon)
steno- narrow (aortic stenosis: narrowing of the aorta)
sub- below, beneath (subcutaneous: below the skin)
supra- above (suprarenal gland: gland above the kidney, the
adrenal gland)
sym- together (symphysis: a joint where two bones meet)
syn- together (synapse: the space between two nerve cells)
tachy- fast (tachycardia: rapid heart rate)
thorac/o- chest (thoracic cavity: chest cavity)
thromb/o- clot (thrombosis: formation of a blood clot)
tox- poison (toxicology: the study of poisons)
trans- across (transmural: across the wall of an organ)
tri- three (trigone: a three-sided area on the ﬂoor of the uri-
nary bladder)
ultra- excessive, extreme (ultrasonic: sound waves beyond
the normal hearing range)
un/i- one (unicellular: made of one cell)
uria-, uro- urine (urinary calculi: stones in the urine)
vas/o- vessel (vasodilation: dilation of a blood vessel)
viscera-, viscero- organ (visceral pleura: the pleural mem-
brane that covers the lungs)
SUFFIXES
-ac pertaining to (cardiac: pertaining to the heart)
-al pertaining to (intestinal: pertaining to the intestine)
-an, -ian characteristic of, pertaining to, belonging to (ovar-
ian cyst: a cyst of the ovary)
-ar relating to (muscular: relating to muscles)
-ary relating to, connected with (salivary: relating to saliva)
-ase enzyme (sucrase: an enzyme that digests sucrose)
-atresia abnormal closure (biliary atresia: closure or absence
of bile ducts)
-blast grow, produce (osteoblast: a bone-producing cell)
-cele swelling, tumor (meningocele: a hernia of the men-
inges)
-centesis puncture of a cavity (thoracocentesis: puncture of
the chest cavity to remove ﬂuid)
-cide kill (bactericide: a chemical that kills bacteria)
-clast destroy, break down (osteoclast: a bone-reabsorbing
cell)
-desis binding, stabilizing, fusion (arthrodesis: the surgical
immobilization of a joint)
-dipsia thirst (polydipsia: excessive thirst)
-dynia pain (gastrodynia: stomach pain)
-ectasia, -ectasis expansion (atelectasis: without expansion)
-ectomy excision, cutting out (thyroidectomy: removal of
the thyroid)
-emia pertaining to blood (hypokalemia: low blood potas-
sium level)
-form structure (spongiform: resembling a sponge)
-gen producting (carcinogen: a substance that produces
cancer)
-genesis production of, origin of (spermatogenesis: produc-
tion of sperm)
-globin protein (myoglobin: a muscle protein)
-gram record, writing (electroencephalogram: a record of
the electrical activity of the brain)
-graph an instrument for making records (ultrasonography:
the use of ultrasound to produce an image)
-ia condition (pneumonia: condition of inﬂammation of the
lungs)
-iasis diseased condition (cholelithiasis: gallstones)
-ic pertaining to (atomic: pertaining to atoms)
-ile having qualities of (febrile: feverish)
-ism condition, process (alcoholism: condition of being
dependent on alcohol)
-ist practitioner, specialist (neurologist: a specialist in dis-
eases of the nervous system)
-itis inﬂammation (hepatitis: inﬂammation of the liver)
-lepsy seizure (narcolepsy: a sudden onset of sleep)
-lith stone, crystal (otoliths: stones in the inner ear)
-logy study of (virology: the study of viruses)
-lysis break down (hemolysis: rupture of red blood cells)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

538
Preﬁxes, Combining Word Roots, and Suffixes Used in Medical Terminology
-megaly enlargement (splenomegaly: enlargement of the
spleen)
-meter a measuring instrument (spirometer: an instrument
to measure pulmonary volumes)
-ness state of, quality (illness: state of being ill)
-oid the appearance of (ovoid: resembling an oval or egg)
-ole small, little (arteriole: small artery)
-oma tumor (carcinoma: malignant tumor)
-opia eye (hyperopia: farsightedness)
-ory pertaining to (regulatory: pertaining to regulation)
-ose having qualities of (comatose: having qualities of a
coma)
-osis state, condition, action, process (keratosis: abnormal
growth of the skin)
-ostomy creation of an opening (colostomy: creation of an
opening between the intestine and the abdominal wall)
-otomy cut into (tracheotomy: cut into the trachea)
-ous pertaining to (nervous: pertaining to nerves)
-pathy disease (retinopathy: disease of the retina)
-penia lack of, deﬁciency (leukopenia: lack of white blood
cells)
-philia love of, tendency (hemophilia: a clotting disorder;
“love of blood”)
-phobia an abnormal fear (acrophobia: fear of heights)
-plasia growth (hyperplasia: excessive growth)
-plasty formation, repair (rhinoplasty: plastic surgery on the
nose)
-plegia paralysis (hemiplegia: paralysis of the right or left
half of the body)
-poiesis production (erythropoiesis: production of red blood
cells)
-ptosis dropping, falling (hysteroptosis: falling of the uterus)
-rrhage burst forth (hemorrhage: loss of blood from blood
vessels)
-rrhea discharge, ﬂow (diarrhea: frequent discharge of feces)
-scope instrument to examine (microscope: instrument to
examine small objects)
-spasm involuntary contraction (blepharospasm: twitch of
the eyelid)
-stasis to be still, control, stop (hemostasis: to stop loss of
blood)
-sthenia strength (myasthenia: loss of muscle strength)
-stomy surgical opening (colostomy: a surgical opening in
the colon)
-taxia muscle coordination (ataxia: loss of coordination)
-tension pressure (hypertension: high blood pressure)
-tic pertaining to (paralytic: pertaining to paralysis)
-tomy incision, cut into (phlebotomy: incision into a vein)
-tripsy crush (lithotripsy: crushing of stone such as gall-
stones)
-trophic related to nutrition or growth (autotrophic: capa-
ble of making its own food, such as a green plant)
-tropic turning toward (chemotropic: turning toward a
chemical)
-ula, -ule small, little (venule: small vein)
-uria urine (hematuria: blood in the urine)
-y condition, process (healthy: condition of health)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

539
APPENDIX G
Answers to Illustration Questions
CHAPTER 1
1–1: The circulatory system works directly with the
urinary system. Notice the red artery and blue
vein entering the left kidney.
1–2: See Table 1–1.
1–3: For the negative feedback mechanism, the brake
is in the cycle itself, the rise in metabolic rate
that inhibits the hypothalamus and pituitary
gland. For the positive feedback mechanism, the
brake is outside the cycle, the white blood cells
destroying the bacteria.
1–4: The femoral area contains the femur, the patellar
area the patella, the frontal area the frontal bone,
the temporal area the temporal bone; there are
others.
1–5: The cranial, vertebral, and thoracic cavities are
surrounded by bone. (Let’s go a step further:
Name the organs in these cavities that are pro-
tected by bone.)
1–6: Any tubular organ would have similar sections:
an artery, a vein, the esophagus, or the trachea.
1–7: The small and large intestines are in all four
quadrants.
CHAPTER 2
2–1: The charge of this atom is neutral because the
number of protons equals the number of elec-
trons (all atoms are neutral).
2–2: The sodium ion has 10 electrons (it lost one) but
still has 11 protons; therefore, it has a charge
of 1.
2–3: The bond of the oxygen molecule is a double
covalent bond: two pairs of shared electrons.
(Let’s go a step further: Which atom is able to
form four covalent bonds?)
2–4: Plasma, tissue ﬂuid, and lymph are extracellular
ﬂuids.
2–5: The pH range of blood is very narrow and
slightly alkaline. The pH range of urine is much 
greater, from slightly alkaline to moderately
acidic.
2–6: The chemical formula for glucose is C6H12O6.
(A step further: What is a disaccharide made
of? A polysaccharide?)
2–7: A diglyceride consists of a glycerol with two
fatty acid chains.
2–8: Myoglobin contains iron; iron enables myoglo-
bin to store oxygen. (This information was in
Tables 2–2 and 2–5.)
2–9: Picture D; excess hydrogen ions would block
the active site just as a heavy metal ion would.
2–10: Adenine paired with guanine would be too wide
to ﬁt between the uprights of the DNA ladder,
and hydrogen bonds would not form between
them. (A step further: State two structural dif-
ferences between DNA and RNA.)
CHAPTER 3
3–1: The receptor site is probably a protein; a cell
has many different protein receptor sites on its
membrane.
3–2: Cilia project through the cell membrane and
have an anchor inside; microvilli are folds of the
cell membrane. (Let’s go a step further: What
are the functions of cilia and microvilli?)
3–3: Filtration depends upon blood pressure.
Phagocytosis depends upon the movement of
WBCs. (A step further: What does diffusion
depend upon, and what does active transport
depend upon?)
3–4: One tRNA attachment site bonds to a speciﬁc
amino acid. The other site is the anticodon that
will bond to a complementary codon on the
mRNA.
3–5: A pair of identical chromatids is made of the
original DNA molecule and its copy (which was
synthesized during interphase). (A step further:
When do the chromatids separate and become
individual chromosomes?)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

540
Answers to Illustration Questions
CHAPTER 4
4–1: Simple squamous epithelium is best for diffusion
because it is the thinnest. (Let’s go a step further:
Where is simple squamous epithelium found?)
4–2: Stratiﬁed squamous and transitional epithelium
are most similar structurally because both have
several layers.
4–3: The cilia of the trachea sweep mucus and foreign
material upward toward the pharynx.
4–4: The matrix of blood is plasma. Triglycerides are
stored in adipocytes.
4–5: Collagen ﬁbers are the matrix of ﬁbrous CT; cal-
cium salts and collagen ﬁbers form the matrix of
bone.
4–6: Skeletal muscle cells and cardiac muscle cells
have striations, which result from the arrange-
ment of the cells’ contraction proteins. (A step
further: Which type of muscle tissue may be
called “voluntary”?)
4–7: The central neuron has eight processes, which
look alike, but would be one axon and seven den-
drites. (A step further: Where is the nucleus of
the neuron located?)
4–8: The mesentery covers the small and large intes-
tines and the liver.
CHAPTER 5
5–1: Blood vessels are found in the dermis and subcu-
taneous tissue.
5–2: The Langerhans cell can pick up foreign mate-
rial such as a bacterium, and transport it to a
lymph node. (Let’s go a step further: What do
melanocytes produce, and what is its function?)
5–3: A hair shaft is made of keratin. (A step further:
What other human structures are made mostly
of keratin?)
5–4: The nail bed is living layers of the epidermis and
the dermis.
CHAPTER 6
6–1: The osteocytes are living cells and need a good
blood supply, with oxygen and nutrients.
6–2: The frontal bone forms in two parts, which in
the infant skull are still separate. The two parts
will eventually grow together (with no suture).
6–3: In a closed epiphyseal disc, all of the cartilage has
been replaced by bone. (Let’s go a step further:
Name the cells that produce bone, that reab-
sorb bone, and that maintain the bone matrix.)
6–4: The vertebrae and facial bones are irregular
bones. (A step further: Name the other bone
categories and give examples of each.)
6–5 and 6–6: The openings at the back of an eye
socket permit passage of the optic nerve and
blood vessels of the eye.
6–7: The foramen magnum is the opening through
which the spinal cord merges with the brain.
6–8: The olfactory foramina are the openings for the
olfactory nerves (sense of smell).
6–9: “Sinus headache” pain is usually from the
frontal sinus and the maxillary sinuses.
6–10: The lumbar vertebra is larger and bulkier than
the thoracic vertebra; the lumbar vertebrae
support more weight. (A step further: What
kind of joint is found between vertebrae?)
6–11: All of the ribs articulate posteriorly with the
thoracic vertebrae.
6–12: The joints of the arm are (from the top):
ball-and-socket joint at the shoulder, hinge
joint at the elbow, pivot joint in the forearm,
gliding joints at the wrist, hinge joints in the
ﬁngers, and a saddle joint at the base of the
thumb.
6–13: The female pelvic inlet is much larger than the
male pelvic inlet; this is an adaptation for child-
birth.
6–14: There is no pivot joint between the tibia and
ﬁbula, and no saddle joint in the big toe.
6–15: The ball-and-socket joint is the most movable;
the symphysis is the least movable.
6–16: These two bones are long bones because each
has an epiphysis. Examples are the joints be-
tween phalanges or between the femur and
tibia.
CHAPTER 7
7–1: When a muscle contracts it shortens and exerts
a pulling force.
7–2: The ﬁtting of an acetylcholine molecule into an
ACh receptor opens a sodium channel in the
sarcolemma. (Let’s go a step further: What
causes a motor neuron to release acetylcholine?)
7–3: The unit of contraction of skeletal muscle is a
sarcomere, shown in picture D. (A step further:
Name the contracting proteins in a sarcomere.)
7–4: Sodium ions enter the cell during depolariza-
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Answers to Illustration Questions
541
tion; potassium ions leave the cell during repo-
larization.
7–5: The myosin ﬁlaments pull the actin ﬁlaments
toward the center of the sarcomere. (A step fur-
ther: Name the proteins that inhibit the sliding
of myosin and actin, and the ion that takes them
out of the way.)
7–6: The muscular, circulatory, respiratory, and
integumentary systems are all part of responses
to exercise.
7–7: Crossing the arm in front of the chest is ﬂexion
of the arm.
7–8: Shape: trapezius (trapezoid), deltoid (the Greek
letter delta)
Size: pectoralis major, gluteus maximus
Location: rectus abdominis, biceps brachii,
latissimus dorsi
A bone: tibialis anterior, biceps femoris, stern-
ocleidomastoid, brachioradialis
Function: adductor longus
7–9: Both orbicularis muscles are circular muscles
that regulate the size of an opening.
7–10: The pectoralis major, latissimus dorsi, and teres
major all move the arm. They are on the trunk
because the sternum and vertebrae provide
strong anchors (origins).
7–11: Flexor muscles of the ﬁngers are on the ante-
rior side of the forearm. You knew because of
the names ﬂexor and digitorum, or you followed
the tendons from the ﬁngers and saw that they
led to these muscles.
7–12: The gastrocnemius is much larger than the tib-
ialis anterior. The gastrocnemius extends the
foot, as when standing on tiptoes or pushing off
to walk. In either case, it must be strong enough
(large enough) to support the entire body.
7–13: The muscles of the female pelvic ﬂoor support
the urinary bladder and uterus.
CHAPTER 8
8–1: Effectors are muscle tissues and glands.
8–2: This is an excitatory synapse because sodium
ions enter the postsynaptic neuron, causing
depolarization. At an inhibitory synapse, potas-
sium ions leave the postsynaptic neuron, caus-
ing hyperpolarization.
8–3: An ascending tract carries sensory impulses to
the brain; a descending tract carries motor
impulses from the brain. (Let’s go a step fur-
ther: Where are the cell bodies of sensory and
motor neurons located?)
8–4: The spinal cord ends between the ﬁrst and sec-
ond lumbar vertebrae. This is important for a
lumbar puncture: The needle must be inserted
into the meningeal sac below the end of the
spinal cord.
8–5: The receptor is a stretch receptor, and the mus-
cle that is stretched contracts.
8–6: The corpus callosum connects the cerebral
hemispheres, so that each knows what the other
is doing. It is a ﬂat though slightly arched band
of nerve ﬁbers (white matter) extending left and
right. (A step further: What parts of a neuron
make up white matter?)
8–7: A lateral ventricle extends from the frontal lobe
back through the parietal and occipital lobes,
and forward and down into the temporal lobe.
8–8: The general sensory area in the parietal lobe
feels and interprets the cutaneous senses and
muscle sense.
8–9: The spinal dura mater is a single layer. The cra-
nial dura mater is a double layer, and at inter-
vals contains the cranial venous sinuses.
8–10: Cerebrospinal ﬂuid is reabsorbed from the cra-
nial subarachnoid space, through the arachnoid
villi, into the blood in the cranial venous
sinuses. (A step further: Why is CSF considered
tissue ﬂuid?)
8–11: Secretion of saliva is mediated by the facial and
glossopharyngeal nerves; gastrointestinal secre-
tions are mediated by the vagus nerves.
8–12: Both ANS divisions supply the heart and have
opposite functions. Sympathetic impulses in-
crease the heart rate, and parasympathetic
impulses decrease the rate.
CHAPTER 9
9–1: Most cutaneous receptors are in the dermis;
some are in subcutaneous tissue. (Let’s go a step
further: Which cutaneous receptors are free
nerve endings, and which are encapsulated
nerve endings?)
9–2: The air we inhale (with vapor molecules) goes
down the pharynx and passes the back of the
tongue (with taste buds).
9–3: Tears end up in the nasal cavities.
9–4: The inferior rectus muscle pulls the eyeball
downward, as if you were looking at the ﬂoor.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

542
Answers to Illustration Questions
9–5: The iris changes the size of the pupil. (A step
further: Which set of iris muscles constricts the
pupil and which dilates it? One more step:
Which nerves are involved; think ANS.)
9–6: The ganglion neurons form the optic nerve.
The rods and cones are the photoreceptors.
9–7: The ﬁrst structure to vibrate is the tympanic
membrane, and second is the malleus. (A step
further: Be sure you can complete the pathway
of vibrations for hearing.)
9–8: The vibrations of the sound waves cause the
round window to bulge out, preventing damag-
ing pressure in the cochlea.
9–9: The canals and cochlear duct contain ﬂuid. The
receptors are the hair cells below the tectorial
membrane. (A step further: Name the cranial
nerve and lobe of the cerebral cortex concerned
with hearing.)
9–10: In part A: Gravity pulls on the otoliths and
bends the hair cells. In part B: Movement of the
head causes the hair cells to sway. (A step fur-
ther: Name the cranial nerve and parts of the
brain concerned with equilibrium.)
CHAPTER 10
10–1: The thyroid hormones are carried by the blood
throughout the body (true of all hormones) to
their target organs.
10–2: ACTH, TSH, FSH, and LH all affect other
endocrine glands.
10–3: In part A: ADH and oxytocin are stored in the
posterior pituitary. In part B: Releasing hor-
mones from the hypothalamus stimulate secre-
tion of anterior pituitary hormones. (Let’s go a
step further: What kind of feedback mechanism
stimulates the anterior pituitary gland?)
10–4: Growth hormone increases mitosis and protein
synthesis, both of which directly contribute to
growth.
10–5: Both the increase in protein synthesis and the
production of energy from all types of foods
contribute to growth and maintenance of bones
and muscles. (These functions of thyroxine and
T3 are necessary for other organs as well.)
10–6: Calcitonin promotes calcium retention in
bones. PTH contributes to the activation of
vitamin D in the kidneys. (A step further: What
is the stimulus for secretion of each of these
hormones?)
10–7: Bones are a reservoir for calcium.
10–8: Insulin enables cells to take in glucose. The
stimulus for insulin secretion is hyper-
glycemia, such as after a meal.
10–9: Epinephrine causes vasodilation and increases
cell respiration in skeletal muscles; norepi-
nephrine causes vasoconstriction. (A step fur-
ther: How does epinephrine increase blood
pressure?)
10–10: Aldosterone directly increases the reabsorp-
tion of sodium ions and the excretion of potas-
sium ions by the kidneys. (A step further:
What are the indirect effects of these func-
tions of aldosterone?)
10–11: Under the stimulus of cortisol, most tissues
will use fats and excess amino acids for energy
production, and glucose will be stored as
glycogen in the liver.
10–12: A target cell must have a speciﬁc receptor for
the hormone, either in the cell membrane
(protein hormones) or in the cytoplasm
(steroid hormones).
CHAPTER 11
11–1: Blood plasma is mostly water (91.5%); RBCs
are the most numerous cells.
11–2: Normoblasts and reticulocytes are usually
found in the red bone marrow because they
are immature stages of RBC development.
(Let’s go a step further: Which cell shown
here is an immature WBC?)
11–3: The center of a RBC is pale because it is thin-
ner than the edge; this is where the nucleus
was.
11–4: Iron and amino acids are recycled; the heme of
the hemoglobin is excreted as bilirubin. (A
step further: Where can iron be stored?)
11–5: Answers will vary, but if you are type O you
can donate to types A, B, and AB as well as
type O. If you are type A you can donate to
type A or AB, and so on.
11–6: The diameter of the arteriole is much larger
than that of the capillary, and platelet plugs
would be washed away before they could
cover the opening. Once a fibrin mesh
forms, the platelets are trapped, as are RBCs.
(A step further: What other mechanism
of hemostasis also works in arterioles, and
why?)
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Answers to Illustration Questions
543
11–7: The liver is a vital organ because it produces
many of the protein clotting factors.
CHAPTER 12
12–1: Serous ﬂuid is found between the serous peri-
cardial layers; it prevents friction as the heart
beats.
12–2: The blue arrows represent blood that is low in
oxygen, returning to the RA from the body by
way of the caval veins. (Let’s go a step further:
What do the red arrows in the left atrium rep-
resent?)
12–3: The mitral and tricuspid valves close when the
ventricles contract, to prevent backﬂow of
blood from the ventricles to the atria. (A step
further: When do the arterial semilunar valves
close, and why is this important?)
12–4: The coronary vessels supply blood to the
myocardium.
12–5: The onset of ventricular systole makes the AV
valves close and the semilunar valves open.
12–6: The SA node is the pacemaker of the heart; it
depolarizes 60 to 80 times per minute, that is,
the normal resting heart rate. (A step further:
Deﬁne bradycardia and tachycardia.)
12–7: Sympathetic impulses increase the heart rate
and force of contraction. (A step further: Name
the parasympathetic nerves to the heart.)
CHAPTER 13
13–1: The tunica media is made of smooth muscle
and is thicker in an artery because it is needed
to help regulate blood pressure. (Let’s go a step
further: What structure found in veins is not
found in arteries, and why not?)
13–2: The highest pressure is BP at the arterial end of
the capillary network; it brings about the
process of ﬁltration. (A step further: By what
process are gases exchanged?)
13–3: Many possible answers. For bones: radial, ulnar,
femoral, tibial, iliac, subclavian, occipital. For
organs: renal, celiac, hepatic, splenic.
13–4: Many possible answers: subclavian, axillary,
brachial, iliac, femoral, popliteal, tibial, renal,
splenic, intercostal.
13–5: The internal jugular vein is the counterpart of
the common carotid artery.
13–6: The brain is always active and needs a large
supply of blood.
13–7: The blood in the portal vein is going to the
liver. The blood is coming from the capillaries
of the digestive organs and spleen.
13–8: Blood ﬂows through the foramen ovale from
the RA to the LA, to bypass the fetal lungs. (A
step further: What other fetal structure helps
blood bypass the fetal lungs?)
13–9: As cross-sectional area increases, velocity of
blood ﬂow decreases. Blood velocity is slowest
in the capillaries. (A step further: Why is this
slow ﬂow important?)
13–10: Aldosterone increases the reabsorption of
sodium ions by the kidneys and ANP increases
the excretion of sodium ions. In both cases
water follows sodium to increase (aldosterone)
or decrease (ANP) blood volume and BP.
13–11: The skeletal muscles have the greatest
increase in blood ﬂow, followed by the skin
and heart. The GI tract and kidneys have the
greatest decrease.
13–12: The kidneys produce renin when BP de-
creases. Angiotensin II causes vasoconstriction
and increases the secretion of aldosterone.
13–13: Changes in BP are the sensory information
used to keep BP within normal limits. The
pressoreceptors are located in the carotid and
aortic sinuses.
CHAPTER 14
14–1: Lymph is returned to the subclavian veins.
Return of lymph to the blood is important to
maintain normal blood volume and BP.
14–2: Before becoming lymph, the water is tissue
ﬂuid.
14–3: Major paired groups of lymph nodes are the
cervical, axillary, and inguinal. (Let’s go a step
further: Why are these locations so impor-
tant?)
14–4: Plasma cells produce antibodies.
14–5: T cells (T lymphocytes) mature in the thymus.
14–6: There are many connections. Lysozyme is a
chemical, yet is found in some mucous mem-
branes; defensins are chemicals produced by
the epidermis. WBCs are part of each aspect:
barriers, cells, and chemicals. Langerhans cells
are part of the epidermis but are mobile. 
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

544
Answers to Illustration Questions
Basophils and mast cells are part of subcuta-
neous tissue and produce histamine and
leukotrienes that contribute to inﬂammation.
14–7: Memory B cells and T cells provide memory;
each cell remembers one speciﬁc foreign anti-
gen.
14–8: The attached antibodies change the shape of
the toxin, and it cannot ﬁt where it might pro-
duce harmful effects. (A step further: What
happens to a virus?)
14–9: After a second exposure, IgG production is
faster and in greater quantity. (A step further:
Explain how a vaccine could be part of this
illustration.)
CHAPTER 15
15–1: The conchae resemble curled shelves or scrolls;
they increase the surface area of the nasal
mucosa. (Let’s go a step further: What are the
functions of the nasal mucosa?)
15–2: The epiglottis covers the larynx during swal-
lowing, like a lid or trap door.
15–3: Exhaled air makes the vocal cords vibrate.
15–4: The right and left primary bronchi have C-
shaped cartilages to keep them open and are
lined with ciliated epithelium.
15–5: The cell of the alveolus and the cell of the cap-
illary are part of the respiratory membrane.
Alveolar type II cells secrete pulmonary surfac-
tant. 
Alveolar 
macrophages 
phagocytize
pathogens and dust.
15–6: During a normal exhalation, the diaphragm and
external intercostal muscles are relaxing (not
contracting as they do for inhalation). (A step
further: Which muscles are involved in a forced
exhalation?)
15–7: Tidal volume  inspiratory reserve  expira-
tory reserve  vital capacity. Residual volume
cannot be measured with a spirometer. (A
step further: Why is residual volume impor-
tant?)
15–8: In external respiration, oxygen moves from the
air in the alveoli to the blood in the pulmonary
capillaries. In internal respiration, CO2 moves
from the tissues (cells) to the blood in the sys-
temic capillaries.
15–9: The inspiratory center in the medulla directly
stimulates inhalation: The red arrows go
directly from the center to the respiratory mus-
cles. (A step further: What other part of the
brain contains respiratory centers?)
15–10: Increased rate and depth of breathing will cor-
rect both imbalances, by taking in more O2 or
exhaling more CO2.
CHAPTER 16
16–1: Digestion takes place in the oral cavity, stom-
ach, and small intestine.
16–2: The pulp cavity (with blood vessels and
nerves) and the dentin (similar to bone) are
living. Another way of knowing that parts of a
tooth are living is that a cavity that has eroded
through the enamel causes pain.
16–3: The salivary glands are exocrine glands
because they have ducts. Saliva is made from
blood plasma. (Let’s go a step further: What is
saliva made of ?)
Table Start at the protein box and follow the
Fig.
arrows backward to the stomach, pancreas,
16–A: and small intestine. (A step further: Be sure
you can do the same for carbohydrates and
fats.)
16–4: The external muscle layer contracts locally for
mechanical digestion and in waves for peri-
stalsis.
16–5: The pyloric sphincter prevents backup of food
from the duodenum to the stomach.
16–6: Blood ﬂows from the hepatic artery and portal
vein through the sinusoids to the central vein
of the lobule and to the hepatic vein. (A step
further: What is found in the blood from the
portal vein?)
16–7: The acini secrete the pancreatic enzymes and
bicarbonates.
16–8: The villi increase the surface area for the
absorption of end products of digestion, as do
the microvilli and plica circulares.
16–9: The ileocecal valve prevents backﬂow of fecal
material from the cecum to the ileum.
16–10: The internal anal sphincter is a continuation
of the circular muscle layer of the rectum.
CHAPTER 17
17–1: The cooling responses occur because the body
temperature is higher than that of the hypo-
thalamic thermostat; the fever has broken.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Answers to Illustration Questions
545
17–2: Most of us would probably survive a range of
88 to 105F (31 to 41C).
17–3: If you follow the arrows from all of the end
products of digestion, you will see that they
converge at pyruvic acid and acetyl CoA.
17–4: No. Only amino acids in the diet (or from
transamination) can be used to synthesize pro-
teins. Notice that no other arrows go to proteins.
17–5: The one on the right has more surface area in
proportion to weight. Or put another way: a
small interior with a large surface—which
would be true for an infant.
CHAPTER 18
18–1: You can see that the left renal artery is short (so
is the right one) and is a direct branch of the
abdominal aorta, where BP is relatively high
because it is close to the left ventricle.
18–2: Renal corpuscles and convoluted tubules are
found in the renal cortex. The renal cortex and
medulla have blood vessels (the renal pelvis is a
space).
18–3: The podocyte’s many “feet” contribute to the
ﬁlter for blood. The lining of the proximal con-
voluted tubule has microvilli, which increase
the surface area for reabsorption. (Let’s go a
step further: What is meant by a threshold level
for reabsorption?)
18–4: Tubular secretion takes place from the blood in
the peritubular capillaries to the ﬁltrate in the
renal tubule. Hydrogen ions, creatinine, and
ammonia are secreted, as are the metabolic
products of medications.
18–5: Aldosterone affects both: It increases the reab-
sorption of sodium ions and the excretion of
potassium ions.
18–6: Carbon dioxide is used to make carbonic acid,
which then yields a hydrogen ion to be excreted
and a bicarbonate ion to be retained.
18–7: The internal urethral sphincter is involuntary;
the external urethral sphincter is voluntary. (A
step further: What kind of muscle tissue is the
detrusor muscle, and is it voluntary or involun-
tary?)
CHAPTER 19
19–1: Cerebrospinal ﬂuid and aqueous humor are the
tissue ﬂuid of the CNS and eye, respectively.
19–2: On a hot day urine volume might decrease and
sweat volume might increase. Loss of water
vapor in exhaled air might also increase.
19–3: Tissue ﬂuid is most like blood plasma, and you
knew this because you knew that tissue ﬂuid is
made directly from plasma by ﬁltration, a
process that would not greatly affect elec-
trolytes.
19–4: A kidney tubule cell obtains a hydrogen ion
from the reaction of carbon dioxide and water
to form carbonic acid, which ionizes.
CHAPTER 20
20–1: The 23 chromosomes are found in the head of
the sperm.
20–2: The secondary oocyte completes meiosis when
(if) the ovum is fertilized.
20–3: The ductus deferens carries sperm from the
epididymis to the urethra.
20–4: Seminiferous tubule (site of formation) to the
rete testis to the epididymis to the ductus
deferens. (Let’s go a step further: What is the
function of the interstitial cells and the susten-
tacular cells of the testis?)
20–5: The uterus is above the urinary bladder, and
during pregnancy will not displace the bladder
(though it will compress the bladder).
20–6: The myometrium is thicker in this view; it is
made of smooth muscle. (A step further: Which
uterine layer regularly changes in thickness?)
20–7: The labia cover the urethral and vaginal open-
ings to prevent drying of their mucous mem-
branes.
20–8: Prolactin stimulates milk production and oxy-
tocin stimulates release of milk. (A step further:
Which hormones contribute to the growth of
the mammary glands?)
20–9: LH triggers ovulation, then transforms the
ruptured follicle into the corpus luteum. (A step
further: Which hormones are secreted by the
corpus luteum?)
CHAPTER 21
21–1: The father, because the sperm cell will have
either an X or a Y chromosome. (The egg cell
will always have an X chromosome.)
21–2: The inner cell mass will become the embryo; it
is made of embryonic stem cells.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

546
Answers to Illustration Questions
21–3: The chorionic villi will become the fetal por-
tion of the placenta. (Let’s go a step further:
Which cells are ﬁrst produced by the yolk
sac?)
21–4: The amniotic ﬂuid is a cushion or shock
absorber for the fetus.
21–5: Oxygen and nutrients move from maternal to
fetal blood.
21–6: The head of a fetus is the largest part, so if the
head emerges ﬁrst from the birth canal,
the limbs are usually in position to emerge
easily.
21–7: With Bb and bb for the parents, the four pos-
sibilities are Bb, Bb, bb, and bb.
21–8: No. With Hh and HH for the parents,
the four possibilities are HH, HH, Hh, and
Hh.
21–9: Yes. With AB and AO for the parents, the four
possibilities are AA, AO, AB, and BO. A child
may have type B blood.
21–10: With XcY and XX for the parents, the two
possibilities for daughters are XcX and XcX;
any daughter will be a carrier. The two possi-
bilities for sons are XY and XY; any son will
have normal color vision.
CHAPTER 22
22–1: The eyes; tears are an unlikely (though we can-
not say impossible) portal of exit.
22–2: The blue and pink colors indicate the Gram
reaction, positive or negative. Spirilla are nei-
ther color because they do not stain with the
Gram method.
22–3: The two parts of a virus are the protein shell
(capsid) and the internal nucleic acid (in this
case RNA).
22–4: Rhizopus, Aspergillus, and ringworm have
mycelia, masses of thread-like hyphae.
22–5: Entamoeba and Giardia live in the digestive sys-
tem of a host.
22–6: The human digestive system is home to these
parasitic worms.
22–7: The mite and both ticks have 8 legs (in all but
the most immature forms) and are not insects,
which have 6 legs.
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

547
Glossary
PRONUNCIATION GUIDE
This pronunciation guide is intended to help you pronounce the words that appear in the Glossary. Although it
is not a true phonetic key, it does help to suggest the necessary sounds by spelling the sounds of the syllables of
frequently encountered words and then using these familiar combinations to “spell out” a pronunciation of the
new word being deﬁned in the Glossary.
VOWELS
Long vowel sounds: ay, ee, eye or igh, oh or ow, yoo
The sound spelled as …
Is pronounced as it appears in …
ay
a as in face
a
a as in atom
aw
au as in cause
o as in frost
ah
o as in proper
ee
e as in beat
e
e as in ten
i
i as in it
u
u as in up
CONSONANTS
Consonants are pronounced just as they look, with g pronounced as it is in gone.
ACCENTS WITHIN WORDS
One accent: boldface capital letters
Two accents: primary accent is in boldface capital letters; secondary accent is in capital letters
—A—
Abdomen (AB-doh-men) Portion of the body between the
diaphragm and the pelvis (Chapter 1).
Abdominal cavity (ab-DAHM-in-uhl KAV-i-tee) Part of
the ventral cavity, inferior to the diaphragm and above
the pelvic cavity (Chapter 1).
Abducens nerves (ab-DEW-senz) Cranial nerve pair VI.
Motor to an extrinsic muscle of the eye (Chapter 8).
Abduction (ab-DUK-shun) Movement of a body part away
from the midline of the body (Chapter 7).
ABO group (A-B-O GROOP) The red blood cell types
determined by the presence or absence of A and B anti-
gens on the red blood cell membrane; the four types are
A, B, AB, and O (Chapter 11).
Absorption (ab-ZORB-shun) The taking in of materials by
cells or tissues (Chapter 3).
Accessory nerves (ak-SES-suh-ree) Cranial nerve pair XI.
Motor to the larynx and shoulder muscles (Chapter 8).
Accessory organs (ak-SES-suh-ree) The digestive organs
that contribute to the process of digestion, although
digestion does not take place within them; consist of the
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

548
Glossary
teeth, tongue, salivary glands, liver, gallbladder, and pan-
creas (Chapter 16).
Acetabulum (ASS-uh-TAB-yoo-lum) The deep socket in
the hip bone that articulates with the head of the femur
(from the Latin “little vinegar cup”) (Chapter 6).
Acetylcholine (as-SEE-tull-KOH-leen) A chemical neuro-
transmitter released at neuromuscular junctions, as well
as by neurons in the central and peripheral nervous sys-
tems (Chapter 7).
Acid (ASS-id) A hydrogen ion (H) donor; when in solution
has a pH less than 7 (Chapter 2).
Acidosis (ASS-i-DOH-sis) The condition in which the pH
of the blood falls below 7.35 (Chapter 2).
Acne (AK-nee) Inﬂammation of the sebaceous glands and
hair follicles (Chapter 5).
Acoustic nerves (uh-KOO-stik) Cranial nerve pair VIII.
Sensory for hearing and equilibrium (Chapter 8).
Acquired immunity (uh-KWHY-erd im-YOO-ni-tee)
The immunity obtained upon exposure to a pathogen or
a vaccine or upon reception of antibodies for a particular
pathogen (Chapter 14).
Acromegaly (AK-roh-MEG-ah-lee) Hypersecretion of
growth hormone in an adult, resulting in exces-
sive growth of the bones of the face, hands, and feet
(Chapter 10).
Acrosome (AK-roh-sohm) The tip of the head of a sperm
cell, a modiﬁed lysosome; contains enzymes to digest the
membrane of the ovum (Chapter 20).
Actin (AK-tin) A contractile protein in the sarcomeres of
muscle ﬁbers; is pulled by myosin (Chapter 7).
Action potential (AK-shun poh-TEN-shul) The changes
in electrical charges on either side of a cell membrane in
response to a stimulus; depolarization followed by repo-
larization (Chapter 7).
Active immunity (AK-tiv im-YOO-ni-tee) The immunity
provided by the production of antibodies after exposure
to a foreign antigen; may be natural (recovery from dis-
ease) or artiﬁcial (reception of a vaccine) (Chapter 14).
Active site theory (AK-tiv SITE THEER-ree) The
process by which an enzyme catalyzes a speciﬁc reaction;
depends on the shapes of the enzyme and the substrate
molecules (Chapter 2).
Active transport (AK-tiv TRANS-port) The process in
which there is movement of molecules against a concen-
tration gradient; that is, from an area of lesser concentra-
tion to an area of greater concentration. Requires energy
(Chapter 3).
Acute (ah-KEWT) 1. Characterized by rapid onset. 2.
Sharp or severe, with respect to symptoms; not chronic.
(Chapter 22).
Adaptation (A-dap-TAY-shun) The characteristic of sensa-
tions in which awareness of the sensation diminishes
despite a continuing stimulus (Chapter 9).
Addison’s disease (ADD-i-sonz) Hyposecretion of the hor-
mones of the adrenal cortex, characterized by low blood
pressure, dehydration, muscle weakness, and mental
lethargy (Chapter 10).
Adduction (ad-DUK-shun) The movement of a body part
toward the midline of the body (Chapter 7).
Adenohypophysis (uh-DEN-oh-high-POFF-e-sis) The
anterior pituitary gland (Chapter 10).
Adipocyte (ADD-i-poh-site) A cell of adipose tissue, spe-
cialized to store fat (Chapter 4).
Adipose tissue (ADD-i-pohz TISH-yoo) A connective tis-
sue composed primarily of adipocytes; function is fat
storage as a source of potential energy (Chapter 4).
Adrenal cortex (uh-DREE-nuhl KOR-teks) The outer
layer of the adrenal glands, which secretes cortisol and
aldosterone (Chapter 10).
Adrenal glands (uh-DREE-nuhl) The endocrine glands
located on the top of the kidneys; each consists of
an adrenal cortex, which secretes cortisol and aldos-
terone, and an adrenal medulla, which secretes epineph-
rine and norepinephrine (Syn.—suprarenal glands)
(Chapter 10).
Adrenal medulla (uh-DREE-nuhl muh-DEW-lah) The
inner layer of the adrenal glands; secretes epinephrine
and norepinephrine (Chapter 10).
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) (uh-DREE-no-
KOR-ti-koh-TROH-pik) A hormone produced by the
anterior pituitary gland that stimulates the adrenal cortex
to secrete cortisol (Chapter 10).
Aerobic (air-ROH-bik) Requiring oxygen (Chapter 3).
Afferent (AFF-er-rent) To carry toward a center or main
part (Chapter 8).
Afferent arteriole (AFF-er-ent ar-TIR-ee-ohl) The arteri-
ole that takes blood from the renal artery into a glomeru-
lus; within its wall are juxtaglomerular cells that secrete
renin (Chapter 18).
Afterbirth (AFF-ter-berth) The placenta delivered shortly
after delivery of the infant (Chapter 21).
After-image (AFF-ter-IM-ije) The characteristic of sensa-
tions in which a sensation remains in the consciousness
even after the stimulus has stopped (Chapter 9).
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) (MAK-yoo-
lar dee-jen-e-RAY-shun) Loss of central vision because
of the growth of abnormal blood vessels or bleeding in
the retina (Chapter 9).
Agglutination (uh-GLOO-ti-NAY-shun) Clumping of
blood cells or microorganisms; the result of an anti-
gen–antibody reaction (Chapter 11).
AIDS (AYDS) Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome;
caused by a virus (HIV) that infects helper T cells and
depresses immune responses (Chapter 14).
Albumin (al-BYOO-min) A protein synthesized by the
liver, which circulates in blood plasma; contributes to the
colloid osmotic pressure of the blood (Chapter 11).
Aldosterone (al-DAH-ster-ohn) A hormone (mineralocor-
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Glossary
549
ticoid) secreted by the adrenal cortex that increases the
reabsorption of sodium and the excretion of potassium by
the kidneys (Chapter 10).
Alimentary tube (AL-i-MEN-tah-ree TOOB) The series
of digestive organs that extends from the mouth to the
anus; consists of the oral cavity, pharynx, esophagus,
stomach, small intestine, and large intestine (Chapter 16).
Allele (uh-LEEL) One of two or more different genes for a
particular characteristic (Chapter 21).
Allergen (AL-er-jen) A substance capable of stimulating an
allergic response (Chapter 14).
Allergy (AL-er-jee) A hypersensitivity to a foreign antigen
that usually does not stimulate an immune response in
people; the immune response serves no useful purpose
(Chapter 14).
Alopecia (AL-oh-PEE-she-ah) Loss of hair, especially that
of the scalp (Chapter 5).
Alpha cells (AL-fah SELLS) The cells of the islets of
Langerhans of the pancreas that secrete the hormone
glucagon (Chapter 10).
Alveolar type I cell (al-VEE-oh-lar TIGHP WON SELL)
The simple squamous epithelial cell that forms the walls
of the alveoli of the lungs (Chapter 15).
Alveolar type II cell (al-VEE-oh-lar TIGHP TOO SELL)
The septal cell in the lungs that produces pulmonary sur-
factant (Chapter 15).
Alveolar ventilation (al-VEE-oh-lar VEN-ti-LAY-shun)
The amount of inhaled air that reaches the alveoli and
participates in gas exchange; about 350–400 mL of a 500-
mL tidal volume (Chapter 15).
Alveoli (al-VEE-oh-lye) The air sacs of the lungs, made of
simple squamous epithelium, in which gas exchange takes
place (Chapter 15).
Alzheimer’s disease (ALZ-high-mers) A progressive brain
disease, of unknown cause, resulting in loss of memory,
intellectual ability, speech, and motor control (Chap-
ter 8).
Amblyopia (AM-blee-OH-pee-ah) Impaired vision without
apparent damage to an eye; often the result of lazy eye
because the brain ignores the image from the lazy eye
and the eye stops focusing (Chapter 9).
Amenorrhea (ay-MEN-uh-REE-ah) Absence of menstrua-
tion (Chapter 20).
Amine/amino group (ah-MEEN/ah-MEE-noh) The NH2
portion of a molecule such as an amino acid (Chapter 12).
Amino acid (ah-MEE-noh ASS-id) An organic compound
that contains an amino, or amine, group (NH2) and a
carboxyl group (COOH). Twenty different amino acids
are the subunit molecules of which human proteins are
made (Chapter 2).
Amniocentesis (AM-nee-oh-sen-TEE-sis) A diagnostic
procedure in which amniotic ﬂuid is obtained for culture
of fetal cells; used to detect genetic diseases or other
abnormalities in the fetus (Chapter 21).
Amnion (AM-nee-on) An embryonic membrane that holds
the fetus suspended in amniotic ﬂuid; fuses with the
chorion by the end of the third month of gestation
(Chapter 21).
Amniotic ﬂuid (AM-nee-AH-tik FLOO-id) The ﬂuid con-
tained within the amnion; cushions the fetus and absorbs
shock (Chapter 21).
Amphiarthrosis (AM-fee-ar-THROH-sis) A slightly mov-
able joint, such as a symphysis (Chapter 6).
Amylase (AM-i-lays) A digestive enzyme that breaks down
starch to maltose; secreted by the salivary glands and the
pancreas (Chapter 16).
Anabolic steroid (AN-ah-BAH-lik STEER-oyd) A chemi-
cal similar in structure and action to the male hormone
testosterone; increases protein synthesis, especially in
muscles (Chapter 7).
Anabolism (an-AB-uh-lizm) Synthesis reactions, in which
smaller molecules are bonded together to form larger
molecules; require energy (ATP) and are catalyzed by
enzymes (Chapter 17).
Anaerobic (AN-air-ROH-bik) 1. In the absence of oxygen.
2. Not requiring oxygen (Chapter 7).
Anaphase (AN-ah-fayz) The third stage of mitosis, in which
the separate sets of chromosomes move toward opposite
poles of the cell (Chapter 3).
Anaphylactic shock (AN-uh-ﬁ-LAK-tik SHAHK) A type
of circulatory shock that is the result of a massive allergic
reaction (from the Greek “unguarded”) (Chapter 13).
Anastomosis (a-NAS-ti-MOH-sis) A connection or join-
ing, especially of blood vessels (Chapter 13).
Anatomic position (AN-uh-TOM-ik pa-ZI-shun) The
position of the body used in anatomic descriptions: The
body is erect and facing forward, the arms are at the sides
with the palms facing forward (Chapter 1).
Anatomy (uh-NAT-uh-mee) The study of the structure
of the body and the relationships among the parts
(Chapter 1).
Anemia (uh-NEE-mee-yah) A deﬁciency of red blood cells
or hemoglobin (Chapter 11).
Anencephaly (an-en-SEFF-ah-lee) A congenital nervous
system defect in which the cerebrum has not developed;
is always fatal (Chapter 17).
Aneurysm (AN-yur-izm) A localized sac or bubble that
forms in a weak spot in the wall of a blood vessel, usually
an artery (Chapter 13).
Angiotensin II (AN-jee-oh-TEN-sin 2) The ﬁnal product
of the renin-angiotensin mechanism; stimulates vasocon-
striction and increased secretion of aldosterone, both of
which help raise blood pressure (Chapter 13).
Anion (AN-eye-on) An ion with a negative charge (Chapter
2).
Antagonistic muscles (an-TAG-on-ISS-tik MUSS-uhls)
Muscles that have opposite functions with respect to the
movement of a joint (Chapter 7).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

550
Glossary
Anterior (an-TEER-ee-your) Toward the front (Syn.—
ventral) (Chapter 1).
Antibiotic (AN-ti-bye-AH-tik) A chemical medication that
stops or inhibits the growth of bacteria or fungi (Chapter
22).
Antibody (AN-ti-BAH-dee) A protein molecule produced
by plasma cells that is speciﬁc for and will bond to a par-
ticular foreign antigen (Syn.—gamma globulin, immune
globulin) (Chapter 14).
Antibody-mediated immunity (AN-ti-BAH-dee-MEE-
dee-ay-ted im-YOO-ni-tee) The mechanism of adaptive
immunity that involves antibody production and the
destruction of foreign antigens by the activities of B cells,
T cells, and macrophages (Syn.—humoral immunity)
(Chapter 14).
Antibody titer (AN-ti-BAH-dee TIGH-ter) A diagnostic
test that determines the level or amount of a particular
antibody in blood or serum (Chapter 14).
Anticodon (AN-ti-KOH-don) A triplet of bases on tRNA
that matches a codon on mRNA (Chapter 3).
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) (AN-ti-DYE-yoo-RET-ik)
A hormone produced by the hypothalamus and stored in
the posterior pituitary gland; increases the reabsorption of
water by the kidney tubules, and in large amounts causes
vasoconstriction and is called vasopressin (Chapter 8).
Antigen (AN-ti-jen) A chemical marker that identiﬁes cells
of a particular species or individual. May be “self” or
“foreign.” Foreign antigens stimulate immune responses
(Chapter 2).
Antigenic (AN-ti-JEN-ik) Capable of stimulating antibody
production (Chapter 14).
Anti-inﬂammatory effect (AN-ti-in-FLAM-uh-tor-ee) To
lessen the process of inﬂammation; cortisol is the hor-
mone that has this effect (Chapter 10).
Antipyretic (AN-tigh-pye-RET-ik) A medication, such as
aspirin, that lowers a fever (Chapter 17).
Antiseptic (AN-ti-SEP-tik) A chemical that destroys bacte-
ria or inhibits their growth on a living being (Chapter 22).
Antithrombin (AN-ti-THROM-bin) A protein synthesized
by the liver that inactivates excess thrombin to prevent
abnormal clotting (Chapter 11).
Antitoxin (AN-tee-TAHK-sin) Antibodies speciﬁc for a
bacterial toxin; used in treatment of diseases such as bot-
ulism or tetanus (Chapter 7).
Anus (AY-nus) The terminal opening of the alimentary tube
for the elimination of feces; surrounded by the internal
and external anal sphincters (Chapter 16).
Aorta (ay-OR-tah) The largest artery of the body; emerges
from the left ventricle; has four parts: ascending aorta,
aortic arch, thoracic aorta, and abdominal aorta (Chap-
ter 13).
Aortic body (ay-OR-tik BAH-dee) The site of chemore-
ceptors in the wall of the aortic arch; detect changes in
blood pH and the blood levels of oxygen and carbon
dioxide (Chapter 9).
Aortic semilunar valve (ay-OR-tik SEM-ee-LOO-nar
VALV) The valve at the junction of the left ventricle and
the aorta; prevents backﬂow of blood from the aorta to
the ventricle when the ventricle relaxes (Chapter 12).
Aortic sinus (ay-OR-tik SIGH-nus) The site of presso-
receptors in the wall of the aortic arch; detect changes in
blood pressure (Chapter 9).
Apgar score (APP-gar SKOR) A system of evaluating an
infant’s condition 1 minute after birth; includes heart
rate, respiration, muscle tone, response to stimuli, and
color (Chapter 21).
Aphasia (ah-FAY-zee-ah) Impairment or absence of the abil-
ity to communicate in speech, reading, or writing. May
involve word deafness or word blindness (Chapter 8).
Aplastic anemia (ay-PLAS-tik uh-NEE-mee-yah) Failure
of the red bone marrow resulting in decreased numbers
of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets; may be
a side effect of some medications (Chapter 11).
Apneustic center (ap-NEW-stik SEN-ter) The respiratory
center in the pons that prolongs inhalation (Chapter 15).
Apocrine gland (AP-oh-krin) The type of sweat gland
(exocrine) found primarily in the axillae and genital area;
actually a modiﬁed scent gland (Chapter 5).
Aponeurosis (A-poh-new-ROH-sis) A ﬂat tendon (Chap-
ter 7).
Apparent (uh-PAR-ent) 1. Readily seen or visible. 2. An
infection in which the patient exhibits the symptoms of
the disease (Chapter 22).
Appendicitis (uh-PEN-di-SIGH-tis) Inﬂammation of the
appendix (Chapter 16).
Appendicular skeleton (AP-en-DIK-yoo-lar) The portion
of the skeleton that consists of the shoulder and pelvic
girdles and the bones of the arms and legs (Chapter 6).
Appendix (uh-PEN-diks) A small tubular organ that
extends from the cecum; has no known function for peo-
ple and is considered a vestigial organ (Chapter 16).
Aqueous (AY-kwee-us) Pertaining to water; used especially
to refer to solutions (Chapter 2).
Aqueous humor (AY-kwee-us HYOO-mer) The tissue
ﬂuid of the eye within the anterior cavity of the eyeball;
nourishes the lens and cornea (Chapter 9).
Arachnoid membrane (uh-RAK-noid) The middle layer of
the meninges, made of web-like connective tissue (from
the Greek “spider-like”) (Chapter 8).
Arachnoid villi (uh-RAK-noid VILL-eye) Projections of
the cranial arachnoid membrane into the cranial venous
sinuses, through which cerebrospinal ﬂuid is reabsorbed
back into the blood (Chapter 8).
Areolar connective tissue (uh-REE-oh-lar) A tissue that
consists of tissue ﬂuid, ﬁbroblasts, collagen and elastin
ﬁbers, and wandering WBCs; found in all mucous mem-
branes and in subcutaneous tissue (Syn.—loose connec-
tive tissue) (Chapter 4).
Arrhythmia (uh-RITH-me-yah) An abnormal or irregular
rhythm of the heart (Chapter 12).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Glossary
551
Arteriole (ar-TEER-ee-ohl) A small artery (Chapter 5).
Arteriosclerosis (ar-TIR-ee-oh-skle-ROH-sis) Deteriora-
tion of arteries with loss of elasticity that is often a con-
sequence of aging or hypertension; a contributing factor
to aneurysm or stroke (Chapter 13).
Artery (AR-tuh-ree) A blood vessel that takes blood from
the heart toward capillaries (Chapter 13).
Arthropod (AR-throw-pod) Invertebrate animals charac-
terized by an exoskeleton and jointed appendages;
includes insects, spiders, ticks, mites, and crustaceans
(Chapter 22).
Articular cartilage (ar-TIK-yoo-lar KAR-ti-lidj) The car-
tilage on the joint surfaces of a bone; provides a smooth
surface (Chapter 6).
Articulation (ar-TIK-yoo-LAY-shun) A joint (Chapter 6).
Ascites (a-SIGH-teez) An abnormal accumulation of ﬂuid
in the peritoneal space (Chapter 15).
Asthma (AZ-mah) A respiratory disorder characterized by
constriction of the bronchioles, excessive mucus produc-
tion, and dyspnea; often caused by allergies (Chapter 15).
Astigmatism (uh-STIG-mah-TIZM) An error of refrac-
tion caused by an irregular curvature of the lens or
cornea (Chapter 9).
Astrocyte (ASS-troh-site) A type of neuroglia that forms
the blood–brain barrier to prevent potentially harmful
substances from affecting brain neurons (Chapter 8).
Asymptomatic (AY-simp-toh-MAT-ik) Without symptoms
(Chapter 22).
Atelectasis (AT-e-LEK-tah-sis) Collapsed or airless lung,
without gas exchange (Chapter 15).
Atherosclerosis (ATH-er-oh-skle-ROH-sis) The abnor-
mal accumulation of lipids and other materials in the
walls of arteries; narrows the lumen of the vessel and may
stimulate abnormal clot formation (Chapter 2).
Atlas (AT-las) An irregular bone, the ﬁrst cervical vertebra;
supports the skull (Chapter 6).
Atmospheric pressure (AT-mus-FEER-ik) The pressure
exerted by the atmosphere on objects on the earth’s sur-
face; 760 mmHg at sea level (Chapter 15).
Atom (A-tom) The unit of matter that is the smallest part of
an element (Chapter 2).
Atomic number (a-TOM-ik) Number of protons in the
nucleus of an atom (Chapter 2).
Atomic weight (a-TOM-ik WAYT) The weight of an atom
determined by adding the number of protons and neu-
trons (Chapter 2).
ATP (Adenosine triphosphate) A specialized nucleotide
that traps and releases biologically useful energy
(Chapter 2).
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) (AY-tree-uhl NAY-tree-
yu-RET-ik) A peptide hormone secreted by the atria of
the heart when blood pressure or blood volume in-
creases; increases loss of sodium ions and water by the
kidneys (Syn.—atrial natriuretic hormone) (Chapter 12).
Atrioventricular (AV) node (AY-tree-oh-ven-TRIK-
yoo-lar NOHD) The second part of the cardiac conduc-
tion pathway, located in the lower interatrial septum
(Chapter 12).
Atrium (AY-tree-um) (Pl.—atria) One of the two upper
chambers of the heart that receive venous blood from the
lungs or the body (Chapter 12).
Atrophy (AT-ruh-fee) Decrease in size of a body part due to
lack of use; a wasting (Chapter 7).
Attenuated (uh-TEN-yoo-AY-ted) Weakened, or less
harmful; used to describe the microorganisms contained
in vaccines, which have been treated to reduce their path-
ogenicity (Chapter 14).
Auditory bones (AW-di-tor-ee) The malleus, incus, and
stapes in the middle ear (Chapter 6).
Auerbach’s plexus (OW-er-baks PLEK-sus) The auto-
nomic nerve plexus in the external muscle layer of the
organs of the alimentary tube; regulates the contractions
of the external muscle layer (Syn.—myenteric plexus)
(Chapter 16).
Auricle (AW-ri-kuhl) The portion of the outer ear external
to the skull; made of cartilage covered with skin (Syn.—
pinna) (Chapter 9).
Autoclave (AW-toh-clayve) A machine that uses steam
under pressure for sterilization (Chapter 22).
Autoimmune disease (AW-toh-im-YOON di-ZEEZ) A
condition in which the immune system produces anti-
bodies to the person’s own tissue (Chapter 6).
Autonomic nervous system (AW-toh-NOM-ik NER-
vuhs) The portion of the peripheral nervous system that
consists of visceral motor neurons to smooth muscle, car-
diac muscle, and glands (Chapter 8).
Autosomes (AW-toh-sohms) Chromosomes other than the
sex chromosomes; for people there are 22 pairs of auto-
somes in each somatic cell (Chapter 21).
Axial skeleton (AK-see-uhl) The portion of the skeleton
that consists of the skull, vertebral column, and rib cage
(Chapter 6).
Axis (AK-sis) An irregular bone, the second cervical verte-
bra; forms a pivot joint with the atlas (Chapter 6).
Axon (AK-sahn) The cellular process of a neuron that car-
ries impulses away from the cell body (Chapter 4).
Axon terminal (AK-sahn TER-mi-nuhl) The end of the
axon of a motor neuron, part of the neuromuscular junc-
tion (Chapter 7).
—B—
B cell (B SELL) A subgroup of lymphocytes, including
memory B cells and plasma cells, both of which are
involved in adaptive immune responses (Chapter 11).
Bacillus (buh-SILL-us) (Pl.—bacilli) A rod-shaped bac-
terium (Chapter 22).
Bacteremia (bak-tah-REE-mee-ah) The presence of
bacteria in the blood, which is normally sterile (Chap-
ter 22).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

552
Glossary
Bacteria (bak-TEER-ee-yuh) (Sing.— bacterium) The
simple unicellular microorganisms of the class Schizo-
mycetes; may be free living, saprophytic, or parasitic
(Chapter 22).
Bactericide (bak-TEER-i-sigh’d) A chemical that kills bac-
teria (Chapter 22).
Bacteriostatic (bak-TEE-ree-oh-STAT-ik) Capable of
inhibiting the reproduction of bacteria (Chapter 22).
Bacteruria (BAK-tur-YOO-ree-ah) The presence of large
numbers of bacteria in urine (Chapter 18).
Ball-and-socket joint (BAWL and SOK-et) A diarthrosis
that permits movement in all planes (Chapter 6).
Band cell (BAND SELL) An immature neutrophil with a
nucleus that has not yet segmented (Chapter 11).
Bartholin’s glands (BAR-toh-linz) The small glands in the
wall of the vagina; secrete mucus into the vagina and
vestibule (Syn.—vestibular glands) (Chapter 20).
Basal ganglia (BAY-zuhl GANG-lee-ah) Masses of gray
matter within the white matter of the cerebral hemi-
spheres; concerned with subconscious aspects of skeletal
muscle activity, such as accessory movements (Chapter 8).
Basal metabolic rate (BAY-zuhl met-ah-BAHL-ik RAYT)
The energy required to maintain the functioning of the
body in a resting condition (Chapter 17).
Base (BAYS) A hydrogen ion (H) acceptor, or hydroxyl ion
(OH) donor; when in solution, has a pH greater than 7
(Chapter 2).
Basilar layer (bah-SILL-ar LAY-er) The permanent vascu-
lar layer of the endometrium that is not lost in menstru-
ation; regenerates the functional layer during each
menstrual cycle (Chapter 20).
Basophil (BAY-so-ﬁll) A type of white blood cell (granular);
contains heparin and histamine (Chapter 11).
Benign (bee-NINE) Not malignant (Chapter 3).
Beta cells (BAY-tah SELLS) The cells of the islets of
Langerhans of the pancreas that secrete the hormone
insulin (Chapter 10).
Beta-oxidation (BAY-tah-AHK-si-DAY-shun) The process
by which the long carbon chain of a fatty acid molecule
is broken down into two-carbon acetyl groups to be used
in cell respiration; takes place in the liver (Chapter 16).
Bile (BYL) The secretion of the liver that is stored in the
gallbladder and passes to the duodenum; contains bile
salts to emulsify fats; is the ﬂuid in which bilirubin and
excess cholesterol are excreted (Chapter 16).
Bile salts (BYL SAWLTS) The active component of bile
that emulsiﬁes fats in the digestive process (Chapter 16).
Bilirubin (BILL-ee-roo-bin) The bile pigment produced
from the heme portion of the hemoglobin of old red
blood cells; excreted by the liver in bile (Chapter 11).
Binary ﬁssion (BYE-na-ree FISH-en) The asexual repro-
ductive process in which one cell divides into two identi-
cal new cells (Chapter 22).
Binocular vision (bye-NOK-yoo-lur VI-zhun) Normal
vision involving the use of both eyes; the ability of the
brain to create one image from the slightly different
images received from each eye (Chapter 9).
Biopsy (BYE-op-see) Removal of a small piece of living tis-
sue for microscopic examination; a diagnostic procedure
(Chapter 5).
Birth canal (BERTH ka-NAL) The vagina during delivery
of an infant (Chapter 21).
Blastocyst (BLAS-toh-sist) The early stage of embryonic
development that follows the morula; consists of the
outer trophoblast and the internal inner cell mass and
blastocele (cavity) (Chapter 21).
Blister (BLISS-ter) A collection of ﬂuid below or within the
epidermis (Chapter 5).
Blood (BLUHD) The ﬂuid that circulates in the heart and
blood vessels; consists of blood cells and plasma (Chap-
ter 4).
Blood–brain barrier (BLUHD BRAYN) The barrier be-
tween the circulating blood and brain tissue, formed by
astrocytes and brain capillaries; prevents harmful sub-
stances in the blood from damaging brain neurons
(Chapter 8).
Blood pressure (BLUHD PRE-shure) The force exerted
by the blood against the walls of the blood vessels; meas-
ured in mmHg (Chapter 13).
Body (BAH-dee) 1. The physical human being as a whole.
2. The supporting part of a vertebra. 3. The central por-
tion of the sternum. 4. Any of a number of small struc-
tures, such as the cell body of a neuron or the sensory
carotid body (Chapter 1).
Body-mass index (BAH-dee mass IN-deks) A measure of
leanness using height and weight (Chapter 17).
Bond (BAHND) An attraction or force that holds atoms
together in the formation of molecules (Chapter 2).
Bone (BOWNE) 1. A connective tissue made of osteocytes
in a calciﬁed matrix. 2. An organ that is an individual part
of the skeleton (Chapter 4).
Botulism (BOTT-yoo-lizm) A disease, characterized by
muscle paralysis, caused by the bacterium Clostridium bot-
ulinum (Chapter 7).
Bowman’s capsule (BOW-manz KAP-suhl) The expanded
end of the renal tubule that encloses a glomerulus;
receives ﬁltrate from the glomerulus (Chapter 18).
Bradycardia (BRAY-dee-KAR-dee-yah) An abnormally slow
heart rate; less than 60 beats per minute (Chapter 12).
Brain (BRAYN) The part of the central nervous system
within the skull; regulates the activity of the rest of the
nervous system (Chapter 8).
Brain stem (BRAYN STEM) The portion of the brain that
consists of the medulla, pons, and midbrain (Chapter 8).
Broad spectrum (BRAWD SPEK-trum) An antibiotic
that is effective against a wide variety of bacteria (Chap-
ter 22).
Bronchial tree (BRONG-kee-uhl TREE) The entire sys-
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Glossary
553
tem of air passageways formed by the branching of the
bronchial tubes within the lungs; the smallest bronchi-
oles terminate in clusters of alveoli (Chapter 15).
Bronchioles (BRONG-kee-ohls) The smallest of the air
passageways within the lungs (Chapter 15).
Brush border (BRUSH BORE-der) The collective name
for the microvilli of the absorptive cells of the mucosa of
the small intestine (Chapter 16).
Buffer system (BUFF-er SIS-tem) A pair of chemicals that
prevents signiﬁcant changes in the pH of a body ﬂuid
(Chapter 2).
Bulbourethral glands (BUHL-boh-yoo-REE-thruhl) The
glands on either side of the prostate gland that open into
the urethra; secrete an alkaline ﬂuid that becomes part of
semen (Syn.—Cowper’s glands) (Chapter 20).
Bundle of His (BUN-duhl of HISS) The third part of
the cardiac conduction pathway, located in the upper
interventricular septum (Syn.—atrioventricular bundle)
(Chapter 12).
Burn (BERN) Damage caused by heat, ﬂames, chemicals, or
electricity, especially to the skin; classiﬁed as ﬁrst degree
(minor), second degree (blisters), or third degree (exten-
sive damage) (Chapter 5).
Bursa (BURR-sah) A sac of synovial ﬂuid that decreases
friction between a tendon and a bone (Chapter 6).
Bursitis (burr-SIGH-tiss) Inﬂammation of a bursa (Chapter
6).
—C—
Calcaneus (kal-KAY-nee-us) A short bone, the largest of
the tarsals; the heel bone (Chapter 6).
Calcitonin (KAL-si-TOH-nin) A hormone secreted by the
thyroid gland that decreases the reabsorption of calcium
from bones (Chapter 10).
Calcitriol (kal-SI-tree-awl) The active form of vitamin D
(Chapter 18).
Callus (KAL-us) Thickening of an area of epidermis
(Chapter 5).
Calorie (KAL-oh-ree) 1. Lowercase “calorie”: the amount
of heat energy needed to change the temperature of
1 gram of water 1 degree centigrade. 2. Uppercase
“Calorie”: a kilocalorie, used to indicate the energy con-
tent of foods (Chapter 17).
Calyx (KAY-liks) (Pl.—calyces) A funnel-shaped extension
of the renal pelvis that encloses the papilla of a renal
pyramid and collects urine (Chapter 18).
Canal of Schlemm (ka-NAL of SHLEM) Small veins at the
junction of the cornea and iris of the eye; the site of reab-
sorption of aqueous humor into the blood (Syn.—scleral
venous sinus) (Chapter 9).
Canaliculi (KAN-a-LIK-yoo-lye) Small channels, such as
those in bone matrix that permit contact between adja-
cent osteocytes (Chapter 6).
Cancer (KAN-ser) A malignant tumor or growth of cells
(Chapter 3).
Capacitation (KAH-pas-i-TAY-shun) The maturation of
sperm within the female reproductive tract; sperm
become capable of fertilization (Chapter 21).
Capillary (KAP-i-lar-ee) A blood vessel that takes blood
from an arteriole to a venule; walls are one cell in thick-
ness to permit exchanges of materials (Chapter 4).
Capsule (KAP-suhl) A gelatinous layer located outside the
cell wall of some bacteria; provides resistance to phago-
cytosis (Chapter 22).
Carbohydrate (KAR-boh-HIGH-drayt) An organic com-
pound that contains carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen;
includes sugars, starches, and cellulose (Chapter 2).
Carbonic anhydrase (kar-BAHN-ik an-HIGH-drays) The
enzyme present in red blood cells and other cells that cat-
alyzes the reaction of carbon dioxide and water to form
carbonic acid (Chapter 15).
Carboxyl group (kar-BAHK-sul) The COOH portion of a
molecule such as an amino acid (Chapter 19).
Carcinogen (kar-SIN-oh-jen) A substance that increases
the risk of developing cancer (Chapter 3).
Carcinoma (KAR-sin-OH-mah) A malignant tumor of
epithelial tissue (Chapter 5).
Cardiac cycle (KAR-dee-yak SIGH-kuhl) The sequence of
events in one heartbeat, in which simultaneous contrac-
tion of the atria is followed by simultaneous contraction
of the ventricles (Chapter 12).
Cardiac muscle (KAR-dee-yak MUSS-uhl) The muscle
tissue that forms the walls of the chambers of the heart
(Chapter 4).
Cardiac output (KAR-dee-yak OUT-put) The amount of
blood pumped by a ventricle in 1 minute; the resting
average is 5 to 6 liters/min (Chapter 12).
Cardiac reserve (KAR-dee-yak ree-ZERV) The difference
between resting cardiac output and maximum exercise
cardiac output (Chapter 12).
Carotid body (kah-RAH-tid BAH-dee) The site of
chemoreceptors in the wall of the internal carotid artery;
detect changes in blood pH and the levels of oxygen and
carbon dioxide in the blood (Chapter 9).
Carotid sinus (kah-RAH-tid SIGH-nus) The site of pres-
soreceptors in the wall of the internal carotid artery;
detect changes in blood pressure (Chapter 9).
Carpals (KAR-puhls) The eight short bones of each wrist
(Chapter 6).
Carrier (KAR-ree-yur) 1. A person who recovers from a
disease but continues to be a source of the pathogen and
may infect others (Chapter 22). 2. In genetics, a woman
with one gene for a sex-linked trait (Chapter 21).
Carrier enzyme (KAR-ree-yur EN-zime) An enzyme that
is part of a cell membrane and carries out the process of
facilitated diffusion of a speciﬁc substance (Syn.—trans-
porter) (Chapter 3).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

554
Glossary
Cartilage (KAR-ti-lidj) A connective tissue made of chon-
drocytes in a protein matrix; is ﬁrm yet ﬂexible (Chap-
ter 4).
Catabolism (kuh-TAB-uh-lizm) Breakdown or degradation
reactions, in which larger molecules are broken down to
smaller molecules; often release energy (ATP) and are
catalyzed by enzymes (Chapter 17).
Catalyst (KAT-ah-list) A chemical that affects the speed of
a chemical reaction, while remaining itself unchanged;
enzymes are catalysts (Chapter 2).
Cataract (KAT-uh-rackt) An eye disorder in which the lens
becomes opaque and impairs vision (from the Latin
“waterfall”) (Chapter 9).
Catecholamines (KAT-e-KOHL-ah-meens) Epinephrine
and norepinephrine, the hormones secreted by the adre-
nal medulla (Chapter 10).
Cation (KAT-eye-on) An ion with a positive charge
(Chapter 2).
Cauda equina (KAW-dah ee-KWHY-nah) The lumbar
and sacral spinal nerves that hang below the end of the
spinal cord, before they exit from the vertebral canal
(Chapter 8).
Cavity (KAV-i-tee) A hollow area inside the body; the
principal cavities are the dorsal and ventral cavities
(Chapter 1).
Cecum (SEE-kum) The ﬁrst part of the large intestine, the
dead-end portion adjacent to the ileum (from the Latin
“blindness”) (Chapter 16).
Cell (SELL) The smallest living unit of structure and func-
tion of the body (Chapter 1).
Cell body (SELL BAH-dee) The part of a neuron that con-
tains the nucleus (Chapter 4).
Cell-mediated immunity (SELL-MEE-dee-ay-ted im-
YOO-ni-tee) The mechanism of adaptive immunity that
does not involve antibody production, but rather the
destruction of foreign antigens by the activities of T cells
and macrophages (Chapter 14).
Cell (plasma) membrane (SELL MEM-brayn) The
membrane made of phospholipids, protein, and choles-
terol that forms the outer boundary of a cell and regu-
lates passage of materials into and out of the cell
(Chapter 2).
Cell respiration (SELL RES-pi-RAY-shun) A cellular
process in which the energy of nutrients is released in the
form of ATP and heat. Oxygen is required, and carbon
dioxide and water are produced (Chapter 2).
Cellulose (SELL-yoo-lowse) A polysaccharide produced 
by plants for their cell walls; it is not digestible by
humans but is important as roughage or ﬁber in the diet
(Chapter 2).
Central (SEN-truhl) The main part; or in the middle of
(Chapter 1).
Central canal (SEN-truhl ka-NAL) The hollow center
of the spinal cord that contains cerebrospinal ﬂuid
(Chapter 8).
Central nervous system (SEN-tral NER-vuhs) The part
of the nervous system that consists of the brain and spinal
cord (Chapter 8).
Centrioles (SEN-tree-ohls) The cell organelles that organ-
ize the spindle ﬁbers during cell division (Chapter 3).
Cerebellum (SER-e-BELL-uhm) The part of the brain
posterior to the medulla and pons; responsible for many
of the subconscious aspects of skeletal muscle function-
ing, such as coordination and muscle tone (Chapter 7).
Cerebral aqueduct (se-REE-bruhl A-kwi-dukt) A tunnel
through the midbrain that permits cerebrospinal ﬂuid to
ﬂow from the third to the fourth ventricle (Chapter 8).
Cerebral cortex (se-REE-bruhl KOR-teks) The gray mat-
ter on the surface of the cerebral hemispheres. Includes
motor areas, sensory areas, auditory areas, visual areas,
taste areas, olfactory areas, speech areas, and association
areas (Chapter 8).
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid (se-REE-broh-SPY-nuhl) The tissue
ﬂuid of the central nervous system; formed by choroid
plexuses in the ventricles of the brain, circulates in and
around the brain and spinal cord, and is reabsorbed into
cranial venous sinuses (Chapter 8).
Cerebrovascular accident (se-REE-broh-VAS-kyoo-lur)
A hemorrhagic or ischemic lesion in the brain, often the
result of aneurysm, arteriosclerosis, atherosclerosis, or
hypertension (Syn.—stroke) (Chapter 8).
Cerebrum (se-REE-bruhm) The largest part of the brain,
consisting of the right and left cerebral hemispheres; its
many functions include movement, sensation, learning,
and memory (Chapter 8).
Cerumen (suh-ROO-men) The waxy secretion of cerumi-
nous glands (Chapter 5).
Ceruminous gland (suh-ROO-mi-nus) An exocrine gland
in the dermis of the ear canal that secretes cerumen (ear
wax) (Chapter 5).
Cervical (SIR-vi-kuhl) Pertaining to the neck (Chapter 1).
Cervical vertebrae (SIR-vi-kuhl VER-te-bray) The seven
vertebrae in the neck (Chapter 6).
Cervix (SIR-viks) The most inferior part of the uterus that
projects into the vagina (Chapter 20).
Cesarean section (se-SAR-ee-an SEK-shun) Removal of
the fetus by way of an incision through the abdominal
wall and uterus (Chapter 21).
Chaperone (SHA-per-own) One of a large group of intra-
cellular proteins that is responsible for the proper folding
of new proteins and for the repair or disposal of damaged
proteins (Chapter 3).
Chemical clotting (KEM-i-kuhl KLAH-ting) A series of
chemical reactions, stimulated by a rough surface or a
break in a blood vessel, that result in the formation of a
ﬁbrin clot (Chapter 11).
Chemical digestion (KEM-i-kuhl dye-JES-chun) The
breakdown of food accomplished by digestive enzymes;
complex organic molecules are broken down to simpler
organic molecules (Chapter 16).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Glossary
555
Chemoreceptors (KEE-moh-re-SEP-ters) 1. A sensory
receptor that detects a chemical change. 2. Olfactory
receptors, taste receptors, and the carotid and aortic
chemoreceptors that detect changes in blood gases and
blood pH (Chapter 9).
Chemotherapy (KEE-moh-THER-uh-pee) The use of
chemicals (medications) to treat disease (Chapter 3).
Chief cells (CHEEF SELLS) The cells of the gastric pits of
the stomach that secrete pepsinogen, the inactive form of
the digestive enzyme pepsin (Chapter 16).
Chlamydia (kluh-MID-ee-ah) A group of simple bacteria;
Chlamydia trachomatis is a sexually transmitted pathogen
that may cause conjunctivitis or pneumonia in infants
born to infected women (Chapter 20).
Cholecystokinin (KOH-lee-SIS-toh-KYE-nin) A hor-
mone secreted by the duodenum when food enters; stim-
ulates contraction of the gallbladder and secretion of
enzyme pancreatic juice (Chapter 16).
Cholesterol (koh-LESS-ter-ohl) A steroid that is synthe-
sized by the liver and is part of cell membranes (Chap-
ter 2).
Cholinesterase (KOH-lin-ESS-ter-ays) The chemical
inactivator of acetylcholine (Chapter 7).
Chondrocyte (KON-droh-sight) A cartilage cell (Chapter
4).
Chordae tendineae (KOR-day ten-DIN-ee-ay) Strands of
connective tissue that connect the ﬂaps of an AV valve to
the papillary muscles (Chapter 12).
Chorion (KOR-ee-on) An embryonic membrane that is
formed from the trophoblast of the blastocyst and will
develop chorionic villi and become the fetal portion of
the placenta (Chapter 21).
Chorionic villi (KOR-ee-ON-ik VILL-eye) Projections of
the chorion that will develop the fetal blood vessels that
will become part of the placenta (Chapter 21).
Chorionic villus sampling (KOR-ee-ON-ik VILL-us) A
diagnostic procedure in which a biopsy of the chorionic
villi is performed; used to detect genetic diseases or other
abnormalities in the fetus (Chapter 21).
Choroid layer (KOR-oyd) The middle layer of the eyeball,
contains a dark pigment derived from melanin that
absorbs light and prevents glare within the eye (Chap-
ter 9).
Choroid plexus (KOR-oyd PLEK-sus) A capillary network
in a ventricle of the brain; forms cerebrospinal ﬂuid
(Chapter 8).
Chromatid (KROH-mah-tid) A potential chromosome
formed by the replication of the DNA of a chromosome
during interphase; two identical chromatids are formed
and are attached at the centromere; they separate during
cell division (Chapter 3).
Chromatin (KROH-mah-tin) The thread-like structure of
the genetic material when a cell is not dividing; is not vis-
ible as individual chromosomes (Chapter 3).
Chromosomes (KROH-muh-sohms) Structures made of
DNA and protein within the nucleus of a cell. A human
cell has 46 chromosomes (Chapter 3).
Chronic (KRAH-nik) Characterized by long duration or
slow progression (Chapter 22).
Chylomicron (KYE-loh-MYE-kron) A small fat globule
formed by the small intestine from absorbed fatty acids
and glycerol (Chapter 16).
Cilia (SILLY-ah) Thread-like structures that project
through a cell membrane and sweep materials across the
cell surface (Chapter 3).
Ciliary body (SILLY-air-ee BAH-dee) A circular muscle
that surrounds the edge of the lens of the eye and
changes the shape of the lens (Chapter 9).
Ciliated epithelium (SILLY-ay-ted) The tissue that has
cilia on the free surface of the cells (Chapter 4).
Circle of Willis (SIR-kuhl of WILL-iss) An arterial
anastomosis that encircles the pituitary gland and sup-
plies the brain with blood; formed by the two internal
carotid arteries and the basilar (two vertebral) artery
(Chapter 13).
Circulatory shock (SIR-kew-lah-TOR-ee SHAHK) The
condition in which decreased cardiac output deprives all
tissues of oxygen and permits the accumulation of waste
products (Chapter 5).
Cisterna chyli (sis-TER-nah KYE-lee) A large lymph ves-
sel formed by the union of lymph vessels from the lower
body; continues superiorly as the thoracic duct (Chapter
14).
Clavicle (KLAV-i-kuhl) The ﬂat bone that articulates with
the scapula and sternum (from the Latin “little key”)
(Syn.—collarbone) (Chapter 6).
Cleavage (KLEE-vije) The series of mitotic cell divisions
that take place in a fertilized egg; forms the early multi-
cellular embryonic stages (Chapter 21).
Cleft palate (KLEFT PAL-uht) A congenital disorder in
which the bones of the hard palate do not fuse, leaving an
opening between the oral and nasal cavities (Chapter 6).
Clinical infection (KLIN-i-kuhl) An infection in which the
patient exhibits the symptoms of the disease (Chapter 22).
Clitoris (KLIT-uh-ris) An organ that is part of the vulva; a
small mass of erectile tissue at the anterior junction of the
labia minora; enlarges in response to sexual stimulation
(Chapter 20).
Clot retraction (KLAHT ree-TRAK-shun) The shrinking
of a blood clot shortly after it forms due to the folding of
the ﬁbrin strands; pulls the edges of the ruptured vessel
closer together (Chapter 11).
Coccus (KOK-us) (Pl.—cocci) A spherical bacterium
(Chapter 22).
Coccyx (KOK-siks) The last four to ﬁve very small verte-
brae; attachment site for some muscles of the pelvic ﬂoor
(Chapter 6).
Cochlea (KOK-lee-ah) The snail-shell–shaped portion of
the inner ear that contains the receptors for hearing in
the organ of Corti (Chapter 9).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

556
Glossary
Codon (KOH-don) The sequence of three bases in DNA or
mRNA that is the code for one amino acid; also called a
triplet code (Chapter 3).
Coenzyme (ko-EN-zime) A non-protein molecule that
combines with an enzyme and is essential for the func-
tioning of the enzyme; some vitamins and minerals are
coenzymes (Chapter 17).
Collagen (KAH-lah-jen) A protein that is found in the form
of strong ﬁbers in many types of connective tissue
(Chapter 4).
Collecting tubule (kah-LEK-ting) The part of a renal
tubule that extends from a distal convoluted tubule to a
papillary duct (Chapter 18).
Colloid osmotic pressure (KAH-loyd ahs-MAH-tik) The
force exerted by the presence of protein in a solution;
water will move by osmosis to the area of greater protein
concentration (Chapter 13).
Colon (KOH-lun) The large intestine (Chapter 16).
Color blindness (KUHL-or BLIND-ness) The inability to
distinguish certain colors, a hereditary trait (Chapter 9).
Columnar (kuh-LUM-nar) Shaped like a column; height
greater than width; used especially in reference to epithe-
lial tissue (Chapter 4).
Common bile duct (KOM-mon BYL DUKT) The duct
formed by the union of the hepatic duct from the liver
and the cystic duct from the gallbladder, and joined by
the main pancreatic duct; carries bile and pancreatic juice
to the duodenum (Chapter 16).
Communicable disease (kuhm-YOO-ni-kah-b’l) A disease
that may be transmitted from person to person by direct
or indirect contact (Chapter 22).
Compact bone (KOM-pakt BOWNE) Bone tissue made of
osteons (haversian systems); forms the diaphyses of long
bones and covers the spongy bone of other bones (Chap-
ter 6).
Complement (KOM-ple-ment) A group of plasma proteins
that are activated by and bond to an antigen–antibody
complex; complement ﬁxation results in the lysis of cel-
lular antigens (Chapter 14).
Complement ﬁxation test (KOM-ple-ment ﬁk-SAY-
shun) A diagnostic test that determines the presence
of a particular antibody in blood or serum (Chap-
ter 14).
Compliance (pulmonary) (kum-PLY-ans) The expansibil-
ity of the lungs and thoracic wall, necessary for adequate
alveolar ventilation (Chapter 15).
Computed tomography (CT) scan (kom-PEW-ted toh-
MAH-grah-fee SKAN) A diagnostic imaging technique
that uses x-rays integrated by computer (Chapter 1).
Concentration gradient (KON-sen-TRAY-shun GRAY-
de-ent) The relative amounts of a substance on either
side of a membrane; diffusion occurs with, or along, a
concentration gradient, that is, from high concentration
to low concentration (Chapter 3).
Conchae (KONG-chay) Three pairs of curved, shelf-like
bones that extend into the nasal cavities; they increase the
surface area of the nasal mucosa (Chapter 6).
Conduction (kon-DUK-shun) 1. The heat loss process in
which heat energy from the skin is transferred to cooler
objects touching the skin. 2. The transfer of any energy
form from one substance to another; includes nerve and
muscle impulses and the transmission of vibrations in the
ear (Chapter 17).
Condyle (KON-dyel) A rounded projection on a bone
(Chapter 6).
Condyloid joint (KON-di-loyd) A diarthrosis that permits
movement in one plane and some lateral movement
(Chapter 6).
Cones (KOHNES) The sensory receptors in the retina of
the eye that detect colors (the different wavelengths of
the visible spectrum of light) (Chapter 9).
Congenital (kon-JEN-i-tuhl) Present at birth (Chapter 21).
Conjunctiva (KON-junk-TIGH-vah) The mucous mem-
brane that lines the eyelids and covers the white of the
eye (Chapter 9).
Conjunctivitis (kon-JUNK-ti-VIGH-tis) Inﬂammation of
the conjunctiva, most often due to an allergy or bacterial
infection (Chapter 9).
Connective tissue (kah-NEK-tiv TISH-yoo) Any of the
tissues that connects, supports, transports, or stores
materials. Consists of cells and matrix (Chapter 4).
Contagious disease (kun-TAY-jus) A disease that is easily
transmitted from person to person by casual contact
(Chapter 22).
Contraction, concentric (kon-TRAK-shun, kon-SEN-
trik) The exertion of force as a muscle shortens (Chap-
ter 7).
Contraction, eccentric (ek-SEN-trik) The exertion of
force, often opposing gravity, as a muscle lengthens
(Chapter 7).
Contrast (KON-trast) The characteristic of sensations in
which a previous sensation affects the perception of a
current sensation (Chapter 9).
Contusion (kon-TOO-zhun) A bruise; the skin is not bro-
ken but may be painful, swollen, and discolored (Chap-
ter 5).
Convection (kon-VEK-shun) The heat loss process in
which heat energy is moved away from the skin surface
by means of air currents (Chapter 17).
Convolution (kon-voh-LOO-shun) A fold, coil, roll, or
twist; the surface folds of the cerebral cortex (Syn.—
gyrus) (Chapter 8).
Cornea (KOR-nee-ah) The transparent anterior portion of
the sclera of the eye; the ﬁrst structure that refracts light
rays that enter the eye (Chapter 9).
Coronal (frontal) section (koh-ROH-nuhl SEK-shun) A
plane or cut from side to side, separating front and back
parts (Chapter 1).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Glossary
557
Coronary vessels (KOR-ah-na-ree VESS-uhls) The blood
vessels that supply the myocardium with blood; emerge
from the ascending aorta and empty into the right atrium
(Chapter 12).
Corpus callosum (KOR-pus kuh-LOH-sum) The band of
white matter that connects the cerebral hemispheres
(Chapter 8).
Corpus luteum (KOR-pus LOO-tee-um) The temporary
endocrine gland formed from an ovarian follicle that has
released an ovum; secretes progesterone and estrogen
(Chapter 10).
Cortex (KOR-teks) The outer layer of an organ, such as the
cerebrum, kidney, or adrenal gland (Chapter 8).
Cortisol (KOR-ti-sawl) A hormone secreted by the adrenal
cortex that promotes the efficient use of nutrients in
stressful situations and has an anti-inﬂammatory effect
(Chapter 10).
Cough reﬂex (KAWF) A reﬂex integrated by the medulla
that expels irritating substances from the pharynx, larynx,
or trachea by means of an explosive exhalation (Chap-
ter 15).
Covalent bond (ko-VAY-lent) A chemical bond formed by
the sharing of electrons between atoms (Chapter 2).
Cranial cavity (KRAY-nee-uhl KAV-i-tee) The cavity
formed by the cranial bones; contains the brain; part of
the dorsal cavity (Chapter 1).
Cranial nerves (KRAY-nee-uhl NERVS) The 12 pairs of
nerves that emerge from the brain (Chapter 8).
Cranial venous sinuses (KRAY-nee-uhl VEE-nus SIGH-
nuh-sez) Large veins between the two layers of the cra-
nial dura mater; the site of reabsorption of the
cerebrospinal ﬂuid (Chapter 8).
Cranium (KRAY-nee-um) The cranial bones or bones of
the skull that enclose and protect the brain (Chapter 6).
Creatine phosphate (KREE-ah-tin FOSS-fate) An energy
source in muscle ﬁbers; the energy released is used to
synthesize ATP (Chapter 7).
Creatinine (kree-A-ti-neen) A nitrogenous waste product
produced when creatine phosphate is used for energy;
excreted by the kidneys in urine (Chapter 7).
Crest (KREST) A bony ridge, such as the iliac crest
(Chapter 6).
Cretinism (KREE-tin-izm) Hyposecretion of thyroxine in
an infant; if uncorrected, the result is severe mental and
physical retardation (Chapter 10).
Cross-section (KRAWS SEK-shun) A plane or cut perpen-
dicular to the long axis of an organ (Chapter 1).
Crypts of Lieberkühn (KRIPTS of LEE-ber-koon) The
digestive glands of the small intestine; secrete digestive
enzymes (Chapter 16).
Cuboidal (kew-BOY-duhl) Shaped like a cube; used espe-
cially in reference to epithelial tissue (Chapter 4).
Culture and sensitivity testing (KUL-chur and SEN-si-
TIV-i-tee) A laboratory procedure to determine the
best antibiotic with which to treat a bacterial infection
(Chapter 22).
Cushing’s syndrome (KOOSH-ingz SIN-drohm) Hyper-
secretion of the glucocorticoids of the adrenal cortex,
characterized by fragility of skin, poor wound healing,
truncal fat deposition, and thin extremities (Chapter 10).
Cutaneous senses (kew-TAY-nee-us) The senses of the
skin; the receptors are mainly in the dermis (Chapter 9).
Cyanosis (SIGH-uh-NOH-sis) A blue, gray, or purple
discoloration of the skin caused by hypoxia and abnormal
amounts of reduced hemoglobin in the blood (Chap-
ter 15).
Cyclic AMP (SIK-lik) A chemical that is the second mes-
senger in the two-messenger mechanism of hormone
action; formed from ATP and stimulates characteristic
cellular responses to the hormone (Chapter 10).
Cystic duct (SIS-tik DUKT) The duct that takes bile into
and out of the gallbladder; unites with the hepatic duct of
the liver to form the common bile duct (Chapter 16).
Cystitis (sis-TIGH-tis) Inﬂammation of the urinary blad-
der; most often the result of bacterial infection (Chap-
ter 18).
Cytochrome transport system (SIGH-toh-krohm) The
stage of cell respiration in which ATP is formed during
reactions of cytochromes with the electrons of the hydro-
gen atoms that were once part of a food molecule, and
metabolic water is formed; aerobic; takes place in the
mitochondria of cells (Syn.—electron transport system)
(Chapter 17).
Cytokines (SIGH-toh-kines) Chemicals released by acti-
vated T cells that attract macrophages. Are also released
by many cells and tissues as part of cellular communica-
tion. (Chapter 14).
Cytokinesis (SIGH-toh-ki-NEE-sis) The division of the
cytoplasm of a cell following mitosis (Chapter 3).
Cytoplasm (SIGH-toh-plazm) The cellular material
between the nucleus and the cell membrane (Chapter 3).
Cytosol (SIGH-toh-sawl) The water of cytoplasm (Chap-
ter 3).
—D—
Dead space (DED SPAYSE) 1. Anatomic: air that is in the
respiratory passages at the end of inhalation and does not
participate in gas exchange. 2. Physiological: the volume
of nonfunctioning alveoli that decrease gas exchange
(Chapter 15).
Deafness (DEFF-ness) Impairment of normal hearing; may
be caused by damage to the vibration conduction path-
way (conduction), the acoustic nerve or cochlear recep-
tors (nerve), or the auditory area in the temporal lobe
(central) (Chapter 9).
Deamination (DEE-am-i-NAY-shun) The removal of an
amino (NH2) group from an amino acid; takes place in
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

558
Glossary
the liver when excess amino acids are used for energy
production; the amino groups are converted to urea
(Chapter 16).
Decomposition reaction
(DE-com-poh-ZI-shun) A
chemical reaction in which bonds in a large molecule are
broken and the products are two or more smaller mole-
cules (Chapter 2).
Decubitus ulcer (dee-KEW-bi-tuss UL-ser) The break-
down and death of skin tissue because of prolonged pres-
sure that interrupts blood ﬂow to the area (Syn.—pressure
ulcer) (Chapter 5).
Defecation reﬂex (DEF-e-KAY-shun) The spinal cord
reﬂex that eliminates feces from the colon (Chapter 16).
Dehydration (DEE-high-DRAY-shun) Excessive loss of
water from the body (Chapter 5).
Deltoid (DELL-toyd) 1. The shoulder region. 2. The large
muscle that covers the shoulder joint (Chapter 1).
Dendrite (DEN-dright) The cellular process of a neuron
that carries impulses toward the cell body (Chapter 4).
Dentin (DEN-tin) The bone-like substance that forms the
inner crown and the roots of a tooth (Chapter 16).
Depolarization (DE-poh-lahr-i-ZAY-shun) The reversal
of electrical charges on either side of a cell membrane in
response to a stimulus; negative charge outside and posi-
tive charge inside; brought about by a rapid inﬂow of
sodium ions (Chapter 7).
Dermatology (DER-muh-TAH-luh-jee) The study of the
skin and skin diseases (Chapter 5).
Dermis (DER-miss) The inner layer of the skin, made of
ﬁbrous connective tissue (Chapter 5).
Detached retina (dee-TACHD RET-in-nah) The separa-
tion of the retina from the choroid layer of the eyeball
(Chapter 9).
Detrusor muscle (de-TROO-ser) The smooth muscle
layer of the wall of the urinary bladder; contracts as part
of the urination reﬂex to eliminate urine (Chapter 18).
Diabetes mellitus (DYE-ah-BEE-tis mel-LYE-tus) Hypo-
secretion of insulin by the pancreas or the inability of
insulin to exert its effects; characterized by hyper-
glycemia, increased urinary output with glycosuria, and
thirst (Chapter 10).
Diagnosis (DYE-ag-NOH-sis) The procedures used to
identify the cause and nature of a person’s illness
(Chapter 1).
Diaphragm (DYE-uh-fram) The dome-shaped skeletal
muscle that separates the thoracic and abdominal cavi-
ties; moves downward when it contracts to enlarge the
thoracic cavity to bring about inhalation (Chapter 1).
Diaphysis (dye-AFF-i-sis) The shaft of a long bone; con-
tains a marrow canal ﬁlled with yellow bone marrow
(Chapter 6).
Diarthrosis (DYE-ar-THROH-sis) A freely movable joint
such as hinge, pivot, and ball-and-socket joints; all are
considered synovial joints because synovial membrane is
present (Chapter 6).
Diastole (dye-AS-tuh-lee) In the cardiac cycle, the relax-
ation of the myocardium (Chapter 12).
Differential WBC count (DIFF-er-EN-shul KOWNT) A
laboratory test that determines the percentage of each of
the ﬁve kinds of white blood cells present in the blood
(Chapter 11).
Diffusion (di-FEW-zhun) The process in which there is
movement of molecules from an area of greater concen-
tration to an area of lesser concentration; occurs because
of the free energy (natural movement) of molecules
(Chapter 3).
Digestive system (dye-JES-tiv SIS-tem) The organ system
that changes food into simpler organic and inorganic
molecules that can be absorbed by the blood and lymph
and used by cells; consists of the alimentary tube and
accessory organs (Chapter 16).
Diploid number (DIH-ployd) The characteristic or usual
number of chromosomes found in the somatic (body)
cells of a species (human  46) (Chapter 3).
Disaccharide (dye-SAK-ah-ride) A carbohydrate molecule
that consists of two monosaccharides bonded together;
includes sucrose, maltose, and lactose (Chapter 2).
Disease (di-ZEEZ) A disorder or disruption of normal
body functioning (Chapter 1).
Disinfectant (DIS-in-FEK-tent) A chemical that destroys
microorganisms or limits their growth on inanimate
objects (Chapter 22).
Dissociation (dih-SEW-see-AY-shun) The separation of an
inorganic salt, acid, or base into its ions when dissolved
in water (Syn.—ionization) (Chapter 2).
Distal (DIS-tuhl) Furthest from the origin or point of
attachment (Chapter 1).
Distal convoluted tubule (DIS-tuhl KON-voh-LOO-ted)
The part of a renal tubule that extends from a loop of
Henle to a collecting tubule (Chapter 18).
Disulﬁde bond (digh-SUL-fyed BAHND) A covalent bond
between the sulfur atoms of two amino acids in a protein;
helps maintain the three-dimensional shape of the pro-
tein (Syn.—disulﬁde bridge) (Chapter 2).
Diverticulitis (DYE-ver-tik-yoo-LYE-tis) Inﬂammation of
diverticula in the intestinal tract (Chapter 16).
DNA (Deoxyribonucleic acid) A nucleic acid in the
shape of a double helix. Makes up the chromosomes of
cells and is the genetic code for hereditary characteristics
(Chapter 2).
DNA replication (REP-li-KAY-shun) The process by
which a DNA molecule makes a duplicate of itself. Takes
place before mitosis or meiosis, to produce two sets of
chromatids (potential chromosomes) within a cell
(Chapter 3).
Dominant (DAH-ma-nent) In genetics, a characteristic that
will be expressed even if only one gene for it is present in
the homologous pair of chromosomes (Chapter 21).
Dormant (DOOR-ment) Temporarily inactive; a state of
little metabolic activity (Chapter 22).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Glossary
559
Dorsal (DOR-suhl) Toward the back (Syn.—posterior)
(Chapter 1).
Dorsal cavity (DOR-suhl KAV-i-tee) Cavity that consists
of the cranial and spinal cavities (Chapter 1).
Dorsal root (DOR-suhl ROOT) The sensory root of a
spinal nerve (Chapter 8).
Dorsal root ganglion (DOR-suhl ROOT GANG-lee-on)
An enlarged area of the dorsal root of a spinal nerve
that contains the cell bodies of sensory neurons (Chap-
ter 8).
Down syndrome (DOWN SIN-drohm) A trisomy in
which three chromosomes of number 21 are present;
characterized by moderate to severe mental retardation
and certain physical malformations (Chapter 20).
Duct (DUKT) A tube or channel, especially one that carries
the secretion of a gland (Chapter 4).
Ductus arteriosus (DUK-tus ar-TIR-ee-OH-sis) A short
fetal blood vessel that takes most blood in the pulmonary
artery to the aorta, bypassing the fetal lungs (Chapter 13).
Ductus deferens (DUK-tus DEF-eer-enz) The tubular
organ that carries sperm from the epididymis to the ejac-
ulatory duct (Syn.—vas deferens) (Chapter 20).
Ductus venosus (DUK-tus ve-NOH-sus) A short fetal
blood vessel that takes blood from the umbilical vein to
the inferior vena cava (Chapter 13).
Duodenum (dew-AH-den-um) The ﬁrst 10 inches of the
small intestine; the common bile duct enters it. (Chap-
ter 16).
Dura mater (DEW-rah MAH-ter) The outermost layer of
the meninges, made of ﬁbrous connective tissue (Chap-
ter 8).
Dwarﬁsm (DWORF-izm) The condition of being abnor-
mally small, especially small of stature due to a hereditary
or endocrine disorder; pituitary dwarﬁsm is caused by a
deﬁciency of growth hormone (Chapter 10).
Dyspnea (DISP-nee-ah) Difficult breathing (Chapter 15).
Dysuria (dis-YOO-ree-ah) Painful or difficult urination
(Chapter 18).
—E—
Ear (EER) The organ that contains the sensory receptors
for hearing and equilibrium; consists of the outer ear,
middle ear, and inner ear (Chapter 9).
Eccrine gland (EK-rin) The type of sweat gland (exocrine)
that produces watery sweat; important in maintenance of
normal body temperature (Chapter 5).
Ectoderm (EK-toh-derm) The outer primary germ layer of
cells of an embryo; gives rise to the epidermis and nerv-
ous system (Chapter 21).
Ectoparasite (EK-toh-PAR-uh-sight) A parasite that lives
on the surface of the body (Chapter 22).
Ectopic focus (ek-TOP-ik FOH-kus) The initiation of a
heartbeat by part of the myocardium other than the
sinoatrial node (Chapter 12).
Ectopic pregnancy (ek-TOP-ik PREG-nun-see) Implan-
tation of a fertilized ovum outside the uterus; usually
occurs in the fallopian tube but may be in the ovary or
abdominal cavity; often results in death of the embryo
because a functional placenta cannot be formed in these
abnormal sites (Chapter 20).
Eczema (EK-zuh-mah) An inﬂammatory condition of the
skin that may include the formation of vesicles or pus-
tules (Chapter 5).
Edema (uh-DEE-muh) An abnormal accumulation of tissue
ﬂuid; may be localized or systemic (Chapter 19).
Effector (e-FEK-tur) An organ such as a muscle or gland
that produces a characteristic response after receiving a
stimulus (Chapter 8).
Efferent (EFF-er-rent) To carry away from a center or main
part (Chapter 8).
Efferent arteriole (EFF-er-ent ar-TIR-ee-ohl) The arteri-
ole that takes blood from a glomerulus to the peritubular
capillaries that surround the renal tubule (Chapter 18).
Ejaculation (ee-JAK-yoo-LAY-shun) The ejection of
semen from the male urethra (Chapter 20).
Ejaculatory duct (ee-JAK-yoo-la-TOR-ee DUKT) The
duct formed by the union of the ductus deferens and the
duct of the seminal vesicle; carries sperm to the urethra
(Chapter 20).
Ejection fraction (ee-JEK-shun FRAK-shun) The percent
of blood in a ventricle that is pumped during systole; a
measure of the strength of the heart (Chapter 12).
Elastin (eh-LAS-tin) A protein that is found in the form of
elastic fibers in several types of connective tissue
(Chapter 4).
Electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) (ee-LEK-troh-KAR-
dee-oh-GRAM) A recording of the electrical changes
that accompany the cardiac cycle (Chapter 12).
Electrolytes (ee-LEK-troh-lites) Substances that, in solu-
tion, dissociate into their component ions; include acids,
bases, and salts (Chapter 19).
Electron (e-LEK-trahn) A subatomic particle that has a
negative electrical charge; found orbiting the nucleus of
an atom (Chapter 2).
Element (EL-uh-ment) A substance that consists of only
one type of atom; 92 elements occur in nature (Chap-
ter 2).
Embolism (EM-boh-lizm) Obstruction of a blood vessel by
a blood clot or foreign substance that has traveled to and
lodged in that vessel (Chapter 11).
Embryo (EM-bree-oh) The developing human individual
from the time of implantation until the eighth week of
gestation (Chapter 21).
Embryonic disc (EM-bree-ON-ik DISK) The portion of
the inner cell mass of the early embryo that will develop
into the individual (Chapter 21).
Emphysema (EM-ﬁ-SEE-mah) The deterioration of alve-
oli and loss of elasticity of the lungs; normal exhalation
and gas exchange are impaired (Chapter 15).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

560
Glossary
Emulsify (e-MULL-si-fye) To physically break up fats into
smaller fat globules; the function of bile salts in bile
(Chapter 16).
Enamel (en-AM-uhl) The hard substance that covers the
crowns of teeth and forms the chewing surface (Chapter
16).
Encapsulated nerve ending (en-KAP-sul-LAY-ted NERV
END-ing) A sensory nerve ending enclosed in a special-
ized cellular structure; the cutaneous receptors for touch
and pressure (Chapter 5).
Endemic (en-DEM-ik) A disease that occurs continuously
or expectedly in a given population (Chapter 22).
Endocardium (EN-doh-KAR-dee-um) The simple squa-
mous epithelial tissue that lines the chambers of the heart
and covers the valves (Chapter 12).
Endocrine gland (EN-doh-krin) A ductless gland that
secretes its product (hormone) directly into the blood
(Chapter 4).
Endocrine system (EN-doh-krin SIS-tem) The organ sys-
tem that consists of the endocrine glands that secrete
hormones into the blood (Chapter 10).
Endocytosis (EN-doh-sigh-TOH-sis) The process by
which a cell takes in particulate matter or a ﬂuid, such as
phagocytosis of bacteria by WBCs; the cell membrane
conforms to the material taken in and forms an intracel-
lular vesicle or vacuole (Chapter 3).
Endoderm (EN-doh-derm) The inner primary germ layer
of cells of an embryo; gives rise to respiratory organs and
the lining of the digestive tract (Chapter 21).
Endogenous (en-DOJ-en-us) Coming from or produced
within the body (Chapter 17).
Endogenous infection (en-DOJ-en-us) An infection
caused by a person’s own normal ﬂora that have been
introduced into an abnormal body site (Chapter 22).
Endolymph (EN-doh-limf) The ﬂuid in the membranous
labyrinth of the inner ear (Chapter 9).
Endometrium (EN-doh-MEE-tree-um) The vascular lin-
ing of the uterus that forms the maternal portion of the
placenta (Chapter 20).
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (EN-doh-PLAZ-mik re-
TIK-yoo-lum) A cell organelle found in the cytoplasm; a
network of membranous channels that transport materi-
als within the cell and synthesize lipids (Chapter 3).
Endothelium (EN-doh-THEE-lee-um) The simple squa-
mous epithelial lining of arteries and veins, continuing as
the walls of capillaries (Chapter 13).
Endotoxin (EN-doh-TAHK-sin) The toxic portion of the
cell walls of gram-negative bacteria; causes fever and
shock (Chapter 22).
Endotoxin shock (EN-doh-TAHK-sin SHAHK) A state of
circulatory shock caused by infection with gram-negative
bacteria (Chapter 22).
Energy levels (EN-er-jee LEV-els) The position of elec-
trons within an atom (Syn.—orbitals or shells) (Chap-
ter 2).
Enteric nervous system (en-TER-ik) The nerve ﬁbers and
plexuses of the alimentary tube; regulate secretions and
contractions, able to function independently of the CNS
(Chapter 16).
Enteroendocrine cell (EN-ter-oh-EN-doh-krin SELL) A
cell of the alimentary tube that secretes hormones
(Chapter 16).
Enzyme (EN-zime) A protein that affects the speed of a
chemical reaction. Also called an organic catalyst
(Chapter 2).
Eosinophil (EE-oh-SIN-oh-ﬁll) A type of white blood cell
(granular); active in allergic reactions and parasitic infec-
tions (Chapter 11).
Epicardium (EP-ee-KAR-dee-um) The serous membrane
on the surface of the myocardium (Syn.—visceral peri-
cardium) (Chapter 12).
Epidemic (EP-i-DEM-ik) A disease that affects many peo-
ple in a given population in a given time with more than
the usual or expected number of cases (Chapter 22).
Epidemiology (EP-i-DEE-mee-AH-luh-jee) The study of
the spread of disease and the factors that determine dis-
ease frequency and distribution (Chapter 22).
Epidermis (EP-i-DER-miss) The outer layer of the skin,
made of stratiﬁed squamous epithelium (Chapter 5).
Epididymis (EP-i-DID-i-mis) (Pl.—epididymides) The
tubular organ coiled on the posterior side of a testis;
sperm mature here and are carried to the ductus deferens
(Chapter 20).
Epiglottis (EP-i-GLAH-tis) The uppermost cartilage of the
larynx; covers the larynx during swallowing (Chapter 15).
Epinephrine (EP-i-NEFF-rin) A hormone secreted by the
adrenal medulla that stimulates many responses to enable
the body to react to a stressful situation (Syn.—adrena-
line) (Chapter 10).
Epiphyseal disc (e-PIFF-i-se-al DISK) A plate of cartilage
at the junction of an epiphysis with the diaphysis of a
long bone; the site of growth of a long bone (Chapter 6).
Epiphysis (e-PIFF-i-sis) The end of a long bone (Chap-
ter 6).
Epithelial tissue (EP-i-THEE-lee-uhl TISH-yoo) The
tissue found on external and internal body surfaces and
that forms glands (Chapter 4).
Equilibrium (E-kwe-LIB-ree-um) 1. A state of balance. 2.
The ability to remain upright and be aware of the posi-
tion of the body (Chapter 9).
Erythema
(ER-i-THEE-mah) Redness of the skin
(Chapter 5).
Erythroblastosis fetalis (e-RITH-roh-blass-TOH-sis fee-
TAL-is) Hemolytic anemia of the newborn, character-
ized by anemia and jaundice; the result of an Rh
incompatibility of fetal blood and maternal blood; also
called Rh disease of the newborn (Chapter 11).
Erythrocyte (e-RITH-roh-sight) Red blood cell (Chap-
ter 11).
Erythropoietin (e-RITH-roh-POY-e-tin) A hormone
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Glossary
561
secreted by the kidneys in a state of hypoxia; stimulates
the red bone marrow to increase the rate of red blood cell
production (Chapter 11).
Esophagus (e-SOF-uh-guss) The organ of the alimentary
tube that is a passageway for food from the pharynx to
the stomach (Chapter 16).
Essential amino acids (e-SEN-shul ah-MEE-noh ASS-
ids) The amino acids that cannot be synthesized by the
liver and must be obtained from proteins in the diet
(Chapter 16).
Essential fatty acids (e-SEN-shul FA-tee ASS-ids) The
fatty acids that cannot be synthesized by the body and
must be obtained from fats in the diet (Chapter 17).
Estrogen (ES-troh-jen) The sex hormone secreted by a
developing ovarian follicle; contributes to the growth of
the female reproductive organs and the secondary sex
characteristics (Chapter 10).
Ethmoid bone (ETH-moyd) An irregular cranial bone that
forms the upper part of the nasal cavities and a small part
of the lower anterior braincase (Chapter 6).
Eustachian tube (yoo-STAY-shee-un TOOB) The air pas-
sage between the middle ear cavity and the nasopharynx
(Syn.—auditory tube) (Chapter 9).
Exocrine gland (EK-so-krin) A gland that secretes its prod-
uct into a duct to be taken to a cavity or surface (Chap-
ter 4).
Exocytosis (EKS-oh-sigh-TOH-sis) The process by which
material is ejected or secreted from a cell; characteristic
of the Golgi apparatus, in which membrane-bound vesi-
cles fuse with the cell membrane and release their con-
tents (Chapter 3).
Expiration (EK-spi-RAY-shun) Exhalation; the output of
air from the lungs (Chapter 15).
Expiratory reserve (ek-SPYR-ah-tor-ee ree-ZERV) The
volume of air beyond tidal volume that can be exhaled
with the most forceful exhalation; average: 1000–1500
mL (Chapter 15).
Extension (eks-TEN-shun) To increase the angle of a joint
(Chapter 7).
External (eks-TER-nuhl) On the outside; toward the sur-
face (Chapter 1).
External anal sphincter (eks-TER-nuhl AY-nuhl SFINK-
ter) The circular skeletal muscle that surrounds the inter-
nal anal sphincter and provides voluntary control of
defecation (Chapter 16).
External auditory meatus (eks-TER-nuhl AW-di-TOR-
ee me-AY-tuss) The ear canal; the portion of the outer
ear that is a tunnel in the temporal bone between the
auricle and the eardrum (Chapter 9).
External respiration (eks-TER-nuhl RES-pi-RAY-shun)
The exchange of gases between the air in the alveoli
and the blood in the pulmonary capillaries (Chap-
ter 15).
External urethral sphincter (eks-TER-nuhl yoo-REE-
thruhl SFINK-ter) The skeletal muscle of the pelvic
ﬂoor encircling the urethra; provides voluntary control
of urination (Chapter 18).
Extracellular ﬂuid (EKS-trah-SELL-yoo-ler FLOO-id)
The water found outside cells; includes plasma, tissue
ﬂuid, lymph, and other ﬂuids (Chapter 2).
Extrinsic factor (eks-TRIN-sik FAK-ter) Vitamin B12,
obtained from food and necessary for DNA synthesis,
especially by stem cells in the red bone marrow (Chap-
ter 11).
Extrinsic muscles (eks-TRIN-sik) The six muscles that
move the eyeball (Chapter 9).
—F—
Facet (FA-sit) A smooth, relatively ﬂat articular surface on a
bone (from the Latin “little face”) (Chapter 6).
Facial bones (FAY-shul) The 14 irregular bones of the face
(Chapter 6).
Facial nerves (FAY-shul) Cranial nerve pair VII; sensory
for taste, motor to facial muscles and the salivary glands
(Chapter 8).
Facilitated diffusion (fuh-SILL-ah-tay-ted di-FEW-zhun)
The process in which a substance is transported through
a membrane in combination with a carrier or transporter
molecule (Chapter 3).
Facultative anaerobe (FAK-uhl-tay-tive AN-air-robe) A
bacterium that is able to reproduce either in the presence
or absence of oxygen (Chapter 22).
Fallopian tube (fuh-LOH-pee-an TOOB) The tubu-
lar organ that propels an ovum from the ovary to the
uterus by means of ciliated epithelium and peristalsis
of its smooth muscle layer (Syn.—uterine tube) (Chap-
ter 20).
Fascia (FASH-ee-ah) A ﬁbrous connective tissue membrane
that covers individual skeletal muscles and certain organs
(Chapter 4).
Fatty acid (FA-tee ASS-id) A lipid molecule that consists of
an even-numbered carbon chain of 12–24 carbons with
hydrogens; may be saturated or unsaturated; an end
product of the digestion of fats (Chapter 2).
Femur (FEE-mur) The long bone of the thigh (Chapter 6).
Fertilization (FER-ti-li-ZAY-shun) The union of the
nuclei of an ovum and a sperm cell; restores the diploid
number (Chapter 3).
Fetal alcohol syndrome (FEE-tuhl AL-koh-hol) Birth
defects or developmental abnormalities in infants born to
women who chronically consumed alcohol during the
gestation period (Chapter 21).
Fever (FEE-ver) An abnormally high body temperature,
caused by pyrogens; may accompany an infectious disease
or severe physical injury (Chapter 17).
Fever blister (FEE-ver BLISS-ter) An eruption of the skin
caused by the herpes simplex virus (Syn.—cold sore)
(Chapter 5).
Fiber (FIGH-ber) Cellulose in the diet that provides exer-
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

562
Glossary
cise for the colon and helps prevent constipation (Chap-
ter 2).
Fibrillation (ﬁ-bri-LAY-shun) Very rapid and uncoordi-
nated heartbeats; ventricular ﬁbrillation is a life-threat-
ening emergency due to ineffective pumping and
decreased cardiac output (Chapter 12).
Fibrin (FYE-brin) A thread-like protein formed by the
action of thrombin on ﬁbrinogen; the substance of which
a blood clot is made (Chapter 11).
Fibrinogen (fye-BRIN-o-jen) A protein clotting factor pro-
duced by the liver; converted to ﬁbrin by thrombin
(Chapter 11).
Fibrinolysis (FYE-brin-AHL-e-sis) 1. The dissolving of a
ﬁbrin clot by natural enzymes, after the clot has served its
purpose. 2. The clinical use of clot-dissolving enzymes to
dissolve abnormal clots (Chapter 11).
Fibroblast (FYE-broh-blast) A connective tissue cell that
produces collagen and elastin ﬁbers (Chapter 4).
Fibrous connective tissue (FYE-brus) The tissue that con-
sists primarily of collagen ﬁbers (the cells are ﬁbroblasts).
Its most important physical characteristic is its strength
(Chapter 4).
Fibrous skeleton of the heart (FYE-brus SKEL-e-tun)
The ﬁbrous connective tissue that encircles and anchors
the edges of the heart valves and prevents stretching
of their openings; it also electrically insulates the
ventricles from the atria so that impulses for contraction
follow only the normal conduction pathway (Chap-
ter 12).
Fibula (FIB-yoo-lah) A long bone of the lower leg; on the
lateral side, thinner than the tibia (Chapter 6).
Filtration (ﬁll-TRAY-shun) The process in which water
and dissolved materials move through a membrane from
an area of higher pressure to an area of lower pressure
(Chapter 3).
Fimbriae (FIM-bree-ay) Finger-like projections at the end
of the fallopian tube that enclose the ovary (Chapter 20).
Fissure (FISH-er) A groove or furrow between parts of an
organ such as the brain (Syn.—sulcus) (Chapter 8).
Flagellum (ﬂah-JELL-um) (Pl.—ﬂagella) A long, thread-
like projection through a cell membrane; provides motil-
ity for the cell (Chapter 3).
Flexion (FLEK-shun) To decrease the angle of a joint
(Chapter 7).
Flexor reﬂex (FLEKS-er REE-ﬂeks) A spinal cord reﬂex in
which a painful stimulus causes withdrawal of a body part
(Chapter 8).
Fluorescent antibody test (ﬂoor-ESS-ent AN-ti-BAH-
dee) A diagnostic test that uses ﬂuorescently tagged anti-
bodies to determine the presence of a particular pathogen
in the blood or other tissue specimen (Chapter 14).
Flutter (FLUH-ter) A very rapid yet fairly regular heartbeat
(Chapter 12).
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) (FAH-li-kuhl) A
gonadotropic hormone produced by the anterior pitu-
itary gland that initiates the production of ova in the
ovaries or sperm in the testes (Chapter 10).
Fomites (FOH-mights; FOH-mi-teez) Inanimate objects
capable of transmitting infectious microorganisms from
one host to another (Chapter 22).
Fontanel (FON-tah-NELL) An area of ﬁbrous connective
tissue membrane between the cranial bones of an infant’s
skull, where bone formation is not complete (Chapter 6).
Foramen (for-RAY-men) A hole or opening, as in a bone
(from the Latin “to bore”) (Chapter 6).
Foramen ovale (for-RAY-men oh-VAHL-ee) An opening
in the interatrial septum of the fetal heart that permits
blood to ﬂow from the right atrium to the left atrium,
bypassing the fetal lungs (Chapter 13).
Fossa (FAH-sah) A shallow depression in a bone (from the
Latin “ditch”) (Chapter 6).
Fovea (FOH-vee-ah) A depression in the retina of the eye
directly behind the lens; contains only cones and is the
area of best color vision (Chapter 9).
Fracture (FRAK-chur) A break in a bone (Chapter 6).
Free nerve ending (FREE NERV END-ing) The end of a
sensory neuron; the receptor for the sense of pain, heat,
or cold in the skin and pain in the viscera (Chapter 5).
Free radical (FREE RA-di-kuhl) A molecule with an
unpaired electron that is very reactive; formed during
normal metabolism and contributes to the natural deteri-
oration (aging) of cells (Chapter 17).
Frontal bone (FRUN-tuhl) The ﬂat cranial bone that
forms the forehead (Chapter 6).
Frontal lobes (FRUN-tuhl LOWBS) The most anterior
parts of the cerebrum; contain the motor areas for volun-
tary movement and the motor speech area (Chapter 8).
Frontal section (FRUN-tuhl SEK-shun) A plane separat-
ing the body into front and back portions (Syn.—coronal
section) (Chapter 1).
Frostbite (FRAWST-bite) The freezing of part of the body,
resulting in tissue damage or death (gangrene) (Chap-
ter 17).
Fructose (FRUHK-tohs) A monosaccharide, a six-carbon
sugar that is part of the sucrose in food; converted to glu-
cose by the liver (Chapter 2).
Functional layer (FUNK-shun-ul LAY-er) The vascular
layer of the endometrium that is lost in menstruation,
then regenerated by the basilar layer (Chapter 20).
Fungus (FUNG-gus) Any of the organisms of the kingdom
Fungi; they lack chlorophyll; may be unicellular or mul-
ticellular, saprophytic or parasitic; include yeasts, molds,
and mushrooms (Chapter 22).
—G—
Galactose (guh-LAK-tohs) A monosaccharide, a six-carbon
sugar that is part of the lactose in food; converted to glu-
cose by the liver (Chapter 2).
Gallbladder (GAWL-bla-der) An accessory organ of diges-
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Glossary
563
tion; a sac located on the undersurface of the liver; stores
and concentrates bile (Chapter 16).
Gallstones (GAWL-stohns) Crystals formed in the gall-
bladder or bile ducts; the most common type is made of
cholesterol (Chapter 16).
Gametes (GAM-eets) The male or female reproductive
cells, sperm cells or ova, each with the haploid number of
chromosomes (Chapter 3).
Gamma globulins (GA-mah GLAH-byoo-lins) Antibodies
(Chapter 14).
Ganglion (GANG-lee-on) A group of neuron cell bodies
located outside the CNS (Chapter 8).
Ganglion neurons (GANG-lee-on NYOOR-onz) The
neurons that form the optic nerve; carry impulses from
the retina to the brain (Chapter 9).
Gastric juice (GAS-trik JOOSS) The secretion of the gas-
tric pits of the stomach; contains hydrochloric acid,
pepsin, gastrin, and mucus (Chapter 16).
Gastric pits (GAS-trik PITS) The glands of the mucosa of
the stomach; secrete gastric juice (Chapter 16).
Gastric ulcer (GAS-trik UL-ser) An erosion of the gastric
mucosa and submucosa (Chapter 16).
Gastrin (GAS-trin) A hormone secreted by the G cells of
the gastric mucosa when food enters the stomach; stimu-
lates the secretion of gastric juice (Chapter 16).
Gene (JEEN) A segment of DNA that is the genetic code
for a particular protein and is located in a deﬁnite posi-
tion on a particular chromosome (Chapter 3).
Gene expression (JEEN ek-SPRESH-un) The transcrip-
tion and translation of a DNA gene to mRNA and to a
protein that gives a cell (or organ or entire organism) a
particular characteristic (Chapter 3).
Genetic code (je-NET-ik KOHD) The DNA code for
proteins that is shared by all living things; the sequence
of bases of the DNA in the chromosomes of cells
(Chapter 2).
Genetic disease (je-NET-ik di-ZEEZ) A hereditary disor-
der that is the result of an incorrect sequence of bases in
the DNA (gene) of a particular chromosome. May be
passed to offspring (Chapter 3).
Genetic immunity (je-NET-ik im-YOO-ni-tee) The
immunity provided by the genetic makeup of a species;
reﬂects the inability of certain pathogens to cause disease
in certain host species (Chapter 14).
Genome (JEE-nohm) The total genetic information con-
tained in the chromosomes of a cell of a species (Chap-
ter 3).
Genotype (JEE-noh-type) The genetic makeup of an indi-
vidual; the genes that are present (Chapter 21).
Gestation (jes-TAY-shun) The length of time from con-
ception to birth; the human gestation period averages
280 days (Chapter 21).
Giantism (JIGH-an-tizm) Excessive growth of the body or
its parts; may be the result of hypersecretion of growth
hormone in childhood (Chapter 10).
Gingiva (jin-JIGH-vah) The gums; the tissue that covers
the upper and lower jaws around the necks of the teeth
(Chapter 16).
Gland (GLAND) A cell or group of epithelial cells that are
specialized to secrete a substance (Chapter 4).
Glaucoma (glaw-KOH-mah) An eye disease often charac-
terized by increased intraocular pressure due to excessive
accumulation of aqueous humor; may result in optic
nerve damage and blindness (Chapter 9).
Glial cells (GLEE-al SELLS) The neuroglia of the central
nervous system (Chapter 4).
Gliding joint (GLY-ding) A diarthrosis that permits a slid-
ing movement (Chapter 6).
Globulins (GLAH-byoo-lins) Proteins that circulate in
blood plasma; alpha and beta globulins are synthesized by
the liver; gamma globulins (antibodies) are synthesized
by lymphocytes (Chapter 11).
Glomerular ﬁltration (gloh-MER-yoo-ler ﬁll-TRAY-
shun) The ﬁrst step in the formation of urine; blood
pressure in the glomerulus forces plasma, dissolved mate-
rials, and small proteins into Bowman’s capsule; this ﬂuid
is then called renal ﬁltrate (Chapter 18).
Glomerular filtration rate (gloh-MER-yoo-ler fill-
TRAY-shun RAYT) The total volume of renal ﬁltrate
that the kidneys form in 1 minute; average is 100–125
mL/minute (Chapter 18).
Glomerulus (gloh-MER-yoo-lus) A capillary network that
is enclosed by Bowman’s capsule; ﬁltration takes place
from the glomerulus to Bowman’s capsule (from the
Latin “little ball”) (Chapter 18).
Glossopharyngeal nerves (GLAH-so-fuh-RIN-jee-uhl)
Cranial nerve pair IX; sensory for taste and cardiovascu-
lar reﬂexes; motor to salivary glands (Chapter 8).
Glottis (GLAH-tis) The opening between the vocal cords;
an air passageway (Chapter 15).
Glucagon (GLOO-kuh-gahn) A hormone secreted by the
pancreas that increases the blood glucose level (Chap-
ter 10).
Glucocorticoids (GLOO-koh-KOR-ti-koids) The hor-
mones secreted by the adrenal cortex that affect the
metabolism of nutrients; cortisol is the major hormone in
this group (Chapter 10).
Gluconeogenesis (GLOO-koh-nee-oh-JEN-i-sis) The
conversion of excess amino acids to simple carbohydrates
or to glucose to be used for energy production (Chap-
ter 10).
Glucose (GLOO-kos) A hexose monosaccharide that is the
primary energy source for body cells (Chapter 2).
Glycerol (GLISS-er-ol) A three-carbon molecule that is
one of the end products of the digestion of fats
(chapter 2).
Glycogen (GLY-ko-jen) A polysaccharide that is the storage
form for excess glucose in the liver and muscles
(Chapter 2).
Glycogenesis (GLY-koh-JEN-i-sis) The conversion of glu-
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

564
Glossary
cose to glycogen to be stored as potential energy
(Chapter 10).
Glycogenolysis (GLY-koh-jen-AHL-i-sis) The conversion
of stored glycogen to glucose to be used for energy pro-
duction (Chapter 10).
Glycolysis (gly-KAHL-ah-sis) The ﬁrst stage of the cell res-
piration of glucose, in which glucose is broken down to
two molecules of pyruvic acid and ATP is formed; anaer-
obic; takes place in the cytoplasm of cells (Chapter 17).
Glycosuria (GLY-kos-YOO-ree-ah) The presence of glu-
cose in urine; often an indication of diabetes mellitus
(Chapter 18).
Goblet cell (GAHB-let) Unicellular glands that secrete
mucus; found in the respiratory and GI mucosa (Chap-
ter 4).
Goiter (GOY-ter) An enlargement of the thyroid gland,
often due to a lack of dietary iodine (Chapter 10).
Golgi apparatus (GOHL-jee) A cell organelle found in the
cytoplasm; synthesizes carbohydrates and packages mate-
rials for secretion from the cell (Chapter 3).
Gonadotropic hormone (GAH-nah-doh-TROH-pik) A
hormone that has its effects on the ovaries or testes
(gonads); FSH and LH (Chapter 10).
Gonorrhea (GAH-nuh-REE-ah) A sexually transmitted
disease caused by the bacterium Neisseria gonorrhoeae;
may also cause conjunctivitis in newborns of infected
women (Chapter 20).
Graaﬁan follicle (GRAF-ee-uhn FAH-li-kuhl) A mature
ovarian follicle that releases an ovum (Chapter 20).
Gram negative (GRAM NEG-uh-tiv) Bacteria that appear
red or pink after Gram staining (Chapter 22).
Gram positive (GRAM PAHS-uh-tiv) Bacteria that appear
purple or blue after Gram staining (Chapter 22).
Gram stain (GRAM STAYN) A staining procedure for bac-
teria to make them visible microscopically and to deter-
mine their Gram reaction, which is important in the
identiﬁcation of bacteria (Chapter 22).
Graves’ disease (GRAYVES) Hypersecretion of thyroxine,
believed to be an autoimmune disease; symptoms reﬂect
the elevated metabolic rate (Chapter 10).
Gray matter (GRAY) Nerve tissue within the central nerv-
ous system that consists of the cell bodies of neurons
(Chapter 8).
Growth hormone (GH) (GROHTH HOR-mohn) A hor-
mone secreted by the anterior pituitary gland that
increases the rate of cell division and protein synthesis
(Chapter 10).
Gyrus (JIGH-rus) A fold or ridge, as in the cerebral cortex
(Syn.—convolution) (Chapter 8).
—H—
Hair (HAIR) An accessory skin structure produced in a hair
follicle (Chapter 5).
Hair cells (HAIR SELLS) Cells with specialized microvilli
(called stereocilia) found in the inner ear; the receptors
for hearing (cochlea), static equilibrium (utricle and sac-
cule), and motion equilibrium (semicircular canals)
(Chapter 9).
Hair follicle (HAIR FAH-li-kuhl) The structure within the
skin in which a hair grows (Chapter 5).
Hair root (HAIR ROOT) The site of mitosis at the base of
a hair follicle; new cells become the hair shaft (Chapter 5).
Haploid number (HA-ployd) Half the usual number of
chromosomes found in the cells of a species. Characteris-
tic of the gametes of the species (human  23) (Chap-
ter 3).
Hard palate (HARD PAL-uht) The anterior portion of the
palate formed by the maxillae and the palatine bones
(Chapter 6).
Haustra (HOWS-trah) The pouches of the colon (Chap-
ter 16).
Haversian system (ha-VER-zhun) The structural unit of
compact bone, consisting of a central haversian canal sur-
rounded by concentric rings of osteocytes within matrix
(Syn.—osteon) (Chapter 4).
Heart murmur (HART MUR-mur) An abnormal heart
sound heard during the cardiac cycle; often caused by a
malfunctioning heart valve (Chapter 12).
Heat exhaustion (HEET eks-ZAWS-chun) A state of
weakness and dehydration caused by excessive loss
of body water and sodium chloride in sweat; the result of
exposure to heat or of strenuous exercise (Chapter 17).
Heat stroke (HEET STROHK) An acute reaction to heat
exposure in which there is failure of the temperature-
regulating mechanisms; sweating ceases, and body tem-
perature rises sharply (Chapter 17).
Heimlich maneuver (HIGHM-lik ma-NEW-ver) A pro-
cedure used to remove foreign material lodged in the
pharynx, larynx, or trachea (Chapter 15).
Helix (HEE-liks) A coil or spiral. Double helix is the
descriptive term used for the shape of a DNA molecule:
two strands of nucleotides coiled around each other and
resembling a twisted ladder (Chapter 2).
Hematocrit (hee-MAT-oh-krit) A laboratory test that
determines the percentage of red blood cells in a given
volume of blood; part of a complete blood count (Chap-
ter 11).
Hematuria (HEM-uh-TYOO-ree-ah) The presence of
blood (RBCs) in urine (Chapter 18).
Hemodialysis (HEE-moh-dye-AL-i-sis) A technique for
providing the function of the kidneys by passing the
blood through tubes surrounded by solutions that selec-
tively remove waste products and excess minerals; may be
life-saving in cases of renal failure (Chapter 18).
Hemoglobin (HEE-muh-GLOW-bin) The protein in red
blood cells that contains iron and transports oxygen in
the blood (Chapter 7).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Glossary
565
Hemolysis (he-MAHL-e-sis) Lysis or rupture of red blood
cells; may be the result of an antigen–antibody reaction
or of increased fragility of red blood cells in some types
of anemia (Chapter 11).
Hemophilia (HEE-moh-FILL-ee-ah) A hereditary blood
disorder characterized by the inability of the blood to
clot normally; hemophilia A is caused by a lack of clotting
factor 8 (Chapter 11).
Hemopoietic tissue (HEE-moh-poy-ET-ik) A blood-
forming tissue, primarily the red bone marrow; lym-
phatic tissue produces some lymphocytes (Chapter 4).
Hemorrhoids (HEM-uh-royds) Varicose veins of the anal
canal (Chapter 13).
Hemostasis (HEE-moh-STAY-sis) Prevention of blood
loss; the mechanisms are chemical clotting, vascular
spasm, and platelet plug formation (Chapter 11).
Heparin (HEP-ar-in) A chemical that inhibits blood clot-
ting, an anticoagulant; produced by basophils. Also used
clinically to prevent abnormal clotting, such as following
some types of surgery (Chapter 11).
Hepatic duct (hep-PAT-ik DUKT) The duct that takes
bile out of the liver; joins the cystic duct of the gallblad-
der to form the common bile duct (Chapter 16).
Hepatic portal circulation (hep-PAT-ik POOR-tuhl) The
pathway of systemic circulation in which venous blood
from the digestive organs and the spleen circulates
through the liver before returning to the heart (Chapter
13).
Hepatitis (HEP-uh-TIGH-tis) Inﬂammation of the liver,
most often caused by the hepatitis viruses A, B, or C
(Chapter 16).
Herniated disc (HER-nee-ay-ted DISK) Rupture of an
intervertebral disc (Chapter 6).
Herpes simplex (HER-peez SIM-pleks) A virus that causes
lesions in the skin or mucous membranes of the mouth
(usually type 1) or genital area (usually type 2); either
type may cause death or mental retardation of infants of
infected women (Chapter 20).
Heterozygous (HET-er-oh-ZYE-gus) Having two differ-
ent alleles for a trait (Chapter 21).
Hexose sugar (HEKS-ohs) A six-carbon sugar, such as glu-
cose, that is an energy source (in the process of cell res-
piration) (Chapter 2).
Hilus (HIGH-lus) An indentation or depression on the
surface of an organ such as a lung or kidney (Chap-
ter 15).
Hinge joint (HINJ) A diarthrosis that permits movement in
one plane (Chapter 6).
Hip bone (HIP BOWNE) The ﬂat bone that forms half of
the pelvic bone; consists of the upper ilium, the lower
posterior ischium, and the lower anterior pubis (Chap-
ter 6).
Hippocampus (hih-poh-KAM-pus) Part of the brain in
the temporal lobe on the ﬂoor of the lateral ventricle;
it is essential for the formation of new memories (Chap-
ter 8).
Histamine (HISS-tah-meen) An inﬂammatory chemical
released by damaged tissues as part of innate immunity;
stimulates increased capillary permeability and vasodila-
tion (Chapter 5).
Hives (HIGHVZ) A very itchy eruption of the skin, usually
the result of an allergy (Chapter 5).
Hodgkin’s disease (HODJ-kinz) A malignancy of the lym-
phatic tissue; a lymphoma (Chapter 14).
Homeostasis (HOH-mee-oh-STAY-sis) The state in
which the internal environment of the body remains rel-
atively stable by responding appropriately to changes
(Chapter 1).
Homologous pair (hoh-MAHL-ah-gus) A pair of chromo-
somes, one maternal and one paternal, that contain genes
for the same characteristics (Chapter 21).
Homozygous (HOH-moh-ZYE-gus) Having two similar
alleles for a trait (Chapter 21).
Hormone (HOR-mohn) The secretion of an endocrine
gland that has speciﬁc effects on particular target organs
(Chapter 4).
Human leukocyte antigens (HLA) (HYOO-man LOO-
koh-sight AN-ti-jens) The antigens on white blood cells
that are representative of the antigens present on all the
cells of the individual; the “self” antigens that are con-
trolled by several genes on chromosome number 6; the
basis for tissue typing before an organ transplant is
attempted (Chapter 11).
Humerus (HYOO-mer-us) The long bone of the upper
arm (Chapter 6).
Humoral immunity (HYOO-mohr-uhl im-YOO-ni-tee)
The mechanism of adaptive immunity that involves anti-
body production and the destruction of foreign antigens
by the activities of B cells, T cells, and macrophages
(Syn.—antibody-mediated immunity) (Chapter 14).
Hyaline membrane disease (HIGH-e-lin MEM-brayn) A
pulmonary disorder of premature infants whose lungs
have not yet produced sufficient pulmonary surfactant to
permit inﬂation of the alveoli (Chapter 15).
Hydrochloric acid (HIGH-droh-KLOR-ik ASS-id) An
acid secreted by the parietal cells of the gastric pits of the
stomach; activates pepsin and maintains a pH of 1–2 in
the stomach (Chapter 16).
Hydrogen bond (HIGH-droh-jen BAHND) A weak bond
that helps maintain the three-dimensional shape of pro-
teins and nucleic acids (Chapter 2).
Hymen (HIGH-men) A thin fold of mucous membrane
that partially covers the vaginal oriﬁce (Chapter 20).
Hypercalcemia (HIGH-per-kal-SEE-mee-ah) A high
blood calcium level (Chapter 10).
Hypercapnia (HIGH-per-KAP-nee-ah) A higher than nor-
mal blood level of carbon dioxide (usually 45–50
mmHg) (Chapter 15).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

566
Glossary
Hyperglycemia (HIGH-per-gligh-SEE-mee-ah) A high
blood glucose level (Chapter 10).
Hyperkalemia (HIGH-per-kuh-LEE-mee-ah) A high
blood potassium level (Chapter 19).
Hypernatremia (HIGH-per-nuh-TREE-mee-ah) A high
blood sodium level (Chapter 19).
Hyperopia (HIGH-per-OH-pee-ah) Farsightedness; an
error of refraction in which only distant objects are seen
clearly (Chapter 9).
Hypertension (HIGH-per-TEN-shun) An abnormally
high blood pressure, consistently above 130/85 mmHg
(Chapter 13).
Hypertonic (HIGH-per-TAHN-ik) Having a greater con-
centration of dissolved materials than the solution used as
a comparison (Chapter 3).
Hypertrophy (high-PER-troh-fee) Increase in size of a
body part, especially of a muscle following long-term
exercise or overuse (Chapter 7).
Hypocalcemia (HIGH-poh-kal-SEE-mee-ah) A low blood
calcium level (Chapter 10).
Hypoglossal nerves (HIGH-poh-GLAH-suhl) Cranial
nerve pair XII; motor to the tongue (Chapter 8).
Hypoglycemia (HIGH-poh-gligh-SEE-mee-ah) A low
blood glucose level (Chapter 10).
Hypokalemia (HIGH-poh-kuh-LEE-mee-ah) A low blood
potassium level (Chapter 19).
Hyponatremia (HIGH-poh-nuh-TREE-mee-ah) A low
blood sodium level (Chapter 19).
Hypophyseal portal system (high-POFF-e-SEE-al POR-
tuhl) The pathway of circulation in which releasing hor-
mones from the hypothalamus circulate directly to the
anterior pituitary gland (Chapter 10).
Hypophysis
(high-POFF-e-sis) The pituitary gland
(Chapter 10).
Hypotension (HIGH-poh-TEN-shun) An abnormally low
blood pressure, consistently below 90/60 mmHg
(Chapter 13).
Hypothalamus (HIGH-poh-THAL-uh-muss) The part of
the brain superior to the pituitary gland and inferior to
the thalamus; its many functions include regulation of
body temperature and regulation of the secretions of the
pituitary gland (Chapter 8).
Hypothermia (HIGH-poh-THER-mee-ah) 1. The condi-
tion in which the body temperature is abnormally low
due to excessive exposure to cold. 2. A procedure used
during some types of surgery to lower body temperature
to reduce the patient’s need for oxygen (Chapter 17).
Hypotonic (HIGH-po-TAHN-ik) Having a lower concen-
tration of dissolved materials than the solution used as a
comparison (Chapter 3).
Hypovolemic shock (HIGH-poh-voh-LEEM-ik SHAHK)
A type of circulatory shock caused by a decrease in blood
volume (Chapter 13).
Hypoxia (high-PAHK-see-ah) A deﬁciency or lack of oxy-
gen (Chapter 2).
—I—
Idiopathic (ID-ee-oh-PATH-ik) A disease or disorder of
unknown cause (Chapter 11).
Ileocecal valve (ILL-ee-oh-SEE-kuhl VALV) The tissue of
the ileum that extends into the cecum and acts as a
sphincter; prevents the backup of fecal material into the
small intestine (Chapter 16).
Ileum (ILL-ee-um) The third and last portion of the small
intestine, about 11 feet long (Chapter 16).
Ilium (ILL-ee-um) The upper, ﬂared portion of the hip
bone (Chapter 6).
Immunity (im-YOO-ni-tee) The state of being protected
from an infectious disease, usually by having been
exposed to the infectious agent or a vaccine; human
immunity has two major components: innate and adap-
tive. Innate immunity is nonspeciﬁc, has no memory, and
consists of anatomic barriers, defensive cells, and chemi-
cals; adaptive immunity is speciﬁc, has memory, and may
involve antibodies (Chapter 11).
Impetigo (IM-pe-TYE-go) A bacterial infection of the skin
that occurs most often in children (Chapter 5).
Implantation (IM-plan-TAY-shun) Embedding of the
embryonic blastocyst in the endometrium of the uterus 5
to 8 days after fertilization (Chapter 21).
In vitro fertilization (IN VEE-troh FER-ti-li-ZAY-shun)
Fertilization outside the body, in which sperm and ova
are mixed in laboratory glassware; early embryos may
then be introduced into the uterus for implantation
(Chapter 20).
Inactivator (in-AK-ti-vay-tur) A chemical that inactivates a
neurotransmitter to prevent continuous impulses (Chap-
ter 8).
Inapparent infection (IN-uh-PAR-ent) An infection with-
out 
symptoms 
(Syn.—subclinical, 
asymptomatic)
(Chapter 22).
Incubation period (IN-kew-BAY-shun) In the course of an
infectious disease, the time between the entry of the
pathogen and the onset of symptoms (Chapter 22).
Incus (ING-kuss) The second of the three auditory bones
in the middle ear; transmits vibrations from the malleus
to the stapes (Chapter 9).
Infarct (IN-farkt) An area of tissue that has died due to lack
of a blood supply (Chapter 12).
Infection (in-FEK-shun) A disease process caused by the
invasion and multiplication of a microorganism (Chapter
22).
Inferior (in-FEER-ee-your) Below or lower (Chapter 1).
Inferior vena cava (VEE-nah KAY-vah) The vein that
returns blood from the lower body to the right atrium
(Chapter 12).
Infestation (in-fess-TAY-shun) The harboring of parasites,
especially worms or arthropods (Chapter 22).
Inﬂammation (in-ﬂuh-MAY-shun) The reactions of tissue
to injury (Chapter 5).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Glossary
567
Inguinal canal (IN-gwi-nuhl ka-NAL) The opening in the
lower abdominal wall that contains a spermatic cord in
men and the round ligament of the uterus in women; a
natural weak spot that may be the site of hernia forma-
tion (Chapter 20).
Inhibin (in-HIB-in) A protein hormone secreted by the sus-
tentacular cells of the testes and by the ovaries; inhibits
secretion of follicle-stimulating hormone (Chapter 10).
Inorganic (IN-or-GAN-ik) A chemical compound that does
not contain carbon–hydrogen covalent bonds; includes
water, salts, and oxygen (Chapter 1).
Insertion (in-SIR-shun) The more movable attachment
point of a muscle to a bone (Chapter 7).
Inspiration (in-spi-RAY-shun) Inhalation; the intake of air
to the lungs (Chapter 15).
Inspiratory reserve (in-SPYR-ah-tor-ee ree-ZERV) The
volume of air beyond tidal volume that can be inhaled
with the deepest inhalation; average: 2000–3000 mL
(Chapter 15).
Insulin (IN-syoo-lin) A protein hormone secreted by the
pancreas that decreases the blood glucose level by
increasing storage of glycogen and use of glucose by cells
for energy production (Chapter 10).
Integumentary system (in-TEG-yoo-MEN-tah-ree) The
organ system that consists of the skin and its accessory
structures and the subcutaneous tissue (Chapter 5).
Intensity (in-TEN-si-tee) The degree to which a sensation
is felt (Chapter 9).
Intercalated disc (IN-ter-kuh-lay-ted DISK) A modiﬁca-
tion of the cell membrane of cardiac muscle cells; the end
membranes of adjacent cells are folded and ﬁt into one
another; permits rapid transmission of the electrical
impulses that bring about contraction (Chapter 4).
Intercostal muscles (IN-ter-KAHS-tuhl MUSS-uhls) The
skeletal muscles between the ribs; the external inter-
costals pull the ribs up and out for inhalation; the inter-
nal intercostals pull the ribs down and in for a forced
exhalation (Syn.—spareribs) (Chapter 15).
Intercostal nerves (IN-ter-KAHS-tuhl NERVS) The pairs
of peripheral nerves that are motor to the intercostal
muscles (Chapter 15).
Interferon (in-ter-FEER-on) A chemical produced by T
cells or by cells infected with viruses; is part of innate
immunity and prevents the reproduction of viruses
(Chapter 14).
Internal (in-TER-nuhl) On the inside, or away from the
surface (Chapter 1).
Internal anal sphincter (in-TER-nuhl AY-nuhl SFINK-
ter) The circular smooth muscle that surrounds the anus;
relaxes as part of the defecation reﬂex to permit defeca-
tion (Chapter 16).
Internal respiration (in-TER-nuhl RES-pi-RAY-shun)
The exchange of gases between the blood in the systemic
capillaries and the surrounding tissue ﬂuid and cells
(Chapter 15).
Internal urethral sphincter (yoo-REE-thruhl SFINK-ter)
The smooth muscle sphincter at the junction of the uri-
nary bladder and the urethra; relaxes as part of the urina-
tion reﬂex to permit urination (Chapter 18).
Interneuron (IN-ter-NYOOR-on) A nerve cell entirely
within the central nervous system (Chapter 8).
Interphase (IN-ter-fayz) The period of time between
mitotic divisions during which DNA replication takes
place (Chapter 3).
Interstitial cells (in-ter-STISH-uhl SELLS) The cells in
the testes that secrete testosterone when stimulated by
LH (Chapter 20).
Intestinal glands (in-TESS-tin-uhl) 1. The glands of the
small intestine that secrete digestive enzymes. 2. The
glands of the large intestine that secrete mucus (Chapter
16).
Intracellular ﬂuid (IN-trah-SELL-yoo-ler FLOO-id) The
water found within cells (Chapter 2).
Intramuscular injection (in-trah-MUSS-kew-ler in-JEK-
shun) An injection of a medication into a muscle
(Chapter 7).
Intrapleural pressure (in-trah-PLOOR-uhl) The pres-
sure within the potential pleural space; always slightly
below atmospheric pressure, about 756 mmHg (Chap-
ter 15).
Intrapulmonic pressure (in-trah-pull-MAHN-ik) The air
pressure within the bronchial tree and alveoli; ﬂuctuates
below and above atmospheric pressure during breathing
(Chapter 15).
Intrinsic factor (in-TRIN-sik FAK-ter) A chemical pro-
duced by the parietal cells of the gastric mucosa; neces-
sary for the absorption of vitamin B12 (Chapter 11).
Involuntary muscle
(in-VAHL-un-tary MUSS-uhl)
Another name for smooth muscle tissue (Chapter 4).
Ion (EYE-on) An atom or group of atoms with an electrical
charge (Chapter 2).
Ionic bond (eye-ON-ik) A chemical bond formed by the
loss and gain of electrons between atoms (Chapter 2).
Iris (EYE-ris) The colored part of the eye, between the
cornea and lens; made of two sets of smooth muscle
ﬁbers that regulate the size of the pupil, the opening in
the center of the iris (from the Latin “rainbow”) (Chapter
9).
Ischemic (iss-KEY-mik) Lack of blood to a body part, often
due to an obstruction in circulation (Chapter 12).
Ischium (ISH-ee-um) The lower posterior part of the hip
bone (Chapter 6).
Islets of Langerhans (EYE-lets of LAHNG-er-hanz) The
endocrine portions of the pancreas that secrete insulin
and glucagon (Syn.—pancreatic islets) (Chapter 10).
Isometric exercise (EYE-so-MEH-trik) Contraction of
muscles without movement of a body part (Chapter 7).
Isotonic (EYE-so-TAHN-ik) Having the same concentra-
tion of dissolved materials as the solution used as a com-
parison (Chapter 3).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

568
Glossary
Isotonic exercise (EYE-so-TAHN-ik) Contraction of
muscles with movement of a body part (Chapter 7).
—J—
Jaundice (JAWN-diss) A condition characterized by a yel-
low color in the whites of the eyes and in light skin;
caused by an elevated blood level of bilirubin. May be
hepatic, prehepatic, or posthepatic in origin (Chapter 11).
Jejunum (je-JOO-num) The second portion of the small
intestine, about 8 feet long (Chapter 16).
Joint capsule (JOYNT KAP-suhl) The ﬁbrous connective
tissue sheath that encloses a joint (Chapter 6).
Juxtaglomerular cells
(JUKS-tah-gloh-MER-yoo-ler
SELLS) Cells in the wall of the afferent arteriole that
secrete renin when blood pressure decreases (Chapter
18).
—K—
Keratin (KER-uh-tin) A protein produced by epidermal
cells; found in the epidermis, hair, and nails (from the
Greek “horn”) (Chapter 5).
Keratinocyte (KER-uh-TIN-oh-sight) A cell of the epider-
mis, produces keratin before dying (Chapter 5).
Ketoacidosis (KEY-toh-ass-i-DOH-sis) A metabolic acido-
sis that results from the accumulation of ketones in the
blood when fats and proteins are used for energy pro-
duction (Chapter 10).
Ketones (KEY-tohns) Organic acid molecules that are
formed from fats or amino acids when these nutrients are
used for energy production; include acetone and ace-
toacetic acid (Chapter 10).
Ketonuria
(KEY-ton-YOO-ree-ah) The presence of
ketones in urine (Chapter 18).
Kidneys (KID-nees) The two organs on either side of the
vertebral column in the upper abdomen that produce
urine to eliminate waste products and to regulate the vol-
ume, pH, and ﬂuid–electrolyte balance of the blood
(Chapter 5).
Kilocalorie (KILL-oh-KAL-oh-ree) A Calorie, which is
1000 calories; used to indicate the energy content of
foods or the energy expended in activity (See: Calorie)
(Chapter 17).
Kinesthetic sense (KIN-ess-THET-ik) Muscle sense
(Chapter 9).
Krebs cycle (KREBS SIGH-kuhl) The stage of cell respi-
ration comprising a series of reactions in which pyruvic
acid or acetyl CoA is broken down to carbon dioxide and
ATP is formed; aerobic; takes place in the mitochondria
of cells (Syn.—citric acid cycle) (Chapter 17).
Kupffer cells (KUP-fer SELLS) The macrophages of the
liver; phagocytize pathogens and old red blood cells
(Chapter 16).
Kyphosis (kye-FOH-sis) An exaggerated thoracic curvature
of the vertebral column (Chapter 6).
—L—
Labia majora (LAY-bee-uh muh-JOR-ah) The outer folds
of skin of the vulva; enclose the labia minora and the
vestibule (Chapter 20).
Labia minora (LAY-bee-uh min-OR-ah) The inner folds of
the vulva; enclose the vestibule (Chapter 20).
Labor (LAY-ber) The process by which a fetus is expelled
from the uterus through the vagina to the exterior of the
body (Chapter 21).
Labyrinth (LAB-i-rinth) 1. A maze; an interconnected
series of passageways. 2. In the inner ear, the bony
labyrinth is a series of tunnels in the temporal bone lined
with membrane called the membranous labyrinth
(Chapter 9).
Lacrimal glands (LAK-ri-muhl) The glands that secrete
tears, located at the upper, outer corner of each eyeball
(Chapter 9).
Lactase (LAK-tays) A digestive enzyme that breaks down
lactose to glucose and galactose; secreted by the small
intestine (Chapter 16).
Lacteals (lak-TEELS) The lymph capillaries in the villi of
the small intestine, which absorb the fat-soluble end
products of digestion (Chapter 14).
Lactic acid (LAK-tik ASS-id) The chemical end product of
anaerobic cell respiration; contributes to fatigue in mus-
cle cells (Chapter 7).
Lactose (LAK-tohs) A disaccharide made of one glucose and
one galactose molecule (Syn.—milk sugar) (Chapter 2).
Lactose intolerance (LAK-tohs in-TAHL-er-ense) The
inability to digest lactose due to a deﬁciency of the
enzyme lactase; may be congenital or acquired (Chapter
16).
Langerhans cell (LAHNG-er-hanz SELL) A mobile,
phagocytic cell of the epidermis (Syn.—dendritic cell)
(Chapter 5).
Large intestine (LARJ in-TESS-tin) The organ of the ali-
mentary tube that extends from the small intestine to the
anus; absorbs water, minerals, and vitamins and elimi-
nates undigested materials (Syn.—colon) (Chapter 16).
Laryngopharynx (la-RIN-goh-FA-rinks) The lower por-
tion of the pharynx that opens into the larynx and
the esophagus; a passageway for both air and food
(Chapter 15).
Larynx (LA-rinks) The organ that is an airway between the
pharynx and the trachea; contains the vocal cords for
speech (Syn.—voice box) (Chapter 15).
Lateral (LAT-er-uhl) Away from the midline, or at the side
(Chapter 1).
Lens (LENZ) The oval structure of the eye posterior to the
pupil, made of transparent protein; the only adjustable
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Glossary
569
portion of the refraction pathway for the focusing of light
rays (Chapter 9).
Lesion (LEE-zhun) An area of pathologically altered tissue;
an injury or wound (Chapter 5).
Leukemia (loo-KEE-mee-ah) Malignancy of blood-form-
ing tissues, in which large numbers of immature and non-
functional white blood cells are produced (Chapter 11).
Leukocyte (LOO-koh-sight) White blood cell; the ﬁve
kinds are neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils, lympho-
cytes, and monocytes (Chapter 11).
Leukocytosis (LOO-koh-sigh-TOH-sis) An elevated white
blood cell count, often an indication of infection
(Chapter 11).
Leukopenia (LOO-koh-PEE-nee-ah) An abnormally low
white blood cell count; may be the result of aplastic ane-
mia, or a side effect of some medications (Chapter 11).
Leukotrienes (LOO-koh-TRY-ens) Chemicals produced
by basophils and mast cells from the phospholipids of
their cell membranes; they increase capillary permeabil-
ity and attract WBCs during inﬂammation (Chapter 14).
Ligament (LIG-uh-ment) A ﬁbrous connective tissue struc-
ture that connects bone to bone (Chapter 6).
Lipase (LYE-pays) A digestive enzyme that breaks down
emulsiﬁed fats to fatty acids and glycerol; secreted by the
pancreas (Chapter 16).
Lipid (LIP-id) An organic chemical insoluble in water;
includes true fats, phospholipids, and steroids (Chap-
ter 2).
Lipoprotein (li-poh-PRO-teen) A large molecule that is a
combination of proteins, triglycerides, and cholesterol;
formed by the liver to circulate lipids in the blood
(Chapter 16).
Lithotripsy (LITH-oh-TRIP-see) Crushing of gallstones
or renal calculi by an instrument that uses ultrasonic
waves applied to the exterior of the body (Chapter 16).
Liver (LIV-er) The organ in the upper right and center of
the abdominal cavity; secretes bile for the emulsiﬁcation
of fats in digestion; has many other functions related to
the metabolism of nutrients and the composition of
blood (Chapter 16).
Liver lobule (LIV-er LAH-byool) The structural unit of
the liver; a columnar hexagon of liver cells and sinusoids
surrounding a central vein; includes the smallest bile
ducts (Chapter 16).
Localized infection (LOH-kuhl-IZ’D) An infection con-
ﬁned to one body organ or site (Chapter 22).
Longitudinal section (LAWNJ-i-TOO-din-uhl SEK-
shun) A plane or cut along the long axis of an organ or
the body (Chapter 1).
Loop of Henle (LOOP of HEN-lee) The part of a renal
tubule that extends from the proximal convoluted tubule
to the distal convoluted tubule (Chapter 18).
Lordosis (lor-DOH-sis) An exaggerated lumbar curvature
of the vertebral column (Chapter 6).
Lower 
esophageal 
sphincter
(e-SOF-uh-JEE-uhl
SFINK-ter) The circular smooth muscle at the lower
end of the esophagus; prevents backup of stomach con-
tents (Syn.—cardiac sphincter) (Chapter 16).
Lower respiratory tract (LOH-er RES-pi-rah-TOR-ee
TRAKT) The respiratory organs located within the
chest cavity (Chapter 15).
Lumbar puncture (LUM-bar PUNK-chur) A diagnostic
procedure that involves removal of cerebrospinal ﬂuid
from the lumbar meningeal sac to assess the pressure and
constituents of cerebrospinal ﬂuid (Chapter 8).
Lumbar vertebrae (LUM-bar VER-te-bray) The ﬁve large
vertebrae in the small of the back (Chapter 6).
Lungs (LUHNGS) The paired organs in the thoracic cav-
ity in which gas exchange takes place between the air in
the alveoli and the blood in the pulmonary capillaries
(Chapter 15).
Luteinizing hormone (LH or ICSH) (LOO-tee-in-EYE-
zing) A gonadotropic hormone produced by the anterior
pituitary gland that, in men, stimulates secretion of
testosterone by the testes or, in women, stimulates ovula-
tion and secretion of progesterone by the corpus luteum
in the ovary (Chapter 10).
Lymph (LIMF) The water found within lymphatic vessels
(Chapter 2).
Lymph node (LIMF NOHD) A small mass of lymphatic
tissue located along the pathway of a lymph vessel; pro-
duces some lymphocytes and destroys pathogens in the
lymph (Chapter 14).
Lymph nodule (LIMF NAHD-yool) A small mass of lym-
phatic tissue located in a mucous membrane; destroys
pathogens that penetrate mucous membranes (Chapter
14).
Lymphatic tissue (lim-FAT-ik TISH-yoo) A hemopoietic
tissue that produces some lymphocytes and in which lym-
phocytes mature and are activated; found in the spleen
and lymph nodes and nodules (Chapter 11).
Lymphocyte (LIM-foh-sight) A type of white blood cell
(agranular); T cells and B cells are involved in the speciﬁc
responses of adaptive immunity; natural killer cells are
nonspeciﬁc and are part of innate immunity (Chapter
11).
Lysosome (LYE-soh-zome) A cell organelle found in the
cytoplasm; contains enzymes that digest damaged cell
parts or material ingested by the cell (Chapter 3).
Lysozyme (LYE-soh-zyme) An enzyme in tears and saliva
that inhibits the growth of bacteria in these ﬂuids
(Chapter 9).
—M—
Macrophage (MAK-roh-fahj) A phagocytic cell derived
from monocytes that contributes to both innate
and adaptive immunity. Capable of phagocytosis of
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

570
Glossary
pathogens, dead or damaged cells, and old red blood
cells; also involved in recognition of foreign antigens and
activation of lymphocytes (Chapter 11).
Macula lutea (MAK-yoo-lah LOO-tee-ah) A spot in the
center of the retina; contains the fovea (Chapter 9).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (mag-NET-ik REZ-
ah-nanse IM-ah-jing) A diagnostic imaging technique
that uses a magnetic ﬁeld and a computer to integrate the
images of internal organs (Chapter 1).
Malignant (muh-LIG-nunt) Tending to spread and become
worse; used especially with reference to cancer (Chapter
3).
Malleus (MAL-ee-us) The ﬁrst of the three auditory bones
in the middle ear; transmits vibrations from the eardrum
to the incus (Chapter 9).
Maltase (MAWL-tays) A digestive enzyme that breaks
down maltose to glucose; secreted by the small intestine
(Chapter 16).
Maltose (MAWL-tohs) A disaccharide made of two glucose
molecules (Chapter 2).
Mammary glands (MAM-uh-ree) The glands of the female
breasts that secrete milk; secretion and release of milk are
under hormonal control (Chapter 20).
Mammography (mah-MOG-rah-fee) A diagnostic proce-
dure that uses radiography to detect breast cancer
(Chapter 20).
Mandible (MAN-di-buhl) The lower jaw bone (Chapter 6).
Manubrium (muh-NOO-bree-um) The upper part of the
sternum (Chapter 6).
Marrow canal (MA-roh ka-NAL) The cavity within the
diaphysis of a long bone; contains yellow bone marrow
(Chapter 4).
Mastoid sinus (MASS-toyd) An air cavity within the mas-
toid process of the temporal bone (Chapter 6).
Matrix (MAY-triks) 1. The non-living intercellular material
that is part of connective tissues. 2. The part of a hair
root in which mitosis takes place (Chapter 4).
Matter (MAT-ter) Anything that occupies space; may be
solid, liquid, or gas; may be living or non-living (Chapter
2).
Maxilla (mak-SILL-ah) The upper jaw bone (Chapter 6).
Mechanical digestion (muh-KAN-i-kuhl dye-JES-chun)
The physical breakdown of food into smaller pieces,
which increases the surface area for the action of diges-
tive enzymes (Chapter 16).
Medial (MEE-dee-uhl) Toward the midline, or in the mid-
dle (Chapter 1).
Mediastinum (ME-dee-ah-STYE-num) The area or space
between the lungs; contains the heart and great vessels
(Chapter 12).
Medulla (muh-DEW-lah) (muh-DULL-ah) 1. The part of
the brain superior to the spinal cord; regulates vital func-
tions such as heart rate, respiration, and blood pressure.
2. The inner part of an organ, such as the renal medulla
or the adrenal medulla (Chapter 8).
Megakaryocyte (MEH-ga-KA-ree-oh-sight) A cell in the
red bone marrow that breaks up into small fragments
called platelets, which then circulate in peripheral blood
(Chapter 11).
Meiosis (my-OH-sis) The process of cell division in which
one cell with the diploid number of chromosomes divides
twice to form four cells, each with the haploid number of
chromosomes; forms gametes (Chapter 3).
Meissner’s plexus (MIZE-ners PLEK-sus) The autonomic
nerve plexus in the submucosa of the organs of the ali-
mentary tube; regulates secretions of the glands in the
mucosa of these organs (Syn.—submucosal plexus)
(Chapter 16).
Melanin (MEL-uh-nin) A protein pigment produced by
melanocytes. Absorbs ultraviolet light; gives color to
the skin, hair, iris, and choroid layer of the eye (Chap-
ter 5).
Melanocyte (muh-LAN-o-sight) A cell in the lower epider-
mis that synthesizes the pigment melanin (Chapter 5).
Melanoma (MEL-ah-NOH-mah) Malignant pigmented
mole or nevus (Chapter 5).
Melatonin (mel-ah-TOH-nin) A hormone produced by the
pineal gland; inﬂuences sleep cycles (Chapter 10).
Membrane (MEM-brayn) A sheet of tissue; may be made of
epithelial tissue or connective tissue (Chapter 4).
Meninges (me-NIN-jeez) The connective tissue mem-
branes that line the dorsal cavity and cover the brain and
spinal cord (Chapter 1).
Meningitis (MEN-in-JIGH-tis) Inflammation of the
meninges, most often the result of bacterial infection
(Chapter 8).
Menopause (MEN-ah-paws) The period during life in
which menstrual activity ceases; usually occurs between
the ages of 45 and 55 years (Chapter 20).
Menstrual cycle (MEN-stroo-uhl SIGH-kuhl) The peri-
odic series of changes that occur in the female reproduc-
tive tract; the average cycle is 28 days (Chapter 20).
Menstruation (MEN-stroo-AY-shun) The periodic dis-
charge of a bloody ﬂuid from the uterus that occurs at
regular intervals from puberty to menopause (Chapter
20).
Mesentery (MEZ-en-TER-ee) The visceral peritoneum
(serous) that covers the abdominal organs; a large fold
attaches the small intestine to the posterior abdominal
wall (Chapter 1).
Mesoderm (MEZ-oh-derm) The middle primary germ
layer of cells of an embryo; gives rise to muscles, bones,
and connective tissues (Chapter 21).
Metabolic acidosis (MET-uh-BAH-lik ass-i-DOH-sis) A
condition in which the blood pH is lower than normal,
caused by any disorder that increases the number of
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Glossary
571
acidic molecules in the body or increases the loss of alka-
line molecules (Chapter 15).
Metabolic alkalosis (MET-uh-BAH-lik al-kah-LOH-sis)
A condition in which the blood pH is higher than nor-
mal, caused by any disorder that decreases the number of
acidic molecules in the body or increases the number of
alkaline molecules (Chapter 15).
Metabolism (muh-TAB-uh-lizm) All of the physical
changes and chemical reactions that take place within the
body; includes anabolism and catabolism (Chapter 1).
Metacarpals (MET-uh-KAR-puhls) The ﬁve long bones in
the palm of the hand (Chapter 6).
Metaphase (MET-ah-fayz) The second stage of mitosis, in
which the pairs of chromatids line up on the equator of
the cell (Chapter 3).
Metastasis (muh-TASS-tuh-sis) The spread of disease from
one part of the body to another (Chapter 3).
Metatarsals (MET-uh-TAR-suhls) The ﬁve long bones in
the arch of the foot (Chapter 6).
Microglia (my-kroh-GLEE-ah) A type of neuroglia capable
of movement and phagocytosis of pathogens (Chapter 8).
Micron (MY-kron) Old name for a micrometer (Chapter 3).
Micrometer (MY-kroh-mee-ter) A unit of linear measure
equal to one thousandth of a millimeter (0.001 mm)
(Chapter 3).
Microvilli (MY-kro-VILL-eye) Folds of the cell membrane
on the free surface of an epithelial cell; increase the sur-
face area for absorption (Chapter 3).
Micturition (MIK-tyoo-RISH-un) Urination; the voiding
or elimination of urine from the urinary bladder
(Chapter 18).
Midbrain (MID-brayn) The part of the brain between the
pons and hypothalamus; regulates visual, auditory, and
righting reﬂexes (Chapter 8).
Mineral (MIN-er-al) An inorganic element or compound;
many are needed by the body for normal metabolism and
growth (Chapter 17).
Mineralocorticoids (MIN-er-al-oh-KOR-ti-koidz) The
hormones secreted by the adrenal cortex that affect
ﬂuid–electrolyte balance; aldosterone is the major hor-
mone in this group (Chapter 10).
Minute respiratory volume (MIN-uht RES-pi-rah-TOR-
ee VAHL-yoom) The volume of air inhaled and exhaled
in 1 minute; calculated by multiplying tidal volume by
number of respirations per minute (Chapter 15).
Mitochondria (MY-toh-KAHN-dree-ah) The cell orga-
nelles in which aerobic cell respiration takes place and
energy (ATP) is produced; found in the cytoplasm of a
cell (Chapter 3).
Mitosis (my-TOH-sis) The process of cell division in
which one cell with the diploid number of chromosomes
divides once to form two identical cells, each with the
diploid number of chromosomes (Chapter 3).
Mitral valve (MY-truhl VALV) The left AV valve (bicuspid
valve), which prevents backﬂow of blood from the left
ventricle to the left atrium when the ventricle contracts
(Chapter 12).
Mixed nerve (MIKSD NERV) A nerve that contains both
sensory and motor neurons (Chapter 8).
Molecule (MAHL-e-kuhl) A chemical combination of two
or more atoms (Chapter 2).
Monocyte (MAH-no-sight) A type of white blood cell
(agranular); differentiates into a macrophage, which is
capable of phagocytosis of pathogens and dead or dam-
aged cells (Chapter 11).
Monosaccharide (MAH-noh-SAK-ah-ride) A carbohy-
drate molecule that is a single sugar; includes the hexose
and pentose sugars (Chapter 2).
Morula (MOR-yoo-lah) An early stage of embryonic devel-
opment, a solid sphere of cells (Chapter 21).
Motility (moh-TILL-e-tee) The ability to move (Chapter
3).
Motion sickness (MOH-shun) Queasiness that accompa-
nies repetitive or unexpected motion (Chapter 9).
Motor area (MOH-ter) Part of the cerebral cortex of the
frontal lobe; generates the impulses necessary for volun-
tary movement (Chapter 7).
Motor neuron (MOH-ter NYOOR-on) A nerve cell that
carries impulses from the central nervous system to an
effector (Syn.—efferent neuron) (Chapter 8).
Mucosa (mew-KOH-suh) A mucous membrane, the
epithelial lining of a body cavity that opens to the envi-
ronment (Chapter 4).
Mucous membrane (MEW-kuss MEM-brayn) The
epithelial tissue lining of a body tract that opens to the
environment (Chapter 4).
Mucus (MEW-kuss) The thick ﬂuid secreted by mucous
membranes or mucous glands (Chapter 4).
Multicellular (MULL-tee-SELL-yoo-lar) Consisting of
more than one cell; made of many cells (Chapter 4).
Multiple sclerosis (MULL-ti-puhl skle-ROH-sis) A pro-
gressive nervous system disorder, an autoimmune dis-
ease, characterized by the degeneration of the myelin
sheaths of CNS neurons (Chapter 8).
Muscle fatigue (MUSS-uhl fah-TEEG) The state in which
muscle ﬁbers cannot contract efficiently, due to a lack of
oxygen and the accumulation of lactic acid (Chapter 7).
Muscle ﬁber (MUSS-uhl FYE-ber) A muscle cell (Chapter
7).
Muscle sense (MUSS-uhl SENSE) The conscious or
unconscious awareness of where the muscles are, and
their degree of contraction, without having to look at
them (Chapter 7).
Muscle tissue (MUSS-uhl TISH-yoo) The tissue special-
ized for contraction and movement of parts of the body
(Chapter 4).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

572
Glossary
Muscle tone (MUSS-uhl TONE) The state of slight con-
traction present in healthy muscles (Chapter 7).
Muscular dystrophy (MUSS-kyoo-ler DIS-truh-fee) A
genetic disease characterized by the replacement of mus-
cle tissue by ﬁbrous connective tissue or adipose tissue,
with progressive loss of muscle functioning; the most
common form is Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy
(Chapter 7).
Muscular system (MUSS-kew-ler) The organ system that
consists of the skeletal muscles and tendons; its functions
are to move the skeleton and produce body heat (Chapter
7).
Mutation (mew-TAY-shun) A change in DNA; a genetic
change that may be passed to offspring (Chapter 3).
Myalgia (my-AL-jee-ah) Pain or tenderness in a muscle
(Chapter 7).
Myasthenia gravis (MY-ass-THEE-nee-yuh GRAH-viss)
An autoimmune disease characterized by extreme muscle
weakness and fatigue following minimal exertion
(Chapter 7).
Mycosis (my-KOH-sis) (Pl.—mycoses) An infection caused
by a pathogenic fungus (Chapter 22).
Myelin (MY-uh-lin) A phospholipid produced by Schwann
cells and oligodendrocytes that forms the myelin sheath
of axons and dendrites (Chapter 2).
Myelin sheath (MY-uh-lin SHEETH) The white, seg-
mented, phospholipid sheath of most axons and den-
drites; provides electrical insulation and increases the
speed of impulse transmission (Chapter 4).
Myocardial infarction (MI) (MY-oh-KAR-dee-yuhl in-
FARK-shun) Death of part of the heart muscle due to
lack of oxygen; often the result of an obstruction in a
coronary artery (Syn.—heart attack) (Chapter 12).
Myocardium (MY-oh-KAR-dee-um) The cardiac muscle
tissue that forms the walls of the chambers of the heart
(Chapter 4).
Myoﬁbril (MY-oh-FYE-bril) A linear arrangement of sar-
comeres within a muscle ﬁber (Chapter 7).
Myoglobin (MY-oh-GLOW-bin) The protein in muscle
ﬁbers that contains iron and stores oxygen in muscle
ﬁbers (Chapter 7).
Myometrium (MY-oh-MEE-tree-uhm) The smooth mus-
cle layer of the uterus; contracts for labor and delivery of
an infant (Chapter 20).
Myopathy (my-AH-puh-thee) A disease or abnormal condi-
tion of skeletal muscles (Chapter 7).
Myopia (my-OH-pee-ah) Nearsightedness; an error of
refraction in which only near objects are seen clearly
(Chapter 9).
Myosin (MY-oh-sin) A contractile protein in the sarco-
meres of muscle ﬁbers; pulls actin ﬁlaments (Chapter 7).
Myxedema (MIK-suh-DEE-mah) Hyposecretion of thy-
roxine in an adult; decreased metabolic rate results in
physical and mental lethargy (Chapter 10).
—N—
Nail follicle (NAYL FAH-li-kuhl) The structure within the
skin of a ﬁnger or toe in which a nail grows; mitosis takes
place in the nail root (Chapter 5).
Narrow spectrum (NAR-oh SPEK-trum) An antibiotic
that is effective against only a few kinds of bacteria
(Chapter 22).
Nasal cavities (NAY-zuhl KAV-i-tees) The two air cavities
within the skull through which air passes from the nos-
trils to the nasopharynx; separated by the nasal septum
(Chapter 15).
Nasal mucosa (NAY-zuhl mew-KOH-sah) The lining of
the nasal cavities; made of ciliated epithelium that warms
and moistens the incoming air and sweeps mucus, dust,
and pathogens toward the nasopharynx (Chapter 15).
Nasal septum (NAY-zuhl SEP-tum) The vertical plate
made of bone and cartilage that separates the two nasal
cavities (Chapter 15).
Nasolacrimal duct (NAY-zo-LAK-ri-muhl) A duct that
carries tears from the lacrimal sac to the nasal cavity
(Chapter 9).
Nasopharynx (NAY-zo-FA-rinks) The upper portion of the
pharynx above the level of the soft palate; an air passage-
way (Chapter 15).
Natural killer cell (NATCH-er-al KILL-er SELL) A type
of lymphocyte that is not speciﬁc and is part of innate
immunity; kills pathogens and tumor cells by direct con-
tact (Chapter 14).
Necrotizing fasciitis (NEK-roh-ty-zing FASH-ee-EYE-
tis) An acute, fulminant, and potentially fatal infection
of fasciae often caused by Group A streptococci (Chap-
ter 5).
Negative feedback mechanism (NEG-ah-tiv FEED-bak)
A control system in which a stimulus initiates a response
that reverses or reduces the stimulus, thereby stopping
the response until the stimulus occurs again and there is
a need for the response (Chapter 1).
Neonatal herpes (NEE-oh-NAY-tal HER-peez) A herpes
simplex infection in a newborn; may cause encephalitis
and may be fatal (Chapter 20).
Nephritis (ne-FRY-tis) Inﬂammation of the kidney; may be
caused by bacterial infection or toxic chemicals (Chapter
18).
Nephron (NEFF-ron) The structural and functional unit of
the kidney that forms urine; consists of a renal corpuscle
and a renal tubule (Chapter 18).
Nerve (NERV) A group of neurons, together with blood
vessels and connective tissue (Chapter 8).
Nerve tissue (NERV TISH-yoo) The tissue specialized to
generate and transmit electrochemical impulses that have
many functions in the maintenance of homeostasis
(Chapter 4).
Nerve tract (NERV TRAKT) A group of neurons that
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Glossary
573
share a common function within the central nervous sys-
tem; a tract may be ascending (sensory) or descending
(motor) (Chapter 8).
Nervous system (NERV-us SIS-tem) The organ system
that regulates body functions by means of electrochemi-
cal impulses; consists of the brain, spinal cord, cranial
nerves, and spinal nerves (Chapter 8).
Neuralgia (new-RAL-jee-ah) Sharp, severe pain along the
course of a nerve (Chapter 8).
Neuritis (new-RYE-tis) Inﬂammation of a nerve (Chapter
8).
Neuroglia (new-ROG-lee-ah) The non-neuronal cells of
the central nervous system; produce the myelin sheath
and contribute to the blood–brain barrier, among other
functions (Chapter 4).
Neurohypophysis (NEW-roo-high-POFF-e-sis) The pos-
terior pituitary gland (Chapter 10).
Neurolemma (NEW-roh-LEM-ah) The sheath around
peripheral axons and dendrites, formed by the cytoplasm
and nuclei of Schwann cells; is essential for the regener-
ation of damaged peripheral neurons (Chapter 8).
Neuromuscular junction (NYOOR-oh-MUSS-kew-lar
JUNK-shun) The termination of a motor neuron on the
sarcolemma of a muscle ﬁber; the synapse is the micro-
scopic space between the two structures (Chapter 7).
Neuron (NYOOR-on) A nerve cell; consists of a cell body,
an axon, and dendrites (Chapter 4).
Neuropathy (new-RAH-puh-thee) Any disease or disorder
of the nerves; may be primary, such as shingles or rabies,
or secondary, such as diabetic neuropathy (Chapter 8).
Neurotoxin (NEW-roh-TOK-sin) A chemical that dis-
rupts an aspect of the functioning of the nervous system
(Chapter 7).
Neurotransmitter
(NYOOR-oh-TRANS-mih-ter) A
chemical released by the axon of a neuron, which crosses
a synapse and affects the electrical activity of the postsy-
naptic membrane (neuron or muscle cell or gland)
(Chapter 4).
Neutron (NEW-trahn) A subatomic particle that has no
electrical charge; found in the nucleus of an atom
(Chapter 2).
Neutrophil (NEW-troh-ﬁll) A type of granular white blood
cell; capable of phagocytosis of pathogens (Chapter 11).
Nevus (NEE-vus) A pigmented area of the skin; a mole
(Chapter 5).
Night blindness (NITE BLIND-ness) The inability to see
well in dim light or at night; may result from a vitamin A
deﬁciency (Chapter 9).
Nine areas (NYNE) The subdivision of the abdomen into
nine equal areas to facilitate the description of locations
(Chapter 1).
Non-communicable disease (NON-kuhm-YOO-ni-kah-
b’l) A disease that cannot be directly or indirectly trans-
mitted from host to host (Chapter 22).
Non-essential amino acids (NON-e-SEN-shul ah-MEE-
noh ASS-ids) The amino acids that can be synthesized by
the liver (Chapter 16).
Norepinephrine
(NOR-ep-i-NEFF-rin) A hormone
secreted by the adrenal medulla that causes vasoconstric-
tion throughout the body, which raises blood pressure in
stressful situations (Chapter 10).
Normal ﬂora (NOR-muhl FLOOR-uh) 1. The population
of microorganisms that is usually present in certain parts
of the body. 2. In the colon, the bacteria that produce
vitamins and inhibit the growth of pathogens (Chapter
16).
Normoblast (NOR-mow-blast) A red blood cell with a
nucleus, an immature stage in red blood cell formation;
usually found in the red bone marrow and not in the
peripheral circulation (Chapter 11).
Nosocomial infection (no-zoh-KOH-mee-uhl) An infec-
tion acquired in a hospital or other healthcare institution
(Chapter 22).
Nuclear membrane (NEW-klee-er MEM-brayn) The
double-layer membrane that encloses the nucleus of a
cell (Chapter 3).
Nucleic acid (new-KLEE-ik ASS-id) An organic chemical
that is made of nucleotide subunits. Examples are DNA
and RNA (Chapter 2).
Nucleolus (new-KLEE-oh-lus) A small structure made of
DNA, RNA, and protein. Found in the nucleus of a cell;
produces ribosomal RNA (Chapter 3).
Nucleotide (NEW-klee-oh-tide) An organic compound
that consists of a pentose sugar, a phosphate group, and
one of ﬁve nitrogenous bases (adenine, guanine, cytosine,
thymine, or uracil); the subunits of DNA and RNA
(Chapter 2).
Nucleus (NEW-klee-us) 1. The membrane bound part of a
cell that contains the hereditary material in chromo-
somes. 2. The central part of an atom containing protons
and neutrons (Chapters 2, 3).
—O—
Occipital bone (ok-SIP-i-tuhl) The ﬂat bone that forms
the back of the skull (Chapter 6).
Occipital lobes (ok-SIP-i-tuhl LOWBS) The most poste-
rior part of the cerebrum; contain the visual areas
(Chapter 8).
Oculomotor nerves (OK-yoo-loh-MOH-tur) Cranial
nerve pair III; motor to the extrinsic muscles of the eye,
the ciliary body, and the iris (Chapter 8).
Olfactory nerves (ohl-FAK-tuh-ree) Cranial nerve pair I;
sensory for smell (Chapter 8).
Olfactory receptors (ohl-FAK-tuh-ree ree-SEP-ters) The
sensory receptors in the upper nasal cavities that detect
vaporized chemicals, providing a sense of smell (Chap-
ter 9).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

574
Glossary
Oligodendrocyte (ah-li-goh-DEN-droh-sight) A type of
neuroglia that produces the myelin sheath around neu-
rons of the central nervous system (Chapter 8).
Oligosaccharide (ah-lig-oh-SAK-ah-ride) A carbohydrate
molecule that consists of from 3–20 monosaccharides
bonded together; form “self ” antigens on cell mem-
branes (Chapter 2).
Oliguria (AH-li-GYOO-ree-ah) Decreased urine forma-
tion and output (Chapter 18).
Oogenesis (Oh-oh-JEN-e-sis) The process of meiosis in
the ovary to produce an ovum (Chapter 3).
Opportunistic infection (OP-er-too-NIS-tik) An infection
caused by a microorganism that is usually a saprophyte
but may become a parasite under certain conditions, such
as lowered host resistance (Chapter 22).
Opsonization (OP-sah-ni-ZAY-shun) The action of
antibodies or complement that upon binding to a for-
eign antigen attracts macrophages and facilitates phago-
cytosis (from the Greek “to purchase food”) (Chap-
ter 14).
Optic chiasma (OP-tik kye-AS-muh) The site of the cross-
ing of the medial ﬁbers of each optic nerve, anterior to
the pituitary gland; important for binocular vision
(Chapter 9).
Optic disc (OP-tik DISK) The portion of the retina where
the optic nerve passes through; no rods or cones are pres-
ent (Syn.—blind spot) (Chapter 9).
Optic nerves (OP-tik) Cranial nerve pair II; sensory for
vision (Chapter 8).
Oral cavity (OR-uhl KAV-i-tee) The cavity in the skull
bounded by the hard palate, cheeks, and tongue (Chapter
16).
Orbit (OR-bit) The cavity in the skull that contains the
eyeball (Syn.—eye socket) (from the Latin “circle” or
“world”) (Chapter 9).
Orbitofrontal cortex (OR-bih-toh-FRUN-tuhl) The part
of the frontal lobe behind the eye; is concerned with
appropriate emotions and behavior, and awareness of the
future (Syn.—prefrontal cortex) (Chapter 8).
Organ (OR-gan) A structure with speciﬁc functions; made
of two or more tissues (Chapter 1).
Organ of Corti (KOR-tee) (spiral organ) The structure in
the cochlea of the inner ear that contains the receptors
for hearing (Chapter 9).
Organ system (OR-gan SIS-tem) A group of related organs
that work together to perform speciﬁc functions (Chap-
ter 1).
Organelle (OR-gan-ELL) An intracellular structure that
has a speciﬁc function (Chapter 3).
Organic (or-GAN-ik) A chemical compound that contains
carbon–hydrogen covalent bonds; includes carbohy-
drates, lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids (Chapter 1).
Origin (AHR-i-jin) 1. The more stationary attachment
point of a muscle to a bone. 2. The beginning (Chap-
ter 7).
Oropharynx (OR-oh-FA-rinks) The middle portion of the
pharynx behind the oral cavity; a passageway for both air
and food (Chapter 15).
Osmolarity (ahs-moh-LAR-i-tee) The concentration of
osmotically active particles in a solution (Chapter 19).
Osmoreceptors (AHS-moh-re-SEP-ters) Specialized cells
in the hypothalamus that detect changes in the water
content of the body (Chapter 10).
Osmosis (ahs-MOH-sis) The diffusion of water through a
selectively permeable membrane (Chapter 3).
Osmotic pressure (ahs-MAH-tik) Pressure that develops
when two solutions of different concentration are sepa-
rated by a selectively permeable membrane. A hypertonic
solution that would cause cells to shrivel has a higher
osmotic pressure. A hypotonic solution that would cause
cells to swell has a lower osmotic pressure (Chapter 3).
Ossiﬁcation (AHS-i-ﬁ-KAY-shun) The process of bone
formation; bone matrix is produced by osteoblasts during
the growth or repair of bones (Chapter 6).
Osteoarthritis (AHS-tee-oh-ar-THRY-tiss) The inﬂam-
mation of a joint, especially a weight-bearing joint, that
is most often a consequence of aging (Chapter 6).
Osteoblast (AHS-tee-oh-BLAST) A bone-producing cell;
produces bone matrix for the growth or repair of bones
(Chapter 6).
Osteoclast (AHS-tee-oh-KLAST) A bone-destroying cell;
reabsorbs bone matrix as part of the growth or repair of
bones (Chapter 6).
Osteocyte (AHS-tee-oh-sight) A bone cell (Chapter 4).
Osteomyelitis (AHS-tee-oh-my-uh-LYE-tiss) Inﬂamma-
tion of a bone caused by a pathogenic microorganism
(Chapter 6).
Osteon (AHS-tee-on) The structural unit of compact bone,
consisting of a central (haversian) canal surrounded by
concentric rings of osteocytes within matrix (Syn.—
haversian system) (Chapter 4).
Osteoporosis (AHS-tee-oh-por-OH-sis) A condition in
which bone matrix is lost and not replaced, resulting in
weakened bones that are then more likely to fracture
(Chapter 6).
Otitis media (oh-TIGH-tis MEE-dee-ah) Inﬂammation of
the middle ear (Chapter 9).
Otoliths (OH-toh-liths) Microscopic crystals of calcium
carbonate in the utricle and saccule of the inner ear; are
pulled by gravity (Chapter 9).
Oval window (OH-vul WIN-doh) The membrane-covered
opening through which the stapes transmits vibrations to
the ﬂuid in the inner ear (Chapter 9).
Ovary (OH-vuh-ree) The female gonad that produces ova;
also an endocrine gland that produces the hormones
estrogen and progesterone (Chapter 10).
Ovum (OH-vuhm) (Pl.—ova) An egg cell, produced by an
ovary (Chapter 20).
Oxygen debt (AHKS-ah-jen DET) The state in which
there is not enough oxygen to complete the process of
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Glossary
575
cell respiration; lactic acid is formed, which contributes
to muscle fatigue (Syn.—recovery oxygen uptake)
(Chapter 7).
Oxytocin (AHK-si-TOH-sin) A hormone produced by the
hypothalamus and stored in the posterior pituitary gland;
stimulates contraction of the myometrium during labor
and release of milk by the mammary glands (Chapter 8).
—P—
Palate (PAL-uht) The roof of the mouth, which separates
the oral cavity from the nasal cavities (Chapter 6).
Palpitation (pal-pi-TAY-shun) An irregular heartbeat of
which the person is aware (Chapter 12).
Pancreas (PAN-kree-us) 1. An endocrine gland located
between the curve of the duodenum and the spleen;
secretes insulin and glucagon. 2. An exocrine gland that
secretes digestive enzymes for the digestion of starch,
fats, and proteins (Chapter 10).
Pancreatic duct (PAN-kree-AT-ik DUKT) The duct that
takes pancreatic juices to the common bile duct (Chapter
16).
Pandemic (pan-DEM-ik) An epidemic that affects several
countries at the same time (Chapter 22).
Papillae (pah-PILL-ay) 1. Elevated, pointed projections. 2.
On the tongue, the projections that contain taste buds
(Chapter 16).
Papillary layer (PAP-i-lar-ee LAY-er) The uppermost layer
of the dermis; contains capillaries to nourish the epider-
mis (Chapter 5).
Papillary muscles (PAP-i-lar-ee MUSS-uhls) Columns of
myocardium that project from the ﬂoor of a ventricle and
anchor the ﬂaps of the AV valve by way of the chordae
tendineae (Chapter 12).
Paradox (PAR-ah-dahks) Something that does not seem
logical and that, therefore, should not be true, but is true.
(Chapter 6)
Paralysis (pah-RAL-i-sis) Complete or partial loss of func-
tion, especially of a muscle (Chapter 7).
Paralytic ileus (PAR-uh-LIT-ik ILL-ee-us) Paralysis of the
intestines that may occur following abdominal surgery
(Chapter 16).
Paranasal sinus (PAR-uh-NAY-zuhl SIGH-nus) An air
cavity in the frontal, maxilla, sphenoid, or ethmoid
bones; opens into the nasal cavities (Chapter 6).
Paraplegia (PAR-ah-PLEE-gee-ah) Paralysis of the legs
(Chapter 8).
Parasite (PAR-uh-sight) An organism that lives on or in
another living organism, called a host, to which it causes
harm (from the Greek for “to eat at another’s table”)
(Chapter 22).
Parasympathetic (PAR-ah-SIM-puh-THET-ik) The divi-
sion of the autonomic nervous system that dominates
during non-stressful situations (Chapter 8).
Parathyroid glands (PAR-ah-THIGH-royd) The four
endocrine glands located on the posterior side of the
thyroid gland; secrete parathyroid hormone (Chap-
ter 10).
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) (PAR-ah-THIGH-royd) A
hormone secreted by the parathyroid glands; increases
the reabsorption of calcium from bones and the absorp-
tion of calcium by the small intestine and kidneys
(Chapter 10).
Parietal (puh-RYE-uh-tuhl) 1. Pertaining to the walls of a
body cavity (Chapter 1). 2. The ﬂat bone that forms the
crown of the cranial cavity (from the Latin “wall”)
(Chapter 6).
Parietal cells (puh-RYE-uh-tuhl SELLS) The cells of the
gastric pits of the stomach that secrete hydrochloric acid
and the intrinsic factor (Chapter 16).
Parietal lobes (puh-RYE-uh-tuhl LOWBS) The parts of
the cerebrum posterior to the frontal lobes; contain the
sensory areas for cutaneous sensation and conscious mus-
cle sense (Chapter 8).
Parkinson’s disease (PAR-kin-sonz) A progressive disorder
of the basal ganglia, characterized by tremor, muscle
weakness and rigidity, and a peculiar gait (Chapter 8).
Parotid glands (pah-RAH-tid) The pair of salivary glands
located just below and in front of the ears (Chapter 16).
Partial pressure (PAR-shul PRES-shur) 1. The pressure
exerted by a gas in a mixture of gases. 2. The value used
to measure oxygen and carbon dioxide concentrations in
the blood or other body ﬂuid (Chapter 15).
Parturition (PAR-tyoo-RISH-uhn) The act of giving birth
(Chapter 21).
Passive immunity (PASS-iv im-YOO-ni-tee) The immu-
nity provided by the reception of antibodies from
another source; may be natural (placental, breast milk) or
artiﬁcial (injection of gamma globulins) (Chapter 14).
Pasteurization (PAS-tyoor-i-ZAY-shun) The process of
heating a ﬂuid to moderate temperatures in order to
destroy pathogenic bacteria (Chapter 22).
Patella (puh-TELL-ah) The kneecap, a short bone (from
the Latin “ﬂat dish”) (Chapter 6).
Patellar reﬂex (puh-TELL-ar REE-ﬂeks) A stretch reﬂex
integrated in the spinal cord, in which a tap on the patel-
lar tendon causes extension of the lower leg (Syn.—knee-
jerk reﬂex) (Chapter 8).
Pathogen (PATH-oh-jen) A microorganism capable of pro-
ducing disease; includes bacteria, viruses, fungi, proto-
zoa, and worms (Chapters 14, 22).
Pathophysiology (PATH-oh-FIZZ-ee-AH-luh-jee) The
study of diseases as they are related to functioning
(Chapter 1).
Pelvic cavity (PELL-vik KAV-i-tee) Inferior portion of the
ventral cavity, below the abdominal cavity (Chapter 1).
Penis (PEE-nis) The male organ of copulation when the
urethra serves as a passage for semen; an organ of elimi-
nation when the urethra serves as a passage for urine
(Chapter 20).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

576
Glossary
Pentose sugar (PEN-tohs) A ﬁve-carbon sugar (monosac-
charide) that is a structural part of the nucleic acids
DNA, RNA, and ATP (Chapter 2).
Pepsin (PEP-sin) The enzyme found in gastric juice that
begins protein digestion; secreted by chief cells (Chapter
16).
Peptidases (PEP-ti-day-ses) Digestive enzymes that break
down polypeptides to amino acids; secreted by the small
intestine (Chapter 16).
Peptide bond (PEP-tyde) A chemical bond that links two
amino acids in a protein molecule (Chapter 2).
Pericardium (PER-ee-KAR-dee-um) The three mem-
branes that enclose the heart, consisting of an outer
ﬁbrous layer and two serous layers (Chapter 12).
Perichondrium (PER-ee-KON-dree-um) The fibrous
connective tissue membrane that covers cartilage
(Chapter 4).
Perilymph (PER-i-limf) The ﬂuid in the bony labyrinth of
the inner ear (Chapter 9).
Periodontal membrane
(PER-ee-oh-DON-tal) The
membrane that lines the tooth sockets in the upper and
lower jaws; produces a bone-like cement to anchor the
teeth (Chapter 16).
Periosteum (PER-ee-AHS-tee-um) The ﬁbrous connec-
tive tissue membrane that covers bone; contains
osteoblasts for bone growth or repair (Chapter 4).
Peripheral (puh-RIFF-uh-ruhl) Extending from a main
part; closer to the surface (Chapter 1).
Peripheral nervous system (puh-RIFF-uh-ruhl NERV-
vuhs) The part of the nervous system that consists of the
cranial nerves and spinal nerves (Chapter 8).
Peripheral resistance (puh-RIFF-uh-ruhl ree-ZIS-tense)
The resistance of the blood vessels to the ﬂow of blood;
changes in the diameter of arteries have effects on blood
pressure (Chapter 13).
Peristalsis (per-i-STALL-sis) Waves of muscular contrac-
tion (one-way) that propel the contents through a hollow
organ (Chapter 2).
Peritoneum (PER-i-toh-NEE-um) The serous membrane
that lines the abdominal cavity (Chapter 1).
Peritonitis (per-i-toh-NIGH-tis) Inﬂammation of the peri-
toneum (Chapter 16).
Peritubular capillaries (PER-ee-TOO-byoo-ler) The cap-
illaries that surround the renal tubule and receive the
useful materials reabsorbed from the renal ﬁltrate; carry
blood from the efferent arteriole to the renal vein
(Chapter 18).
Pernicious anemia (per-NISH-us uh-NEE-mee-yah) An
anemia that is the result of a deﬁciency of vitamin B12 or
the intrinsic factor (Chapter 11).
Peyer’s patches (PYE-erz) The lymph nodules in the
mucosa of the small intestine, especially in the ileum
(Chapter 14).
pH A symbol of the measure of the concentration of hydro-
gen ions in a solution. The pH scale extends from 0–14,
with a value of 7 being neutral. Values lower than 7
are acidic; values higher than 7 are alkaline (basic)
(Chapter 2).
Phagocytosis (FAG-oh-sigh-TOH-sis) The process by
which a moving cell engulfs a particle; especially, the
ingestion of microorganisms by white blood cells
(Chapter 3).
Phalanges (fuh-LAN-jees) The long bones of the ﬁngers
and toes. There are 14 in each hand or foot (from the
Latin “line of soldiers”) (Chapter 6).
Phantom pain (FAN-tum PAYN) Pain following amputa-
tion of a limb that seems to come from the missing limb
(Chapter 9).
Pharynx (FA-rinks) A muscular tube located behind the
nasal and oral cavities; a passageway for air and food
(Chapter 15).
Phenotype (FEE-noh-type) The appearance of the individ-
ual as related to genotype; the expression of the genes
that are present (Chapter 21).
Phlebitis (ﬂe-BY-tis) Inﬂammation of a vein (Chapter 13).
Phospholipid (FOSS-foh-LIP-id) An organic compound in
the lipid group that is made of one glycerol, two fatty
acids, and a phosphate molecule; forms the bilayer of cell
membranes (Chapter 2).
Phrenic nerves (FREN-ik NERVZ) The pair of peripheral
nerves that are motor to the diaphragm (Chapter 15).
Physiology (FIZZ-ee-AH-luh-jee) The study of the func-
tioning of the body and its parts (Chapter 1).
Pia mater (PEE-ah MAH-ter) The innermost layer of the
meninges, made of thin connective tissue on the surface
of the brain and spinal cord (Chapter 8).
Pilomotor muscle (PYE-loh-MOH-ter) A smooth muscle
attached to a hair follicle; contraction pulls the follicle
upright, resulting in “goose bumps” (Syn.—arrector pili
muscle) (Chapter 5).
Pineal gland (PIN-ee-uhl) An endocrine gland on the pos-
terior wall of the third ventricle of the brain; secretes
melatonin (Chapter 10).
Pinocytosis (PIN-oh-sigh-TOH-sis) The process by which
a stationary cell ingests very small particles or a liquid
(Chapter 3).
Pituitary gland (pi-TOO-i-TER-ee) An endocrine gland
located below the hypothalamus, consisting of anterior
and posterior lobes (Syn.—hypophysis) (Chapter 10).
Pivot joint (PI-vot) A diarthrosis that permits rotation
(Chapter 6).
Placenta (pluh-SEN-tah) The organ formed in the uterus
during pregnancy, made of both fetal and maternal tissue;
the site of exchanges of materials between fetal blood and
maternal blood (Chapter 13).
Plane (PLAYN) An imaginary ﬂat surface that divides the
body in a speciﬁc way (Chapter 1).
Plasma (PLAZ-mah) The water found within the blood
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Glossary
577
vessels. Plasma is 52%–62% of the total blood (Chap-
ter 2).
Plasma cell (PLAZ-mah SELL) A cell derived from an acti-
vated B cell that produces antibodies to a speciﬁc antigen
(Chapter 14).
Plasma proteins (PLAZ-mah PRO-teenz) The proteins
that circulate in the liquid portion of the blood; include
albumin, globulins, and clotting factors (Chapter 11).
Plasticity (pla-STIS-si-tee) The ability of a tissue to grow
or change; used especially for the ability of the brain to
adapt to changing needs and to recruit different neurons
for certain functions, as may occur in recovery from a
stroke (Chapter 8).
Platelets (PLAYT-lets) Blood cells that are fragments of
larger cells (megakaryocytes) of the red bone marrow;
involved in blood clotting and other mechanisms of
hemostasis (Syn.—thrombocytes) (Chapter 4).
Pleural membranes (PLOOR-uhl MEM-braynz) The
serous membranes of the thoracic cavity (Chapter 1).
Plica circulares (PLEE-ka SIR-kew-LAR-es) The circular
folds of the mucosa and submucosa of the small intestine;
increase the surface area for absorption (Chapter 16).
Pneumonia (new-MOH-nee-ah) Inﬂammation of the lungs
caused by bacteria, viruses, or chemicals (Chapter 15).
Pneumotaxic center (NEW-moh-TAK-sik SEN-ter) The
respiratory center in the pons that helps bring about
exhalation (Chapter 15).
Pneumothorax (NEW-moh-THAW-raks) The accumula-
tion of air in the potential pleural space, which increases
intrapleural pressure and causes collapse of a lung
(Chapter 15).
Podocytes (POH-doh-sights) The cells that form the inner
layer of Bowman’s capsule of the renal corpuscle; adja-
cent foot processes form pores that make the layer very
permeable (Chapter 18).
Polarization (POH-lahr-i-ZAY-shun) The distribution of
ions on either side of a membrane; in a resting neuron or
muscle cell, sodium ions are more abundant outside the
cell, and potassium and negative ions are more abundant
inside the cell, giving the membrane a positive charge
outside and a relative negative charge inside (Chapter 7).
Polypeptide (PAH-lee-PEP-tyde) A short chain of amino
acids, not yet a speciﬁc protein (Chapter 2).
Polysaccharide (PAH-lee-SAK-ah-ryde) A carbohydrate
molecule that consists of many monosaccharides (usually
glucose) bonded together; includes glycogen, starch, and
cellulose (Chapter 2).
Polyuria (PAH-li-YOO-ree-ah) Increased urine formation
and output (Chapter 18).
Pons (PONZ) The part of the brain anterior and superior
to the medulla; contributes to the regulation of respira-
tion (from the Latin “bridge”) (Chapter 8).
Pore (POR) An opening on a surface to permit the passage
of materials (Chapter 3).
Portal of entry (POR-tuhl of EN-tree) The way a
pathogen enters the body, such as natural body openings
or breaks in the skin (Chapter 22).
Portal of exit (POR-tuhl of EG-zit) The way a pathogen
leaves a host, such as in respiratory droplets, feces, or
reproductive secretions (Chapter 22).
Positive feedback (PAHS-ah-tiv FEED-bak) A control
system that requires an external event to stop or reverse
the stimulus; may become a self-perpetuating cycle that
causes harm (Chapter 1).
Positron emission tomography (PET) (PAHS-i-tron eh-
MISH-shun toh-MAH-grah-fee) An imaging technique
that depicts rate of metabolism or blood ﬂow in organs or
tissues (Chapter 1).
Posterior (poh-STEER-ee-your) Toward the back (Syn.—
dorsal) (Chapter 1).
Postganglionic neuron (POST-gang-lee-ON-ik) In the
autonomic nervous system, a neuron that extends from a
ganglion to a visceral effector (Chapter 8).
Precapillary sphincter (pree-KAP-i-lar-ee SFINK-ter) A
smooth muscle cell at the beginning of a capillary net-
work that regulates the ﬂow of blood through the net-
work (Chapter 13).
Preganglionic neuron (PRE-gang-lee-ON-ik) In the auto-
nomic nervous system, a neuron that extends from the
CNS to a ganglion and synapses with a postganglionic
neuron (Chapter 8).
Premotor area (pre-MOH-ter) The area of the frontal
cerebral cortex anterior to the motor area; is concerned
with learning sequential movements (Chapter 8).
Presbyopia (PREZ-bee-OH-pee-ah) Farsightedness that is
a consequence of aging and the loss of elasticity of the
lens (Chapter 9).
Pressoreceptors (PRESS-oh-ree-SEP-ters) The sensory
receptors in the carotid sinuses and aortic sinus that
detect changes in blood pressure (Chapter 9).
Primary bronchi (PRY-ma-ree BRONG-kye) The two
branches of the lower end of the trachea; air passageways
to the right and left lungs (Chapter 15).
Prime mover (PRYME MOO-ver) The muscle responsible
for the main action when a joint is moved (Chapter 7).
Prions (PREE-ons) Proteinaceous infectious particles that
are the cause of lethal disease of the nervous system in
people and animals (Chapter 2).
Process (PRAH-sess) 1. An action or series of actions that
has a predictable and speciﬁc outcome, such as the
process of protein synthesis. 2. A cellular extension, such
as the axon of a neuron. 3. A projection of a bone, often
for muscle attachment, such as the spinous process of a
vertebra (Chapter 1).
Progesterone (proh-JESS-tuh-rohn) The sex hormone
secreted by the corpus luteum of the ovary and by the
placenta; contributes to the growth of the endometrium
and the maintenance of pregnancy (Chapter 10).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

578
Glossary
Projection (proh-JEK-shun) The characteristic of sensa-
tions in which the sensation is felt in the area where the
receptors were stimulated (Chapter 9).
Prolactin (proh-LAK-tin) A hormone produced by the
anterior pituitary gland that stimulates milk production
by the mammary glands (Chapter 10).
Pronation (proh-NAY-shun) Turning the palm downward,
or lying face down (Chapter 7).
Prophase (PROH-fayz) The ﬁrst stage of mitosis, in which
the pairs on chromatids become visible (Chapter 3).
Proprioception (PROH-pree-oh-SEP-shun) The sense of
the body, of its place, position, and movement; includes
muscle sense and equilibrium (from the Latin “one’s
own”) (Chapter 7).
Proprioceptor (PROH-pree-oh-SEP-ter) A sensory recep-
tor in a muscle that detects stretching of the muscle
(Syn.—stretch receptor) (Chapter 7).
Prostaglandins (PRAHS-tah-GLAND-ins) Locally acting
hormone-like substances produced by virtually all cells
from the phospholipids of their cell membranes; the
many types have many varied functions (Chapter 10).
Prostate gland (PRAHS-tayt) A muscular gland that sur-
rounds the ﬁrst inch of the male urethra; secretes an alka-
line ﬂuid that becomes part of semen; its smooth muscle
contributes to ejaculation (Chapter 20).
Prostatic hypertrophy (prahs-TAT-ik high-PER-truh-fee)
Enlargement of the prostate gland; may be benign or
malignant (Chapter 20).
Proteasome (PROH-tee-ah-sohm) A cell organelle that
destroys misfolded or damaged proteins; contains
enzymes called proteases (Chapter 3).
Protein (PROH-teen) An organic compound made of
amino acids linked by peptide bonds (Chapter 2).
Proteinuria (PROH-teen-YOO-ree-ah) The presence of
protein in urine (Chapter 18).
Prothrombin (proh-THROM-bin) A clotting factor syn-
thesized by the liver and released into the blood; con-
verted to thrombin in the process of chemical clotting
(Chapter 11).
Proton (PROH-tahn) A subatomic particle that has a posi-
tive electrical charge; found in the nucleus of an atom
(Chapter 2).
Proton pump (PROH-tahn PUMP) An enzyme of the
parietal cells of the stomach lining; secretes a hydrogen
ion (in exchange for potassium), which unites with a
chloride ion to form HCl in gastric juice (Chapter 16).
Protozoa (PROH-tuh-ZOH-ah) (Sing.— protozoan) The
simplest animal-like microorganisms in the kingdom
Protista; usually unicellular, some are colonial; may be
free living or parasitic (Chapter 22).
Proximal (PROK-si-muhl) Closest to the origin or point of
attachment (Chapter 1).
Proximal convoluted tubule (PROK-si-muhl KON-voh-
LOO-ted) The part of a renal tubule that extends from
Bowman’s capsule to the loop of Henle (Chapter 18).
Pruritus (proo-RYE-tus) Severe itching (Chapter 5).
Puberty (PEW-ber-tee) The period during life in which
members of both sexes become sexually mature and capa-
ble of reproduction; usually occurs between the ages of
10 and 14 years (Chapter 20).
Pubic symphysis (PEW-bik SIM-ﬁ-sis) The joint between
the right and left pubic bones, in which a disc of cartilage
separates the two bones (Chapter 6).
Pubis (PEW-biss) The lower anterior part of the hip bone
(Syn.—pubic bone) (Chapter 6).
Pulmonary artery (PULL-muh-NER-ee AR-tuh-ree) The
artery that takes blood from the right ventricle to the
lungs (Chapter 12).
Pulmonary edema (PULL-muh-NER-ee uh-DEE-muh)
Accumulation of tissue ﬂuid in the alveoli of the lungs
(Chapter 15).
Pulmonary semilunar valve (PULL-muh-NER-ee SEM-
ee-LOO-nar VALV) The valve at the junction of the
right ventricle and the pulmonary artery; prevents back-
ﬂow of blood from the artery to the ventricle when the
ventricle relaxes (Chapter 12).
Pulmonary surfactant (PULL-muh-NER-ee sir-FAK-
tent) A lipoprotein secreted by the alveoli in the lungs;
reduces the surface tension within alveoli to permit inﬂa-
tion (Chapter 15).
Pulmonary veins (PULL-muh-NER-ee VAYNS) The four
veins that return blood from the lungs to the left atrium
(Chapter 12).
Pulp cavity (PUHLP) The innermost portion of a tooth
that contains blood vessels and nerve endings (Chap-
ter 16).
Pulse (PULS) The force of the heartbeat detected at an
arterial site such as the radial artery (Chapter 12).
Pulse deﬁcit (PULS DEF-i-sit) The condition in which the
radial pulse count is lower than the rate of the heartbeat
heard with a stethoscope; may occur in some types of
heart disease in which the heartbeat is weak (Chapter 13).
Pulse pressure (PULS PRES-shur) The difference be-
tween systolic and diastolic blood pressure; averages
about 40 mmHg (Chapter 13).
Punnett square (PUHN-net SKWAIR) A diagram used to
determine the possible combinations of genes in the off-
spring of a particular set of parents (Chapter 21).
Pupil (PYOO-pil) The opening in the center of the iris;
light rays pass through the aqueous humor in the pupil
(Chapter 9).
Purkinje ﬁbers (purr-KIN-jee) Specialized cardiac muscle
ﬁbers that are part of the cardiac conduction pathway
(Chapter 12).
Pyloric sphincter (pye-LOR-ik SFINK-ter) The circular
smooth muscle at the junction of the stomach and the
duodenum; prevents backup of intestinal contents into
the stomach (from the Greek “gatekeeper”) (Chapter 16).
Pyloric stenosis (pye-LOR-ik ste-NOH-sis) Narrowing of
the opening between the stomach and duodenum caused
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Glossary
579
by hypertrophy of the pyloric sphincter; a congenital dis-
order (Chapter 16).
Pyrogen (PYE-roh-jen) Any microorganism or substance
that causes a fever; includes bacteria, viruses, or chemi-
cals released during inﬂammation (called endogenous
pyrogens); activates the heat production and conserva-
tion mechanisms regulated by the hypothalamus
(Chapter 17).
—Q—
QRS wave The portion of an ECG that depicts depolariza-
tion of the ventricles (Chapter 12).
Quadrants (KWAH-drants) A division into four parts, used
especially to divide the abdomen into four areas to facil-
itate description of locations (Chapter 1).
Quadriplegia (KWAH-dri-PLEE-jee-ah) Paralysis of all
four limbs (Chapter 17).
—R—
Radiation (RAY-dee-AY-shun) 1. The heat loss process in
which heat energy from the skin is emitted to the cooler
surroundings. 2. The emissions of certain radioactive ele-
ments; may be used for diagnostic or therapeutic pur-
poses (Chapter 17).
Radius (RAY-dee-us) The long bone of the forearm on the
thumb side (from the Latin “a spoke”) (Chapter 6).
Range-of-motion exercises (RANJE of MOH-shun)
Movements of joints through their full range of motion;
used to preserve mobility or to regain mobility following
an injury (Chapter 7).
Receptor (ree-SEP-tur) A specialized cell or nerve ending
that responds to a particular change such as light, sound,
heat, touch, or pressure (Chapter 5).
Receptor site (ree-SEP-ter SIGHT) An arrangement of
molecules, often part of the cell membrane, that will
accept only molecules with a complementary shape
(Chapter 3).
Recessive (ree-SESS-iv) In genetics, a characteristic that
will be expressed only if two genes for it are present in
the homologous pair of chromosomes (Chapter 21).
Recovery oxygen uptake (ree-KOV-e-ree AHKS-ah-jen
UP-tayk) Oxygen debt (Chapter 7).
Red blood cells (RED BLUHD SELLS) The most numer-
ous cells in the blood; carry oxygen bonded to the hemo-
globin within them (Syn.—erythrocytes) (Chapter 4).
Red bone marrow (RED BOWN MAR-row) The primary
hemopoietic tissue; found in ﬂat and irregular bones;
produces all the types of blood cells (Chapter 6).
Reduced hemoglobin (re-DOOSD HEE-muh-GLOW-
bin) Hemoglobin that has released its oxygen in the sys-
temic capillaries (Chapter 11).
Referred pain (ree-FURD PAYNE) Visceral pain that is
projected and felt as cutaneous pain (Chapter 9).
Reﬂex (REE-ﬂeks) An involuntary response to a stimulus
(Chapter 8).
Reﬂex arc (REE-ﬂeks ARK) The pathway nerve impulses
follow when a reﬂex is stimulated (Chapter 8).
Refraction (ree-FRAK-shun) The bending of light rays as
they pass through the eyeball; normal refraction focuses
an image on the retina (Chapter 9).
Relaxin (ree-LAKS-in) A hormone produced by the corpus
luteum and placenta; inhibits contractions of the
myometrium (Chapter 20).
Releasing 
hormones
(ree-LEE-sing HOR-mohns)
Hormones released by the hypothalamus that stimulate
secretion of hormones by the anterior pituitary gland
(Syn.—releasing factors) (Chapter 10).
Remission (ree-MISH-uhn) Lessening of severity of symp-
toms (Chapter 8).
Renal artery (REE-nuhl AR-te-ree) The branch of the
abdominal aorta that takes blood into a kidney (Chap-
ter 18).
Renal calculi (REE-nuhl KAL-kew-lye) Kidney stones;
made of precipitated minerals in the form of crystals
(Chapter 18).
Renal corpuscle (REE-nuhl KOR-pus’l) The part of a
nephron that consists of a glomerulus enclosed by a
Bowman’s capsule; the site of glomerular ﬁltration
(Chapter 18).
Renal cortex (REE-nuhl KOR-teks) The outermost tissue
layer of the kidney; consists of renal corpuscles and con-
voluted tubules (Chapter 18).
Renal failure (REE-nuhl FAYL-yer) The inability of the
kidneys to function properly and form urine; causes
include severe hemorrhage, toxins, and obstruction of
the urinary tract (Chapter 18).
Renal fascia (REE-nuhl FASH-ee-ah) The ﬁbrous connec-
tive tissue membrane that covers the kidneys and the sur-
rounding adipose tissue and helps keep the kidneys in
place (Chapter 18).
Renal ﬁltrate (REE-nuhl FILL-trayt) The ﬂuid formed
from blood plasma by the process of ﬁltration in the renal
corpuscles; ﬂows from Bowman’s capsules through the
renal tubules where most is reabsorbed; the ﬁltrate that
enters the renal pelvis is called urine (Chapter 18).
Renal medulla (REE-nuhl muh-DEW-lah) The inner tis-
sue layer of the kidney; consists of loops of Henle and
collecting tubules; the triangular segments of the renal
medulla are called renal pyramids (Chapter 18).
Renal pelvis (REE-nuhl PELL-vis) The most medial area
of the kidney; a cavity formed by the expanded end of the
ureter at the hilus of the kidney (Chapter 18).
Renal pyramids (REE-nuhl PEER-ah-mids) The triangu-
lar segments of the renal medulla; the papillae of the pyr-
amids empty urine into the calyces of the renal pelvis
(Chapter 18).
Renal tubule (REE-nuhl TOO-byool) The part of a
nephron that consists of a proximal convoluted tubule,
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

580
Glossary
loop of Henle, distal convoluted tubule, and collecting
tubule; the site of tubular reabsorption and tubular secre-
tion (Chapter 18).
Renal vein (REE-nuhl VAYN) The vein that returns blood
from a kidney to the inferior vena cava (Chapter 18).
Renin-angiotensin mechanism (REE-nin AN-jee-oh-
TEN-sin) A series of chemical reactions initiated by a
decrease in blood pressure that stimulates the kidneys to
secrete the enzyme renin; culminates in the formation of
angiotensin II (Chapter 10).
Repolarization (RE-pol-lahr-i-ZAY-shun) The restoration
of electrical charges on either side of a cell membrane
following depolarization; positive charge outside and a
negative charge inside brought about by a rapid outﬂow
of potassium ions (Chapter 7).
Reproductive system (REE-proh-DUK-tive SIS-tem)
The male or female organ system that produces gametes,
ensures fertilization, and in women, provides a site for
the developing embryo-fetus (Chapter 20).
Reservoir (REZ-er-vwor) 1. A person or animal who har-
bors a pathogen and is a source of the pathogen for oth-
ers (Chapter 22). 2. A storage site (Chapter 7).
Resident ﬂora (REZ-i-dent FLOOR-uh) Part of normal
ﬂora; those microorganisms on or in nearly everyone in
speciﬁc body sites nearly all the time (Chapter 22).
Residual air (ree-ZID-yoo-al) The volume of air that
remains in the lungs after the most forceful exhalation;
important to provide for continuous gas exchange; aver-
age: 1000–1500 mL (Chapter 15).
Resistance (re-ZIS-tenss) The total of all of the body’s
defenses against pathogens; includes the non-speciﬁc
aspects of innate immunity such as unbroken skin and the
speciﬁc mechanisms of adaptive immunity such as anti-
body production (Chapter 22).
Resorption (ree-ZORP-shun) The process of removal by
absorption, such as the removal of bone matrix by osteo-
clasts (Chapter 6).
Respiratory acidosis (RES-pi-rah-TOR-ee ass-i-DOH-
sis) A condition in which the blood pH is lower than nor-
mal, caused by disorders that decrease the rate or
efficiency of respiration and permit the accumulation of
carbon dioxide (Chapter 15).
Respiratory alkalosis (RES-pi-rah-TOR-ee al-kah-LOH-
sis) A condition in which the blood pH is higher than
normal, caused by disorders that increase the rate of res-
piration and decrease the level of carbon dioxide in the
blood (Chapter 15).
Respiratory pump (RES-pi-rah-TOR-ee) A mechanism
that increases venous return; pressure changes during
breathing compress the veins that pass through the tho-
racic cavity (Chapter 13).
Respiratory system (RES-pi-rah-TOR-ee SIS-tem) The
organ system that moves air into and out of the lungs so
that oxygen and carbon dioxide may be exchanged
between the air and the blood (Chapter 15).
Resting potential (RES-ting poh-TEN-shul) The differ-
ence in electrical charges on either side of a cell mem-
brane not transmitting an impulse; positive charge
outside and a negative charge inside (Chapter 7).
Reticulocyte (re-TIK-yoo-loh-sight) A red blood cell that
contains remnants of the endoplasmic reticulum, an
immature stage in red blood cell formation; makes up
about 1% of the red blood cells in peripheral circulation
(Chapter 11).
Reticuloendothelial system (re-TIK-yoo-loh-en-doh-
THEE-lee-al) Former name for the tissue macrophage
system, the organs or tissues that contain macrophages
(RE cells) that phagocytize old red blood cells; the liver,
spleen, and red bone marrow (Chapter 11).
Retina (RET-i-nah) The innermost layer of the eyeball that
contains the photoreceptors, the rods and cones (Chap-
ter 9).
Retroperitoneal (RE-troh-PER-i-toh-NEE-uhl) Located
behind the peritoneum (Chapter 18).
Reuptake (ree-UP-tayk) The reabsorption of a substance
that was just secreted; used with respect to some neuro-
transmitters (Chapter 8).
Rh factor (R-H FAK-ter) The red blood cell types deter-
mined by the presence or absence of the Rh (D) antigen
on the red blood cell membranes; the two types are Rh
positive and Rh negative (Chapter 11).
Rheumatoid arthritis (ROO-muh-toyd ar-THRY-tiss)
Inﬂammation of a joint; an autoimmune disease. The
joint damage may progress to fusion and immobility of
the joint (Chapter 6).
Rhodopsin (roh-DOP-sin) The chemical in the rods of
the retina that breaks down when light waves strike
it; this chemical change initiates a nerve impulse
(Chapter 9).
RhoGAM (ROH-gam) The trade name for the Rh (D)
antibody administered to an Rh-negative woman who has
delivered an Rh-positive infant; it will destroy any fetal
red blood cells that may have entered maternal circula-
tion (Chapter 11).
Ribosome (RYE-boh-sohme) A cell organelle found in the
cytoplasm; the site of protein synthesis (Chapter 3).
Ribs (RIBZ) The 24 ﬂat bones that, together with the ster-
num, form the rib cage. The ﬁrst seven pairs are true
ribs, the next three pairs are false ribs, and the last two
pairs are ﬂoating ribs (Chapter 6).
Rickets (RIK-ets) A deﬁciency of vitamin D in children,
resulting in poor and abnormal bone growth (Chapter 6).
RNA (Ribonucleic acid) A nucleic acid that is a single
strand of nucleotides; essential for protein synthesis
within cells; messenger RNA (mRNA) is a copy of the
genetic code of DNA; transfer RNA (tRNA) aligns amino
acids in the proper sequence on the mRNA (Chapter 2).
Rods (RAHDZ) The sensory receptors in the retina of the
eye that detect the presence of light (Chapter 9).
Round window (ROWND WIN-doh) The membrane-
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Glossary
581
covered opening of the inner ear that bulges to prevent
pressure damage to the organ of Corti (Chapter 9).
Rugae (ROO-gay) Folds of the mucosa of organs such as
the stomach, urinary bladder, and vagina; permit expan-
sion of these organs (Chapter 16).
—S—
Saccule (SAK-yool) A membranous sac in the vestibule of
the inner ear that contains receptors for static equilib-
rium (Chapter 9).
Sacroiliac joint (SAY-kroh-ILL-ee-ak) The slightly mov-
able joint between the sacrum and the ilium (Chapter 6).
Sacrum (SAY-krum) The ﬁve fused sacral vertebrae at the
base of the spine (Chapter 6).
Saddle joint (SA-duhl) The carpometacarpal joint of the
thumb, a diarthrosis (Chapter 6).
Sagittal section (SAJ-i-tuhl SEK-shun) A plane or cut from
front to back, separating right and left parts (from the
Latin “arrow”) (Chapter 1).
Saliva (sah-LYE-vah) The secretion of the salivary glands;
mostly water and containing the enzyme amylase
(Chapter 16).
Salivary glands (SAL-i-va-ree) The three pairs of exocrine
glands that secrete saliva into the oral cavity; parotid,
submandibular, and sublingual pairs (Chapter 16).
Salt (SAWLT) A chemical compound that consists of a pos-
itive ion other than hydrogen and a negative ion other
than hydroxyl (Chapter 2).
Saltatory conduction (SAWL-tah-taw-ree kon-DUK-
shun) The rapid transmission of a nerve impulse from
one node of Ranvier to the next; characteristic of myeli-
nated neurons (Chapter 8).
Saprophyte (SAP-roh-ﬁght) An organism that lives on dead
organic matter; a decomposer (Syn.—saprobe) (Chap-
ter 22).
Sarcolemma (SAR-koh-LEM-ah) The cell membrane of a
muscle ﬁber (Chapter 7).
Sarcomere (SAR-koh-meer) The unit of contraction in a
skeletal muscle ﬁber; a precise arrangement of myosin
and actin ﬁlaments between two Z lines (Chapter 7).
Sarcoplasmic reticulum (SAR-koh-PLAZ-mik re-TIK-
yoo-lum) The endoplasmic reticulum of a muscle ﬁber; is
a reservoir for calcium ions (Chapter 7).
Saturated fat (SAT-uhr-ay-ted) A true fat that is often
solid at room temperature and of animal origin; its fatty
acids contain the maximum number of hydrogens
(Chapter 2).
Scapula (SKAP-yoo-luh) The ﬂat bone of the shoulder that
articulates with the humerus (Syn.—shoulder blade)
(Chapter 6).
Schwann cell (SHWAHN SELL) A cell of the peripheral
nervous system that forms the myelin sheath and neu-
rolemma of peripheral axons and dendrites (Chapter 4).
Sclera (SKLER-ah) The outermost layer of the eyeball,
made of ﬁbrous connective tissue; the anterior portion is
the transparent cornea (Chapter 9).
Scoliosis (SKOH-lee-OH-sis) A lateral curvature of the
vertebral column (Chapter 6).
Scrotum (SKROH-tum) The sac of skin between the upper
thighs in males; contains the testes, epididymides, and
part of the ductus deferens (Chapter 20).
Sebaceous gland (suh-BAY-shus) An exocrine gland in the
dermis that produces sebum (Chapter 5).
Sebum (SEE-bum) The lipid (oil) secretion of sebaceous
glands (Chapter 5).
Secondary infection (SEK-un-DAR-ee) An infection made
possible by a primary infection that has lowered the
host’s resistance (Chapter 22).
Secondary sex characteristics (SEK-un-DAR-ee SEKS)
The features that develop at puberty in males or females;
they are under the inﬂuence of the sex hormones but are
not directly involved in reproduction. Examples are
growth of facial or body hair and growth of muscles
(Chapter 20).
Secretin (se-KREE-tin) A hormone secreted by the duode-
num when food enters; stimulates secretion of bile by the
liver and secretion of bicarbonate pancreatic juice
(Chapter 16).
Secretion (see-KREE-shun) The production and release of
a cellular product with a useful purpose (Chapter 4).
Section (SEK-shun) The cutting of an organ or the body to
make internal structures visible (Chapter 1).
Selectively permeable (se-LEK-tiv-lee PER-me-uh-buhl)
A characteristic of cell membranes; permits the passage
of some materials but not of others (Chapter 3).
Self-limiting disease (self-LIM-i-ting) A disease that typi-
cally lasts a certain period of time and is followed by
recovery (Chapter 22).
Semen (SEE-men) The thick, alkaline ﬂuid that contains
sperm and the secretions of the seminal vesicles, prostate
gland, and bulbourethral glands (Chapter 20).
Semicircular canals (SEM-eye-SIR-kyoo-lur) Three oval
canals in the inner ear that contain the receptors that
detect motion (Chapter 9).
Seminal vesicles (SEM-i-nuhl VESS-i-kulls) The glands
located posterior to the prostate gland and inferior to the
urinary bladder; secrete an alkaline ﬂuid that enters the
ejaculatory ducts and becomes part of semen (Chap-
ter 20).
Seminiferous tubules (sem-i-NIFF-er-us) The site of
spermatogenesis in the testes (Chapter 20).
Sensation (sen-SAY-shun) A feeling or awareness of condi-
tions outside or inside the body, resulting from the stim-
ulation of sensory receptors and interpretation by the
brain (Chapter 9).
Sensory neuron (SEN-suh-ree NYOOR-on) A nerve cell
that carries impulses from a receptor to the central nerv-
ous system. (Syn.—afferent neuron) (Chapter 8).
Septic shock (SEP-tik SHAHK) A type of circulatory shock
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

582
Glossary
that is a consequence of a bacterial infection (Chap-
ter 13).
Septicemia (SEP-tih-SEE-mee-ah) The presence of bacte-
ria in the blood (Chapter 5).
Septum (SEP-tum) A wall that separates two cavities, such
as the nasal septum between the nasal cavities or the
interventricular septum between the two ventricles of the
heart (Chapter 12).
Serous ﬂuid (SEER-us FLOO-id) A ﬂuid that prevents
friction between the two layers of a serous membrane
(Chapter 4).
Serous membrane (SEER-us MEM-brayn) An epithelial
membrane that lines a closed body cavity and covers the
organs in that cavity (Chapter 4).
Sex chromosomes (SEKS KROH-muh-sohms) The pair
of chromosomes that determines the gender of an indi-
vidual; designated XX in females and XY in males
(Chapter 21).
Sex-linked trait (SEKS-LINKED TRAYT) A genetic
characteristic in which the gene is located on the X chro-
mosome (Chapter 7).
Simple (SIM-puhl) Having only one layer, used especially
to describe certain types of epithelial tissue (Chapter 4).
Sinoatrial (SA) node (SIGH-noh-AY-tree-al NOHD) The
ﬁrst part of the cardiac conduction pathway, located in
the wall of the right atrium; initiates each heartbeat
(Chapter 12).
Sinusoid (SIGH-nuh-soyd) A large, very permeable capil-
lary; permits proteins or blood cells to enter or leave the
blood (Chapter 13).
Skeletal muscle pump (SKEL-e-tuhl MUSS-uhl) A mech-
anism that increases venous return; contractions of the
skeletal muscles compress the deep veins, especially those
of the legs (Chapter 13).
Skeletal system (SKEL-e-tuhl) The organ system that con-
sists of the bones, ligaments, and cartilage; supports the
body and is a framework for muscle attachment (Chap-
ter 6).
Skin (SKIN) An organ that is part of the integumentary sys-
tem; consists of the outer epidermis and the inner dermis
(Chapter 5).
Sliding ﬁlament mechanism (SLY-ding FILL-ah-ment)
The sequence of events that occurs within sarcomeres
when a muscle ﬁber contracts (Chapter 7).
Small intestine (SMAWL in-TESS-tin) The organ of the
alimentary tube between the stomach and the large intes-
tine; secretes enzymes that complete the digestive
process and absorbs the end products of digestion
(Chapter 16).
Smooth muscle (SMOOTH MUSS-uhl) The muscle tis-
sue that forms the walls of hollow internal organs. Also
called visceral or involuntary muscle (Chapter 4).
Sneeze reﬂex (SNEEZ) A reﬂex integrated by the medulla
that expels irritating substances from the nasal cavities by
means of an explosive exhalation (Chapter 15).
Sodium-potassium pumps (SEW-dee-um pa-TASS-ee-
um) The active transport mechanisms that maintain a
high sodium ion concentration outside the cell and a high
potassium ion concentration inside the cell (Chapter 7).
Soft palate (SAWFT PAL-uht) The posterior portion of
the palate that is elevated during swallowing to block the
nasopharynx (Chapter 15).
Solute (SAH-loot) The substance that is dissolved in a solu-
tion (Chapter 2).
Solution (suh-LOO-shun) The dispersion of one or more
compounds (solutes) in a liquid (solvent) (Chapter 2).
Solvent (SAHL-vent) A liquid in which substances (solutes)
will dissolve (Chapter 2).
Somatic (soh-MA-tik) Pertaining to structures of the body
wall, such as skeletal muscles and the skin (Chapter 8).
Somatostatin (SOH-mat-oh-STAT-in) 1. Growth hor-
mone inhibiting hormone (GHIH); produced by the
hypothalamus. 2. The hormone produced by the delta
cells of the pancreas (Chapter 10).
Somatotropin (SOH-mat-oh-TROH-pin) Growth hor-
mone (Chapter 10).
Specialized ﬂuids (SPEH-shul-eyezd FLOO-ids) Speciﬁc
compartments of extracellular fluid; include cere-
brospinal ﬂuid, synovial ﬂuid, and aqueous humor in the
eye (Chapter 2).
Spermatic cord (sper-MAT-ik KORD) The cord that sus-
pends the testis; composed of the ductus deferens, blood
vessels, and nerves (Chapter 20).
Spermatogenesis (SPER-ma-toh-JEN-e-sis) The process
of meiosis in the testes to produce sperm cells (Chap-
ter 3).
Spermatozoa (sper-MAT-oh-ZOH-ah) (Sing.—spermato-
zoon) Sperm cells; produced by the testes (Chapter 20).
Sphenoid bone (SFEE-noyd) The ﬂat bone that forms part
of the anterior ﬂoor of the cranial cavity and encloses the
pituitary gland (Chapter 6).
Sphincter (SFINK-ter) A circular muscle that regulates the
size of an opening (Chapter 7).
Spina biﬁda (SPY-nuh BIF-i-duh) A congenital malforma-
tion of the backbone in which the spinal cord and
meninges may protrude; there are many variations and
degrees of impairment (Chapter 17).
Spinal cavity (SPY-nuhl KAV-i-tee) The cavity within the
vertebral column that contains the spinal cord and men-
inges; part of the dorsal cavity (Syn.—vertebral canal or
cavity) (Chapter 1).
Spinal cord (SPY-nuhl KORD) The part of the central
nervous system within the vertebral canal; transmits
impulses to and from the brain (Chapter 8).
Spinal cord reﬂex (SPY-nuhl KORD REE-ﬂeks) A reﬂex
integrated in the spinal cord, in which the brain is not
directly involved (Chapter 8).
Spinal nerves (SPY-nuhl NERVS) The 31 pairs of nerves
that emerge from the spinal cord (Chapter 8).
Spinal shock (SPY-nuhl SHAHK) The temporary or
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Glossary
583
permanent loss of spinal cord reﬂexes following injury to
the spinal cord (Chapter 8).
Spirillum (spih-RILL-uhm) (Pl.—spirilla) A bacterium
with a spiral shape (Chapter 22).
Spirochete (SPY-roh-keet) Spiral bacteria of the order
Spirochaetales (Chapter 22).
Spleen (SPLEEN) An organ located in the upper left
abdominal quadrant behind the stomach; consists of lym-
phatic tissue that produces lymphocytes; also contains
macrophages that phagocytize old red blood cells
(Chapter 14).
Spongy bone (SPUN-jee BOWNE) Bone tissue not organ-
ized into haversian systems; forms most of the short, ﬂat,
and irregular bones and forms epiphyses of long bones
(Chapter 6).
Spontaneous fracture (spahn-TAY-nee-us) A fracture that
occurs without apparent trauma; often a consequence of
osteoporosis (Syn.—pathologic fracture) (Chapter 6).
Spore (SPOOR) 1. A bacterial form that is dormant and
highly resistant to environmental extremes such as heat.
2. A unicellular fungal reproductive form (Chapter 22).
Squamous (SKWAY-mus) Flat or scale-like; used especially
in reference to epithelial tissue (Chapter 4).
Stapes (STAY-peez) The third of the auditory bones in the
middle ear; transmits vibrations from the incus to the
oval window of the inner ear (Chapter 9).
Starch (STARCH) A polysaccharide produced by plants;
digested to glucose, a source of energy for cell respiration
(Chapter 2).
Starling’s law of the heart (STAR-lingz LAW) The force
of contraction of cardiac muscle ﬁbers is determined by
the length of the ﬁbers; the more cardiac muscle ﬁbers
are stretched, the more forcefully they contract (Chap-
ter 12).
Stem cell (STEM SELL) 1. An embryonic cell capable of
differentiating into any of the specialized cells of an
organism (Chapter 3). 2. The unspecialized cell found in
red bone marrow and lymphatic tissue that is the precur-
sor cell for all types of blood cells (Chapter 11). 3. Any
unspecialized cell with the potential to differentiate
(Chapter 3).
Stenosis (ste-NOH-sis) An abnormal constriction or nar-
rowing of an opening or duct (Chapter 12).
Sterilization (STIR-ill-i-ZAY-shun) The process of com-
pletely destroying all of the microorganisms on or in a
substance or object (Chapter 22).
Sternum (STIR-num) The ﬂat bone that forms part of the
anterior rib cage; consists of the manubrium, body, and
xiphoid process (Syn.—breastbone) (Chapter 6).
Steroid (STEER-oyd) An organic compound in the lipid
group; includes cholesterol and the sex hormones
(Chapter 2).
Stimulus (STIM-yoo-lus) A change, especially one that
affects a sensory receptor or that brings about a response
in a living organism (Chapter 9).
Stomach (STUM-uk) The sac-like organ of the alimentary
tube between the esophagus and the small intestine; is a
reservoir for food and secretes gastric juice to begin pro-
tein digestion (Chapter 16).
Strabismus (strah-BIZ-mis) An impairment of binocular
vision, the optic axes of the eyes cannot be oriented prop-
erly on an object because of an imbalance in one set of
extrinsic muscles; the “lazy eye” may drift medially or lat-
erally (Chapter 9).
Stratiﬁed (STRA-ti-fyed) Having two or more layers
(Chapter 4).
Stratum corneum (STRA-tum KOR-nee-um) The outer-
most layer of the epidermis, made of many layers of dead,
keratinized cells (Chapter 5).
Stratum germinativum (STRA-tum JER-min-ah-TEE-
vum) The innermost layer of the epidermis; the cells
undergo mitosis to produce new epidermis (Syn.—stra-
tum basale) (Chapter 5).
Streptokinase (STREP-toh-KYE-nase) An enzyme pro-
duced by bacteria of the genus Streptococcus that was used
clinically to dissolve abnormal clots, such as those in
coronary arteries (Chapter 11).
Stretch receptor (STRETCH ree-SEP-ter) A sensory
receptor in a muscle that detects stretching of the muscle
(Syn.—proprioceptor) (Chapter 7).
Stretch reﬂex (STRETCH REE-ﬂeks) A spinal cord reﬂex
in which a muscle that is stretched will contract (Chap-
ter 8).
Striated muscle (STRY-ay-ted MUSS-uhl) The muscle
tissue that forms the skeletal muscles that move bones
(Syn.—voluntary, skeletal muscle) (Chapter 4).
Stroke volume (STROHK VAHL-yoom) The amount of
blood pumped by a ventricle in one beat; the resting
average is 60–80 mL/beat (Chapter 12).
Subarachnoid space (SUB-uh-RAK-noid) The space
between the arachnoid membrane and the pia mater;
contains cerebrospinal ﬂuid (Chapter 8).
Subclinical infection (sub-KLIN-i-kuhl) An infection in
which the person shows no symptoms (Syn.—inapparent,
asymptomatic) (Chapter 22).
Subcutaneous (SUB-kew-TAY-nee-us) Below the skin; the
superﬁcial fascia between the dermis and the muscles
(Chapter 5).
Sublingual glands (sub-LING-gwal) The pair of salivary
glands located below the ﬂoor of the mouth (Chap-
ter 16).
Submandibular glands (SUB-man-DIB-yoo-lar) The pair
of salivary glands located at the posterior corners of the
mandible (Chapter 16).
Submucosa (SUB-mew-KOH-sah) The layer of connective
tissue and blood vessels located below the mucosa (lin-
ing) of a mucous membrane (Chapter 16).
Substrates (SUB-strayts) The substances acted upon, as by
enzymes (Chapter 2).
Sucrase (SOO-krays) A digestive enzyme that breaks down
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

584
Glossary
sucrose to glucose and fructose; secreted by the small
intestine (Chapter 16).
Sucrose (SOO-krohs) A disaccharide made of one glucose
and one fructose molecule (Syn.—cane sugar, table
sugar) (Chapter 2).
Sulcus (SUHL-kus) A furrow or groove, as between the gyri
of the cerebrum (Syn.—ﬁssure) (Chapter 8).
Superficial
(soo-per-FISH-uhl) Toward the surface
(Chapter 1).
Superﬁcial fascia (soo-per-FISH-uhl FASH-ee-ah) The
subcutaneous tissue, between the dermis and the muscles.
Consists of areolar connective tissue and adipose tissue
(Chapter 4).
Superior (soo-PEER-ee-your) Above, or higher (Chap-
ter 1).
Superior vena cava (VEE-nah KAY-vah) The vein that
returns blood from the upper body to the right atrium
(Chapter 12).
Supination (SOO-pi-NAY-shun) Turning the palm upward,
or lying face up (Chapter 7).
Suspensory ligaments
(suh-SPEN-suh-ree LIG-uh-
ments) The strands of connective tissue that connect the
ciliary body to the lens of the eye (Chapter 9).
Sustentacular cells (SUS-ten-TAK-yoo-lar SELLS) The
cells of the testes that secrete inhibin (Chapter 20).
Suture (SOO-cher) A synarthrosis, an immovable joint
between cranial bones or facial bones (from the Latin
“seam”) (Chapter 6).
Sympathetic (SIM-puh-THET-ik) The division of the
autonomic nervous system that dominates during stress-
ful situations (Chapter 8).
Sympathomimetic (SIM-pah-tho-mi-MET-ik) Having the
same effects as sympathetic impulses, as has epinephrine,
a hormone of the adrenal medulla (Chapter 10).
Symphysis (SIM-ﬁ-sis) An amphiarthrosis in which a disc
of cartilage is found between two bones, as in the verte-
bral column (Chapter 6).
Symptomatic infection (SIMP-toh-MAT-ik) An infection
in which the patient exhibits the symptoms of the disease
(Chapter 22).
Synapse (SIN-aps) The space between the axon of one neu-
ron and the cell body or dendrite of the next neuron or
between the end of a motor neuron and an effector cell
(Chapter 4).
Synaptic knob (si-NAP-tik NAHB) The end of an axon of
a neuron that releases a neurotransmitter (Chapter 8).
Synarthrosis (SIN-ar-THROH-sis) An immovable joint,
such as a suture (Chapter 6).
Synergistic muscles (SIN-er-JIS-tik MUSS-uhls) Muscles
that have the same function, or a stabilizing function,
with respect to the movement of a joint (Chapter 7).
Synovial ﬂuid (sin-OH-vee-uhl FLOO-id) A thick slippery
ﬂuid that prevents friction within joint cavities (Chap-
ter 6).
Synovial membrane (sin-OH-vee-uhl MEM-brayn) The
connective tissue membrane that lines joint cavities and
secretes synovial ﬂuid (Chapter 4).
Synthesis (SIN-the-siss) The process of forming complex
molecules or compounds from simpler compounds or
elements (Chapter 2).
Syphilis (SIFF-i-lis) A sexually transmitted disease caused
by the bacterium Treponema pallidum; may also cause con-
genital syphilis in newborns of infected women (Chap-
ter 20).
Systemic infection (sis-TEM-ik) An infection that has
spread throughout the body from an initial site (Chap-
ter 22).
Systole (SIS-tuh-lee) In the cardiac cycle, the contraction of
the myocardium; ventricular systole pumps blood into
the arteries (Chapter 12).
—T—
T cells (T SELLS) A subgroup of lymphocytes; include
helper T cells, cytotoxic T cells, and memory T cells, all
of which are involved in adaptive immune responses
(Chapter 11).
T tubule (TEE TOO-byool) A transverse tubule, a fold of
the sarcolemma; carries the action potential to the inte-
rior of a muscle ﬁber (Chapter 7).
Tachycardia (TAK-ee-KAR-dee-yah) An abnormally rapid
heart rate; more than 100 beats per minute (Chapter 12).
Taenia coli (TAY-nee-uh KOH-lye) The longitudinal
muscle layer of the colon; three bands of smooth muscle
ﬁbers that extend from the cecum to the sigmoid colon
(Chapter 16).
Talus (TAL-us) One of the tarsals; articulates with the tibia
(Chapter 6).
Target organ (TAR-get OR-gan) The organ (or tissue) in
which a hormone exerts its speciﬁc effects (Chapter 10).
Tarsals (TAR-suhls) The seven short bones in each ankle
(Chapter 6).
Taste buds (TAYST BUDS) Structures on the papillae of
the tongue that contain the chemoreceptors for the detec-
tion of chemicals (food) dissolved in saliva (Chapter 9).
Tears (TEERS) The watery secretion of the lacrimal
glands; wash the anterior surface of the eyeball and keep
it moist (Chapter 9).
Teeth (TEETH) Bony projections in the upper and lower
jaws that function in chewing (Chapter 16).
Telophase (TELL-ah-fayz) The fourth stage of mitosis, in
which two nuclei are re-formed (Chapter 3).
Temporal bone (TEM-puh-ruhl) The ﬂat bone that forms
the side of the cranial cavity and contains middle and
inner ear structures (Chapter 6).
Temporal lobes (TEM-puh-ruhl LOWBS) The lateral
parts of the cerebrum; contain the auditory, olfactory,
and taste areas (Chapter 8).
Tendon (TEN-dun) A ﬁbrous connective tissue structure
that connects muscle to bone (Chapter 7).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Glossary
585
Teratogen (te-RAH-toh-jen) Anything that causes devel-
opmental abnormalities in an embryo; may be a chemical
or microorganism to which an embryo is exposed by way
of the mother (Chapter 21).
Testes (TES-teez) (Sing.—testis) The male gonads that
produce sperm cells; also endocrine glands that secrete
the hormone testosterone (Chapter 10).
Testosterone (tes-TAHS-ter-ohn) The sex hormone
secreted by the interstitial cells of the testes; responsible
for the maturation of sperm, growth of the male repro-
ductive organs, and the secondary sex characteristics
(Chapter 10).
Tetanus (TET-uh-nus) 1. A sustained contraction of a
muscle ﬁber in response to rapid nerve impulses; the
basis for all useful movements. 2. A disease, characterized
by severe muscle spasms, caused by the bacterium
Clostridium tetani (Chapter 7).
Thalamus (THAL-uh-muss) The part of the brain superior
to the hypothalamus; regulates subconscious aspects of
sensation (Chapter 8).
Theory (THEER-ree) A statement that is the best explana-
tion of all the available evidence on a particular process
or mechanism. A theory is not a guess (Chapter 3).
Thoracic cavity (thaw-RASS-ik KAV-i-tee) Part of the
ventral cavity, superior to the diaphragm (Chapter 1).
Thoracic duct (thaw-RASS-ik DUKT) The lymph vessel
that empties lymph from the lower half and upper left
quadrant of the body into the left subclavian vein
(Chapter 14).
Thoracic vertebrae (thaw-RASS-ik VER-te-bray) The 12
vertebrae that articulate with the ribs (Chapter 6).
Threshold level–renal (THRESH-hold LE-vuhl) The
concentration at which a substance in the blood not nor-
mally excreted by the kidneys begins to appear in the
urine; for several substances, such as glucose, in the renal
ﬁltrate, there is a limit to how much the renal tubules can
reabsorb (Chapter 18).
Thrombocyte (THROM-boh-sight) Platelet; a fragment
of a megakaryocyte (Chapter 11).
Thrombocytopenia
(THROM-boh-SIGH-toh-PEE-
nee-ah) An abnormally low platelet count (Chapter 11).
Thrombopoietin (THROM-boh-POY-e-tin) A hormone
produced by the liver that stimulates development of
megakaryocytes in the red bone marrow (Chapter 11).
Thrombus (THROM-bus) A blood clot that obstructs
blood ﬂow through a blood vessel (Chapter 11).
Thymus (THIGH-mus) An organ made of lymphatic tissue
located inferior to the thyroid gland; large in the fetus
and child, and shrinks with age; produces T cells and
hormones necessary for the maturation of the immune
system (Chapter 14).
Thyroid cartilage (THIGH-roid KAR-ti-ledj) The largest
and most anterior cartilage of the larynx; may be felt in
the front of the neck (Chapter 15).
Thyroid gland (THIGH-roid) An endocrine gland on the
anterior side of the trachea below the larynx; secretes
thyroxine, triiodothyronine, and calcitonin (Chapter 10).
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
A hormone
secreted by the anterior pituitary gland that causes the
thyroid gland to secrete triiodothyronine and thyroxine
(Chapter 10).
Thyroxine (T4) (thigh-ROK-sin) A hormone secreted by
the thyroid gland that increases energy production and
protein synthesis (Chapter 10).
Tibia (TIB-ee-yuh) The larger long bone of the lower leg
(Syn.—shinbone) (Chapter 6).
Tidal volume (TIGH-duhl VAHL-yoom) The volume of
air in one normal inhalation and exhalation; average:
400–600 mL (Chapter 15).
Tissue (TISH-yoo) A group of cells with similar structure
and function (Chapter 1).
Tissue ﬂuid (TISH-yoo FLOO-id) The water found in
intercellular spaces. Also called interstitial ﬂuid (Chap-
ter 2).
Tissue macrophage system (TISH-yoo MAK-roh-fayj)
The organs or tissues that contain macrophages that
phagocytize old red blood cells: the liver, spleen, and red
bone marrow (Chapter 11).
Tissue typing (TISH-yoo TIGH-ping) A laboratory pro-
cedure that determines the HLA types of a donated
organ, prior to an organ transplant (Chapter 11).
Titin (TIGH-tin) The protein in sarcomeres that anchors
myosin ﬁlaments to the Z lines (Chapter 7).
Tongue (TUHNG) A muscular organ on the ﬂoor of the
oral cavity; contributes to chewing and swallowing and
contains taste buds (Chapter 16).
Tonsillectomy (TAHN-si-LEK-toh-mee) The surgical
removal of the palatine tonsils and/or adenoid (Chapter
14).
Tonsils (TAHN-sills) The lymph nodules in the mucosa of
the pharynx, the palatine tonsils, and the adenoid; also
the lingual tonsils on the base of the tongue (Chapter 14).
Toxin (TAHK-sin) A chemical that is poisonous to cells
(Chapter 22).
Toxoid (TAHK-soyd) An inactivated bacterial toxin that is
no longer harmful yet is still antigenic; used as a vaccine
(Chapter 14).
Trace element (TRAYS EL-uh-ment) Those elements
(minerals) needed in very small amounts by the body for
normal functioning (Chapter 2).
Trachea (TRAY-kee-ah) The organ that is the air passage-
way between the larynx and the primary bronchi (Syn.—
windpipe) (Chapter 15).
Transamination (TRANS-am-i-NAY-shun) The transfer
of an amino (NH2) group from an amino acid to a carbon
chain to form a non-essential amino acid; takes place in
the liver (Chapter 16).
Transcription (tran-SKRIP-shun) The process by which a
complementary copy, mRNA, is made of a DNA gene;
will be followed by translation (Chapter 3).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

586
Glossary
Transient ﬂora (TRAN-zee-ent FLOOR-uh) Part of nor-
mal ﬂora; those microorganisms that may inhabit speciﬁc
sites in the body for short periods of time (Chapter 22).
Transitional (trans-ZI-shun-uhl) Changing from one form
to another (Chapter 4).
Transitional epithelium (tran-ZI-shun-uhl) A type of
epithelium in which the surface cells change from
rounded to ﬂat as the organ changes shape (Chapter 4).
Translation (trans-LAY-shun) The process by which pro-
teins are synthesized on the ribosomes of a cell; tRNA
molecules line up amino acids according to the codons on
the mRNA molecule (Chapter 3).
Transporter (trans-POOR-ter) A protein that is part of a
cell membrane and necessary for the facilitated diffusion
of a substance such as glucose (Chapter 3).
Transverse section (trans-VERS SEK-shun) A plane or
cut from front to back, separating upper and lower parts
(Chapter 1).
Tricuspid valve (try-KUSS-pid VALV) The right AV valve,
which prevents backﬂow of blood from the right ventri-
cle to the right atrium when the ventricle contracts
(Chapter 12).
Trigeminal nerves (try-JEM-in-uhl) Cranial nerve pair V;
sensory for the face and teeth; motor to chewing muscles
(Chapter 8).
Triglyceride (try-GLI-si-ryde) An organic compound, a
true fat, that is made of one glycerol and three fatty acids
(Chapter 2).
Trigone (TRY-gohn) Triangular area on the ﬂoor of the
urinary bladder bounded by the openings of the two
ureters and the urethra (Chapter 18).
Triiodothyronine (T3) (TRY-eye-oh-doh-THIGH-roh-
neen) A hormone secreted by the thyroid gland that
increases energy production and protein synthesis
(Chapter 10).
Trisomy (TRY-suh-mee) In genetics, having three homol-
ogous chromosomes instead of the usual two (Chap-
ter 20).
Trochlear nerves (TROK-lee-ur) Cranial nerve pair IV;
motor to an extrinsic muscle of the eye (Chapter 8).
Trophoblast (TROH-foh-blast) The outermost layer of
the embryonic blastocyst; will become the chorion, one
of the embryonic membranes (Chapter 21).
Tropomyosin (TROH-poh-MYE-oh-sin) A protein that
inhibits the contraction of sarcomeres in a muscle ﬁber
(Chapter 7).
Troponin (TROH-poh-nin) A protein that inhibits the
contraction of the sarcomeres in a muscle ﬁber (Chap-
ter 7).
True fat (TROO FAT) An organic compound in the lipid
group that is made of glycerol and fatty acids (Chapter 2).
Trypsin (TRIP-sin) A digestive enzyme that breaks down
proteins into polypeptides; secreted by the pancreas
(Chapter 16).
Tubal ligation (TOO-buhl lye-GAY-shun) A surgical pro-
cedure to remove or sever the fallopian tubes; usually
done as a method of contraception in women (Chap-
ter 20).
Tubular reabsorption (TOO-byoo-ler REE-ab-SORP-
shun) The processes by which useful substances in the
renal ﬁltrate are returned to the blood in the peritubular
capillaries (Chapter 18).
Tubular secretion (TOO-byoo-ler se-KREE-shun) The
processes by which cells of the renal tubules secrete sub-
stances into the renal ﬁltrate to be excreted in urine
(Chapter 18).
Tunica (TOO-ni-kah) A layer or coat, as in the wall of an
artery (Chapter 13).
Tympanic membrane (tim-PAN-ik) The eardrum, the
membrane that is stretched across the end of the ear
canal; vibrates when sound waves strike it (Chapter 9).
Typing and cross matching (TIGH-ping and KROSS-
match-ing) A laboratory test that determines whether or
not donated blood is compatible, with respect to the red
blood cell types (Chapter 11).
—U—
Ubiquitin (yoo-BIK-wi-tin) An intracellular protein that
tags damaged proteins so that they may be destroyed by
proteasomes (Chapter 3).
Ulna (UHL-nuh) The long bone of the forearm on the lit-
tle ﬁnger side (Chapter 6).
Ultrasound (UHL-tra-sownd) 1. Inaudible sound. 2. A tech-
nique used in diagnosis in which ultrasound waves
provide outlines of the shapes of organs or tissues (Chap-
ter 21).
Umbilical arteries (uhm-BILL-i-kull AR-tuh-rees) The
fetal blood vessels contained in the umbilical cord that
carry deoxygenated blood from the fetus to the placenta
(Chapter 13).
Umbilical cord (uhm-BILL-i-kull KORD) The structure
that connects the fetus to the placenta; contains two
umbilical arteries and one umbilical vein (Chapter 13).
Umbilical vein (uhm-BILL-i-kull VAYN) The fetal blood
vessel contained in the umbilical cord that carries oxyge-
nated blood from the placenta to the fetus (Chapter 13).
Unicellular (YOO-nee-SELL-yoo-lar) Composed of one
cell (Chapter 4).
Unsaturated fat (un-SAT-uhr-ay-ted) A true fat that is
often liquid at room temperature and of plant origin; its
fatty acids contain less than the maximum number of
hydrogens (Chapter 2).
Upper respiratory tract (UH-per RES-pi-rah-TOR-ee
TRAKT) The respiratory organs located outside the
chest cavity (Chapter 15).
Urea (yoo-REE-ah) A nitrogenous waste product formed in
the liver from the deamination of amino acids or from
ammonia (Chapter 5).
Uremia (yoo-REE-me-ah) The condition in which blood
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Glossary
587
levels of nitrogenous waste products are elevated; caused
by renal insufficiency or failure (Chapter 18).
Ureter (YOOR-uh-ter) The tubular organ that carries
urine from the renal pelvis (kidney) to the urinary blad-
der (Chapter 18).
Urethra (yoo-REE-thrah) The tubular organ that carries
urine from the urinary bladder to the exterior of the body
(Chapter 18).
Urinary bladder (YOOR-i-NAR-ee BLA-der) The organ
that stores urine temporarily and contracts to eliminate
urine by way of the urethra (Chapter 18).
Urinary system (YOOR-i-NAR-ee SIS-tem) The organ
system that produces and eliminates urine; consists of the
kidneys, ureters, urinary bladder, and urethra (Chap-
ter 18).
Urine (YOOR-in) The ﬂuid formed by the kidneys from
blood plasma (Chapter 18).
Uterus (YOO-ter-us) The organ of the female reproductive
system in which the placenta is formed to nourish a
developing embryo-fetus (Chapter 20).
Utricle (YOO-tri-kuhl) A membranous sac in the vestibule
of the inner ear that contains receptors for static equilib-
rium (Chapter 9).
—V—
Vaccine (vak-SEEN) A preparation of a foreign antigen that
is administered by injection or other means in order to
stimulate an antibody response to provide immunity to a
particular pathogen (Chapter 14).
Vagina (vuh-JIGH-nah) The muscular tube that extends
from the cervix of the uterus to the vaginal oriﬁce; serves
as the birth canal (Chapter 20).
Vagus nerves (VAY-gus) Cranial nerve pair X; sensory for
cardiovascular and respiratory reﬂexes; motor to larynx,
bronchioles, stomach, and intestines (Chapter 8).
Valence (VAY-lens) The combining power of an atom when
compared to a hydrogen atom; expressed as a positive or
negative number (Chapter 2).
Valve (VALVE) A structure in a cavity or tube that closes
upon, and thus prevents, backﬂow of the ﬂuid therein
(from the Latin “a leaf of a double door”) (Chapter 12).
Varicose vein (VAR-i-kohs VAYN) An enlarged, abnor-
mally dilated vein; most often occurs in the legs (Chap-
ter 13).
Vasectomy (va-SEK-tuh-me) A surgical procedure to
remove or sever the ductus deferens; usually done as a
method of contraception in men (Chapter 20).
Vasoconstriction (VAY-zoh-kon-STRIK-shun) A decrease
in the diameter of a blood vessel caused by contraction
of the smooth muscle in the wall of the vessel (Chap-
ter 5).
Vasodilation (VAY-zoh-dye-LAY-shun) An increase in the
diameter of a blood vessel caused by relaxation of the
smooth muscle in the wall of the vessel (Chapter 5).
Vasomotor center (VAY-zoh-MOH-ter) The part of the
medulla that regulates the diameter of arteries and veins;
contributes to normal blood pressure (Chapter 8).
Vasopressin (VAY-zoh-PRESS-in) Antidiuretic hormone
(Chapter 8).
Vector (VEK-ter) An arthropod that transmits pathogens
from host to host, usually when it bites to obtain blood
(Chapter 22).
Vein (VAYN) A blood vessel that takes blood from capillar-
ies back to the heart (Chapter 13).
Venous return (VEE-nus ree-TURN) The amount of
blood returned by the veins to the heart; is directly
related to cardiac output, which depends on adequate
venous return (Chapter 12).
Ventilation (VEN-ti-LAY-shun) The movement of air into
and out of the lungs (Chapter 15).
Ventral (VEN-truhl) Toward the front (Syn.—anterior)
(Chapter 1).
Ventral cavity (VEN-truhl KAV-i-tee) Cavity that consists
of the thoracic, abdominal, and pelvic cavities (Chap-
ter 1).
Ventral root (VEN-truhl ROOT) The motor root of a
spinal nerve (Chapter 8).
Ventricle (VEN-tri-kul) 1. A cavity, such as the four ventri-
cles of the brain that contain cerebrospinal ﬂuid. 2. One
of the two lower chambers of the heart that pump blood
to the body or to the lungs (Chapter 8).
Venule (VEN-yool) A small vein (Chapter 13).
Vertebra (VER-te-brah) One of the bones of the spine or
backbone (Chapter 6).
Vertebral canal (VER-te-brahl ka-NAL) The spinal cavity
that contains and protects the spinal cord (Chapter 6).
Vertebral column (VER-te-brahl KAH-luhm) The spine
or backbone (Chapter 6).
Vestibule (VES-ti-byool) 1. The bony chamber of the inner
ear that contains the utricle and saccule (Chapter 9).
2. The female external genital area between the labia
minor that contains the openings of the urethra, vagina,
and Bartholin’s glands (Chapter 20).
Vestigial organ (ves-TIJ-ee-uhl) An organ that is reduced
in size and function when compared with that of evolu-
tionary ancestors; includes the appendix, ear muscles that
move the auricle, and wisdom teeth (Chapter 16).
Villi (VILL-eye) 1. Folds of the mucosa of the small intes-
tine that increase the surface area for absorption; each vil-
lus contains a capillary network and a lacteal (Chapter
16). 2. Projections of the chorion, an embryonic mem-
brane that forms the fetal portion of the placenta
(Chapter 21).
Virulence (VIR-yoo-lents) The ability of a microorganism
to cause disease; the degree of pathogenicity (Chap-
ter 22).
Virus (VIGH-rus) The simplest type of microorganism,
consisting of either DNA or RNA within a protein shell;
all are obligate intracellular parasites (Chapter 14).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

588
Glossary
Visceral (VISS-er-uhl) Pertaining to organs within a body
cavity, especially thoracic and abdominal organs (Chap-
ter 8).
Visceral effectors (VISS-er-uhl e-FEK-turs) Smooth mus-
cle, cardiac muscle, and glands; receive motor nerve
ﬁbers of the autonomic nervous system; responses are
involuntary (Chapter 8).
Visceral muscle (VIS-ser-uhl MUSS-uhl) Another name
for smooth muscle tissue (Chapter 4).
Vital capacity (VY-tuhl kuh-PASS-i-tee) The volume of air
involved in the deepest inhalation followed by the most
forceful exhalation; average: 3500–5000 mL (Chap-
ter 15).
Vitamin (VY-tah-min) An organic molecule needed in small
amounts by the body for normal metabolism or growth
(Chapter 17).
Vitreous humor (VIT-ree-us HYOO-mer) The semi-
solid, gelatinous substance in the posterior cavity of the
eyeball; helps keep the retina in place (Chapter 9).
Vocal cords (VOH-kul KORDS) The pair of folds with-
in the larynx that are vibrated by the passage of air,
producing sounds that may be turned into speech
(Chapter 15).
Voluntary muscle (VAHL-un-tary MUSS-uhl) Another
name for striated or skeletal muscle tissue (Chapter 4).
Vomer (VOH-mer) The ﬂat bone that forms the lower,
posterior portion of the nasal septum (from the Latin
“plowshare”) (Chapter 6).
Vomiting (VAH-mi-ting) Ejection through the mouth of
stomach and intestinal contents (Chapter 16).
Vulva (VUHL-vah) The female external genital organs
(Chapter 20).
—W–X–Y–Z—
Wart (WART) An elevated, benign skin lesion caused by a
virus (Chapter 5).
White blood cells (WIGHT BLUHD SELLS) The cells
that destroy pathogens that enter the body and provide
immunity to some diseases; the ﬁve kinds are neutrophils,
eosinophils, basophils, lymphocytes, and monocytes
(Syn.—leukocytes) (Chapter 4).
White matter (WIGHT) Nerve tissue within the central
nervous system that consists of myelinated axons and
dendrites of interneurons (Chapter 8).
Worm (WURM) An elongated invertebrate; parasitic
worms include tapeworms and hookworms (Chapter 22).
Xiphoid process (ZYE-foyd) The most inferior part of the
sternum (from the Greek “sword-like”) (Chapter 6).
Yellow bone marrow (YELL-oh BOWN MAR-roh)
Primarily adipose tissue, found in the marrow cavities of
the diaphyses of long bones and in the spongy bone of
the epiphyses of adult bones (Chapter 6).
Yolk sac (YOHK SAK) An embryonic membrane that forms
the ﬁrst blood cells for the developing embryo (Chap-
ter 21).
Z line (ZEE LYEN) The lateral boundary of a sarcomere in
muscle tissue; anchors myosin and actin filaments
(Chapter 7).
Zoonoses (ZOH-oh-NOH-seez) (Sing.—zoonosis) Dis-
eases of animals that may be transmitted to people under
certain conditions (Chapter 22).
Zygote (ZYE-goht) A fertilized egg, formed by the union of
the nuclei of egg and sperm; the diploid number of chro-
mosomes (46 for people) is restored (Chapter 20).
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

589
Index
Page numbers followed by a “t,” “f,” or “b” indicate tables, ﬁgures, or boxed material, respectively.
A
Abdomen
areas, 16, 17f
transverse section, 16f
Abdominal aorta, 297f
Abdominal cavity, 15
Abducens nerve, 188f, 189t
Abduction, 150f, 150t
Abductor pollicis, 156f
ABO blood types, 252, 259, 259t, 260f,
490t
Absorption (digestion), 383–384
Absorptive cell, 383f
Accelerator center, 284, 285f
Accessory nerve, 188f, 189t
Accessory organs (digestion), 370
Acetabulum, 123–125, 126f, 127f
Acetylcholine (ACh), 142, 143f, 169, 191
receptors, 143f, 145, 148b
Achilles tendon, 152f
Acid-base balance, 360–361, 446–450
Acidity. See pH
Acidosis, 30, 361
Acids, 31–33
Acini, 382f
Acoustic nerve, 188f, 189t
Acquired immunity, 336
Acromegaly, 230b
Acromial end (clavicle), 124f
Acromian process, 124f
Acrosome, 459, 476
Actin, 142, 144f
Active immunity, 336
Active site theory, 38, 40f
Active transport, 54, 425
Adaptation (sensations), 198–199
Adaptive immunity, 330–334, 331f
Addison’s disease, 242b
Adduction, 150f, 150t
Adductor group, 157t
Adductor longus, 153f, 158f
Adductor magnus, 152f, 158f
Adenohypophysis, 226
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP), 402
Adipose tissue, 76–77, 408, 467f
Adrenal cortex, 226f, 237–242
disorders of, 242b
hormones of, 242t
Adrenal gland, 190f, 191t, 224f, 236–242,
420f
Adrenal medulla, 236–237
hormones of, 237t
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH),
226f, 230, 231t, 242
Aerobic, 51
Afferent arteriole, 421, 423f, 426f
Afferent lymphatic vessel, 326f
Afferent neurons, 170
After-image (sensations), 199
Afterbirth, 480
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD),
204–206
Agglutination, 261, 334
Aging
cells, 63
digestive system, 389–390
endocrine system, 245
ﬂuid regulation, 450–451
heart, 286
integumentary system, 101
lymphatic system, 337
metabolism, 413
muscular system, 149
nervous system, 191
pH regulation, 450–451
reproductive system, 470
respiratory system, 361
senses, 216
skeletal system, 128–131
tissue, 84
urinary system, 433–435
vascular system, 314
AIDS, 48, 332b, 504
Albumin, 252, 253f, 388
Aldosterone, 240, 242t, 309, 310f, 312f,
428t, 429f
functions of, 240f
reabsorption of water, 427
Alimentary tube, 370
structure, 373–376, 375f
Alkalinity. See pH
Alkalosis, 361
Alleles, 487
Allergen, 336b
Allergies, 334, 336b
Alpha cells, 235, 237t, 382f
Alveolar
duct, 348f
glands, 467
sacs, 71f
structure, 350f
ventilation, 353–354
Alveoli, 347, 348f, 350f, 356f
Alzheimer’s disease, 183b
Amblyopia, 210
AMD. See Age-related macular degen-
eration
Amenorrhea, 468
Amines, 225
Amino acids, 37, 57f, 403, 406–407
metabolism, 388
non-essential, 388, 406, 407f
structure, 38f
Amniocentesis, 481b
Amnion, 477, 479f
Amniotic ﬂuid, 477, 485f
Ampulla, 212f, 215f
Ampulla of vater, 382f
Amylase, 379
Anabolic steroids, 141b
Anabolism, 400
Anal canal, 371f, 385f, 387f
Anaphase, 60
Anastomoses, 292–293
Anatomic dead space, 354
Anatomy, 4
Anconius, 156f
Anemia, 59b, 257b
Aneurysm, 181b, 294b
Angiotensin I, 312f
Angiotensin II, 240, 311, 312f, 429
Angiotensinogen, 312f
Anions, 26, 445
Anococcygeal ligament, 159f
Antagonistic muscles, 138–139, 139f
Antagonistic pair, 225
Anterior cavity (eye), 207
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Anterior cerebral artery, 303f
Anterior communicating artery, 303f
Anterior crest, 127f
Anterior facial vein, 298f
Anterior fontanel, 109f
Anterior interventricular branch, 278f
Anterior pituitary, 226f, 228–231
hormones, 231t
Anterior tibial artery, 297f, 301t
Anterior tibial vein, 298f, 302t
Antibiotics, 510–511
Antibodies, 332, 333f
classes, 333t
Antibody-mediated immunity, 330,
330–334
Antibody responses, 334, 335f
Antibody titer, 334b
Anticodon, 57f, 58
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), 179, 226f,
227–228, 228t, 309, 310f, 427, 428t,
429f, 444
Antigens, 34, 48, 326f, 327
Antipyretic, 400
Antiseptic, 505
Antithrombin, 268
Anus, 159f, 385f, 387f, 459f, 463f, 467f
Aorta, 275, 276f, 278f, 305f, 356f, 420f
Aortic arch, 216, 276f, 285f, 297f, 305f
Aortic body, 285f, 360
Aortic semilunar valve, 275, 276f, 277f,
277t
Aortic sinus, 285f
Apex (heart), 276f
Apgar score, 486b
Aphasia, 182b
Apical pulse, 304b
Aplastic anemia, 257b
Apneustic center, 358, 359f
Apocrine glands, 98
Aponeurosis, 138
Appendectomy, 385
Appendicitis, 385
Appendicular skeleton, 112
Appendix, 385, 385f
Aqueous humor, 207
Aqueous (water) solution, 26
Arachnoid membrane, 184, 185f, 186f
Arachnoid villi, 184, 185f, 186f
Arcuate artery, 422f
Areola, 467f
Areolar connective tissue, 75–76
Arm, 122–123
Arrhythmias (heart), 282, 282b
Arterial receptors, 216
Arteries, 292, 293f, 356f
disorders of, 294b
head and neck, 299f
Arteriole, 98, 99t, 292, 293f, 348f, 375f
Arteriosclerosis, 294b
Arthritis, 103b
Arthropods, 499, 514–515, 515f
vectors, 524t
Articular cartilage, 106, 110f
Ascaris, 514
Ascending colon, 371f, 385f
Ascending tracts, 172
Association areas (brain), 182–183
Asthma, 349b
Astigmatism, 208b
Astrocyte, 167f, 168t
Atherosclerosis, 35, 280b, 294b
Atlas (vertebrae), 119, 120f
Atomic number, 24
Atomic weight, 24
Atoms, 24–25
carbon, 25f
ATP (adenosine triphosphate), 29, 30, 34,
229f, 232f, 245f
active transport, 145, 425–427
cell respiration, 42, 42t, 401, 401f
glucose, 54
liver cells, 388
mitochondria, 51
mitosis, 60
muscle ﬁbers, 140–142
reproductive system, 459
Atretic follicles, 464
Atria, 275
Atrial diastole, 279f
Atrial natriuretic hormone (ANH), 275,
428t
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), 275, 309,
310f, 429f
reabsorption of water, 427
Atrial systole, 279f
Atrioventricular (AV) bundle, 281, 281f
Atrioventricular (AV) node, 279, 281f,
285f
Atrium, left and right, 275
Atrophy (muscle), 147
Auditory area (brain), 180f, 182
Auditory bones, 119
Auditory tube, 201f
Auerbach’s plexus, 375f, 376
Auricle, 210, 211f
Autoclave, 505
Autoimmune arthritis, 130b
Autoimmune disorder, 148b, 168b
Autonomic nervous system (ANS),
187–191, 190f
functions, 191t
Autonomic pathways, 187
Autosomes, 476
Avian inﬂuenza A (H5N1), 507, 507b
Axial skeleton, 112
Axillary artery, 297f, 300t
Axillary lymph nodes, 323, 325f
Axillary vein, 298f, 302t
Axis (vertebrae), 119, 120f
Axon, 81, 81t, 166, 167f, 170f
presynaptic neuron, 169f
Axon terminal, 142, 143f, 167f
Azygos vein, 302t
B
B cell (blood), 255f, 262, 330
B12, 409t
Bacteremia, 502
Bacteria, 498, 508–511
diseases caused, 516–519t
shapes, 509f
Bactericides, 505
Bacteriostatic chemicals, 505
Bacteriuria, 434t
Bacteroides fragilis, 500
Ball-and-socket joint, 122, 123, 129f
Band cell, 255f, 262
Baroreceptors, 359f
Barrier methods (of contraception), 461b
Barriers (immunity), 327–328
Bartholin’s gland, 463f, 464f, 466
Basal ganglia (brain), 177f, 183
Basal metabolic rate (BMR), 408
Bases, 31–33
Basilar artery, 299f, 303f
Basilar layer
Basilar membrane, 213f
Basilic vein, 298f, 302t
Basophils, 253f, 255f, 262, 329f
Benign tumors, 61b
Beta cells, 235, 237t, 382f
Bicarbonate buffer system, 446–448, 447t
Bicarbonate juice, 379–381
Bicep, 139f, 156f
brachii, 152f, 153f, 157t
femoris, 152f, 158f
Bicuspid valve. See Mitral valve
Bile, 379
Bile duct, 371f, 380f, 382f
Bile salts, 379
Bilirubin, 258–259, 258f
formation, 388
Binocular vision, 209
Binomial nomenclature, 499–500
Biopsy, 94b
Biotin, 409t
Bipolar neurons, 206f
Birth canal, 483
Bitter (taste area), 201f
Bladder, 375f
trigone, 420f
Blastocoele, 478f
Blastocyst, 476, 478f
Blister, 91
Blood, 74–75, 251–268
capillaries, 323f
590
Index
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

cells, 254–268, 256f
life span, 256–259
characteristics, 252
components, 253f
count, complete, 262t
ﬂow
distribution, 309–310
velocity of, 306–307
gases, 30b
pressure, 54–56, 307–310
diastolic, 307
maintenance, 307–309
regulation, 310–314
systolic, 307
stroke volume, 283, 284t
test
kidney function, 434b
types, 259–261
inheritance, 491f
typing and cross-matching, 261
vessels, 98, 191t
structure, 293f
Blood-brain barrier, 167f
Body
cavities, 14f
metabolism, 395–413
structures, from primary germ layers,
480t
temperature, 396–400
effects of changes, 402f
regulation, 398–399
Body Mass Index, 412b
Bone(s), 78–79, 226f; see also Skeletal
system; Skeleton
arm and shoulder girdle, 124f
classiﬁcation, 106–108
collar, 110f
compact, 106, 110f
cranial, 112
fractures and repair, 111b
growth and maintenance
hormones, 112t
factors affecting, 108–112
hip and leg, 128b
leg, 127f
shoulder and arm, 125t
tissue, 107f
Bony labyrinth (ear), 210
Botulism, 146b
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE),
39b
Bowman’s capsule, 423f, 424, 426f
Brachial artery, 297f, 300t
Brachial plexus, 173f
Brachial vein, 298f, 302t
Brachialis, 152f, 153f, 156f
Brachiocephalic artery, 276f, 297f, 299f,
300t
Brachiocephalic vein, 298f, 302t
Brachioradialis, 152f, 153f, 156f, 157t
Bradycardia, 283
Brain, 176–184; see also speciﬁc regions
association areas, 182–183
basal ganglia, 183
cerebellum, 178
cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF), 184–186,
186f
cerebrum, 179–184
corpus callosum, 183–184
frontal lobes, 180–181
hypothalamus, 178–179
left cerebral hemisphere, 180f
medulla, 176
meninges, 184–186
structure, 185f
midbrain, 176–178
midsagittal section, 177f
motor areas, 140
occipital lobe, 182
parietal lobes, 181
pons, 176
role of in muscle motion, 139–140
temporal lobes, 181–182
thalamus, 179
ventricles, 176
Brain stem, 176
Breasts, 226f
Breathing mechanisms, 347–351
Broad ligament, 464f
Broca’s motor speech, 181
Bronchial artery, 300t
Bronchial tree, 346
Bronchioles, 190f, 191t, 346, 348f
BSE. See Bovine spongiform encephalopa-
thy
Buccal cavity, 370–373; see also Oral cavity
Buccinator, 154f, 154t
Buffer systems, 32–33, 446–448
Bulbospongiosus, 159f, 159t
Bulbourethral gland, 459f, 462
Bundle branches, 281
Bundle of His, 285f; see also
Atrioventricular (AV) bundle
Burns, 92b, 93b
Bursae, 128
C
Calcaneus, 125
Calcaneus tarsal, 127f
Calcitonin, 231, 233–234, 233t, 234f
bone growth, 112t
functions, 234f
Calcitriol, 430
Calcium, 410t, 447t
Callus, 91
Calories, 405
Calyces, 421, 422f
Canal of Schlemm, 207
Canaliculi, 106
Cancer, 61b
Candida albicans, 512
Capacitation, 476
Capillaries, 293–296, 293f, 295f, 383f, 384
anterior pituitary, 227f
exchanges, 295–296, 295f
hypothalamus, 227f
Capitate, 124f
Capitulum, 124f
Capsule (lymph node), 326f
Carbohydrate, 35t
metabolism, 386
Carbon monoxide, 357b
Carbonic anhydrase, 358
Carcinogens, 61b
Cardiac
conduction pathway, 279–283
cycles, 278–279, 279f
muscle, 81
notch, 348f
output, 283–284, 284t
reserve, 284, 284t
Cardiogenic shock, 314b
Carotid
arteries, 216
body, 285f, 360
sinus, 285f
Carpals, 114f, 123, 124f, 125t
Carrier enzyme, 54
Cartilage, 79, 110f
Catabolism, 401
Catalysts, 38
Cataracts, 205b
Catecholamines, 238
Cations, 26, 445
Cauda equina, 172, 173f
Caval veins, 275
Cavernous tissue (penis), 432f
Cavernous urethra, 432f, 459f
Cecum, 371f, 385, 385f
Celiac artery, 297f, 300t
Celiac ganglion, 190f
Cell(s), 4, 48–63, 245f
aging, 63
body, 81, 81t, 166, 167f, 170f
division, 60–63
interstitial, 450, 460f
membranes, 35, 48–49, 49f, 50f
nucleus, 57f, 245f
organelles, 50–52
functions, 52t
respiration, 30, 401, 404f
summary, 405t
stem, 60, 254, 255f, 476, 480
structure, 48–52
transport mechanisms, 52–56, 54t, 55f
Cell-mediated immunity, 330
Index
591
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Cellulose, 34
Cementum, 372f
Central body (sternum), 122
Central canal (of spinal cord), 170f, 172,
178f, 185f, 186f
Central deafness, 214b
Central nervous system (CNS), 81, 166,
174, 184
Central tendon, 159f
Centrioles, 50f, 51, 52t
Cephalic vein, 298f, 302t
Cerebellum, 177f, 178, 178f, 186f, 303f
Cerebral aqueduct, 176, 178f, 186f
Cerebral cortex, 177f, 179, 185f, 358, 359f
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF), 172, 176–178,
184–186, 186f
Cerebrovascular accidents (CVA), 181b
Cerebrum, 139, 179–184, 185f, 186f, 303f
Cerumen, 97
Ceruminous glands, 97–98, 99t
Cervical lymph nodes, 323, 325f
Cervical plexus, 173f
Cervical vertebrae, 114f, 119, 120f
Cervix, 463f, 464f, 465, 483f
Cesarean section, 484
Chaperones (proteins), 63
Chemical, 4
bonds, 25–28
clotting, 265, 266t, 267f
defenses (immunity), 328
digestion, 370
reactions, 28
regulation of respiration, 359–360
Chemistry, 24–42
Chemokines, 328
Chemoreceptors, 200, 216, 284, 359–360,
360
Chemotherapy, 61b
Chief cells, 377, 377f
Chlamydias, 509–510
infection, 466b
Chloride, 447t
Chlorine, 410t
Cholecystokinin, 379–381, 381
Cholesterol, 37, 37t, 407f, 408
Cholinesterase, 142, 143f, 169, 191
Chondrocytes, 79, 110f
Chordae tendineae, 275, 276f, 277t
Chorion, 476, 479, 479f
Chorionic villi, 479
Chorionic villus sampling (CVS), 481b
Choroid, 206f
Choroid layer, 204
Choroid plexus, 176–178, 177f, 186f
Chromatin, 49, 50f
Chromosomes, 49, 487
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), 352b
Chylomicrons, 384
Cilia, 50f, 51, 52t, 73
Ciliary body, 204
Ciliary ganglion, 190f
Ciliated epithelium, 116
Circle of Willis, 296–299, 303f
Circular muscle, 387f
Circulation
fetal, 301–306
hepatic portal, 301
hepatic portion, 304f
pathways, 296–306
pulmonary, 296
systemic, 296–301
Circulatory shock, 92b, 314b
Circumcision, 462
Circumﬂex artery, 276f
Cisterna chyli, 322, 325f
CJD. See Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
Classiﬁcation (white blood cells), 262
Clavicle, 114f, 122, 124f, 125t
Cleavage (human development), 476
Clinical infection, 501
Clitoris, 159f, 463f, 466, 467f
Clot
dissolving, 268b
factors, 388
preventing abnormal, 268
retraction, 266
CNS. See Central nervous system
Cobalt, 410t
Coccygeus, 159f, 159t
Coccyx, 114f, 119, 120f, 126f, 159f
Cochlea, 210–214, 211f, 212f, 213f
Cochlear, 211f, 212f, 213f
Codon, 57f, 58
Coenzymes, 408
Cold-related disorders, 400b
Collagen, 75, 95
cosmetic, 78b
and vitamin C, 78b
Collecting tubule (nephron), 423f, 426f
Colloid osmotic pressure (COP), 295
Colon, 190f, 385; see also Large intestine
Color blindness, 209b, 429f
Columnar cells, 70f
Common bile duct, 379, 380f
Common carotid arteries, 285f, 297f
Common iliac artery, 301t
Common iliac vein, 298f, 302t
Communicable disease, 504
Compact bone, 106, 110f
Compensated shock, 314b
Complement, 328, 329f
Complement ﬁxation test, 334b
Compliance (lungs), 354
Computed tomography (CT) scanning,
18b
Concentration gradient, 52
Concentric contraction (muscle), 140
Conchae, 116, 344, 345f
Conduction (heat loss), 397
Conduction deafness, 214b
Condyles, 113
Condyloid joint, 116
Condyloid process, 115f
Cones (retina), 204, 206f
Congenital fetal infections, 483b
Conjunctiva, 203, 203f
Conjunctivitis, 203
Connective tissue, 6, 74–79, 75f, 76f
membranes, 84, 84t
types, 77t
Contraception, 461b
Contraction (muscle), 140
concentric, 140
eccentric, 140
Contrast (sensations), 198
Convolutions (brain), 180; see also Gyri
Copper, 410t
Coracoid process, 124f
Cornea, 204
Corona radiata, 478f
Coronal suture, 115f
Coronary arteries, 277, 277f, 300t
disease, 280b
Coronary sinus, 278f
Coronary vessels, 277–278, 278f
Coronoid process, 115f
Corpus albicans, 469f, 478f
Corpus callosum (brain), 177f, 179,
183–184, 186f
Corpus cavernosum, 459f
Corpus luteum, 243, 464, 464f, 469f, 478f
Corpus spongiosum, 459f
Cortex (lymph node), 326f
Corticospinal tract, 170f
Corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH),
230, 242
Cortisol, 240–242, 242t, 406t
Costal cartilages, 123f
Covalent bonds, 26–27
Cranial nerves, 186–187, 188f, 189t
Cranial venous sinuses, 184, 186f, 302t
Creatine, 141
Cretinism, 235b
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), 39b
Cribriform plate, 117f
Cricoid cartilage, 345f, 346f
Crista, 215f
Crista galli, 117f
Cryptococcus, 513
Cryptorchidism, 457
Crypts of Lieberkühn, 381
CT. See Computed tomography
Cubital nodes, 325f
Cuboid tarsal, 127f
Cuboidal cells, 70f
Cuneiforms, 127f
Cushing’s syndrome, 242b
Cutaneous senses, 199–200
Cyanosis, 357b
592
Index
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Cyclic AMP (cAMP), 244, 245f
Cystic duct, 379, 380f, 382f
Cystic ﬁbrosis, 74b, 490t
Cystitis, 435b
Cytochrome transport system, 403, 405t
Cytokines, 328
Cytoplasm, 50–52, 50f
Cytosol, 50
Cytotoxic T cells, 330
D
Dead-end lymph capillaries, 324f
Deafness, 214b
Deamination, 388, 405, 407f
Deciduous teeth, 371
Decubitus ulcer, 98
Deep fascia, 84t
Deep femoral artery, 297f
Deep palmar artery, 297f
Defecation reﬂex, 386
Defensins, 90, 327, 329f
Defensive cells (immunity), 328
Dehydration, 98
Delta cells, 237t, 382f
Deltoid muscle, 149b, 152f, 153f, 155f,
156f, 157t
Deltoid tubercle, 124f
Dendrites, 81, 81t, 166, 167f, 170f
postsynaptic neuron, 169f
Dendritic cells. See Langerhans cells
Dentin, 372, 372f
Deoxyribonucleic acid. See DNA
Depolarization, 171, 172t
Dermis, 95–99
functions, 99t
Descending colon, 371f, 385f
Descending tracts (nervous system), 172
Detached retina, 207
Detoxiﬁcation (by liver), 389
Detrusor muscle, 431, 432f
Diabetes mellitus, 236, 238b
Diagnosis, fetal, 481b
Diagnostic tests, 334b
Diaphragm, 155t, 348, 348f, 351f, 359f,
375f, 420f
Diaphysis, 106
Diastole, 278
Diastolic blood pressure, 307
Diffusion, 52
Digestion
chemical, 370
completion, 381–385
end products, 370
mechanical, 370
organs, 371f
process, 374t
regulation of secretions, 381t
types, 370
Digestive system, 369–389
Diglyceride, 34
Diploid number, 60
Discs (intervertebral), 120, 120f, 121b
Disease, 4
diagnosis of, 4
self-limiting, 502
sexually transmitted, 466b
vectors, 499
Disinfectant, 505
Dissociation, 26; see also Ionization
Distal convoluted tubule (nephron), 423f,
424, 426f
Disulﬁde bonds, 27–28
Diverticula, 384b
DNA, 40f, 41–42, 42t, 56–60, 245f
Dominant allele, 487
Dorsal arch (vein), 298f
Dorsal cavity, 13
Dorsal column (spinal cord), 170f
Dorsal root ganglion, 170f, 172, 185f
Dorsalis pedis, 301t
Dorsiﬂexion, 150t
Double helix, 56
Down syndrome, 458b
Drew, Charles, 252
Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy, 148b,
490t
Ducts (exocrine glands), 73
Ductus arteriosus, 305, 305f
Ductus deferens, 459f, 460f, 461
Ductus venosus, 304, 305f, 486
Duodenal ulcers, 384b
Duodenum, 371f, 375f, 377f, 378, 382f
Dura mater, 184, 185f, 186f
Dyspnea, 357b
Dystrophin, 148b
E
Ear, 210–215
Eardrum, 210, 211f
Ear wax. See Cerumen
Eccentric contraction (muscle), 140
Eccrine glands, 98, 99t, 397
ECF. See Extracellular ﬂuid
Ectoderm, 477, 480t
Ectopic focus, 282b
Ectopic pregnancy, 465
Edema, 443
Effector, 170, 174
Effector muscle, 170f
Efferent arteriole, 421, 423f, 426f
Efferent lymphatic vessel, 326f
Efferent neuron, 167f, 170
EGFR. See Epidermal growth factor
receptor
Ejaculatory duct, 459f, 461
Ejection fraction, 284, 284t
Elastic connective tissue, 78
Elastin, 75, 95
Electrocardiogram (ECG), 282b
Electrolyte imbalances, 447b
Electrolytes, 253f, 445–446
Electron, 24
Elements, 24–42
Embolism, 268
Embryo, 477–480, 479f
Embryo-fetus growth, 482t
Embryonic development, 478f, 479f
Embryonic disc, 477
Embryonic membranes, 477, 477–480
Emphysema, 352b
Enamel, 372, 372f
Encapsulated nerve endings, 199
Endemic, 503
Endocardium, 274, 277t
Endocrine system, 222–245, 224f
Endocytosis, 56
Endoderm, 477, 480t
Endolymph, 212f, 213f
Endometrium, 464f, 465, 479f
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER), 51, 52t, 245f
Endothelial cells, 293f
Endothelium, 268, 292, 293f
Endotoxin, 509
Entamoeba histolytica, 513
Enteric nervous system, 376
Enteroendocrine cell, 383f
Enzymes, 38–41, 40
Eosinophils, 253f, 255f, 262
Ependyma, 168t
Epicardium, 82, 274, 277t
Epicranial aponeurosis, 154f
Epidemic, 503
Epidemiology, 503–504
Epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR), 61b
Epidermis, 90–93, 92f, 95t
Epididymis, 459–461, 459f, 460f
Epiglottis, 345f, 346, 346f, 347f, 348f
Epinephrine, 237, 237t, 239f, 310f, 396,
397t, 406t
Epiphyseal discs, 108, 110f
Epiphyses, 106
Epithelial membranes, 82, 83f
Epithelial tissue, 4–6, 70–74, 375f
Epithelium. See Epithelial tissue
Equilibrium, 210
physiology, 215f
ER. See Endoplasmic reticulum, 51
Erythroblastosis fetalis. See Rh disease
Erythrocytes, 253f, 254, 255f
Erythropoietin, 254, 430, 431b
Escherichia Coli, 499–500
Esophageal artery, 300t
Esophagus, 345f, 371f, 373, 377f
Essential amino acids, 388
Essential fatty acids, 408
Estrogen, 243, 468, 468t, 470t, 481
bone growth, 112t
Index
593
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Ethmoid bone, 113, 115f, 117f, 201f, 345f
Ethmoid sinus, 119f
Eustachian tube, 211f, 345f
Exercise, 140–141
responses, 147–149, 148f
Exhalation, 349–351, 351f
Exocytosis, 51
Expiration center, 358, 359f
Expiration. See Exhalation
Expiratory reserve, 353
Extension, 150f, 150t
External anal sphincter, 159f, 159t, 386,
387f
External auditory meatus, 115f, 116f, 210,
211f
External carotid artery, 297f, 300t, 303f
External elastic lamina, 293f
External iliac artery, 297f, 301t
External iliac vein, 298f, 302t
External intercostals, 155t, 348, 351f, 359f
External jugular vein, 298f, 302t
External muscle layer (digestion), 376
External oblique, 152f, 153f, 155f, 155t
External respiration, 354, 356f
External urethral sphincter, 431, 432f
Extracellular ﬂuid (ECF), 29, 442
Extrinsic factor, 256
Extrinsic muscles, 203
Eye(s), 190f, 202–210
F
Facial artery, 297f, 299f
Facial bones, 116
Facial nerve, 188f, 189t, 201f
Facilitated diffusion, 54
Fallopian tube, 463f, 464–465, 464f, 478f
False ribs, 122
Farsightedness (Hyperopia), 208b
Fascia, 138, 144f
Fats, as energy sources, 403–405
Fatty acids, 408
FDA. See Food and Drug Administration
Feces, elimination of, 386
Feedback mechanisms, 11f
Female reproduction hormones, 470t
Femoral artery, 297f, 301t
Femoral nerve, 173f, 174t
Femoral vein, 298f, 302t
Femur, 114f, 125, 127f, 128b, 149b
Fertilization, 62, 476, 478f
Fetus
alcohol syndrome, 484b
circulation, 301–306, 305f
development, 483f
diagnosis, 481b
full term, 485f
infections, congenital, 483b
Fever, 397, 399–400, 401f, 402f
Fiber, 34, 387b
Fibrillation, 282–283
Fibrin, 266, 267f
Fibrinogen, 252, 253f, 267f
Fibrinolysis, 266
Fibroblasts. See Connective tissue
Fibrous connective tissue, 77–78
Fibrous pericardium, 84t, 274
Fibrous skeleton (heart), 277f, 277t
Fibula, 114f, 125, 127f, 128b
Filtration, 54–56
capillaries, 295
Fimbriae, 463f, 464–465, 464f
Fingernail, structure, 96f
Fissures (brain), 180; see also Sulci
Flagella, 51, 52t, 459
Flexion, 150f, 150t
Flexor carpi radialis, 156f
Flexor digitorum longus, 158f
Flexor reﬂexes, 175; see also Withdrawal
reﬂexes
Floating kidney, 421b
Floating ribs, 122
Fluid-electrolyte and acid-base balance,
441–451
Fluid regulation, aging, 450–451
Fluorescent antibody test, 334b
Folacin. See Folic acid
Foliate papillae, 201f
Folic acid, 408, 409t
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 226f,
230, 231, 231t, 243, 450, 460t, 467,
470t
Follicles, 95–96
Follicular phase, 468
Fomites, 504
Fontanels, 108
Food, 405–408, 407f
Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
78b
Foramen magnum, 116f, 117f
Foramen ovale, 305, 305f, 486
Fovea, 204
Free nerve endings, 199
Free radicals, 408
Frontal bone, 109f, 112, 115f, 117f
Frontal lobes, 139, 177f, 180f, 303f
Frontal sinus, 119f, 345f, 348f
Frontalis, 154f, 154t
Frostbite, 400b
Functional dendrite, 167f
Functional layer
uterus, 465
Functions
platelets, 263–268
white blood cells, 262–263
Fundus
stomach, 377f
uterus, 464f, 465
Fungi, 499, 512–513, 513f
diseases caused, 522t
G
G cell, 377f
Gallbladder, 371f, 379, 380f
Gallstones, 381b
Gametes, 61, 456
Gamma globulins, 332
Ganglion, 172
Ganglion neurons, 206, 206f, 209
Gases
diffusion of, 354–355
exchange of, 354–355
transport of in blood, 355–358
Gastric pits, 376
Gastrin, 378
Gastrocnemius, 152f, 153f, 157t, 158f
Gender, inheritance of, 477f
Gene, 49–50, 58, 487
General sensory area (brain), 180f, 181
Genetic code, 42, 56–59
Genetic disease, 58, 59b
Genetic immunity, 334–335
Genetics, 486–493
Genital herpes, 466b
Genome, 56
Genotype, 487
Giantism, 230b
Giardia lamblia, 513
Gingiva, 372, 372f
Glands, 73–74, 96–98
apocrine, 98
ceruminous, 97–98
eccrine, 98
endocrine, 74
epithelial, 70
exocrine, 73–74
multicellular, 73
sebaceous, 96–97
sweat, 98
unicellular, 73
Glandular epithelium, 72
Glans penis, 459f
Glaucoma, 207b
Glenoid fossa, 124f
Glial cells, 166
Gliding joints, 123, 129f
Globulins, 252, 253f, 388
Glomerular ﬁltration, 424–425
representation, 426f
Glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR), 424–425
Glomerulus, 421, 426f
Glossopharyngeal nerve, 188f, 189t, 201f,
285f
Glottis, 346, 347f
Glucagon, 235, 236f, 237t, 406t
Glucocorticoids, 240
594
Index
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Gluconeogenesis, 235
Glucose, 142, 406
Gluteus maximus, 157t, 158f, 159f
Gluteus medius muscle, 149b, 152f, 157t
Glycerol, 408
Glycogen, 34, 142, 406, 407f
Glycogenesis, 236
Glycogenolysis, 235
Glycolysis, 403, 405t
Glycosuria, 434t
Goblet cell, 73, 383f
Goiter, 235b
Golgi apparatus, 50f, 51, 52t, 58
Gonadal artery, 297f
Gonadal vein, 298f
Gonadotropin releasing hormone
(GnRH), 230, 231, 243
Gonorrhea, 466b
Graaﬁan follicle, 463, 469f
Gracilis, 152f, 153f, 158f
Gram stain, 508
Graves’ disease, 235b
Gray matter, 170f, 172, 179, 185f
Great cardiac vein, 278f
Great saphenous vein, 298f, 302t
Greater curvature (stomach), 377f
Greater omentum, 375f
Greater sciatic notch, 126f
Greater trochanter, 127f
Greater wing, 117f
Growth hormone (GH), 112t, 226f,
228–230, 229, 231t, 406t
Growth hormone inhibiting hormone
(GHIH), 229
Growth hormone releasing hormone
(GHRH), 179, 225, 229
Gluteus maximus, 155f
Gyri, 180
H
Hair cells (ear), 213f, 215f
Hair follicles, 95–96, 95f, 99t
Hamate, 124f
Hamstring, 157t
Haploid number, 62
Hard palate, 201f, 345f
Haustra, 385, 385f
Haversian systems, 79, 106
HDL. See High-density lipoproteins
Hearing, 210
Heart, 190f, 191t, 273–285, 323f
aging, 286
anatomy, 277t
anterior view, 276f
chambers, vessels and valves, 274–277
conduction pathway, 281f
location and pericardial membranes,
274
murmur, 279, 281b
nervous regulation, 285f
physiology, 284t
rate, 283, 284t
regulation, 284–285
sounds, 278–279
valves, superior view, 277f
Heat conservation, 399
Heat exhaustion, 398b
Heat loss, 397–399, 399t
Heat production, 396
factors affecting, 397t
Heat-related disorders, 398b, 402f
Helper T cells, 330
Hematocrit (Hct), 254
Hematuria, 434t
Hemiazygos vein, 298f
Hemocytoblasts, 254
Hemodialysis, 425b
Hemoglobin, 4, 142, 254, 355
Hemoglobin A (HbA), 59b
Hemolysis, 261
Hemolytic anemia, 257b
Hemolytic jaundice, 259b
Hemophilia, 266b, 490t
Hemopoietic tissue, 74, 254
Hemorrhoids, 294b
Hemostasis, 263, 265f
Heparin, 262
Hepatic
artery, 297f, 300t, 380f
duct, 379, 380f, 382f
ﬁxture, 385f
jaundice, 259b
portal, 298f
portal circulation, 301
vein, 298f, 302t, 304f
Hepatitis, 389b
Hepatocytes, 380f
Herniated disc, 121b
Herpes simplex virus, 97b
Heterozygous, 487
High-density lipoproteins (HDL), 36b
Hilus, 326f, 347, 421
Hinge joint, 122, 123, 125, 129f
Hip, 123
Hip bones, 123, 126f
Hippocampus, 177f, 183
Histamine, 92b, 241, 262
HIV, 48, 504
circumcision, 462
Hodgkin’s disease, 327b
Homeostasis, 7–12, 10, 11, 48
Homologous pairs, 487
Homozygous, 487
Hormone, 74, 224
action, 244–245, 245f
anterior pituitary, 227f
blood pressure, 309, 310f
chemistry of, 225
effects on kidneys, 428t, 429f
female reproduction, 470t
male reproduction, 460t
metabolism regulation, 406t
other, 243–244
placental, 480–481
reabsorption of water, 427
secretion regulation, 225
steroid, 244–245
Human body, 4–17
abdominal cavity, 15
cavities, 14f
cavities and membranes, 12–15
dorsal cavity, 13
general plan, 12–17
levels of organization, 4–7, 5f
location and position, terms, 14t
parts and areas, 12, 13f
pelvic cavity, 15
planes and sections, 15–16, 15f
terminology, 12–17
terms of location and position, 12t
thoracic cavity, 15
ventral cavity, 13
visualizing the interior, 18b
Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG),
480–481
Human development and genetics,
475–495
Human genetic diseases, 490t
Human genetic traits, 491t
Human leukocyte antigens (HLA), 263
Humerus, 114f, 122, 124f, 125t, 139f,
149b
Hunger and thirst, 202
Huntington’s disease, 490t
Hyaline membrane disease, 351
Hydrogen bonds, 27–28
Hymen, 465, 467f
Hyoid bone, 345f, 346f
Hypercalcemia, 233, 447b
Hypercapnia, 360
Hyperglycemia, 236
Hyperkalemia, 447b
Hypernatremia, 447b
Hypertension, 307, 308b
Hypocalcemia, 233–234, 447b
Hypoglossal nerve, 188f, 189t
Hypoglycemia, 235
Hypokalemia, 447b
Hyponatremia, 447b
Hypophyseal portal, 228
Hypotension, 307
Hypothalamic-hypophyseal tract, 227f
Hypothalamus, 10, 177f, 178–179, 186f,
224f, 226f, 227f, 231, 358, 359f
body temperature, 398, 402f
pituitary gland relationship, 227f
Index
595
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Hypothermia, 400b, 402f
Hypovolemic shock, 314b
Hypoxia, 30b, 59b, 254
I
ICF. See Intracellular ﬂuid
Ileocecal valve, 385, 385f
Ileum, 378, 385f
Iliac crest, 126f, 149b
Iliac lymph nodes, 325f
Iliacus muscle, 420f
Iliopsoas, 153f, 157t, 158f
Ilium, 114f, 123, 126f
Immune globulins (Ig), 332
Immunity, 262, 327–337
acquired, 336
active, 336
adaptive, 330–334
barriers, 327–328
chemical defenses, 328
defensive cells, 328
genetic, 334–335
innate, 327–329
passive, 336
types of, 334–337, 337t
Implantation, 476
In vitro fertilization (IVF), 465b
Inactivator (chemical), 168t, 169f
Incubation period, 501
for some infectious diseases, 502t
Incus, 119, 210, 211f
Infant at birth, 486
Infant botulism, 386b
Infantile Krabbe’s disease, 480
Infections
reservoirs, 504
spread, 504
types, 502–503
urinary tract, 435b
Infectious disease, 500–503
Inferior hypophyseal artery, 227f
Inferior lobe (lung), 348f
Inferior mesenteric artery, 297f, 300t
Inferior mesenteric ganglion, 190f
Inferior mesenteric vein, 298f, 304f
Inferior phrenic artery, 300t
Inferior sagittal sinus, 298f, 299f
Inferior vena cava, 275, 276f, 298f, 302t,
304f, 305f, 380f, 420f
Inﬂammation, 51, 241, 328, 329f
Infraspinatus, 152f, 155f
Inguinal canal, 461
Inguinal lymph nodes, 323, 325f
Inhalation, 349, 351f
Inheritance
dominant-recessive, 487–489
eye color, 488f
multiple alleles, 489
sex-linked traits, 489–492
Inhibin, 243, 459, 460t, 468, 470t
Inhibitory center, 284, 285f
Injection sites, 149b
Innate immunity, 327–329, 329f
Inner ear, 210–215
Inorganic chemicals, 4
Inorganic compounds (of importance),
28–33
Inspiration center, 358, 359f
Inspiratory reserve, 353
Insulin, 235–236, 237t, 406t
bone growth, 112t
functions, 236f
Integumentary system, 90–101, 329f
Intensity (sensations), 198
Interatrial septum, 275
Intercalated discs, cardiac muscle, 81
Intercostal artery, 297f, 300t
Intercostal muscle, 467f
Intercostal nerve, 173f, 174t, 349
Intercostal vein, 298f
Interferons, 328, 329f
Interior nasal concha, 115f
Interlobar artery, 422f
Internal anal sphincter, 191t, 386, 387f
Internal carotid artery, 297f, 300t, 303f
Internal elastic lamina, 293f
Internal iliac artery, 297f, 301t, 305f
Internal iliac vein, 298f, 302t
Internal intercostal muscles, 348
Internal intercostals, 155t
Internal jugular vein, 298f, 302t
Internal oblique, 155f
Internal respiration, 354, 356f
Internal urethral sphincter, 191t, 431,
432f
Interneurons, 170f, 171
Interphase, 60
Interstitial cells, 459, 460f
Interventricular septum, 275, 276f
Intestinal gland, 383f
Intestines, 191t
disorders, 384b
Intracellular ﬂuid (ICF), 29, 30, 442
Intrinsic factor, 256
Involuntary muscle, 79
Iodine, 410t
Ion, 25
Ionic bonds, 25–26
formation, 26f
Ionization, 26
Iris, 191t, 204
Iron, 410t
Iron-deﬁciency anemia, 4, 257b
Irregular bones, 106
Irreversible shock, 314b
Ischiocavernosus, 159f, 159t
Ischium, 114f, 123, 126f, 127f, 159f
Islets of Langerhans, 74, 233–235, 238b,
382f
Isometric exercise, 140
Isotonic exercise, 140
J
Jaundice, 259b
Jejunum, 378
Joints, 128
types, 129f, 129t
Juxtaglomerular cells, 423f, 429
K
Kaposi’s sarcoma, 332b
Keratin, 90
Keratinocytes, 90
Ketoacidosis, 238b, 406b
Ketones, 405
Ketonuria, 434t
Ketosis, 405, 406b
Kidney, 190f, 226f, 420f, 421–424
acid-base balance, 428–429, 430f
blood vessels, 424
ﬂoating, 421b
frontal section, 422f
hormones, 428t, 429f
internal structure, 421
other functions of, 429–431
stones, 433b
Kilocalories, 405
Krebs citric acid cycle, 402–403, 405t
Kyphosis, 122b
L
Labia 463f, 466, 467f
Lacrimal apparatus, 203, 203f
Lacrimal bone, 115f, 116
Lacrimal canal, 115f, 203f
Lacrimal duct, 203f
Lacrimal glands, 203, 203f
Lacrimal sac, 203, 203f
Lactase, 382
Lacteals, 322, 375f, 383f, 384
Lactic acid, 142
Lactiferous duct, 467f
Lactiferous gland, 467f
Lactose intolerance, 384b
Lambdoidal suture, 115f, 117f
Landsteiner, Karl, 252
Langerhans cells, 93, 95t, 328, 329f
Large intestine, 190f, 385–386, 385f
Laryngopharynx, 345f, 346
Larynx, 235f, 345f, 346, 346f, 348f
Lateral condyle, 127f
Lateral hypophyseal vein, 227f
Lateral malleolus, 127f
Lateral ventricle, 177f, 186f
Latissimus dorsi, 152f, 155f, 157t
Lazy eye. See Strabismus
596
Index
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

LDL. See Low-density lipoproteins
Left anterior descending artery, 276f
Left atrium, 275, 276f, 277t, 281f, 305f
Left bundle branch, 281f
Left colic vein, 304f
Left common carotid artery, 276f, 300t,
303f
Left common iliac artery, 420f
Left common iliac vein, 420f
Left coronary artery, 276f, 278f
Left coronary vein, 276f
Left gastric artery, 297f, 300t
Left gastric vein, 298f, 304f
Left gastroepiploic vein, 304f
Left hepatic vein, 380f
Left internal jugular vein, 276f
Left pulmonary artery, 276f
Left pulmonary vein, 276f
Left subclavian artery, 276f, 300t
Left subclavian vein, 325f
Left ventricle, 275–277, 276f, 277t, 281f
Left ventricular hypertrophy, 308b
Leg, 123
Lens, 204
Leptin, 76, 412b
Lesser trochanter, 127f
Leukemia, 263, 263b
Leukocytes, 253f, 261
Leukocytosis, 263
Leukopenia, 263
Levator ani, 159f, 159t
Levator ani muscle, 387f
Levator labii superioris, 154f
Life span (blood cells), 256–259
Lind, James, 78b
Lingual tonsil, 201f, 345f
Lipase, 379
Lipid metabolism, 388
Lipids, 34–37, 36f, 37t
metabolism, 388
Lithotripsy, 381b
Liver, 191t, 371f, 374t, 375f, 379, 380f,
386–389, 397t
Liver lobule, 379
Long bones, 106
Longitudinal ﬁssure, 177f
Longitudinal muscle, 387f
Longitudinal muscle layer (stomach), 377f
Loop of Henle, 423f, 424, 426f
Lordosis, 122b
Low-density lipoproteins (LDL), 36b
Lower esophageal sphincter (LES), 373
Lumbar artery, 300t
Lumbar plexus, 173f
Lumbar puncture, 187b
Lumbar vertebrae, 114f, 119, 120f, 420f
Lumen, 460f
Lunate, 124f
Lungs, 346–347, 351f
Luteal phase, 468
Luteinizing hormone (LH), 226f,
230–231, 231t, 243, 450, 460t, 468, 470t
Lymph, 322
capillaries, 322, 323f
nodes, 322–324, 323f, 326f
nodules, 322–324, 375f
vessels, 322
vessels and nodes, 325f
Lymphatic system, 320–338
Lymphatic tissue, 254, 322–327
Lymphatic vessels, 323f, 375f
Lymphoblast, 255f
Lymphocytes, 253f, 262, 326f
Lysosome, 50f, 51, 52t
Lysozyme, 203, 328, 329f
M
Macrophage, 255f, 262, 323, 326f, 350f
Macula lutea, 204
Magnesium, 410t, 447t
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 18b
Malignant, 61b
Malleus, 119, 210, 211f
Maltase, 382
Mammary plexus, 325f
Mammary glands, 467, 467f, 468t
Mammography, 468b
Mandible, 109f, 114f, 115f, 116, 201f
Mandibular fossa, 115f
Manganese, 410t
Manubrium, 122
Marrow canal, 106, 108
Masseter, 153f, 154f, 154t
Mast cells, 75, 99, 328, 329f
Mastoid fontanel, 109f
Mastoid process, 115f, 116f
Mastoid sinus, 119, 211f
Mastoiditis, 119
Maternal blood tests, 481b
Maturing follicles, 478f
Maxilla, 109f, 114f, 115f, 116, 345f
Maxillary artery, 297f, 299f
Maxillary sinus, 119f
mDNA. See Mitochondrial DNA
Mechanical digestion, 370
Medial condyle, 127f
Medial malleolus, 127f
Median nerve, 173f, 174t
Mediastinum, 348f
Medication, administering, 100b
Medulla, 176, 177f, 178f, 186f, 190f, 303f,
360
heart, 284, 285f
respiration, 358
Medullary cavity, 110f
Megakaryocyte, 255f, 263
Meiosis, 61–63, 450–457
Meissner’s plexus, 375f, 376
Melanin, 94, 95t
Melanocytes, 93–95, 95t
Melatonin, 243
Membranous labyrinth, 210
Membranes, 70, 82–84
Membranous urethra, 432f, 459f
Memory B cells, 330–331
Memory T cells, 330
Meninges, 13, 84t, 184–186
structure, 185f
Meningitis, 187b
Menopause, 456
Menstrual cycle, 467–470, 469f
Mental foramen, 115f
Mentalis, 154f
Merkel cells, 90, 95t, 96
Mesenteric lymph nodes, 325f
Mesentery, 15, 82, 83f, 375f, 376
Mesoderm, 477, 480t
Messenger RNA. See mRNA
Metabolic acidosis, 361, 449, 450t
Metabolic alkalosis, 361, 450, 450t
Metabolic rate, 7, 408, 408–412, 411b
Metabolism, 7–12, 400–413
Metacarpals, 114f, 123, 124f
Metaphase, 60
Metastasis, 61b
Metastasize, 94b
Metatarsals, 114f, 125, 127f
Microbes, control, 504–507
Microbiology
golden age, 498b
human disease, 497–524
twentieth century, 499b
twenty-ﬁrst century, 507b
Microglia, 166, 168t
Micrometers, 48
Microorganisms, classiﬁcation, 498–500
Microvilli, 50f, 51–52, 52t, 72, 383–384,
383f, 425
Micturition (of urine), 431
Midbrain, 176–178, 177f, 190f
Middle cerebral artery, 303f
Middle ear, 210
Middle lobe (lung), 348f
Middle nasal concha, 115f
Middle sacral artery, 300t
Mineralocorticoids, 240
Minerals, 410t
Minute respiratory volume (MRV), 353
Mitochondrial DNA (mDNA), 51
Mitochondrion, 50f, 51, 52t, 143f, 169f
Mitosis, 60–61, 62f, 90
Mitral valve, 275, 276f, 277t
Mixed nerves, 171
Molecules, 25
Monocytes, 253f, 255f, 262
Monoglyceride, 34
Mons pubis, 467f
Morula, 476, 478f
Motility, 51
Index
597
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Motion sickness, 216b
Motor areas (brain), 140, 180, 180f
Motor nerves, 171
Motor neuron, 143f, 174
Motor speech area (brain), 180f
MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging
mRNA, 56t, 57f, 58
Mucosa, 82
Mucosa (alimentary tube), 373–376, 375f
Mucous cells, 377, 377f
Mucous membranes, 82–84, 83f, 324, 329f
Mucus, 73, 84
Multiple sclerosis (MS), 168b
Muscle
actions, 150f, 150t
arrangements, 138–139
cardiac, 80t, 81
cells, 144f
contraction
energy sources, 141–142
sliding ﬁlament mechanism, 146–147
fatigue, 142
ﬁbers, 138, 144f
microscopic structure, 142–145
ﬁlaments, 144f
head and neck, 150, 154f, 154t
hip and leg, 151, 157t, 158f
major of the body, 149–159, 152f, 153f
pelvic ﬂoor, 159f, 159t
sense, 141, 200
shoulder and arm, 151, 156f, 157t
structure, 138–140
tissue, 6, 79–81, 80f, 80t
tone, 140–141
trunk, 151, 155f, 155t
Muscular dystrophy, 148b, 490t
Muscular system, 137–159
Mutation (genetic change), 61b
Myasthenia gravis, 148b
Myelin, 35–37
Myelin sheath, 166, 167f
Myocardium, 81, 274, 277t
Myoﬁbrils, 142, 144f
Myoglobin, 142
Myometrium, 464f, 465
Myosin, 142, 144f
Myxedema, 235b
N
Nails, 96, 99t
Nasal bone, 115f, 116
Nasal cavity, 201f, 203f, 344, 348f
Nasal mucosa, 344
Nasal septum, 344
Nasolacrimal duct, 203, 203f
Nasopharynx, 344, 345f, 348f
Natural killer cells, 262, 328, 329f
Navicular (bone), 127f
Nearsightedness (Myopia), 208b
Necrotizing fasciitis, 99
Negative feedback mechanism, 10–11, 11f,
225
Neonatal herpes, 466b
Nephritis, 435b
Nephron, 421–424, 422f, 423f
Nerve, 171
deafness, 214b
ﬁbers, 166
functions, 81t
impulse, 171, 172t
tissue, 6, 81–82, 166–169
tracts, 171
major peripheral, 174t
Nervous regulation, respiration, 358–359,
359f
Nervous system, 165–192
Neural plasticity, 182
Neuroglia, 81t, 166, 168t
Neurohypophysis, 226
Neurolemma, 166, 167f
Neuromuscular junction, 142, 143f
Neuron structure, 167f
Neurons, 81, 81t, 166
structure, 167f
types, 170–171
Neuropathy, 200
Neurotoxin, 146b, 509
Neurotransmitters, 81, 81t, 168t, 169f,
189–191
Neutral fats. See True fats
Neutron, 24
Neutrophils, 253f, 255f, 262, 326f
Niacin, 403, 409t
Night blindness, 209b
Nitric oxide, 31b
Nodal artery, 326f
Nodal vein, 326f
Nodes of Ranvier, 166, 167f
Non-essential amino acids, 388, 406,
407f
Noncommunicable disease, 504
Norepinephrine, 191, 237, 237t, 239f,
310f
Normal ﬂora, 386b, 500, 501t
Normoblast, 254, 255f
Nose, 344
Nosocomial infection, 502
Nostril, 345f
Nuclear membrane, 49, 50f, 57f
Nuclear pore, 57f, 245f
Nucleic acids, 41–42, 42t
Nucleolus, 49, 50f
Nucleotide, 41
Nucleus, 167f
O
Oblique muscle layer (stomach), 377f
Obstructive jaundice, 259b
Obturator foramen, 126f
Occipital artery, 297f
Occipital bone, 109f, 113, 115f, 116f, 117f
Occipital condyles, 116f
Occipital lobe, 177f, 178f, 180f, 182, 209
Oculomotor nerve, 188f, 189t
Olecranon process, 124f
Olfaction., 202
Olfactory areas, 181
Olfactory bulb and tract, 201f
Olfactory foramina, 117f
Olfactory nerve, 188f, 189t, 201f
Olfactory receptors, 201f, 202, 344, 345f
Oligodendrocytes, 166, 168t
Oligosaccharide antigens, 49f
Oogenesis, 62, 456–457, 458f
Ophthalmic artery, 300t
Opsonization, 333
Optic chiasma, 209, 227f
Optic disc, 206
Optic nerve, 177f, 188f, 189t, 206, 206f,
209
Optic nerve ﬁbers, 206f
Oral cavity, 370–373
Oral contraceptives, 461b
Orbicularis oculi, 154f, 154t
Orbicularis oris, 154f, 154t
Orbit (bones), 203
Orbitofrontal cortex, 180f, 181
Organ of Corti, 212, 213f
Organ systems, 6–7, 7t, 8–9f
Organic chemicals, 4
Organic compounds, of importance,
33–42
Organs, 6, 226f
Oropharynx, 345, 345f
Osmolarity, 444
Osmoreceptors, 227, 443
Osmosis, 52–53
Ossiﬁcation, 108, 110f
Osteoarthritis, 130b
Osteoblasts, 108, 110f
Osteoclasts, 108
Osteocytes, 78
Osteons, 79, 106
Osteoporosis, 113b
Otic ganglion, 190f
Otitis media, 210
Otoliths, 214, 215f
Outer ear, 210
Oval window (ear), 210, 212f, 213f
Ovarian artery, 301t
Ovarian follicles, 456
Ovarian ligament, 464f
Ovarian vein, 302t
Ovaries, 224f, 226f, 242–243, 462–464,
463f, 464f, 478f
Ovulation, 478f
Ovum, 478f
Oxygen debt, 142
598
Index
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Oxygen saturation, partial pressures, 355t
Oxytocin, 179, 226f, 228, 228t, 467, 468t,
483
P
Palatine bone, 116, 116f, 345f
Palatine process (maxilla), 116f
Palatine tonsil, 201f, 345f
Palpitations, 282
Pancreas, 190f, 191t, 224f, 233–236, 237t,
304f, 371f, 374t, 375f, 382f
Pancreatic duct, 379
Pandemic, 503
Pantothenic acid, 409t
Parotid gland, 371f
Papilla of pyramid, 422f
Papillae, 372
Papillary duct, 422f
Papillary layer, 95, 99t
Papillary muscles, 275, 276f, 277t
Paralytic ileus, 384b
Paranasal sinuses, 116, 119f, 344
Parasympathetic ANS, 187, 189, 190f
Parathyroid gland, 224f, 233, 235f
hormones, 234t
Parathyroid hormone (PTH), 112t, 233,
234f, 234t, 428t, 429f
Parietal bone, 109f, 112, 115f, 117f
Parietal cells, 377, 377f
Parietal lobes, 141, 177f, 180f, 181
Parietal pericardium, 274
Parietal peritoneum, 375f, 432f
Parietal pleura, 83f, 347
Parkinson’s disease, 184b
Parotid glands, 372
Partial pressures, oxygen saturation, 355t
Parturition and labor, 481–486
Passive immunity, 336
Pasteurize, 505
Patella, 114f, 125, 127f
Patellar reﬂex, 174–175, 175f
Pathogens, 507–515
Pathophysiology, 4
Pectineus, 153f, 158f
Pectoralis major, 153f, 155f, 157t, 467f
Pelvic bones, 128b
Pelvic cavity, 15
Pelvic inlet, 126f
Pelvis, 420f
brim, 126f
Pentose sugars, 406
Pepsin, 377
Pepsinogen, 377
Peptidases, 382
Peptide bond, 37, 57f, 58
Peptides, 225
Pericardial artery, 300t
Pericardial membranes, 15, 274
Pericardium, 82
Perichondrium, 84t
Perilymph, 210
Perineum, 465
Periodontal membrane, 372f
Periosteum, 84t, 106–108, 138
Peripheral nervous system (PNS), 81, 166
Peristalsis, 34, 376
Peritoneum, 15, 82, 83f, 376
Peritonitis, 378b
Peritubular capillaries, 423f, 424, 426f
Pernicious anemia, 256, 257b
Peroneal artery, 301t
Peroneus brevis, 158f
Peroneus longus, 158f
Perpendicular plate, 115f
PET. See Positron emission tomography
Peyer’s patches, 324
pH, 31–33, 32f, 252
aging, 450–451
effects of changes, 450, 450t
urine, 433, 434t
Phagocyte, 329f
Phagocytosis, 56, 262
Kupffer cells, 388
Phalanges, 114f, 123, 124f, 125, 127f
Phantom pain, 198
Pharyngeal tonsil, 345f
Pharynx, 344–346, 371f, 373
Phenotype, 487
Phenylketonuria (PKU), 490t
Phlebitis, 294b
Phosphate, 447t
Phosphate buffer system, 448
Phospholipids, 35, 37t, 49f, 407f, 408
Phosphorus, 410t
Phrenic nerve, 173f, 174t, 349
Physiologic dead space, 354
Physiology, 4
Pia mater, 184, 185f, 186f
Pigment cells, 206f
Pilomotor muscle, 95–96
Pineal gland, 224f, 243
Pinna (ear), 210
Pinocytosis, 56
Pisiform, 124f
Pituitary dwarﬁsm, 230b
Pituitary gland, 10, 177f, 224f, 225–231
hormones, organs affected, 226f
Pivot joint, 119, 122, 129f
Placenta, 303, 305f, 479f, 480, 483f, 484f,
485f
Placental hormones, 480–481
Plantar arches (arteries), 301t
Plantar ﬂexion, 150t
Plantaris, 158f
Plasma, 74, 252–253
cell, 255f, 323, 332
membrane, 48
proteins, 252
synthesis, 388
Plasmodium, 513
Platelets, 75, 263–268
Platysma, 154f
Pleural membranes, 15, 82, 346–347,
348f
Pleural space, 348f
Plica circulares, 383, 383f
Pneumocystis carinii, 332b
Pneumocystis jiroveci, 332b, 513
Pneumonia, 332b, 357b
Pneumotaxic center, 358, 359f
Pneumothorax, 352b
PNS. See Peripheral nervous system
Podocyte, 423f, 424
Polarization, 171, 172t
Polypeptide, 37
Pons, 176, 177f, 178f, 186f, 190f, 303f,
358
Popliteal artery, 297f, 301t
Popliteal lymph nodes, 325f
Popliteal vein, 298f, 302t
Portal of entry (of pathogen), 503–504,
503f
Portal of exit (of pathogen), 503–504, 503f
Portal vein, 304f, 380f
Positive feedback mechanism, 10, 11f
Positron emission tomography (PET),
18b
Posterior cavity, 207
Posterior cerebral artery, 303f
Posterior communicating artery, 303f
Posterior lobe vein, 227f
Posterior pituitary, 226f, 227–228, 227f
hormones, 226f, 228t
Posterior tibial artery, 297f, 301t
Posterior tibial vein, 302t
Postganglionic neuron, 187, 190f
Posthepatic jaundice, 259b
Potassium, 410t, 447t
Potassium pump, 143–145
Precapillary sphincter, 293f, 294, 295f
Prefrontal cortex. See Orbitofrontal cortex
Preganglionic neuron, 187, 190f
Pregnancy, maternal changes, 482t
Prehepatic jaundice, 259b
Premature birth, 485b
Premotor areas (brain), 180, 180f
Prepuce, 459f
Presbyopia, 208b
Pressoreceptors, 216, 284
Primary bronchi, 346, 350f
Primary follicles, 463, 469f, 478f
Progesterone, 243, 468, 468t, 470t, 481
Progressive shock, 314b
Projection, 198
Prolactin, 226f, 230, 231t, 467, 468t
Pronation, 150t
Prophase, 60
Propagation of impulse, 172t
Proprioception. See Muscle sense
Index
599
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Prostaglandins (PGs), 244
Prostate gland, 432f, 459f, 461–462
Prostatic hypertrophy, 462b
Prostatic urethra, 432f
Proteasome, 50f, 51, 52t
Proteins, 37–40, 225, 406, 407f
buffer system, 448
energy sources, 403–405
functions, 39t
hormones, 244
prions, 39b
structure, 38f
synthesis, 56t, 57f, 245, 245f
Proteinuria, 434t
Prothrombin, 252, 267f
Proton, 24
Proton pumps, 377
Protozoa, 499, 513–514, 514f
diseases caused, 523t
Proximal convoluted tubule (nephron),
423f, 424, 426f
Psoas major muscle, 420f
Pterygopalatine ganglion, 190f
Puberty, 450
Pubic arch, 126f
Pubic symphysis, 123, 126f
Pubis, 114f, 123, 126f, 127f
Pulmonary
artery, 297f, 305f, 356f
bronchus, 348f
capillaries, 348f, 356f
circulation, 296
edema, 357b
semilunar valve, 275, 276f, 277f, 277t
surfactant, 347
veins, 275, 298f, 356f
volumes, 351–354
Pulp cavity, 372, 372f
Pulse, 304b; see also Heart rate
Punnett square, 487
Pupil, 204
Purkinje ﬁbers, 281f, 282
Pyloric sphincter, 376, 382f
Pyloric stenosis, 378b
Pylorus, 377f
Pyridoxine, 409t
Pyrogens, 399
Q
Quadriceps femoris, 157t
R
Radial artery, 297f, 300t
Radial nerve, 173f, 174t
Radial tuberosity, 124f
Radial vein, 302t
Radiation, heat loss, 397
Radius, 114f, 122, 124f, 125t, 139f
Range-of-motion (ROM), 139
Reabsorption (of renal ﬁltrate)
mechanisms, 425–427
Receptor, 170f, 174, 198, 244–245, 245f
sites, 48, 49f, 99t, 169f, 170, 245f
skin, 96, 167f
Recessive allele, 487
Recovery oxygen uptake, 142
Rectal fold, 387f
Rectum, 190f, 371f, 375f, 385f, 387f, 459f,
463f
Rectus abdominis, 153f, 155f, 155t
Rectus femoris, 153f, 158f
Red blood cells (RBC), 75, 254–259
Red bone marrow (RBM), 106, 254,
254–256
Referred pain, 200
Reﬂex, 172
Reﬂex arc, 174–175
Refraction (of light), 207
errors, 208b
Regulation, body temperature, 398–399
Relaxin, 468, 470t
Releasing hormones, 225, 227f, 228
Renal-angiotensin mechanism, 430t
Renal artery, 300t, 420f, 422f, 424
Renal corpuscle, 421–424, 422f
Renal cortex, 421, 422f, 423f
Renal failure, 425b
Renal fascia, 421
Renal ﬁltrate, 424
Renal mechanisms
acid-base balance, 450
Renal medulla, 421, 422f, 423f
Renal pelvis, 421, 422f
Renal pyramids, 421
Renal tubule, 422f, 424
Renal vein, 298f, 302t, 420f, 422f, 424
Renin, 311, 312f, 429
Renin-angiotensin mechanism, 240, 311,
312f, 312t
Repolarization, 171, 172t
Reproductive organs, 190f
Reproductive system, 455–470, 463f, 464f,
459f
Resident ﬂora, 500
Residual air, 353
Resistance, host, 500
Resorption, 108
Respiration, 350f
acid-base balance, 360–361
chemical regulation, 359–360
nervous regulation, 358–359
regulation, 358–360
Respiratory acidosis, 361, 449, 450t
Respiratory alkalosis, 361, 449, 450t
Respiratory compensation, 361
metabolic pH changes, 449–450
Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS). See
Hyaline membrane disease
Respiratory mechanisms, acid-base bal-
ance, 448–450
Respiratory muscles
actions, 351f
Respiratory pump, 308, 322
Respiratory system, 343–362, 348f
aging, 361
divisions, 344–347
Respiratory tract
heat loss, 398
upper, 345f
Rete testis, 460f
Reticulocyte, 254, 255f
Reticulocytes, 255f
Retina, 204
detached, 207
microscopic structure, 206f
Reuptake, 169
Rh disease, 261b
Rh factor, 259, 261
Rheumatoid arthritis, 130b
Rhodospin, 207
RhoGAM, 261b
Rhomboideus major, 155f
Rib cage, 122, 123f
Riboﬂavin, 409t
Ribonucleic acid. See RNA
Ribosomal RNA, 49
Ribosomes, 50f, 51, 52t, 56t, 57f, 245f
Ribs, 114f, 122
Rickettsias, 509–510
Right atrioventricular (AV) valve, 275
Right atrium, 275, 276f, 277t, 281f, 305f
Right axillary artery, 299f
Right axillary vein, 299f
Right bundle branch, 281f
Right colic vein, 304f
Right common carotid artery, 299f, 300t,
303f
Right common iliac artery, 297f
Right coronary artery, 276f, 278f
Right coronary vein, 278f
Right external carotid artery, 299f
Right external jugular, 299f
Right gastric vein, 304f
Right hepatic vein, 380f
Right internal carotid artery, 299f
Right internal jugular, 299f
Right lymphatic duct, 325f
Right pulmonary artery, 276f
Right pulmonary veins, 276f
Right subclavian artery, 299f, 300t
Right subclavian vein, 299f
Right transverse sinus, 299f
Right ventricle, 275, 276f, 277t, 281f, 285f
Right vertebral artery, 299f
Right vertebral vein, 299f
600
Index
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

RNA, 40f, 41–42, 42t, 58–59
Rods (retina), 204, 206f
Rotation, 150t
Rough endoplasmic reticulum, 50f
Round ligament, 464f
Round window (ear), 212f, 213f, 214
Rubrospinal tract, 170f
Rugae, 376, 377f, 431, 432f, 464f
Ruptured disc, 121b
S
Saccule, 214–215, 215f
Sacral plexus, 173f
Sacroiliac joints, 119, 126f
Sacrospinalis group, 155t
Sacrum, 114f, 119, 120f, 126f, 420f, 459f,
463f
Saddle joint, 123, 129f
Saliva, 328, 372
Salivary glands, 190f, 191t, 372, 372–373,
374t
Salmonella food poisoning, 384b
Salt, 26
taste area, 201f
Saltatory conduction, 171
Sarcolemma, 142, 143f, 144f
depolarization, 145
electrical changes, 145t
polarization, 143–145
Sarcomeres, 142, 143f, 144f
Sarcoplasmic reticulum, 142, 144f
Sartorius, 153f, 157t, 158f
Scala tympani, 212f
Scala vestibuli, 212f
Scaphoid, 124f
Scapula, 114f, 122, 124f, 125t, 139f, 149b
Schwann cells, 81, 81t, 166, 167f
Sciatic nerve, 149b, 173f, 174t
Sclera, 204, 206f
Scoliosis, 122b
Scrotum, 457, 459f
Sebaceous glands, 96–97, 99t
Sebum, 96
Secondary follicles, 469f
Secondary sex characteristics, 243
Secretin, 379, 381
Selective permeability, 48
Sella turcica, 113, 117f
Semen, 462
Semicircular canals, 211f, 212f, 213f, 215
Semilunar notch, 124f
Semimembranosus, 152f, 158f
Seminal vesicle, 459f, 461
Seminiferous tubules, 450, 459, 460f
Semitendinosus, 152f
Semispinalis capitis, 154t
Semitendinosus, 158f
Sensations, characteristics, 198–199
Senses, 197–216
Sensory areas, 198
Sensory association area (brain), 180f
Sensory nerves, 171
Sensory neurons, 174, 198
Sensory pathway, 198
Sensory tracts, 198
Septic shock, 314b
Septicemia, 92b, 502
Serosa, 375f, 376
Serous ﬂuid, 82, 274
Serous membranes, 82
Serratus anterior, 155f
Sex chromosomes, 476
Sex-linked trait, 266b
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs),
466b
Shingles, 174b
Short bones, 106
Shoulder, 122–123
Sickle-cell anemia, 257b, 490t
Sickle-cell hemoglobin (HbS), 59b
Sigmoid colon, 375f, 385f
Sinoatrial (SA) node, 279, 281f, 285f
Sinusoids, 294, 380f
Skeletal muscle, 138
pump, 308, 322
structure, 144f
tissue, 79
Skeletal system, 105–131
Skeleton, 112–128, 114f
Skin, 90–99; see also Integumentary system
Skull, 112–119, 109f, 114f, 115f
bones, 118t
Sliding ﬁlament mechanism, 142
Small cardiac vein, 278f
Small intestine, 190f, 371f, 374t, 375f,
378–379, 381–383, 383f
sections, 15f
Small saphenous vein, 298f, 302t
Smell
sense of, 202
structures concerned with, 201f
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum, 50f
Smooth muscle tissue, 79–80, 293f
Sodium, 410t, 447t
pump, 143
Soft palate, 201f, 344, 345f, 348f
Soleus, 152f, 153f, 157t, 158f
Solutions, 53b
Somatostatin, 229, 237t
Somatotropin. See Growth hormone (GH)
Sour (taste area), 201f
Sperm, 478f
Spermatic cord, 460f, 461
Spermatids, 460f
Spermatocytes, 460f
Spermatogenesis, 62, 450, 457f, 464f
Spermatogonia, 460f
Spermatozoa (sperm cells), 460f
Sphenoid bone, 109f, 113, 115f, 117f,
201f
Sphenoid fontanel, 109f
Sphenoid sinus, 119f, 345f, 348f
Spinal cord, 171–176, 173f, 177f, 186f
cross-section, 170f
injuries, 176b
nerves, 173f
reﬂexes, 172–176, 174
Spinal nerve, 172, 185f
Spine curves, abnormalities, 122b
Spinothalamic tract, 170f
Spinous process (of axis), 120f
Spleen, 304f, 324, 325f, 371f
Splenic artery, 297f, 300t
Splenic ﬂexure, 385f
Splenic vein, 298f, 304f
Splenius capitis, 154t, 155f
Spongy bone, 106, 110f
Squamosal suture, 115f, 117f
Squamous cell, 70f
carcinoma, 94b
Stapes, 119, 210, 211f
Staphylococcus aureus, 499
Staphylococcus epidermidis, 499–500
Starling’s law of the heart, 283, 307, 311
Stem cell, 60, 254, 255f
implantation, 476
placenta, 480
Stenosis, 281b
Sterilization, 461b, 505
Sternal end (clavicle), 124f
Sternocleidomastoid, 153f, 154f, 154t,
155f
Sternohyoid, 154f
Sternum, 114f, 122, 123f, 351f
Steroids, 37, 37t, 225
hormones, 244–245, 245f, 408
Stimuli, 198
Stomach, 190f, 191t, 304f, 371f, 374t,
375f, 376–378, 377f
disorders, 378b
Strabismus, 210
Straight sinus, 298f, 299f
Stratum corneum, 90–93, 95t
Stratum germinativum, 90, 95t
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 500
Streptokinase, 268b
Stretch receptors, 141
Stretch reﬂex, 175
Striated muscle, 79
Stroke (cerebrovascular accident),
146–147, 181b
Stroke volume, 283, 284t
Styloid process, 116f
Subarachnoid space, 184, 185f, 186f
Subclavian artery, 297f
Subclavian vein, 298f, 302t, 323f
Index
601
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

Sub-clinical infection, 501
Subcutaneous tissue, 99–101
functions, 100t
Sublingual gland, 371f, 372
Submandibular ganglion, 190f
Submandibular gland, 371f, 372
Submaxillary lymph nodes, 325f
Submucosa, 375f, 376
Substrates, 38
Sucrase, 382
Sulci, 180
Sulfate, 447t
Sulfur, 410t
Superﬁcial fascia, 84t
Superﬁcial fascia. See Subcutaneous tissue
Superﬁcial palmar arch, 297f
Superﬁcial temporal artery, 300t
Superior gluteal
artery and vein, 149b
Superior hypophyseal artery, 227f
Superior iliac spine, anterior, 126f
Superior iliac spine, posterior, 126f
Superior lobe (lung), 348f
Superior mesenteric artery, 297f, 300t,
382f, 420f
Superior mesenteric ganglion, 190f
Superior mesenteric vein, 298f, 304f, 382f,
420f
Superior phrenic artery, 300t
Superior sagittal sinus, 185f, 298f, 299f
Superior vena cava, 275, 276f, 298f, 302t
Supination, 150t
Supporting cells (ear), 213f
Suprarenal artery, 300t
Suprarenal gland. See Adrenal gland
Suspensory ligaments, 204
Sustentacular (Sertoli) cells, 459, 460f
Sutures, bone joints, 113–114
Sweat glands, 98, 191t
Sweet (taste area), 201f
Sympathetic ganglion, 190f
Sympathetic nerves, 285f
Sympathetic nervous system, 396
Sympathomimetic, 238
Symphysis joints, 120, 129f
Symphysis pubis, 420f, 459f, 463f
Synapse, 81, 81t, 142, 168–169, 170f
impulse transmission, 169f
Synaptic cleft, 143f
Synaptic knobs, 170f
Synergistic muscles, 139
Synovial ﬂuid, 28
Synovial joints, 128, 130f
Synovial tissue, 84t
Synthesis, 26
Syphilis, 466b
Systemic arteries, 297f
major, 300–301t
Systemic capillaries, 356f
Systemic circulation, 296–301
Systemic veins, 298f, 302t
Systole, 278
Systolic blood pressure, 307
T
T cell (blood), 255f, 262, 326, 330
T tubule, 143f, 145
Tachycardia, 283
Taeniae coli, 385, 385f
Talus, 125, 127f
Tarsals, 114f, 125, 127f, 128b
Taste
areas (brain), 181
buds, 200
sense, 200–202
structures concerned with, 201f
Tay-Sachs disease, 490t
Tears (Lacrimal glands), 203
Tectorial membrane, 213f
Teeth, 370–372, 371f
Telomeres, 63
Telophase, 60
Temporal bone, 109f, 112–113, 115f, 116f,
117f, 211f
Temporal lobe, 177f, 178f, 180f, 181–182,
212, 303f
Temporalis, 154f
Tendons, 138
Teres major, 152f, 155f, 157t
Testes, 224f, 226f, 243, 457–459, 459f,
460f
Testicular artery, 301t, 460f
Testicular vein, 302t, 460f
Testosterone, 141b, 243, 459, 460t
bone growth, 112t
Tetanus, 146b
Tetanus (sustained muscle contraction),
146
Thalamus, 177f, 179
Thiamine, 409t
Thoracic cavity, 15
Thoracic duct , 322
Thoracic lymph duct, 325f
Thoracic spinal cord, 285f
Thoracic vertebrae, 114f, 119, 123f
Thrombin, 267f
Thrombocytes, 253f, 255f, 263
Thrombocytopenia, 263
Thrombopoietin, 263
Thrombus, 181b, 268
Thymus, 224f, 324–327
location in child, 327f
Thyroid cartilage, 345f, 346, 346f
Thyroid gland, 224f, 226f, 231–233, 232f,
234f, 235f
hormones, 233t
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH),
226f, 230, 231t, 232
Thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH),
230
Thyroxine (T4), 230, 231, 231–233, 233t,
396, 397t, 406t
bone growth, 112t
disorders, 235b
functions, 232f
Tibia, 114f, 125, 127f, 128b
Tibial tuberosity, 127f
Tibialis anterior, 153f, 157t, 158f
Tissue, 4–6, 70–82
subcutaneous, 99–101
Tissue and aging, 84
Tissue macrophage system, 256
Titin, 142
Titin ﬁlament, 144f
Tongue, 201f, 371f, 372
Tonsillectomy, 324
Tonsils, 324
Tooth structure, 372f
Toxoid, 335b
Trace elements, 30–31, 31t
Trachea, 190f, 235f, 345f, 346, 347f, 348f,
351f
Tracheal cartilage, 346f
Trans fats, 35
Transamination, 388, 407f
Transcription (in genes), 58
Transfer RNA. See tRNA
Transient ﬂora, 500
Transitional epithelium, 431
Translation (in genes), 58
Transverse abdominis, 155f
Transverse colon, 371f, 375f, 385f
Transverse perineus, 159f, 159t
Transverse process, 120f
Transverse sinus, 298f
Transverse tubule, 144f
Trapezius, 124f, 152f, 154f, 155f, 155t
Trapezoid, 124f
Tricep, 139f, 156f
Triceps brachii, 152f, 153f, 157t
Trichinella, 515
Tricuspid valve, 275, 276f, 277f, 277t
Trigeminal nerve, 188f, 189t, 201f
Triglyceride, 34
Trigone, 431, 432f
Triiodothyronine (T3), 231, 231–233, 233t
functions, 232f
Triplet (DNA), 58
Triquetrum, 124f
Trisomy
Down syndrome, 458b
tRNA, 56t, 57f, 58
Trochlea, 124f
Trochlear nerve, 188f, 189t
Trophoblast, 476, 478f, 479f
Tropomyosin, 142, 144f
Troponin, 142
True fats, 34, 37t, 76, 407f
602
Index
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

True ribs, 122
Trypsin, 379
Tubal ligation, 461b
Tubular reabsorption (urinary system),
425–427
Tubular secretion (urinary system), 427
Tunica externa, 292, 293f
Tunica intima, 292, 293f
Tunica media, 292, 293f
Twins, 478b
Tympanic canal, 213f
Tympanic membrane. See Eardrum
Type I cell, 350f
U
Ubiquitin, 51
Ulna, 114f, 122, 124f, 125t, 139f
Ulnar artery, 297f, 300t
Ulnar nerve, 173f, 174t
Ulnar vein, 302t
Ultrasound, 481b
Umbilical arteries, 303–304, 305f
Umbilical cord, 305f, 480, 483f, 485f
Umbilical vein, 304, 305f
Upper respiratory tract, 345f
Urea, 98
Ureter, 420f, 422f, 431, 432f
Urethra, 159f, 420f, 431, 432f, 463f
penis, 462
Urethral opening, 467f
Urethral oriﬁce, 432f
Urinary bladder, 190f, 191t, 420f, 431,
432f, 459f, 463f
Urinary system, 5f, 419–435, 420f
aging, 433–435
Urinary tract infections, 435b
Urination reﬂex, 431
Urine
abnormal constituents, 434t
characteristics, 432–433
characteristics of normal, 434t
elimination, 431
formation, 424–425, 427–428
Urobilin, 258f
Uterus, 226f, 375f, 463f, 464f, 465, 483f
Utricle, 212f, 214–215, 215f
Uvula, 345f
V
Vaccines, 334, 335b, 337b
Vagina, 159f, 463f, 464f, 465–466, 467f,
483f
Vagus nerve, 188f, 189t, 190f, 285f
Vallate papillae, 201f
Valve, 293f
Varicose veins, 294b
Vas deferens, 461
Vascular spasm, 264
Vascular system, 291–314
Vasoconstriction, 98, 397
Vasodilation, 92b, 98, 397
Vasomotor center, 312t
Vasopressin. See Antidiuretic hormone
(ADH)
Vastus lateralis, 149b, 152f, 153f, 158f
Vastus medialis, 153f, 158f
Veins, 292–293, 293f, 356f
disorders, 294b
head and neck, 299f
Vena cavae, 356f
Venous return, 283, 307–308
Ventilation, 347
Ventral cavity, 13
Ventral root, 170f, 172
Ventricle (brain), 176, 177f, 178f, 186f
Ventricle (heart), 275–277
Ventricular diastole, 279f
Ventricular systole, 279f
Venules, 292–293, 293f, 348f, 375f
Vermiform appendix, 371f
Vertebrae, 119
Vertebral artery, 297f, 300t, 303f
Vertebral body, 120f
Vertebral canal, 120, 120f
Vertebral column, 119–122, 120f
Vertebral vein, 298f
Vestibular branch, 211f
Vestibular canal, 213f
Vestibular membrane, 213f
Vestibular nerve, 212f
Vestibule (ear), 211f, 214
Vestibulocochlear nerve, 212f
Vestigial organ, 385
Villi, 383
Virulence, 500
Virus, 498–499, 511–512
diseases caused, 520–522t
shapes, 511f
Visceral effectors, 187
Visceral motor neurons, 187
Visceral muscle, 79
Visceral pericardium, 274
Visceral pleura, 83f, 347
Visceral sensations, 202
Visceral sensory neurons, 170
Vision, physiology, 207–210
Visual area (brain), 180f, 182
Visual association area (brain), 180f
Vital capacity, 353
Vitamin A, 409t
Vitamin C, 409t
Vitamin D, 409t, 430
Vitamin E, 409t
Vitamin K, 409t
Vitamins, 408, 409t
Vitamins and minerals, 408
Vitreous humor, 207
Vocal cords, 346, 346f, 347f
Vocal folds, 348f
Voiding (urine), 431
Volar arch, 300t
Volar digital vein, 298f
Voluntary muscle, 79
Vomer, 115f, 116, 116f
Vulva, 466
W
Water compartments, 29, 29f, 442–443,
442f
Water intake and output, 443–445, 443t,
444f
Weight loss, 411b
White blood cells (WBC), 75, 261–263;
see also leukocytes
functions, 262–263
types, 264b
White matter, 170f, 171, 172, 179, 185f
Withdrawal reﬂexes, 175; see also Flexor
reﬂexes
Word blindness, 182b
Word deafness, 182b
Worms (Helminths), 499, 514, 515f
infestations caused, 523t
X
Xiphoid process, 122, 123f
Y
Yellow bone marrow, 106
Yolk sac, 477, 479f
Z
Z line, 142, 144f
Zinc, 410t
Zona pellucida, 478f
Zygomatic arch, 114f
Zygomatic bone, 109f, 115f, 116, 116f
Zygomatic process, 115f, 116f
Zygomaticus, 154f
Zygote, 457
Index
603
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

12-2 Heart Murmur, 281
12-3 Electrocardiogram, 282
12-4 Arrhythmias, 282
13-1 Disorders of Arteries, 294
13-2 Disorders of Veins, 294
13-3 Pulse Sites, 304
13-4 Hypertension, 308
13-5 Circulatory Shock, 314
14-1 Hodgkin’s Disease, 327
14-2 Aids, 332
14-3 Diagnostic Tests, 334
14-4 Vaccines, 335
14-5 Allergies, 336
14-6 Vaccines That Have Changed Our Lives, 337
15-1 Asthma, 349
15-2 Hyaline Membrane Disease, 351
15-3 Pneumothorax, 352
15-4 Emphysema, 352
15-5 The Heimlich Maneuver, 353
15-6 Pulmonary Edema, 357
15-7 Pneumonia, 357
15-8 Carbon Monoxide, 357
16-1 Disorders of the Stomach, 378
16-2 Gallstones, 381
16-3 Disorders of the Intestines, 384
16-4 Infant Botulism, 386
16-5 Fiber, 387
16-6 Hepatitis, 389
17-1 Heat-Related Disorders, 398
17-2 Cold-Related Disorders, 400
17-3 Ketosis, 406
17-4 Metabolic Rate, 411
17-5 Weight Loss, 411
17-6 Leptin and Body-Mass Index, 412
18-1 Floating Kidney, 421
18-2 Renal Failure and Hemodialysis, 425
18-3 Erythropoietin, 431
18-4 Kidney Stones, 433
18-5 Blood Tests and Kidney Function, 434
18-6 Urinary Tract Infections, 435
19-1 Edema, 443
19-2 Electrolyte Imbalances, 447
20-1 Trisomy and Down Syndrome, 458
20-2 Contraception, 461
20-3 Prostatic Hypertrophy, 462
20-4 In Vitro Fertilization, 465
20-5 Sexually Transmitted Diseases, 466
20-6 Mammography, 468
21-1 Twins, 478
21-2 Fetal Diagnosis, 481
21-3 Congenital Fetal Infections, 483
21-4 Fetal Alcohol Syndrome, 484
21-5 Premature Births, 485
21-6 Apgar Score, 486
21-7 Solution to Genetics Question, 492
22-1 The Golden age of Microbiology, 498
22-2 Microbiology in the 20th Century, 499
22-3 Microbiology in the 21st Century, 507
Copyright © 2007 by F. A. Davis.

