
Everyday Utopia s


Everyday
Utopia s
The Conceptual Life of Promising Spaces
Davina Cooper
Duke University Press Durham and London 2014

© 2014 Duke University Press
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America on acid-­free paper ♾
Designed by Heather Hensley
Typeset in Whitman by Tseng Information Systems, Inc.
Library of Congress Cataloging-­in-­Publication Data
Cooper, Davina.
Everyday Utopias : the conceptual life of promising spaces / 
Davina Cooper.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
isbn 978-0-8223-5555-7 (cloth : alk. paper)
isbn 978-0-8223-5569-4 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Utopias—Political aspects. 2. Utopias—
Social aspects. I. Title.
hx806.c668 2014
335′.02—dc23 2013025249

For Yvonne and Peter


Contents
	
Acknowledgments ix
	
1.	Introduction 1
	
2.	Toward a Utopian Conceptual Attitude 24
	
3.	Casting Equality and the Touch of State Governance 45
	
4.	Public Nudism and the Pursuit of Equality 73
	
5.	Unsettling Feminist Care Ethics through a Women’s  
and Trans Bathhouse 100
	
6.	Normative Time and the Challenge of Community Labor  
in Local Exchange Trading Schemes 129
	
7.	Property as Belonging at Summerhill School 155
	
8.	Market Play at Speakers’ Corner 186
	
9.	Conclusion 217
	
notes 229
	
references 251
	
index 277


Acknowledgments
This book started life as a research project on prefigurative com-
munity spaces. Funded by the Leverhulme Trust, its inception and 
development were deeply shadowed by the deaths of two people in 
November 2001 whose work and attitude to life were hugely for-
mative for this project’s imagining: my father, Charles Cooper, and 
my close friend the Canadian scholar Marlee Kline.
In the twelve years since, the development of this book has bene-
fited from the time, generosity, and reflections of many colleagues, 
family, and friends. I want to thank those who variously answered 
my calls for help in finding relevant texts, inspired my thinking 
with their thoughts and suggestions, discussed ideas over coffee, 
meals, and walks, and gave me feedback on draft chapters: Lucy 
Sargisson, Reina Lewis, John Clarke, Janet Newman, David Bell, 
Alan Norrie, Jon Goldberg-­Hiller, Stewart Motha, John Roberts, 
Morag McDermont, Toni Williams, Iain Ramsay, Shona Hunter, 
Marilyn Strathern, Fleur Johns, Susan Boyd, Rosemary Auchmuty, 
Jon Binnie, Vikki Bell, Miranda Joseph, Judy Fudge, Lisa Herman, 
Chris Newfield, Avery Gordon, Wendy Larner, Gail Mason, Yvette 
Taylor, Brenna Bhandar, Lisa Adkins, Kitty Cooper, Sue Cooper, 
Adi Cooper, Ruth Barcan, Christine Cocker, Alan Kanter, Vivi 
Lachs, Yvonne Lawrence, Peter Levine, Eleanor Curran, Maria 
Drakopoulou, Kal Michael, Antu Sorainen, Miriam David, Bonnie 
Honig, Ian Stronach, Chris Beasley, Brenda Cossman, Jamie Heck-
ert, and, the late Nina Klowden Herman. A big thank you also 
goes to Eve Darian-­Smith and Philip McCarty for the use of their

x    Acknowledgments
lovely house in Santa Barbara, a good place to finish a book on everyday 
utopias.
Many lines of thought have been significantly influenced by the doc-
toral students I worked with during the book’s progression. I am grateful 
to Toni Johnson for her work on the imaginary domain; Sarah Lamble 
got me thinking further about the dynamic and processual character 
of knowledge generation in conditions of conflict; I learned a lot from 
Sarah Keenan’s work on space and property, and from Emily Grabham’s 
work on the body. Suhraiya Jivraj, Ryoko Matsuno, Toni Johnson, Sarah 
Lamble, Stacy Douglas, Jenny Smith, Lucy Barnes, and Achala Chandani 
Abeysekara also all provided excellent research assistance at different 
points during the project.
I was very lucky to have four excellent readers—Margaret Davies, 
Mariana Valverde, Kate Bedford, and Emily Grabham—who generously 
gave feedback on different parts of the book in various early forms. Their 
comments, suggestions, and insights have shaped the text in many places. 
The book also benefited considerably from being workshopped shortly 
before its completion. Margaret Denike, Doris Buss, Kim Brooks, Vrinda 
Narain, Carissima Mathen, Robert Leckey, and Shauna Van Praagh gen-
erously gave their time to reading and discussing the manuscript in ways 
that helped me to sharpen the book’s core and to tie up some of its loose 
threads.
I want to thank Ruth Levitas. Her influence on the content of this 
book is profound, and I am particularly grateful for her encouragement 
in its latter stages. I am also very grateful to the anonymous readers for 
Duke University Press, whose excellent suggestions, at different stages of 
development, made for a much improved book. My editor at Duke Uni-
versity Press, Courtney Berger, gave thoughtful feedback that was always 
spot on. Christine Choi, also at Duke, provided considerable help and ad-
vice, especially with the images used in this book.
Many chapters in this book are based on interviews. I am grateful to 
the Leverhulme Trust, the Arts and Humanities Research Council, and 
Kent Law School for funding the necessary research. These chapters, 
however, could not have been written without the willingness, tolerance, 
and kindness shown by actors in many of the everyday utopias studied, 
as they answered questions, sent me materials, and introduced me to 
other people willing to reflect on the sites in which they were involved. 
In this respect, I especially want to thank Carlyle Jansen, Zoe Readhead, 

Acknowledgments    xi
Michael Newman, Jason Preater, Gordon Rhead, Sarah Spencer, Moira 
Dustin, Karen Jochelson, and Heiko Khoo.
Finally, thanks go to my partner, Didi Herman, for her incisive ques-
tions and efforts to draw from me cogent responses, for reading and 
commenting on countless drafts, and for modeling how to make com-
pleting a book look effortless (a modeling I singularly failed to live up 
to)—in other words, for everything . . . and for everything else.
Some of the material included in this book has appeared in earlier form 
elsewhere. An earlier version of chapter 3 was published as “Reading 
the State as a Multi-­Identity Formation: The Touch and Feel of Equality 
Governance,” Feminist Legal Studies 19 (2011): 3–25. A previous version 
of chapter 6 was published as “Time against Time: Normative Tempo-
ralities and the Failure of Community Labour in Local Exchange Trading 
Schemes,” Time and Society 22 (2013): 31–54. Sections of chapters 4 and 7 
were published in earlier form in “Theorising Nudist Equality: An En-
counter between Political Fantasy and Public Appearance,” Antipode 43 
(2011): 326–57, and in “Opening up Ownership: Community Belonging, 
Belongings and the Productive Life of Property,” Law and Social Inquiry 
32 (2007): 625–64.


chapter 1
Introduction
In 1995 Florence joined a Local Exchange Trading Scheme (lets) 
in England’s West Midlands.1 She joined to meet people like her-
self, left-­wing alternative kinds of people, and to be able to trade 
without using pounds. Through her lets, she got to know people 
and made friends. She produced homemade bread and jams, 
offered some decorating and gardening, and bought other people’s 
produce and services, including a ride to the airport, dog care, and 
house sitting. Samantha joined a North London lets a couple of 
years later, attracted too by the idea of exchanging skills without 
official money. She gave people lifts, offered word-­processing, and 
gained a cleaner. Eventually she left because few people took up 
her services, and the main thing she wanted, house repairs, was 
unavailable on a scheme dominated by, in her words, alternative 
therapies, arts, and crafts.
Meanwhile, across the Atlantic, another experimental social 
space was in full swing. In 1998 a group of Canadians, dissatisfied 
with the lack of casual sex spaces for women, started a bathhouse. 
Inspired by the agentic sexual openness of men’s bathhouses, while 
seeking to develop something that was community-­based, femi-
nist, and progressive, Pussy Palace was born. It aimed to create 
a space where women and subsequently transgendered people 
could develop erotic confidence and a more raunchy sexual cul-
ture. Bathhouse volunteers offered a practical education in anal 
sex, finding your g-­spot, lap dancing, and breast play. Carla volun-
teered to lap-­dance at a bathhouse event, the first time she’d ever

2    Introduction
done such a thing. She described the venue as warren-­like, dark, con-
fusing, and exciting. It seemed like a place of incredible opportunity, a 
place to meet people and to be sexually visible in new and unanticipated 
ways.
Far older than lets or the Toronto bathhouse is Speakers’ Corner 
in London’s Hyde Park. There, for over a century, people have come to 
orate, to gather in throngs to discuss current affairs, and to listen. An 
unusual space, in the sense that you can join unknown others in conver-
sation about politics and religion, stand on a stepladder and lecture into 
the air, heckle, tease, and make fun of speakers or audience, Speakers’ 
Corner continues to be a place that is especially attractive to those ex-
cluded from mainstream discursive fora. Charles is a regular, attending 
most Sundays to listen to speakers and enjoy their boisterous dialogue 
with the crowds. But he also goes to meet Corner friends, other regulars 
he has come to know. They will ask how he is doing and about his week. 
With them he can express life’s daily frustrations and get a sympathetic 
response.
Sites such as these are everyday utopias—networks and spaces that 
perform regular daily life, in the global North,2 in a radically differ-
ent fashion. Everyday utopias don’t focus on campaigning or advocacy. 
They don’t place their energy on pressuring mainstream institutions 
to change, on winning votes, or on taking over dominant social struc-
tures. Rather they work by creating the change they wish to encounter, 
building and forging new ways of experiencing social and political life.3 
Because their focus is on building alternatives to dominant practices, 
everyday utopias have faced both disregard and disdain from those on 
the left who judge this strategy to be misplaced. However, at a time of 
considerable pessimism and uncertainty among radicals about the char-
acter and accomplishment of wholesale change, what it entails, and how 
it can be brought about, interest has risen in the transformative poten-
tial of initiatives that pursue in a more open, partial, and contingent way 
the building of another world.
This book focuses on six everyday utopian sites. Alongside lets, 
Speakers’ Corner, and the Toronto bathhouse, they are public nudism, 
equality governance, and Summerhill School. These are sites involved in 
the daily practice of trading, public speaking, having sex, appearing in 
public, governing, learning, and living in community with others. They 
are also sites that vary hugely—in their form, scale, duration, and re-

Introduction    3
lationship to mainstream life. Given the very obvious and considerable 
differences between public nudism and state equality governance, for 
instance, it may be hard to see what these sites have in common, par-
ticularly what they have significantly in common. The premise of this 
book is that what these very different sites share is captured by the para-
doxical articulation of the utopian and the everyday.4 Over the next few 
pages, I want to map the main contours of this articulation and then 
cut through to the heart of this book, which concerns the potential of 
everyday utopias to contribute to a transformative politics specifically 
through the concepts they actualize and imaginatively invoke.
Since its early identification as an impossible kind of good space, 
the utopian has led to a range of literary representations, as well as to 
other kinds of materialization in music, art, urban design, and commu-
nity living. Interest in the utopian has also generated a growing field 
of academic scholarship. While much of this work focuses on utopian 
“objects”—including novels, buildings, and planned communities 
(e.g., Kraftl 2007; Kumar 1987; Sargisson 2012; Sargisson and Sargent 
2004)—increasing attention has been paid to the utopian as an orienta-
tion or form of attunement, a way of engaging with spaces, objects, and 
practices that is oriented to the hope, desire, and belief in the possibility 
of other, better worlds (e.g., Levitas 2013). This orientation can take a 
conservative or reactionary form; however, within utopian studies it has 
largely been tuned to the possibility of more egalitarian, democratic, and 
emancipatory ways of living.
For Ruth Levitas, one of the leading scholars in utopian studies, social 
dreaming, longing, and desire for change are key dimensions of the uto-
pian, along with the hope—or, perhaps more accurately, the belief—that 
more egalitarian, freer ways of living are possible. Levitas’s work builds 
on the influential utopian Marxist Ernst Bloch. While Bloch (1986) finds 
glimpses of the utopian in a wide array of different social practices, in-
cluding daydreaming and storytelling, he also emphasizes the limitations 
of what he calls “abstract utopias,” compensatory fantasies invested in 
so that the present world can be made livable. Bloch argues instead for 
“concrete utopias,” which anticipate and reach forward toward a real 
possible future. While abstract utopias are wishful, concrete utopias are 
deliberate and determined (also Levitas 1990). “Concrete utopia can be 
understood both as latency and as tendency. It is present historically, as 
an element in human culture which Bloch seeks to recover; and it refers 

4    Introduction
forward to the emergent future . . . a praxis-­oriented category character-
ized by ‘militant optimism’” (Levitas 1997: 70). The everyday utopias of 
this book form a kind of concrete utopia. While Bloch focused more on 
the latencies of the present and the horizon of future possibility, every-
day utopias share his emphasis on what is doable and viable given the 
conditions of the present. Yet everyday utopias also capture a sense of 
hope and potential, in that they anticipate something more, something 
beyond and other to what they can currently realize.
The dynamic quality of everyday utopias is an important aspect of 
what it is to be a contemporary utopian space. While none of the sites 
discussed is entirely spontaneous and most are planned or designed to 
some degree, they are not the realization of a blueprint. Moving away 
from an interest in blueprints has been a significant dimension of mod-
ern utopian studies.5 While many generations of scholars, politicians, 
activists, and writers have criticized the utopian for relying on a static 
notion of the perfect society that can be imagined and then executed 
(e.g., Bauman 2003b; Shklar 1994), contemporary scholarship and writ-
ing is far more interested in the utopian as an ethos or complex pro-
cess, whose failure and struggles are as important as success (e.g., see 
Levitas 2007; Moylan 1986; Sargisson 2007). In the case of everyday 
utopias, the materialization of a plan or idea is never a final putting into 
effect; instead it involves constant adaptation and change. This may be 
in order to keep as close as possible to the original vision, as witnessed 
at Summerhill School in seeking to sustain Neill’s original vision in the 
face of ongoing challenges. But it can also be a way of responding to new 
desires and wants, as with the Toronto bathhouse and British equality 
governance.
At the same time, despite the reforms and evolution that highlight 
their temporal contingency, everyday utopias share continuities with an 
older utopian tradition in their ambition and confidence. Trading with-
out “real” money, going about one’s business naked, running a school in 
which children don’t have to go to class, all challenge basic presumptions 
about how things should work. Many everyday utopias are dismissed as 
bizarre and ludicrous, for they take regular activities beyond their con-
ventional parameters. Against the assumption that anything outside the 
“normal” is impossible, everyday utopias reveal their possibility. Indeed 
it may be the everyday aspect of the activities that most intensifies per-
ceptions of them as strange and unsettling as they offer an alternative 

Introduction    5
model for doing the things people take for granted as necessary to do. 
Everyday utopias do so with confidence, refusing to view their activities 
as the “outside” world does. For participants, the practices engaged in 
are normal and right. Yet these feelings and perceptions of normality 
don’t necessarily predate participation; they often come from immer-
sion. In this sense, everyday utopias don’t simply enact new practices, re-
sponding to participants’ prior interests and sense of how things should 
be. Everyday utopias also bring about (or seek to bring about) new forms 
of normalization, desire,6 and subjectivity—from the self-­regulating 
children of Summerhill School to the active erotic agents of the Toronto 
bathhouse.
In ways that resonate with utopian studies and utopian literature, 
everyday utopias are oriented toward a better world.7 At the same time, 
the movement toward the world that is sought does not take shape only 
in attempts to prefigure it. A key theme in discussions of the utopian is 
the place it makes available from which to critique the world as it cur-
rently is. By creating a world at a (temporal or spatial) distance from 
their own, utopian creators de-­familiarize the world they know and in-
habit; in the process they enable taken-­for-­granted aspects to be ques-
tioned and rethought. Everyday utopias also offer sites of judgment, even 
though this is not an explicit feature of most of the sites I discuss. Like 
literary utopias, everyday utopias largely oppose indirectly what exists 
and what is coming into being, by creating other, better ways.8 So Local 
Exchange Trading Schemes expose capitalist societies’ seemingly un-
productive dependence on scarce monies and fruitless drive to accumu-
late and Speakers’ Corner exposes the inequalities of an inaccessible, 
corporate-­owned mass media, but neither site focuses its time and ener-
gies on opposing what is. Rather critique depends on everyday utopias’ 
ability to pose a more desirable but also viable alternative.
Critique through establishing something new lies, however, in a com-
plex relationship with the notion of utopia as an impossible space—the 
“no place” as well as the “good place” that the word utopia puns on. What 
it means to be impossible varies. For the sites I discuss, impossibility does 
not mean a lack of existence, for the sites are very clearly up and running. 
Rather everyday utopias are impossible in the way a liberal government 
promoting equality may seem engaged in an impossible—because para-
doxical—pursuit (see chapter 3), impossible in the sense of nonviable 
(as I explore with lets in chapter 6), or impossible in the sense of un-

6    Introduction
imaginable (as with the women’s casual sex space, discussed in chap-
ter 5). It is because of this apparently impossible character that the sites 
discussed remain largely (although not entirely or evenly) absent from 
imaginings of their sector. In a sense, everyday utopias are social black 
holes, absorbing those who enter but missing from prevailing maps of 
their field, whether this concerns the field of state governance,9 school-
ing, appearing in public, or having sex. Of course, one reason for their 
erasure may be that of scale: the sites are simply too small to be noticed. 
Yet, on their own terms, many of the sites—Summerhill School, nudism, 
Speakers’ Corner, for instance—have acquired fame or notoriety. Still, 
on the school-­scape, clothes-­scape, or discursive-­scape, where one might 
expect to find them, everyday utopias’ relative singularity—their lack of 
intelligible, institutionalized, or visible connections and relationships to 
other practices and institutions within their sector—leaves them unseen 
and unrecognized.
In Cultural Studies in the Future Tense, Lawrence Grossberg (2010: 278) 
writes, “Everyday life . . . refers to the uncatalogued, habitual, and often 
routinized nature of day-­to-­day living, what we don’t think about while 
we’re living it; it encompasses all those activities whose temporality goes 
unnoticed.” As the tissue of life socially lived, the everyday is something 
people and institutions (elite and nonelite) routinely and habitually co-­
create—forging routines and responding to recurrent needs through 
times of calm as well as times of social crisis.10 How do these dimensions 
of the routinized and organized everyday cohere with the ambitious, im-
possible, critical domain of utopian social dreaming?
Within utopian novels, extension into the everyday is commonplace 
as utopian inhabitants go about their daily lives. In this book, by con-
trast, a focus on the everyday extends into utopia. Here prosaic dimen-
sions of regular life—sex, trading, teaching, politics, public appearance, 
and speech—are performed in innovative and socially ambitious ways 
that, by challenging, simultaneously reveal prevailing norms, ideologies, 
and practices. But it isn’t just the character of the activities that makes 
these utopias everyday. It also lies in their routines, rules, and common-
place concerns; their embeddedness within wider social life; their “here 
and now” ethos; and in the way they open up the terrain of the everyday 
to deliberate refashioning.
Accounts of the utopian in music, painting, and other arts often imply 
a mysterious, magical, tantalizing quality—a world that is glimpsed but 

Introduction    7
not fully apparent (Levitas 2013). While similar claims have been made 
about the everyday,11 there is also a sense in which the everyday con-
fronts, nonsentimentally and unromantically, the mechanics and opera-
tion of regular, sometimes boring existence. This ethos of maintenance, 
of digging in and getting things done, is apparent in many if not all of the 
sites I discuss. It is a pragmatism oriented to survival and to doing the 
best one can; of establishing, promoting, and maintaining internal rules, 
systems, adjudicative structures, and etiquette conventions.12 Such prag-
matism undercuts any notion of perfection still residing within the uto-
pian; as such it echoes the work of utopian scholars and creators who 
emphasize the dynamic, improvised, often flawed quality of many uto-
pian spaces. As H. G. Wells ([1905] 2005: 176) wrote more than a hun-
dred years ago, “In a modern Utopia there will, indeed, be no perfection; 
in Utopia there must also be friction, conflicts and waste, but the waste 
will be enormously less than in our world.”13
What makes the everyday, with its rules, procedures, challenges, plea-
sures, and anxieties, so striking in the spaces I discuss is the way such an 
everyday folds into the utopian. To take one example, interviewing vol-
unteer sexual service providers at the Toronto bathhouse, I was struck 
by the commonplace character of their concerns. These women were 
engaged in unusual practices, in the sense of providing (mainly women) 
with free sexual services and experiences, yet their concerns, for the 
most part, were intensely quotidian: how to deal with poor client hy-
giene without causing offense; how to make sure they kept to time so 
queues didn’t build outside their door; how to end an encounter with 
an inexperienced client who thought she had found a date for the night 
(see chapter 5).14
The deployment of rules and routines indicates something of the iso-
morphic character of everyday utopias. While they may ambitiously seek 
to actualize counterhegemonic practices, they draw on many aspects of 
mainstream culture. The embedding of everyday utopias within wider 
social life is important too in other respects. In their work on intentional 
communities in New Zealand, Lucy Sargisson and Lyman Tower Sar-
gent (2004) suggest that proximity and connection to the world outside 
are vital for sustaining alternative residential communities’ well-­being 
and influence. In everyday utopias, the importance of this connection is 
also evident. I suggested earlier that everyday utopias may be absent or 
missed from their wider scapes, even as they can prove utterly immers-

8    Introduction
ing for participants. But while everyday utopias demand and absorb the 
attention of those involved, they aren’t totalizing lifelong places. In this 
sense, they differ from many intentional communities, where people live 
out (or plan to live out) significant chunks of their life. Most of the sites 
discussed in this book are entered or engaged for discrete periods: a fort-
night’s holiday rambling naked or relaxing at a naturist resort; carving 
out time to sell homemade cakes to other lets members; the office-­day 
advancement of equality governance by state officials; occasional eve-
nings spent at a bathhouse. Nudism, lets trading, promoting equality, 
and casual sex can, of course, extend beyond such time-­limited slots. 
However, in the main, the cases discussed in this book concern lives 
lived only partially, transiently, or momentarily within everyday utopias. 
Even in the case of a residential site, such as Summerhill School, where 
people eat, sleep, study, socialize, and play in the same complex of build-
ings, what we have is an intentionally temporary dwelling (to the extent 
that it functions as school children’s primary home). And even when 
living at the school, young Summerhillians regularly leave its grounds to 
go into town, to go home during the holidays, or to take part in school 
trips.
Such movement between everyday utopias and the wider world re-
quires physical proximity. Literary utopias may involve complex jour-
neys or temporal-­spatial warps that deposit the traveler somewhere else, 
but the sites discussed here lie close to people’s doorsteps. Certainly 
some travel is involved, whether for the children who attend Summer-
hill School from Japan, South Korea, and the United States or the far-­
flung international visitors who come to Speakers’ Corner. Yet, for the 
most part, the quotidian character of everyday utopias depends on being 
nearby; regulars can participate because the site (practice or network) 
is easy to reach.15 Indeed a repeated complaint from lets participants, 
particularly (but not only) from those who had to cross rural counties in 
order to trade, was the time, effort, and transportation costs involved.
Participative ease, of course, is not limited to physical proximity. 
While in practice ease is not always possible or evident, the ethos and 
symbolic character of everyday utopias suggest access should be unex-
ceptional—that sites are open, available, or touched by a broad public 
and that modes of entry or membership are straightforward. Regularity 
and durability are important here also. lets, for instance, cannot pro-
vide a meaningful trading alternative if exchanges occur only annually. 

Introduction    9
Equality governance seems doomed to fail if policies are ad hoc and spo-
radic. This doesn’t mean everyday utopias necessarily achieve a system-
atic regularity. However, in the case of lets and the Toronto bathhouse, 
lack of trading, on the one hand, and ad hoc infrequent events, on the 
other, were identified by participants as major impediments to the site’s 
more complete realization.
The movement of members between everyday utopias and a wide ar-
ray of other sites—indeed the interwoven character of the sites them-
selves in their multiple entangled relationships to other places and pro-
cesses—highlights a crucial dimension of everyday utopias. Far from 
offering totalizing expressions of what an ideal self-­sufficient life could 
be, everyday utopias are more akin to hot spots of innovative practice, in-
stantiating something like the utopian strands Jeffrey Alexander (2001) 
discusses, engaged in the work of “civil repair.” While my focus is not on 
everyday utopias’ extroverted activities (with the exception of equality 
governance), the “critical proximity” of everyday utopias to mainstream 
social forces and processes is centrally important. Scholars in utopian 
studies often focus on the importance of distance, the estrangement or 
de-­familiarization that comes from observing one’s own world from a 
place that is very definitely someplace else.16 Everyday utopias, as I dis-
cuss, also provide this estrangement. Yet as proximate everyday sites, 
they offer a critical form of closeness as well. Critical proximity here 
works in several ways: the productive disjuncture of inappropriately 
placed activities (such as being naked in public nonnudist spaces); the 
pressure that political and social contiguity can exert and the channels 
it can open up (the hope of state-­based equality governance and lets); 
and the knowledge of mainstream practices that comes from being close 
at hand (crucial to Speakers’ Corner as a critical, deliberative space).
In this way the contiguity associated with the everyday identifies the 
productive potential of these sites as well as their prosaic character. But 
the productivity of everyday utopias doesn’t pertain just to the quality 
of being proximate. What the everyday also opens up is the possibility 
of enacting and performing the tissue of daily life differently. For the 
everyday is not uniform or homogeneous. While its general form tran-
scends the particularities of any specific social formation, the charac-
teristics it takes on in any given context are shaped and colored by that 
formation. To what extent, then, can collective actors choose to enact the 
everyday in ways that counter or confront mainstream rhythms and sys-

10    Introduction
tems? One example of such an attempt—in the sense of being forged as 
a reversal (even as its terms are also generated by dominant, socioeco-
nomic conditions)—is the slow-­food movement (Leitch 2003). Devel-
oped in Italy in the late 1980s, although swiftly spreading farther, slow 
food sought to transform the everyday experience of culinary produc-
tion, exchange, and consumption. Contesting late capitalism’s indus-
trialization of food production and cooking, slow food sought to build 
social economies around more attentive, locally embedded, culinary en-
counters. In ways that resonate with other utopian norms, slow food 
aimed to educate taste, to make visible (rather than obscure) the links 
between production and consumption, and to revalue pleasure and well-­
being alongside a more general respect for nature, producers, and con-
sumers (Leitch 2003; Parkins 2004; Petrini 2001; Pietrykowski 2004). 
I don’t want to romanticize slow food, which has also been associated 
with cultural commodification, the strengthening of geopolitical iden-
tities, and various forms of national and economic protectionism (see 
Leitch 2003; Pietrykowski 2004).17 However, along with the slow-­city 
movement, which sought to encourage calmer, less polluted urban en-
vironments, attentive to a local sense of place, and to supporting local 
crafts and produce (see Knox 2005), slow food stands as an intervention 
in the enactment of everyday life, a deliberate attempt to construct or 
encourage alternative forms of culinary performance.
While not discussed further in this book, slow food as a way of recon-
stituting everyday life shares many of the aspirations (as well as some of 
the problems) of lets, a networked site I do discuss. In lets, trading, 
work, and exchange were deliberately articulated to community, locality, 
sociability, and pleasure in opposition to the exploitation, waste, and 
alienation associated with contemporary global economies (see chap-
ter 6). Somewhat differently, Speakers’ Corner stands as a counter to the 
commodification of speech apparent in mainstream communicative and 
media forums (see chapter 8). By demonstrating the emotional and intel-
lectual power of open-­air public speech and dialogue, Speakers’ Corner 
challenges the privatization and commercialization of the deliberative 
public sphere.
Speakers’ Corner differs from lets and slow food in many respects. 
However, one quality they share is an apparent nostalgia for earlier 
modes of social engagement and consumption against modern forms 
of institutionally mediated and managed large-­scale production.18 But 

Introduction    11
everyday utopias do not invariably face backward. Several sites discussed 
in this book provide a reworking of the everyday that, more explicitly, 
projects forward to new kinds of social relations: from the imagined envi-
ronment of nondiscrimination toward which equality governance beck-
ons to the new gendered modes of sexual expression and performance 
witnessed at the Toronto bathhouse.
The Conceptual Force of Promising Spaces
Radical sites and other experiments in living have been approached from 
different angles. Drawing on a variety of terms to capture their inno-
vative, socially promising character,19 scholars have explored the ethos, 
conventions, and norms of counterhegemonic practices, the activities 
they develop, the challenges and obstacles they face, and the relation-
ships they form. In this book I want to complement existing work by 
taking a different approach. While it shares a concern with the contribu-
tion alternative sites make and might make to a socially transformative 
politics oriented to more egalitarian, democratic, and liberatory social 
worlds, the focus of this book is on the conceptual life and potential of 
everyday utopias.
This focus is driven by two interlocking claims. First, as conceptually 
potent, innovative sites, everyday utopias can revitalize progressive and 
radical politics through their capacity to put everyday concepts, such as  
property, care, markets, work, and equality, into practice in counter-
normative ways. This does not necessarily mean that everyday utopias in-
vert status quo concepts. While some sites may identify such inversions 
in their original planning or design, as, for instance, in the education pio-
neer A. S. Neill’s objectives in establishing Summerhill School, the prac-
tical experiment of keeping an everyday utopia going over many years 
means the relationship between the way concepts are actualized within 
such sites and the status quo becomes more multifaceted and complex. 
Consequently, and this is the book’s second claim, everyday utopias, as 
nondominant “minor stream” social sites, are hugely fruitful places from 
which to think differently and imaginatively about concepts, particularly 
when such thinking is oriented to a socially transformative politics.
Underpinning these two claims is a particular understanding of con-
cepts. This book works from the premise that concepts are not ideas 
or mental constructs through which social life appears but the oscillat-
ing movement between imagining and actualization. Approaching con-

12    Introduction
cepts in this way generates a range of questions: How does the move-
ment between imagining and actualization take place? What happens 
when these two ‘forms’ diverge or grow apart so that the way a concept is 
imagined has no relationship to how it is manifested? And how does con-
ceptual development within an everyday utopia relate to worlds outside?
I address these questions through a utopian framework, which is ex-
plored in more detail in chapter 2. Utopianism is often charged with 
idealism: that it treats the imagination as an autonomous domain out of 
which new ways of living can and will emerge. While utopian approaches 
are generally more complex, central to the conceptual framework devel-
oped in this book is the importance of material practices and spaces. For 
it is in these differently forged ways of doing things that everyday con-
cepts become both actualized and imagined otherwise. Everyday utopias 
condition participants to think, feel, hope, imagine, and experience life 
differently; at the same time, as I have discussed, they are not sealed-­
off, autonomous sites. Through the movement of people and processes, 
everyday utopian practice can incite nonmembers also to imagine con-
cepts differently. So visitors can be inspired by what they see and learn, 
allowing their brief incursion into a more utopian world to reframe the 
way they experience and think about a life largely lived elsewhere.
The modeling and inspiration that alternative spaces can provide has 
been explored in relation to various spaces, including Sasha Roseneil’s 
(1995) groundbreaking work on the Greenham Common Women’s Peace 
Camp of the 1980s. There, in a makeshift camp snaking the perimeter of 
a U.S. military base in southern England, women experienced life along 
feminist, antihierarchical lines. Those who left took with them lessons 
learned about participatory democracy, lesbian sexualities, living inde-
pendently, and protest. But how did these lessons learned relate to what 
was experienced at Greenham in terms of its practice? Did Greenham 
women understand democracy differently as a result of participating in 
its successful realization at the camp, or did their thinking about democ-
racy emerge from the camp’s expressed ideals combined with its practi-
cal failure to accomplish them?
The complex and uneven relationship between how concepts are 
imagined and how they are actualized lies at the heart of this book, as I 
explore in some detail in chapter 2. A conventional approach to innova-
tive spaces or experiments in living tends to focus on stable local con-

Introduction    13
cepts, where imaginings and actualization cohere. These are often the 
dimensions of a space or practice that receive the most attention (public 
and academic). In the case of this book’s sites, this could mean address-
ing the way freedom is understood and expressed at Summerhill, or in 
relation to nudism, casual sex, or speech acts at Speakers’ Corner. Of 
course, in any of these contexts, actualization may fall short, but the re-
lationship between how freedom is imagined and practiced is presumed 
to be a clear and straightforward one in which both forms can be known 
and identified; indeed that is how we can know that actualization has 
fallen short or diverged from freedom’s imagining. Stable conceptual 
lines, where what is done and what is imagined are seen to cohere,20 are 
important, generating and shoring up the distinctive identity and recog-
nized value of particular sites. But while such conceptualizations help 
to secure the site’s existence, making visible what it stands for, attract-
ing participants, and indeed signaling what the site can model to those 
who participate and then move on (or to those who continue to inhabit 
other worlds as well), they are not the conceptual lines on which this 
book dwells.
Rather I am interested in those more oblique, what one might even 
call “queer” lines. These are the lines that emerge when particular sites 
are considered in relation to unexpected concepts—property, for in-
stance, rather than freedom at Summerhill School; touch rather than 
discrimination in the context of equality governance. They are also the 
lines that emerge when actualization and imagining don’t do what is ex-
pected, producing complex relationships of nonresemblance. This fail-
ure to converge does not necessarily depend on unexpected couplings. It 
can also occur when mainstream imaginings, such as of care or equality, 
meet community practices they cannot adequately recognize; when 
community imaginings of particular concepts acquire, in their opera-
tional pursuit, an undesired or unsought practical shape; or when con-
cepts are manifested in ways that differ significantly from the expressed 
imaginings of participants.
In a book that is concerned with everyday utopias’ contribution to a 
transformative politics, why focus on these oblique, queer, or circuitous 
lines? Two reasons stand out, which I explore in more detail in chap-
ter 2. First, such lines illuminate the sites in question in new, valuable 
ways. Exploring the Toronto bathhouse in relation to care and ethics 

14    Introduction
rather than sex or bodies, for instance, fleshes out aspects of the site 
that remain less familiar despite the cluster of writing on the Toronto 
site. Likewise considering equality governance through the concept of 
touch rather than in relation to more commonly applied concepts draws 
attention to oft-­neglected questions about the form and normative im-
plications of state contact, feeling, and proximity. The value of this illu-
mination goes beyond simply understanding particular sites better. Be-
cause it draws attention to the manifold things such sites do, beyond 
their headline contribution, it demonstrates what they can bring to dif-
ferent kinds of social politics. So Speakers’ Corner can contribute to re-
imagining markets through the multiple ways it practically articulates 
markets to play, as well as doing what it is famous for: instantiating a 
symbolic domain of “free” speech.
Second, instances where the actualization and imagining of concepts 
fail to converge in simple, linear ways identify political pressure points. 
Everyday utopias’ practical manifestation of concepts, such as property 
or markets, for instance, can support new conceptual lines that lead to 
different forms of imagining. While this may be based on the way con-
cepts are materialized within everyday utopias, it can extend further to 
unsettle wider commonsense assumptions about what concepts mean 
and how they operate, providing resources for reimagining in other con-
texts. Focusing on less developed or less traveled conceptual lines, where 
imagining and actualization do not converge, also identifies those lines 
that are most dynamic and in formation. These less settled lines hold out 
the most potential to develop in multiple, new ways.
The conceptual richness of innovative social spaces is a dimension of 
utopian epistemology that has received little attention. But if a reason 
for exploring this richness lies in the relationship of everyday utopias 
to social transformation, how should we understand this relationship? 
The question of how change occurs has been given both a temporal and 
a spatial configuration within utopian studies. Yet while the tendency 
has been to see change through the lens of nostalgia or hope, the ma-
terial presence of everyday utopias—as something more than imagined 
spaces—begs important questions about the place of the present. While 
the present can provide the terrain in which seeds of the future flourish 
or where traces, ghosts, and longings for the past lie, it can also be a time 
in which utopian actors find themselves utterly captivated by the tex-
ture and demands of what is now. In this sense, everyday utopias might 

Introduction    15
contribute to a transformative politics by sustaining what is, including 
through the concepts they actualize and invoke. I return to these themes 
in my concluding chapter.
A Visitor in Another Land
Utopias, for the most part, are peopled spaces, and the visitor is an impor-
tant figure within much utopian writing, the bridge between the world 
that is left and the imaginary idealized world (or nomos), of some other 
time or place, that is entered. Heuristically it is through the visitor’s jour-
ney and growing acceptance of the new world that the one (temporarily) 
left behind becomes ever more problematized and estranged. This pro-
cess and relationship are also central to this book’s unfolding. Research-
ing different spaces and practices, I too had hosts, people who answered 
my questions, took responsibility for my presence, and introduced me to 
others. Yet while visitors to literary utopias may start out hostile or skep-
tical before coming to see the benefits of their new temporary home, 
this was not my relationship to the sites I researched. While the sites 
selected were chosen for their significance—in terms of their ambition, 
scale, or longevity—they were also sites that were in some way familiar. 
I was not a member or participant in any, but I came to the sites with 
some prior knowledge: stories about Summerhill School told to me as 
a child by my father, my occasional teenage visits to Speakers’ Corner, 
some know-­how about equality governance gleaned from my years as an 
elected member of a radical local council, family friends’ involvement in 
lets and, to a lesser degree, nudism, and my friends’ involvement with 
the Toronto bathhouse.
Yet unlike the visitor who temporarily becomes part of a new world, 
my aim wasn’t immersion; also unlike the visitor of many utopian novels, 
my stays in everyday utopias often proved short—a few days at a time 
at Summerhill, a number of Sundays over the course of eight years at 
Speakers’ Corner. For other sites, where entry largely took place through 
phone conversations, my inhabiting was also less richly embodied (or 
perhaps differently embodied in ways that could combine drinking tea 
in my kitchen while considering the challenges of lets trading or late-­
night bathhouse sex). Keen to avoid the exoticization that can come 
from a traveler encountering striking new ways of performing familiar 
activities, I also did not want the sites to become too familiar, to lose the 
particular intellectual, ethical, sensory, and affective traction that came 

16    Introduction
from an interchange between inside and out. Paramount in being a visi-
tor in this context is the movement (virtual and actual) between differ-
ent spaces, the process of crossing as much as the practices within any 
given space, the sensory experience of entering from the outside, of try-
ing to act appropriately, and of dwelling on what rightly should be given 
in return. I return to this relationship later, but first let me say something 
about my sources and data.
While anchoring my conceptual analysis in an understanding of the 
different sites’ practices was essential, this book does not provide an 
ethnographic account of everyday utopias. For many of the sites, ethno-
graphic or at least richly detailed accounts are already available. Conse-
quently the descriptions offered in the chapters that follow are brief and 
purposive, intended to give readers a sense of the different sites and of 
the relationship the concepts explored have to them, rather than full, tex-
tured accounts of places and practices (even as I have tried to avoid easy 
conceptualizations that come from ignoring the complex, multifaceted 
character of the sites concerned). With the exception of public nudism, 
where the material used is exclusively textual, interviews took place 
with participants in all the sites discussed, and over the course of a de-
cade I interviewed about 150 people.21 Given the diversity of participants 
in each setting, my approach to identifying and selecting interviewees 
varied. But for the most part, I sought to interview people with different 
levels of involvement—key actors as well as more casual participants or 
one-­time players. I also sought to interview people differently located 
in terms of age, gender, class, education, ethnicity, and sexuality. Most 
interviews were one-­time events, but some participants—particularly 
those playing key roles in the organizations I researched—were inter-
viewed on several occasions over a number of years. In this way, most 
clearly with the Toronto bathhouse, Summerhill School, and lets, I was 
able to develop an impression of the site or initiative as it evolved and 
changed over the course of a decade.
Different approaches to generating data have different strengths and 
weaknesses, and some of the approaches adopted reflected what was 
practically possible rather than necessarily preferred. I would have liked, 
for instance, to visit the Toronto bathhouse, but I was never able to fly 
to Canada to attend on the one or two occasions a year the bathhouse 
took place. At the same time, not having my own personal experience to 
place against the recollections of others perhaps had some benefits (or at 

Introduction    17
least shaped the research process) in that I listened in a different way to 
stories told, unable to select between them according to my own percep-
tion of how the bathhouse functioned. Observation of organizations as a 
researcher is clearly partial; not everything is on view, and perceptions 
of places can be unduly influenced by the conditions dominating one’s 
visits. At the same time, interviews are not any more transparent. I was 
acutely aware of this during bathhouse interviews, since those volunteer-
ing to talk were predominantly participants who had had a good time. 
Few people told me stories of disastrous or even difficult experiences, 
whether their own or those of others attending that they knew. Thus I 
am conscious that my narrative is based on the stories of those who en-
joyed themselves or who were stimulated by the event, as it is also based 
on the choices interviewees made about what to relate to an outsider, 
choices which, perhaps inevitably, focused on interesting moments or 
episodes. Whether these stories exaggerated the sexual buzz, tension, 
and experimentation of the bathhouse is hard to gauge. A few women 
told me stories of disappointment, how the sexual excitement they had 
anticipated and hoped for never arose; some interviewees described an 
erotic fading away over the course of the bathhouse’s life span. But for 
the most part, different people’s narratives coalesced around an image of 
a sensual, erotically charged, sexually experimental space.
The political choices involved in responding to interview questions 
shaped interviewee accounts from other sites also, and the promotional 
work of bathhouse participants was evident elsewhere—hardly sur-
prising given that I, as an outsider, was interviewing people involved in 
often controversial places. Summerhill children were striking in their 
advocacy and desire to protect their school from unnecessary exposure 
and critique. Officials working in the field of equality governance, if for 
somewhat different reasons, were also guarded, or at least careful in the 
ways they discussed organizational practice. If interviewees were un-
surprisingly protective of their site—apart from the occasional critic—
documents were equally so, particularly those produced by the official 
bodies that equality governance brought forth.22 Media stories, mainly 
drawn on in my public nudism chapter, may have revealed different 
agenda but certainly were far from transparent in their often sensation-
alistic accounts of “improperly” naked happenings.
In using different data sources, I have sought to create accounts that 
resonate with participants’ experiences and perceptions. At the same 

18    Introduction
time, my focus on concepts—how they were actualized and the dis-
crepancies between actualization and imagining among participants 
and outsiders—means this book is not primarily an “insider” account, 
in the sense of focusing on what concepts meant to utopian members. 
Rather it offers one visitor’s interpretation, anchored in the stimula-
tion and experience that comes from entering, attending to, and think-
ing about places and practices beyond one’s own domain, from being 
conditionally and temporarily welcomed and then leaving. In this way 
the conceptual lines followed are ones that cross and recross different 
spaces and practices. They are lines that move between external imagin-
ings (mainstream and dissident), the conceptual imaginings of site par-
ticipants as these were communicated through texts, speech, and other 
kinds of conscious enactment, and the ways concepts were practically 
manifested: how care and property, for instance, were done, as well as 
talked about. Exploring these conceptual lines, which are also in a sense 
my own lines, is not intended as a solipsistic endeavor.23 Nor is it my 
claim that these lines are better or truer than those generated by others. 
Oriented to a politics of social transformation and to the active place of 
everyday utopias within such a project, these lines offer one set of con-
ceptual reflections crafted through a particular intellectual and practical 
history grown from left politics, academic traditions of Marxism, femi-
nism, and poststructuralism, the renewed interest in materiality and 
the senses, and the particular interdisciplinary inflections of sociolegal 
studies, sociopolitical analysis, normative theory, and utopian scholar-
ship. Other mediations, academic or otherwise, would undoubtedly pro-
duce other conceptual lines, and it is the relationship with these other 
lines, as well as the value of encouraging interaction across them (rather 
than their forced convergence or silo-­ization), that drives this book.24
Everyday utopias are places from which to think and about which to 
think. Yet one thing to emphasize, in the light of the chapters that fol-
low, is that the attitude adopted by this book for the most part side-­steps 
normative critique. Perhaps surprisingly, given the growing interest in 
equivocal, critical, and reflexive utopias (Levitas 2013; Moylan 1986), 
this book works from the premise that the sites explored have some-
thing progressive to offer and, for the most part, it does not interrogate 
this premise by critically assessing or pulling apart the aspirations or 
projects of the sites and activities discussed. Certainly none of the sites 

Introduction    19
claimed to be perfect or, for that matter, to be utopias, and I do not wish 
to hold them up to, or evaluate their departure from, a standard they 
never sought or promised. The problem of academic research adopting 
such a perfectionist orientation was clearly and challengingly spelled out 
in my very first interview with a lets activist in 2001. Deeply frustrated 
with academic interest in lets at that time, he remarked that academics 
got drawn excitedly to lets politics and promise, but having conducted 
their research—having exploited the energies and taken advantage of 
the time of lets activists—they then reverted to being academics and 
proceeded to intellectually dismantle the sites studied. Whether this is a 
fair comment about lets research I am not sure; however, the gist of his 
annoyance returned to me many times over the decade as I found my-
self more critically contemplating the politics and values of various sites.
My decision to decenter normative critique does not only come, how-
ever, from a disinclination to hold the sites up to an excessively high, 
impossible, and perhaps fundamentally undesirable moral standard. It 
is also a response to their varied and hybrid political ideologies. The six 
everyday utopias I discuss span a variety of politics, from social demo-
cratic to queer feminist, egalitarian, communitarian, localist, and liber-
tarian. Thus it would be too simple to say that the sites speak to my own 
political commitments and values. In different ways, for different sites, 
moments of connection and common ground sit alongside moments 
of intense unease. For while these sites reveal commitments to certain 
kinds of democracy, freedom, and equality, they also display in differ-
ent ways relations of hierarchy, exclusion, repression, and inequality. 
These dimensions are important to understanding the sites as multi-
dimensional networked practices, complexly entwined with the wider 
world of which they are part. However, because the book’s aim is to de-
velop lines of conceptualizing anchored in the progressive possibilities 
of the practices addressed, it is this which I center. Certainly I have not 
avoided critique altogether. Chapter 3 does address more critically the 
kind of touch equality governance procures; chapter 4 comments on the 
troubled relationship between nudism and other equality politics; and 
in chapter 6 I explore why lets failed to pull off their project of com-
munity labor (an examination that despite its constructive intentions 
may fall within the scope of my early interviewee’s objections). But even 
as this book does address the challenges facing particular sites and the 

20    Introduction
problems that proximity to mainstream social practices can generate, for 
the most part I have steered away from assessing the dreams and values 
around which these sites were organized.
I want to close this chapter by briefly setting out the main themes of the 
rest of the book. Chapter 2 takes up the question of a utopian conceptual 
attitude. For, if we want to understand the conceptual contribution of 
everyday utopias to a transformative politics, we need a framework that 
is attentive to the creativity, imagination, hopefulness, and challenges 
that innovative conceptual developments face. We also need a frame-
work that is attentive to practice and materiality. Against a conventional 
approach to concepts, which treats concepts as ideas that explicitly or 
implicitly relate to mainstream life and dominant social relations, the 
chapter explores what it would mean to approach concepts as the oscil-
lating movement between imagining and actualization, a movement that 
can create new conceptual lines through (and from) everyday utopian 
spaces. In the six chapters that follow, I go on to explore different di-
mensions of this framework, working through six different site-­concept 
couplings. Loosely divided into two clusters, the first cluster, chapters 3 
to 5, focuses on the questions and challenges arising from progressive 
scholarship’s interest in equality, care, ethics, and pleasure.
Chapter 3 addresses the everyday utopia of “casting equality,” a gov-
ernmental project intent on advancing social equality through statu-
tory and bureaucratic means. In the light of a wider literature that has 
very profitably drawn on the senses, and especially sight, to understand 
state governance, this chapter takes touch as its lens in order to explore 
the forms of touch that casting equality expressly imagines and deploys. 
Touch is a way of governing and of understanding governance, but what 
are the limits of touch as a social democratic means of rule in neolib-
eral times? Can we imagine (and perhaps even find) more radical forms 
of governmental touch—of a state, for instance, that feels and feels its 
way? Yet imagining a more sensitive form of governmental touch im-
mediately comes up against the problematic of the state. Critical scholar-
ship has long been wary of the proximity and intrusion that a touching-­
feeling state might engender, but does this mean states should be kept 
at a distance? Adopting a utopian attitude, can states touch differently? 
Building on the conceptual framework established in chapter 2, I seek to 

Introduction    21
create a conceptual line between the state that is actualized in equality 
governance and progressive modes of state reimagining in order to ex-
plore the political strategies that this might make available for advancing 
different kinds of state contact and proximity.
The construction of new possibilities as a result of reframing how 
concepts are understood provides a central axis for chapter 4. While 
chapter 3 takes its primary concept, touch, as a relatively stable lens 
through which to look in order to see the state, in chapter 4 the analyti-
cal relationship is reversed. Here the main concept, equality, is what is 
in flux, animated and shaped by the social terrain through which it is ex-
plored. This chapter also continues with the theme of equality explored 
in chapter 3. However, instead of approaching equality as an elaborately 
expressed governmental program, equality here takes shape as a set of 
normative principles within the far less organized, grassroots terrain of 
public nudism. At the heart of this chapter is the question of presence. 
How can equality exist in a context where it is neither uttered nor so-
cially operational (given the extensive discrimination nudists and nud-
ism face)? Moreover, even if we can find equality present, what form 
can it take given the conservative norms that also structure its realiza-
tion? Journeying through different manifestations of public nudism 
(from public spheres to public appearances) and different conceptions 
of equality (from equal allocation of spaces to the insignificance of dif-
ferences), this chapter explores how public nudism expresses equality as 
both a presupposition and as potential. Focusing on what equality can 
come to mean, the chapter explores how practices, such as public nud-
ism, can open up ways of thinking about concepts beyond the limits of 
their past and present form.
Public nudism demonstrates how bodily sensation, pleasure, and 
freedom can intersect the orderly calculating orientation of equality. 
This intersection is explored further in chapter 5, which addresses the 
relationship between feminist care ethics and a women’s sexual bath-
house. While the bathhouse, as a queer feminist space, manifests cer-
tain accepted elements of ethical care, it also reveals the limitations 
and risks endemic to the exercise of importing normative conceptual 
frameworks from other, more mainstream contexts. Approaching ethi-
cal care through the bathhouse (rather than imposing care ethics on the 
bathhouse) foregrounds other ways of imagining both care and ethics, 
grounded in attentiveness, sensation, and the multiple ways in which 

22    Introduction
dilemmas about what to do are experienced and perceived. Yet explor-
ing how a women’s bathhouse generates other conceptual lines when it 
comes to care and ethics is not intended to displace feminist care ethics. 
Rather it gestures to the importance of approaching concepts in ways 
that avoid the monolithic investments of much normative conceptual-
izing.
Chapters 3 to 5 focus on concepts that critical and progressive com-
mentators have tended to avow (namely equality, care, and touch). Chap-
ters 6 through 8, by contrast, turn to concepts (trading, property, and 
markets) about which the left has conventionally been more ambiva-
lent. Drawing on contemporary scholarship within economic sociology 
and sociolegal studies, these three chapters address the challenges in-
volved in reimagining and reactualizing relations of exchange, attach-
ment, and selection. Chapter 6 centers on the effort and struggle to put 
new, community-­based forms of trade into effect. Specifically, it focuses 
on the difficulties lets encountered in attempting to establish a virtu-
ous cycle in which economic transactions and community development 
would build and augment each other. The chapter asks why this failed 
to happen. Why was such a powerful and sustained imagining unable 
to be put into effect, or put into effect in ways so different from what 
was sought? While several explanations can be identified, this discussion 
focuses on time—not just in its insufficiency but in the presence and 
force of incompatible temporalities, namely of labor time and commu-
nity time. Exploring why these were unable to cohere, the chapter con-
siders the pressure exerted by three material factors: the limits of lets 
design, the individualization of responsibility, and the difficulties arising 
from lets’ proximity to mainstream labor markets.
Community labor proved a concept that, in the case of lets, could 
not move from imagining to actualization, at least not in ways governed 
by the logic of resemblance; chapter 7 explores the movement in reverse. 
It addresses how actualization can provide an impetus to new forms of 
imagining when established imaginings prove unable to make sense of 
the innovative practices they are supposed to represent. As with other 
forms of movement between imagining and actualization, this process 
requires mediators (academics, community members, activists, policy-
makers) working through the relationship between what is practiced 
and what is elsewhere imagined to create new conceptual lines. Drawing 
on community perceptions and academic scholarship on ownership, this 

Introduction    23
chapter pursues a way of thinking about property, anchored in the work 
property performs at Summerhill School. Specifically it explores how 
property, organized around an axis of belonging (and not just belong-
ings), worked to sustain a variegated residential community in which 
public, intimate, and boundary-­crossing practices could comfortably co-
exist.
Chapter 8 also focuses on the work a particular concept can do. But 
here, rather than taking a single conceptual line, as with property in 
chapter 7, it explores how two concepts can simultaneously be actual-
ized in multiple ways, with very different implications for a transfor-
mative politics. My focus is Speakers’ Corner as a place of market play. 
Through the mediating work of four cultural formations—carnival, tast-
ing, contact zones, and edgework (or risky play)—the chapter explores 
how the articulation of market play provides a tool for leveraging and 
for holding an audience; works to redefine markets as pleasurable, ex-
ploratory, nontrading spaces; and provides a playful structure through 
which neoliberal market relations can be parodied and critiqued. Thus 
this chapter works with the conceptual plasticity of the marketplace to 
supplement critiques of market capitalism. Its aim is not to recuperate 
the market as a beneficial and delightful sensory structure, but to ex-
plore what can be gained and learned from the variegated conceptual 
lines a space such as Speakers’ Corner opens up.
Over the course of these six case studies, this book advances in two 
directions (which, given the nature of utopian epistemology, is often the 
same direction): toward a utopian understanding of concepts (as con-
cepts), on the one hand, and toward the conceptual pathways and open-
ings that might contribute to a transformative politics, on the other. I 
indicated earlier that this book approaches such a politics as oriented to 
more egalitarian, freer, and democratic ways of living. But how do the 
conceptual pathways of everyday utopias in fact contribute to this? In 
the final chapter, I turn to this question of politics and change. While 
utopian thinking conventionally places change in some future time, con-
temporary theoretical and political developments have cast doubt on 
change’s arrow. In this last chapter, then, I consider the transformative 
temporality of everyday utopias’ conceptual lives and consider the extent 
to which change is past or present rather than to come.

CHAPTER 2
Toward a Utopian Conceptual Attitude
If utopia is . . . philosophically, a method rather than a state, it cannot be 
realized or not realized—it can only be applied.
Suvin 1979: 52
The conceptual lines of everyday utopias contribute to a transfor-
mative politics, but what does this mean, and how does it happen? 
In this book I explore this relationship and its promise from differ-
ent angles working through a series of sites and concepts. Since the 
book takes a somewhat idiosyncratic approach to particular con-
cepts as well as to the notion of the concept in general, this chapter 
establishes some core building blocks, explaining what I mean by 
concepts, exploring their dynamic character, where we find them, 
what they look like, and what it is that concepts actually do.
To develop a way of approaching everyday utopias’ conceptual 
life and promise that may also prove useful for other conceptual 
projects, I turn to utopian studies.1 This turn has a necessarily 
improvised quality since, while utopian studies offers a rich and 
vibrant body of scholarship, it has not, for the most part, developed 
a distinctive conceptual framework. Nevertheless, as I explore in 
more detail below, its methods, debates, and general orientation 
contribute rich intellectual resources for thinking about concepts 
in ways especially attuned to the politics of what concepts do, as 
well as how they manifest themselves and how they change.
A key feature of contemporary utopian studies is its focus on 
the work that the utopian performs (Anderson 2006: 694). While

Utopian Conceptual Attitude    25
this has a representational dimension, the utopian is not simply a depic-
tion of another kind of place, but a process or challenge—a mode of striv-
ing toward something else that is better—in which questions of imagina-
tion, creativity, and processes of change are deeply entwined (e.g., Dolan 
2005). Certainly utopian studies is not the only field concerned with 
change, nor is it the only field to address the political work of concepts. 
However, what is distinctive and of pivotal importance for my purposes 
is utopia’s focus on actualization, the positive example or instantiation 
that demonstrates what could be as well as what is. To say that utopia 
emphasizes manifestation may seem, in some respects, counterintuitive, 
for utopia in the popular imagination is deeply entangled with notions of 
the imagined, impossibly perfect place. However, as discussed in chap-
ter 1, contemporary utopian studies has moved some distance away from 
the idea of static perfection to emphasize process, conflict, temporality, 
and choice. Moreover, while older conceptions of the utopian may be 
turned to the challenge of perfection, they still rely on the work of enact-
ment, whether imagined or socially trialed. And it is in this narrated or 
practiced performance of other ways of living that much of the concep-
tual traction explored in this book can be found.
The main part of this chapter establishes the conceptual framework, 
developed in more detail through the course of the book. At the heart of 
this framework is the work of everyday utopias as “minor-­stream” spaces, 
generating concepts not simply through what participants think and be-
lieve but also through what they collectively do. This materialist con-
ceptual framework, with its emphasis on practice and manifestation, as 
well as imagining, raises some core epistemological questions: How can 
concepts incorporate the material dimensions of practice? Why is this 
important for thinking about concepts’ political promise? How do con-
cepts evolve and change? What contribution to transformative change 
can concepts actually make? I begin by considering some very different 
conceptual perspectives to those explored in the course of this book. 
These far more common approaches to conceptualizing treat concepts 
as ideas, drawn from mainstream practice, and attuned to the escalating 
problems of the world in which we live. My argument is not that these 
approaches are wrong, nor are they wholly unhelpful. However, they 
have limitations, particularly when it comes to thinking about concepts 
in new ways and to understanding the conceptual value of spaces that 
are innovative and unusual.

26    Chapter 2
Approaching Concepts
Whether scholarship is radical, conservative, or liberal, a pervasive as-
sumption is that concepts are ideational—elements or building blocks 
in the world of thought. Peter Hallward (2006: 141) remarks, “A con-
cept renders a slice of chaos available for thought.” Concepts help us 
to understand and communicate about the world, producing forms of 
knowledge with stabilizing or, conversely, destabilizing effects. Concepts 
may be influenced by social practice and material conditions (particu-
larly when they seek to represent what is or might be), but concepts are 
not composed of the social world they refract or seek to alter. Nicholas 
Gane (2009: 87), discussing Deleuze and Guattari, describes concepts as 
“devices that draw on the complexities of the empirical world in order to 
open our theoretical imagination to things as they might be.”2
The critical geographer Doreen Massey (2005) takes a similar ap-
proach in her thought-­provoking book For Space. An overriding aim of 
the book is to provide a way of conceptualizing space that foregrounds 
social diversity and heterogeneity, recognizing space’s generative and 
unpredictable capacity—that it is not all given and knowable from the 
outset. So Massey rejects conceptions of space that, in counterposing 
space and time, treat the former, but not the latter, as fixed and static. 
Massey’s suggestions of how we might rethink space are interesting and 
fruitful. However, when approaching space as a concept, she reverts to a 
more conventional approach that places concepts clearly and exclusively 
within the realm of thought. Massey writes, “I hope . . . to liberate ‘space’ 
from some chains of meaning . . . in order to set it into other chains . . . 
where it can have a new and more productive life” (19).3 What concepts 
mean, what they can signify, even their form is treated as flexible and 
evolving. However, their stable, permanent dwelling as ideas rather than 
as (or as including) material practices remains settled and uncontested.
Locating concepts within the realm of thought might seem to make a 
level of flexibility, creativity, and choice possible as concepts are able to 
develop freely in an infinite number of differently imagined directions. 
Conceptual scholarship, however, is usually far more bounded, develop-
ing through the historically extended interplay of intellectual engage-
ment and debate. This can be seen in academic work on many of the 
concepts explored in this book, including touch, the state, equality, and 

Utopian Conceptual Attitude    27
property. Writers may vary in the extent to which their understanding 
of these terms draws explicitly from specific, historically situated places. 
Nevertheless the reliance that textual approaches place on a concept’s 
intellectual ancestry or provenance structures and limits what particu-
lar concepts can mean. Conceptual histories become histories of elite 
or scholarly usage.4 As the historian Dipesh Chakrabarty remarked, 
“The problem with these [European thought] universals is this: they, as 
thought concepts, come packaged as though they have transcended the 
particular histories in which they were born. But being pieces of prose 
and language, they carry intimations of histories of belonging, which are 
not everybody’s history” (quoted in Dube 2002: 865).5
Idealist forms of academic conceptualizing have a tendency to drag 
the social histories and naturalized assumptions of their textual sources 
(or protagonists) around with them. But even conceptual thinking that 
does not rely on the history of ideas often draws in implicit and unre-
marked ways from the dominant social practices and common senses 
that surround it. The power of dominant social practices to structure 
what concepts mean, and the limits this can place on conceptual devel-
opment, particularly in relation to nondominant sites and ways of doing 
things, can be seen in the case of legal pluralism. While legal pluralists 
argue that legal orders in a given social domain are multiple, there never-
theless remains a powerful tendency to draw the paradigm of law (what 
law actually means so one can know when it is present) from state law. 
Tamanaha (1993: 201) comments, “Law’s conceptual connection to the 
state cannot be severed . . . [T]he search for the institutional aspect of 
norm formulation or enforcement is nothing other than a smuggled ref-
erence to the state bureaucratic legal apparatus . . . [T]he state law model 
inescapably provides the kernel of the concept of non-­state ‘law.’” Trying 
to conceive of law differently is clearly challenging; as I explore below, 
counterintuitive ways of imagining concepts, including law, face prob-
lems of resonance and impact when nobody recognizes the way they 
are framed. Legal pluralists, like others, are drawn to modes of juridi-
cal understanding that have salience, and if constituencies in the global 
North understand community norms, rules, and adjudicative processes 
in ways that draw on imaginings of state law (see chapter 7), it may seem 
foolish to ignore this. On the other hand, if scholars remain embedded 
within dominant state-­generated notions of what law is like, they may 

28    Chapter 2
fail to recognize other, law-­like practices, particularly when these also 
fall outside of community members’ own law-­talk. But then if nobody 
understands such practices as law-­like, what value is there in addressing 
them as such? The challenge of thinking about concepts in ways that di-
verge from both local and mainstream forms of concept-­talk, and what 
gets opened up as a result for a transformative politics, is a recurring 
theme of this book.
Concepts can be understood in ways that draw implicitly on main-
stream practice, but this conceptual relationship to the mainstream—to 
what is dominant, normal, or pervasive—can also acquire a more ex-
plicit cast as concepts are deliberately drawn from prevailing practice in 
service of a particular project. Within liberal scholarship, this has often 
functioned as a way of legitimating and entrenching both the concepts 
and the status quo—as concepts rationalize and render explicable, natu-
ral, and necessary a set of social arrangements that in turn consolidate, 
validate, and justify the concepts. In his work on justice, the liberal po-
litical philosopher John Rawls (1996) explicitly adopts this approach. Ab-
stracting from prevailing contemporary depictions, or what he describes 
as “political traditions,” Rawls articulates ideals that, in his view, can 
generate “overlapping consensus.” He writes, “We collect such settled 
convictions . . . and try to organize the basic ideas and principles implicit 
in these convictions” (8). “Justice as fairness” is the “best approximation 
. . . and constitute[s] the most appropriate basis for the institutions of 
a democratic society” (xvii). In other words, Rawls suggests, within lib-
eral nation-­states, the normative concepts that we have derive in prac-
tical ways from the societies in which we live. By broadly reflecting and 
affirming the way things are, such concepts work to guide but also to 
maintain the status quo through time.
The limits of this approach for a transformative politics—indeed the 
resistance this approach places on a transformative politics—are readily 
apparent. Locating legitimacy in a “reasonable” consensus, other ways 
of understanding justice—whether they emerge from minority claims 
or as potential lines drawn from progressive minority practice—are dis-
avowed (to the extent they are indeed noticed, which frequently they 
are not). Yet developing normative concepts in relation to mainstream 
or dominant practice is not the sole domain of liberal scholarship. Other 
scholars have also sought to develop normative or idealized concepts by 

Utopian Conceptual Attitude    29
reworking what seems like their common, pervasive usage. While this 
can take the form of extraction—abstracting concepts from contexts in 
ways intended to clean them of local “imperfections”—it can also work 
in Derridean-­inspired ways through the (seemingly impossible but nec-
essary) relationship between concepts’ everyday practical and condi-
tional usage and their infinite, unconditional, unknowable form (e.g., 
Patton 2010: 46–51; Dikeç 2002).6 Recognizing concepts’ capacity to 
extend beyond the norms governing mainstream practice makes it pos-
sible to consider normative practices, such as gifting or care, in ways 
attuned to these concepts’ more idealized form; thus everyday utopias 
might be understood as instantiating what is generally understood as 
care or democracy, but in more desirable or “purer” ways. Alternatively, 
everyday utopias might be seen as working with and through the re-
lationship between a concept’s conditional and unconditional form, but 
doing so in a different key, where the conditional form in particular has 
been reframed.
Yet one challenge for approaches that seek to fashion more “perfect” 
versions of normative concepts is the question of emergence: namely, 
from where do such perfect conceptions arise? Of course they may be 
driven less by (the problems besetting) actual material practice than by 
genealogical or other epistemological strategies, but to the extent that 
contemporary social relations provide a ground, however shadowy, for 
conceptualizing, the question remains: How do mainstream relations 
ground what ought to be? For even if normative concepts are explicitly 
framed as reversals or purer forms of what exists, they remain depen-
dent (for their existence, form, and shape) on mainstream conceptual 
usage and the mainstream social relations underpinning them. Trying to 
build progressive normative concepts out of dominant social practices 
remains mired in the effects such practices have on the concepts gener-
ated—a stuckness that may prove as hard to identify as it is to remove. 
If material life cannot be known fully or directly, its effects on (and pres-
ence within) concepts may be equally impenetrable. “Concepts’ . . . gen-
eration and use are conditioned by the social world in which humans 
think and employ them. . . . As long as the social world which governs 
the generation and use of concepts is opaque, concepts do not immedi-
ately disclose their social content to the subjects that employ them” 
(Benzer 2011: 578–79).

30    Chapter 2
The difficulty of drawing radical, normative concepts from main-
stream social life, a difficulty not eliminated by simply reversing main-
stream norms in the creation of such concepts, has undoubtedly con-
tributed to critical scholarship’s preference for analyzing instead “the 
contradictory, antagonistic ‘real relations’” (Hall 2003: 140) alongside 
the cultural forms through which such relations are played out (see also 
Hennessy 2000), forms that are variously read as distorting, mystify-
ing, generative, and necessarily interpretive (since we cannot get beyond 
thought). As a result, critical scholars have tended to refrain from study-
ing small-­scale progressive social sites. Such sites appear to be trivial, 
messy distractions, taking attention away from the major social relations 
structuring the world. Alternatively, they are seen as minor dependent 
places wherein the problems besetting mainstream social formations 
(and their concepts) are merely replicated and reproduced, despite par-
ticipants’ claims to the contrary. Yet, focusing exclusively on the power 
of mainstream life and dominant social relations to structure the con-
ceptual imaginary—approaching this as the only game in town—is con-
ceptually impoverishing. It neglects the possibilities posed by a utopian 
approach rooted in the practices, flows, desires, and projects of nonmain-
stream places.
The failure to consider such utopian spaces comes not only from criti-
cal conceptual scholarship’s tendency to focus on hegemonic relations 
and practices. It comes also from the distinctive register in which work 
attuned to the future is largely oriented, with its focus on the grim ten-
dencies of a worsening present.7 Ulrich Beck remarks, in discussion with 
Roy Boyne (2001: 54), “Today a normative orientation to the future is ex-
pressed in terms of what needs to be avoided.”
Critical work on neoliberalism characteristically evidences this ap-
proach. It focuses on what neoliberalism is (and is becoming), as it un-
folds a vision of the world seen, unhappily, as taking shape. While not all 
dystopic accounts and analyses focus on the conceptual, concepts and 
neologisms are frequently deployed to encapsulate a broader range of 
anticipated and imagined processes and shifts, from Agamben’s (1998: 
176) work on the camp as “the new biopolitical nomos of the planet” 
to Giroux’s (2008) “biopolitics of disposability,” Mbembe’s (2003) con-
cept of necropolitics, and Bauman’s (2003a) “liquid love,” where humans 
are treated “as objects of consumption and . . . judge[d] . . . after the 
pattern of consumer objects by the volume of pleasure they are likely 

Utopian Conceptual Attitude    31
to offer” (75), subsequently being disposed of “to make room for other 
goods” (49).8
Identifying dystopia through the condensed form of the concept may 
be enacted neutrally, but it is often carried out in warning, its implicit 
or explicit imperative being that something needs to be done before it is 
too late.9 For progressive and critical scholars, the portrayal of dystopia 
is an important part of the intellectual-­political project, grounded in the 
academic capacity to identify trends and to foresee the force of present 
practice as it thrusts itself, with huge damage, into the time fast upon us 
(e.g., Bhavnani and Foran 2008).10 While both utopia and dystopia are 
seen as mirrors of each other in the sense of deploying polarized images 
of what could be, as conceptual lines they function somewhat differently. 
Utopia conventionally depends on stimulating desire and hope in order 
to inspire and motivate change. Dystopias, by contrast, aim to stimulate 
action in order to resist or halt what is feared to be emerging. Dystopic 
narratives assume change, that the world is not a static or stable place 
but moving toward, indeed in some cases already enacting, its own ruin. 
Utopian discourse, by contrast, often assumes the reverse, namely that 
people need to be jolted out of passive acquiescence through the educa-
tion of desire and the creation of belief that it is possible to destabilize 
and transform what appears an overly secure status quo. Gibson-­Graham 
(2006a: xii) offer a similar rationale for their project of discursively chal-
lenging capitalism’s perceived hegemony: “Our intervention has been 
to propose a language of the diverse economy as an exploratory prac-
tice of thinking economy differently in order to perform different econo-
mies. . . . Our hope is to disarm and dislocate the naturalized dominance 
of the capitalist economy and make a space for new economic becom-
ings—ones that we will need to work to produce.”
Toward a Utopian Conceptual Attitude
Making progressive developments visible is an important aspect of mod-
eling and inspiring change. This book argues that such visibility should 
be joined to new kinds of conceptual thinking, something that remains 
insufficiently accomplished when concepts are approached as ideas 
drawn from and in relation to mainstream life and governance and ori-
ented toward sustaining the status quo or preventing impending forms 
of harm. But what kinds of conceptual understandings and openings are 
made available by everyday utopias? And how should we approach them? 

32    Chapter 2
I have suggested that everyday utopias highlight the need for a different 
kind of conceptual framework, one that foregrounds material practice 
and change. In the rest of this chapter, I suggest what this might entail.
Epistemology from the Margins
In recent years various frameworks have sought to counter the idealist 
orientation and mainstream focus of normative political philosophy and 
the observational axis of the elite subject. Feminist standpoint perspec-
tives and other forms of critical reading provide relational approaches to 
epistemology and power that foreground the place from where analysis 
is done,11 disavowing the possibility of objective or universal understand-
ings, as they simultaneously place in question the prevailing truth-­claims 
of the powerful (e.g., Alcoff and Potter 1993; Harding 2004; Hartsock 
1997). While feminist standpoint theory has been intensively critiqued, 
what is important about these epistemologies from the margins, for my 
purposes, is their emphasis on reading social life through and from non-
dominant experiences and forms: for instance, understanding the body 
through corporeal forms that are not hegemonic but female, disabled, 
and queer (or as viruses, transplants, or surgery); understanding prop-
erty not through private ownership but through squatting, common or 
public lands.12 Epistemologies of the margins are not simply intended as 
perspectives from which to critique mainstream, hegemonic forms; they 
also open up possibilities for exploring what other kinds of forms could 
be like. This double move recognizes the relational character of particu-
lar experiences and social locations. What it is to live as a woman or have 
a woman’s body is structured by gender relations and the production of 
masculinity (as masculinity is also structured by other gendered forms), 
but subordinate locations or relations are not simply or only that. They 
also develop forms of experience, living, and knowing that go beyond 
mirroring or countering the status quo to traverse it at odd and complex 
angles. bell hooks (1991: 149–150) similarly remarks, “Marginality [is] 
much more than a site of deprivation. . . . It is also the site of radical pos-
sibility . . . for the production of a counter-­hegemonic discourse that is 
not just found in words but in habits of being and the way one lives. . . . 
It offers . . . the possibility of radical perspective from which to see and 
create, to imagine alternatives, new worlds.”
Utopian frameworks reveal a comparable dual aspect. On the one 
hand, utopian narratives, practices, and places are developed in critique 

Utopian Conceptual Attitude    33
of and opposition to prevailing taken-­for-­granted ways of doing things—
offering a place from which to trouble assumptions of the present. But 
the world-­building dimension of utopia means that locally generated 
concepts cannot be reduced solely to their function of opposing the 
status quo. Utopian concepts do not derive simply and only from the 
world they reject; they are also forged with some degree of autonomy 
through their anchorage in the utopian world that is grown.
I mentioned at the start of this chapter that utopian studies, for the 
most part, has not developed a thoroughgoing account of the conceptual, 
even as concepts are central to its work. Utopian studies is interested in 
how utopian texts (and to a lesser degree utopian practices) rethink con-
cepts, such as gender, relationships, community, possessions, and work, 
in terms of what they mean and how they are practiced. However, while 
it has circled around the problem of the conceptual, utopian studies has 
largely not offered an explicitly new way of thinking about concepts as 
concepts.13 This book aims to contribute to this project, drawing on uto-
pian studies methods and thinking in order to consider what concepts 
mean, how they work, and where they might be found in a way that is 
oriented to the conceptual contribution of everyday utopias to a trans-
formative politics.
But how are we to build a conceptual framework adequate to the task? 
Starting with a commitment to another better way of living, utopian per-
spectives emphasize the importance of “society imagined otherwise, 
rather than merely society imagined” (Levitas 2005: 14; Sargisson 2012). 
While utopian scholarship, as I have said, does not belabor the concep-
tual character of normative terms, reimagining the practices and sys-
tems to which such terms gesture is a central task. Fleshing out norma-
tive terms, such as democracy and equality, by describing key features of 
the utopian landscape provides a degree of political (and so conceptual) 
specificity and closure; it is not change for its own sake that is desired 
and sought, but particular kinds of change. At the same time, developing 
concepts by means of establishing landscapes emphasizes the importance 
of location and happening. Innovations may not be practically realized, 
but even in storytelling or other art forms utopian perspectives depend 
upon some kind of (imagined) actualization (what Jameson [1977: 11] 
refers to as a “pre-­conceptual thinking-­in-­images”).14
In this way utopias are fundamentally different from campaigns, argu-
ments, or slogans that declare the change they wish to see. With their 

34    Chapter 2
experiments and innovations in living (including in imagined experi-
ments), utopias emphasize the importance of transformed social exis-
tence to thinking differently. As a consequence, utopian texts and meth-
ods also center ontological or human change. It is not simply about the 
creation of worlds or ways of living that will better meet people’s inter-
ests as they currently are. Utopia is also centrally concerned with those 
changing interests, desires, identifications, and forms of embodiment 
that happen as people (and other forms of life) experience other ways 
of living (Levitas 2013). This process is a dynamic one; while older uto-
pian currents tended to focus on timeless spaces, more recent utopias 
are oriented toward change and contradiction, toward human impulse 
and strategies, and toward action rather than system design (Moylan 
1986: 49).
Out of these primary commitments to experimenting, imagining, and 
pursuing change come a series of epistemological elements, creative, af-
fective, and social, which together make up what we might call, follow-
ing Foucault, a utopian “attitude.” Foucault (1984: 39) writes, “I mean a 
mode of relating to contemporary reality . . . in the end, a way of think-
ing and feeling; a way, too, of acting and behaving that at one and the 
same time marks a relation of belonging and presents itself as a task.” 
Contemporary utopian studies emphasizes the importance of invention, 
improvisation, and speculative futures; it lays stress on sensation, the 
ineffable, and feelings such as optimism, hope, and enchantment; and it 
relies on bridging concepts that link present practice to a different and 
transformed future, from Bloch’s “anticipatory illumination,” Novum, 
“docta spes,” and the “not yet” to more widely used notions such as pre-
figuration, becoming, potential, and limits.15 Taken together, these ele-
ments provide materials for constructing a utopian approach that seeks 
to take concepts beyond their already established existence, to the cre-
ation and recognition of new conceptual lines. In the rest of the chap-
ter I explore what it means to create conceptual lines, focusing on the 
relationship between actualization and imagining. For if the dynamic 
character of concepts depends on the disjuncture between how they are 
imagined and how they are manifested, as chapter 1 suggests, what does 
this disjuncture entail? In what ways can particular concepts be actu-
alized but not imagined, imagined but not actualized, or actualized in 
ways that diverge from their expressed imagining?

Utopian Conceptual Attitude    35
Between Actualization and Imagining
Imagining emphasizes the dimension of fantasy, of contemplation and 
abstraction, of drawing from a wide range of different contexts and 
usages to understand (but also to visualize, sense, or form) what has 
been, what is, and what could be. As such, imagining constitutes a main-
stay of utopian writing and practice (Jacoby 2005: 22; see also Moylan 
1986). It is also a quotidian aspect of the way all of us conceptualize, 
moving between different contexts to imagine what a term might mean; 
feeling or thinking about concepts in relation to others that partner, 
complicate, or oppose it. As such, the conceptual imagination remains 
on the move. Linda Zerilli (2005: 181) writes, “Every extension of a politi-
cal concept always involves an imaginative opening up of the world that 
allows us to see and articulate relations between things that have none 
(in any necessary, logical sense). . . . Political relations are always exter-
nal to their terms: they involve not so much the ability to subsume par-
ticulars under concepts, but an imaginative element, the ability to see or 
to forge new connections.” Such imagining is always partial, improvised, 
and unfinished; a key premise of contemporary utopian studies in its ap-
proach to imagining other worlds, provisionality applies to imagining 
concepts as well.
Actualization, by contrast, emphasizes the dimension of presence or 
manifestation, as concepts inhere within systems, structures, and other 
material arrangements—although the focus of this book is specifically 
on concepts’ presence in (and as) social practices.16 While some con-
cepts take a tangible form and others an intangible one, in many cases 
presence involves a mixture of the two, especially for complexly mani-
fested concepts, such as the state (see chapter 3). Yet particular concepts 
are not actualized in isolation. Just as imagining concepts depends on 
other linked terms—those that constitute the concept and place, dif-
ferentiate, and oppose it—actualization also depends on a web of social 
practices. This web is important, as later chapters explore, in what con-
cepts can do. It is also important in structuring and limiting how particu-
lar concepts can be reimagined.
Incorporating actualization into our understanding of concepts em-
phasizes the importance of materiality and practice; concepts are not ab-
stract generalities floating above the “real” world; they are not elements 

36    Chapter 2
in some kind of autonomous mental film through which a material life 
“below” becomes intelligible. Yet to say that concepts are actualized and 
mean something more than concepts, as dimensions of thought, are 
shaped and provoked by material conditions, or used by subjects in the 
course of their everyday life raises difficult questions. In particular, how 
can we get at the material life of concepts to explore the ways actualiza-
tion diverges from established thought.
The relationship (and accompanying tensions) between imagining 
and actualization becomes clearer with an example. If we take the con-
cept of utopia, we can think of it as embracing the different ways utopian 
worlds have been (narratively and socially) actualized and practiced—
from Marge Piercy’s (1976) Mattapoisett and Kim Stanley Robinson’s 
(1993) Mars, to nineteenth-­century American communities (Kanter 
1972), England’s garden city movement (Meacham 1999), and contem-
porary intentional communities in New Zealand (Sargisson and Sargent 
2004).17 At the same time, utopia is popularly imagined as an impossibly 
perfect, overly designed, atemporal place, where nothing changes. Actu-
alization and imagining, in this instance, identify quite different things, 
and there appears to be a disjuncture between them. Of course, this 
example may seem to oversimplify the problem since the actualized in-
stances are already identified (by their creator or by interpreters) as uto-
pian; thus it might seem as if the distinction here is really between dif-
ferent visions of utopia rather than between what is actualized and what 
is in fact imagined. At the same time, as in most cases, we enter the rela-
tionship between imagining and actualization in the middle, where what 
is manifested is already identified in ways that create a conceptual link 
with particular kinds of imagining (even as they may seem to diverge) 
and where what is imagined is shaped (in mirroring or inverted ways) by 
some kind of practice. Thus, we move between forms of imagining and 
actualization already in some relationship to each other.
A driving theme of this book is the movement between imagining 
and actualization. However, this should not be understood as meaning 
that concepts form coherent entities oscillating between the actual or 
material world, on the one hand, and the world of ideas and fantasy, on 
the other. Bracketing for the moment the notion that these are sepa-
rate worlds, we might see concepts as inhering rather in the movement 
itself. In other words, concepts are not things but processes. William 
Connolly’s (2011: 4) words, drawn from a different context, are useful 

Utopian Conceptual Attitude    37
here: “It is the reverberations back and forth . . . with each folding into 
the other and both surging . . . that make all the difference.”
Concepts keep moving, but what keeps them moving, what sustains 
the dynamic quality of conceptual “lines,” that embedded or reiterated 
movement between imagining and actualization? Utopian studies sug-
gests two distinct possibilities. The first is inherent in the concept of 
concepts. Since neither imagination nor material practice can ever ade-
quately capture or respond to the other, oscillation remains inevitable 
and ceaseless.18 This momentum is particularly apparent with norma-
tive concepts, which depend for their practical realization on a more 
idealized imagined version that is hailed, sometimes even pursued but 
never attained, as with Derrida’s conditional and unconditional concepts 
(1992a, 1992b; Patton 2010). While the more perfectly imagined version 
of concepts such as freedom, democracy, or justice appears impossible to 
realize, the fantasy of what it could mean and entail, as discussed earlier, 
pulls on what is actualized. At the same time, the reality of social prac-
tice in a particular context exerts a conditioning and constraining force 
on how concepts are imagined, even as normative concepts insistently 
trouble the pragmatic constraints of such practice.
The second way utopian studies approaches conceptual flux relates 
to the longing for and process of social transformation. In taking up a 
utopian conceptual attitude, the pressure that both imagining and actu-
alization can place on the conceptual lines forged is vital to thinking 
about change. Whether generated by new fantasies about how to live 
or practical experiments in living, the hopeful dimension of a utopian 
attitude yearns for these progressive shifts to drive change, bringing the 
rest of the conceptual line into line, as it were.19 Yet, as contemporary 
utopian scholarship has explored, the process of change is not straight-
forward (Garforth 2009). Operationalizing what is imagined can come 
up against resistance or blockages; and of course concepts may be ex-
pressly and deliberately imagined in ways that ensure or coexist with 
their nonmanifestation, as explored in relation to governments’ asser-
tion of a benign state touch in chapter 3. The disparagement of wish-
ful thinking within utopian studies speaks to those conceptualizations 
that seem doomed to remain at the fantastical level, thanks to a change 
agenda that fails to be adequately anchored in the reality of contempo-
rary social conditions.
Yet while particular lines can be socially stymied (at least as linear 

38    Chapter 2
processes of correspondence in which actualization and imagining are 
expected to resemble each other), actualization and imagining do not 
take shape as discrete separate worlds but simultaneously interconnect 
in multiple, complexly tangled ways.20 One instance of their interconnec-
tion can be found in the case of potential. This is not just the potential for 
new, better practices, but also the potential of concepts, such as property, 
markets, and the state, to be other than they currently appear. Potential 
foregrounds the material conditions of the present, what is actualized 
and evident, yet it simultaneously depends on imagining the future and 
what the present could become. In this way it resonates with utopian 
studies’ orientation toward anticipation and hope. Identifying potential, 
however, requires interpretation. Potential may necessarily carry with it 
a degree of force that shapes change over time, but potential needs to be 
recognized and found. In part this is because realization of an imagined 
future is contingent and uncertain; in part it is because imagining both 
the present and the future is speculative and open to contestation.
A different example of the way imagining and actualizing concepts 
fold into each other, one less developed within utopian studies but yet 
central to this book, concerns the place of imagining in the way con-
cepts are actualized. In the case of the state, for instance, how officials 
think about the state constitutes part of what the state is (an “is” that 
also evolves). The state isn’t simply a set of material apparatuses. It also 
incorporates reflexive fantasies held by those who contribute to its insti-
tutional processes. At one level, this may simply seem to imply that the 
mental images of state actors are a part of the assemblage of things that 
compose the state. But if the state is a more dynamic and evolving con-
cept (in its material practices, in how it is imagined, and in the relation-
ship between the two), what matters, primarily, about state actors’ fan-
tasies is how they are expressed, the way they shape and are brought to 
bear on what it is state actors do—the documents they write, the policies 
and laws they develop, the decisions they oppose or obstruct.21 Partici-
pants’ imaginings of the state may work to consolidate or stabilize a par-
ticular state identity, but they can also have transformative, or at least 
destabilizing, effects. If state actors imagine the state as, for instance, the 
main body capable of promoting social justice, they may seek to actual-
ize this fantasy; such attempts then become a part of the state’s ongoing 
story. This doesn’t mean their attempts will necessarily (or even likely) 
succeed. They may be resisted, thwarted, excluded, or defused, or such 

Utopian Conceptual Attitude    39
attempts may be used to cover up the state’s less seemly side. Neverthe-
less the presence of such attempts becomes part of the conceptual line of 
the state’s (including particular states) evolving formation.
Mediations
Reflecting on what imagining does within processes of actualization, 
the kinds of power available to particular actors and actions within par-
ticular contexts is important. Wishful thinking may mystify or distract 
from the reality of one’s own powerlessness, yet imagining that things 
are other than they seem to be is rarely sufficient in itself to give such 
imaginings force. Ian Hacking (2002: 8) remarks, discussing Nietzsche, 
“Naming alone is never enough to create. . . . Naming occurs in sites, 
particular places, and at particular times. For a name to begin to do its 
creative work, it needs authority. One needs usage within institutions. 
Naming does its work only as a social history works itself out.” While it 
would seem not to be enough, for instance, to reimagine the state as an 
egalitarian body for it to change to become one, the power of such a fan-
tasy may depend (at least in part) on the authority attached and the form 
such expressed imagining takes.
This book explores the place of authority and usage in moving be-
tween concepts’ actualization and imagining through practices of me-
diation. In utopian studies, the most explicit mediations are performed 
by creators and (fictional) visitors—in other words, by those who bridge 
the world of utopia and the world “outside.” However, if we think of me-
diations as those practices through which conceptual lines are generated 
and worked, the kinds of practices and actors involved are considerably 
extended. Conceptual lines are created by utopian participants as well 
as by outside observers, including academics. While the latter are often 
treated by fellow academics as central players in forging new conceptual 
lines—connecting practices and imaginings in novel and imaginative 
ways—it is important not to reduce the participants of utopian com-
munities (and other actors who engage with the sites) to simply follow-
ing conceptual lines already laid down or waiting to be discovered. The 
practices of community participants are a far more creative part of the 
conceptual mediation process.
Writing in a different context, Bruno Latour (2005: 58) draws a useful 
distinction between agentic mediators and nonagentic intermediaries. 
In the case of intermediaries, he writes, “nothing will be present in the 

40    Chapter 2
effect that has not been in the cause. . . . For mediators, the situation is 
different: causes do not allow effects to be deduced. . . . If vehicles are 
treated as mediators triggering other mediators, then a lot of new and 
unpredictable situations will ensue” (58–59). What is important about 
mediations is that they do something—whether it is to create new con-
ceptual lines or to vary or embed further those already in existence. As ex-
plored in this book, mediating practices are extensive and wide-­ranging, 
from document writing, speech making, and campaigns to exchanging 
goods, walking in the woods, managing school classrooms, giving a mas-
sage in a bathhouse, or enticing passersby in an open-­air public forum.
Mediating activities and actors provide the generative ground through 
which concepts develop, change, thrive, get stuck, and carry power. They 
can, in Sarah Keenan’s (2010) words, hold concepts up or impede what 
it is they do. Mediations can also lose or fail to exert force. Iconoclas-
tic attempts to create new conceptual lines sometimes demonstrate this 
kind of failure: intentional communities unable to flourish beyond their 
initial impetus; utopian designs that don’t take off; stories that are read 
as too fantastical; theoretical scholarship that short-­circuits practice to 
reimagine concepts in ways that fail to make an impression. We might 
think of these as phantom conceptual lines, apparent but going nowhere, 
yet such disavowals should also be performed with care. A recurring 
theme within utopian studies is the extent to which actions written off as 
failed or pointless at a given moment can become subsequently revalued 
and appreciated as looking backward identifies “hidden” seeds and ker-
nels that have since germinated (see Muñoz 2009).
Sensation and the Unutterable
In the chapters that follow, I explore the conceptual lines generated 
through different kinds of mediating activities. One feature that stands 
out, however, about the way these lines are forged, from the perspective 
of a utopian framework, is the importance of the ineffable, of what can-
not or simply is not said, and so is expressed, experienced, and known 
in other ways. Recognizing how knowledge and understanding exceed 
what is utterable is not limited to utopian studies. It can also be seen in 
other contemporary literatures, such as nonrepresentational (or more 
than representational) geography (e.g., Lorimer 2005; Thrift 2008). 
Working within this framework, Kevin Hetherington (2003: 1939) for 
instance writes, “We enter our homes through our slippers. . . . We sense 

Utopian Conceptual Attitude    41
a form of presence/present in that entry. . . . The feel of something can 
generate a sense of who we are and where we find ourselves—a sense of 
place.” But does knowing our home through our slippers equate to know-
ing concepts, such as the home, in more than linguistic ways? Or is it, 
simply, that what our particular home means, or indeed someone else’s, 
works best through a textile-­mediated form of touch?
For writers such as Nicholas Gane (2009), feeling and the senses func-
tion as a kind of preconceptual underpinning. Ruth Levitas (2013) takes 
a similar approach in her rich discussion of the ineffable, utopian power 
of color and music. However, I want to suggest that concepts themselves, 
in part because they are not simply ideas but the movement between 
actualization and imagining, also take shape and so can be known and 
recognized in more than linguistic ways. We can see this with the simple 
example of sourness. While the term sour and what it means for an object 
to taste sour can be linguistically explained, this process is far slower, 
more awkward, and cruder than the initial (and ongoing) sensory recog-
nition and recollection of sour.22 Tasting something and knowing it is 
sour is not purely about effective categorization, however. What it means 
to be sour, in particular contexts, how sour is imagined, also extends con-
ceptually beyond what is utterable.
Utopian studies’ emphasis on experience and sensation, including in 
relation to storytelling texts, which work through the imaginary reloca-
tion of the reader to another world rather than through campaigning 
rhetoric or analytical argument, highlight the importance of these other 
forms of knowing. Conceptual lines may be captured linguistically,23 but 
conceptual lines do not require conscious, explicit expression in order 
to become forged, and conceptual lines should not be reduced to what 
is sayable or said.
Recognition
Concepts may not depend on utterances, but do they still depend on 
some kind of recognition, as Hetherington’s (2003) example of his home 
and his slippers suggests? And when it comes to the question of concep-
tual recognition, what exactly is it that is recognized? Conventionally 
recognition suggests a correspondence between an imagined category 
and the actual thing or practice, so the thing or practice is recognized 
as belonging to a particular, imagined class; and where such recognition 
fails, either the category or the thing may need to change.

42    Chapter 2
Drawing on this correspondence in order to unsettle it has been a 
core feature of many utopian texts. Newly imagined practices and sys-
tems, relating, for instance, to reproductive patterns and technolo-
gies, economics, or domestic life—what it means, for instance, to be 
a worker, give birth, or participate politically—demand new forms of 
identification (or changes to old ones) as existing conceptions fail to hold 
up to the challenge the utopian provides. Within this temporally stag-
gered process of conceptual recognition and adjustment, nonrecogni-
tion also plays an important part. In utopian fiction, outsiders enter new 
worlds with bewilderment; they gaze around unable to make sense of 
what they observe or clearly making the wrong sense of what they ob-
serve. In William Morris’s ([1890] 2003) News from Nowhere and Piercy’s 
(1976) A Woman on the Edge of Time, visitor misrecognition is an essen-
tial element, dramatically underscoring the radical changes to have oc-
curred, heuristically enabling the author to inform the reader about the 
new world they have spun. At the same time, in these novels the process 
of being introduced to and taken through the new world brings the visi-
tor to a better understanding of what things mean and how they work. 
Thus nonrecognition is temporary and resolvable.
The power of nonrecognition also permeates everyday nonutopian 
political practice. When concepts are understood as mental frames that 
make life intelligible in particular ways, conceptual nonrecognition sug-
gests the failure of things to correspond with or fit such mental frames 
(or vice versa). So practices are not recognized as being law, property, 
or care because they lack key accepted or institutionally determined fea-
tures. Or concepts may be unrecognized as the concepts they are in-
tended to be because their framing diverges too markedly from what is 
presently accepted or understood. Strategically deploying these forms of 
conceptual nonrecognition in the course of political activism becomes 
part of a process of seeking to unsettle and to reidentify practices or 
terms: “property is theft”; “the law is an ass.” Nonrecognition here is not 
a goal in itself but validated by what it can accomplish—a process that 
often entails new forms of recognition. But can conceptual nonrecogni-
tion prove more enduring; can recognition remain elusive?
One concept whose contemporary deployment has deliberately 
sought to trouble the movement toward recognition is that of queer. 
While some understand the term as a synonym for gay and others treat 
the term as one of sexual deviance, queer also functions as a refusal of 

Utopian Conceptual Attitude    43
identification, deliberately gesturing toward that which cannot be named 
or rendered intelligible or normal. But even this gesture depends for its 
success on familiarity and notice. Queer may not seek to represent a co-
hort of people in the sense of rendering them transparent and knowable, 
but it still seeks recognition—whether of its own conceptual parameters 
(what counts as queer) or in the challenge it presents to other forms of 
thought and practice.
Approaching concepts as the oscillation between imagining and actu-
alization, as this book does, makes a different approach to the question 
of conceptual recognition possible. For recognition doesn’t depend on 
“real” things fitting linguistic terms or terms fitting, and thus elucidat-
ing, particular social practices (or indeed other imagined terms). In-
stead, in ways that resonate with feminist accounts of recognition as 
a social practice (e.g., Fraser 1997), conceptual recognition concerns a 
relationship to particular conceptual lines, as one of noticing, creating, 
following, responding to, having regard for, or being concerned about. 
Approaching recognition in this way does not make concepts transpar-
ent. Concepts remain elusive because actualization, imagining, and the 
quality of the movement between them exceeds what we can know (see 
note 18). Concepts also remain elusive, as I discuss, in terms of what 
they may become. This sense of uncertainty and improvised openness 
is an important dimension of contemporary utopian scholarship, with 
its move away from blueprint utopias to the recognized impossibility of 
knowing what future worlds will hold. While such an inability to know 
may seem a truism, its value is in what we do with it when it comes to the 
present imagining of concepts such as equality, markets, care, or touch. 
This is not simply a matter of identifying limited knowledge about the 
future; it is also about bringing such future openness and uncertainty 
into how we understand these concepts within the now (as I explore in 
relation to equality in chapter 4).
Destabilizing established conceptual lines can undoubtedly prove ex-
citing, but this book doesn’t advocate elusive, unrecognizable concepts 
either as an end or as a general means toward some other goal. While 
some academic work suggests that representation and doing (or reflect-
ing and performing) are necessarily different conceptual orientations, 
this book treats them as far more entwined, as it explores the work per-
formed by different conceptual imaginings and actualizations as they 
variously unsettle what is taken for granted, suggest new ways of think-

44    Chapter 2
ing, pose strategic openings and interventions, and engage in commu-
nity maintenance and development work.24 Within utopian studies, the 
shift of focus to what the concept of utopia does has focused attention 
on a range of tasks, from denaturalizing the status quo to stimulating and 
educating the imagination, promoting a desire for change, demonstrat-
ing the limits of what can be thought of, and performing textually and ex-
perimentally the political struggles that change invokes (Jameson 1977; 
Levitas 2013). As the oscillation between what is imagined and actual-
ized, the concept of utopia does far more than represent a particular 
kind of idealized society, even as the depiction or glimpse of something 
else and other is an integral part of the utopian.
Yet for concepts such as utopia to act and do things, some sort of 
recognition is necessary. As I have said, approaching conceptual recog-
nition as something other than a pure relationship of resemblance be-
tween the imagined term (or concept) and the thing or practice allows 
many forms of recognition to be, in a sense, recognized. While the focus 
of this book is on the conceptual lines everyday utopias can generate, it 
also offers an account of recognition in some of its many different forms, 
for the book treats recognition as a relationship that cannot be assumed. 
Indeed it is the pervasive failure on the left, and specifically among criti-
cal academics, to recognize the conceptual life and promise of every-
day utopias within the wider pursuit of a transformative politics, which 
drives this book.
I begin the process of exploring the productive work of concepts 
within everyday utopias with the concept of touch. My interest is in the 
particular way touch was deployed by state projects to advance equality, 
focusing on the case of British governance between 2009 and 2010. 
While academic work has extensively explored the state’s deployment of 
vision as a powerful and disciplinary means of governance, far less has 
been said about touch. Starting with the conventional notion of a con-
ceptual “lens,” I gaze through touch in order to consider the different 
ways that contact, feeling, and relations of proximity saturate the politi-
cal landscape as public bodies deploy an imaginary of touch in order to 
know and to rule. At the same time, following the touch that is present 
brings forth questions, both troubling and fruitful, about state engage-
ment with progressive politics.

chapter 3
Casting Equality and the  
Touch of State Governance
So touch, like vision, articulates [a] . . . rich, complex world, a world of 
movement and exploration, of non-­verbal social communication. It is a 
carnal world, with its pleasures of feeling and being felt. . . . And equally 
it is a profound world of philosophical verification, of the communica-
tion of presence and empathy with others, of the co-­implication of body, 
flesh and world.
Paterson 2007: 2
In developing a utopian conceptual attitude, sensation and affect 
are important sources of knowledge. In this, the first of six case 
studies, I use touch to explore equality as a state-­led governance 
project that has sought to undo structural asymmetries by target-
ing discrimination on specific, enumerated grounds. In doing so 
I ask: How does equality governance use touch to help it know? 
And does following the touch of equality governance, as an every-
day utopia, open up more progressive and transformative ways of 
understanding the touching state—that is, the state that feels and 
that experiences, in turn, the feelings of others?
Reading state practice through (and in relation to) the senses is 
not new. Several writers have explored the place of odor and smell 
in governance relations (e.g., Corbin 1986; Curtis 2008; Śliwa and 
Riach 2012), and even more have considered the state’s use of vision 
as a means of surveillance, militarism, and control (e.g., Feldman 
1997; Roy 2006; Scott 1998). Far less attention, however, has been

46    Chapter 3
paid to touch.1 In many ways, this is surprising given the wealth of 
scholarship on touch, and given also the manifold ways state gover-
nance invokes practices of contact, proximity, connection, and sensa-
tion. These practices come sharply to the fore in coercive and authori-
tarian state projects (from imprisonment and war to schooling and 
disciplinary forms of welfare, including through international aid), but 
they also come to the fore when states act in ostensibly more progressive 
ways, including in the measures introduced to advance equality.
Exploring the relationship of touch to state equality projects can take 
several forms. Here I want to start with touch as a lens through which 
the field of equality governance is surveyed. As a lens, touch frames and 
illuminates the object of study but is not itself reinflected in the process. 
In this chapter, I explore what happens when we look at equality gov-
ernance through touch: how we find touch present in multiple ways, in-
cluding idiomatically within public documents, in the discourse of good 
relations, and as a way of imagining state bodies touching (and being 
touched) differently. Yet taking touch as a lens makes it unsurprising 
that touch is what we find, as our imagination builds conceptual lines 
of resemblance into and through the practical world observed. Treat-
ing concepts as lenses has its limits; one key problem is that it explicitly 
envisages concepts as lying outside the domain of practice. While this 
book seeks to move beyond this framework of an active exterior con-
cept making sense of a passive terrain of practice, the notion of a con-
ceptual lens indicates something of the academic visitor’s imagination 
as particular ideas are brought to a place or scene (see chapter 1). Here 
taking touch as my lens opens a series of questions about the contact-
ful state: What does equality governance touch? What touches it back? 
Can equality governance generate forms of touch that challenge con-
ventional assumptions about the coercive and disciplinary touch of the 
state? And what kind of state is imagined when we think about, and fol-
low, equality governance’s touch?
Casting Equality as an Everyday Utopia
At the heart of my account is the everyday utopia of casting equality. De-
rived from the thirteenth-­century Old Norse word kasta, meaning “to 
throw,” casting starts with the form something takes when it is thrown, 
and from there extends in rich and multiple ways to include ideas of 
being assigned, arranged, devised, and controlled. In this account of 

Touch of State Governance    47
equality governance, I draw on three distinctive sets of meanings: the 
line cast, as in fishing, to extend its reach; the act of molding and shap-
ing, as when something is cast (which includes also the act of receiving 
shape, a solidification that may prove impossible to undo or recast); and 
casting as the assignment of roles, as in a play. Casting can also suggest 
the creation of something not yet ready to be formed, as in a calf’s pre-
mature birth. This idea of being forged too early is highly salient for uto-
pian thinking, itself centrally concerned with the future’s incipient re-
lationship to, and presence within, the now (chapter 9).
To give this discussion of casting equality greater specificity, my focus 
is one particular project: the equality governance agenda that developed 
in Britain under the Blair-­led Labour government, which reached its 
zenith in 2009–10, the year the Equality Bill 2009 passed through Par-
liament. In many respects, Britain’s equality project resembled other 
national equality projects of its time, with its focus on removing dis-
criminatory obstacles and enabling members of disadvantaged groups to 
access educational, employment, and cultural opportunities. In Britain 
in 2009–10 equality governance slid between its institutional and legal 
machinery, the “fair deal” environment it sought to achieve,2 and the 
promise that all individuals would flourish by acquiring the necessary 
capabilities thanks to governmental action (Carpenter 2009).
Despite the range of non-­state bodies involved, central to this equality 
project was the place of government, particularly central government, 
and of formal state instruments of governance. The central presence of 
the state distinguishes casting equality from other everyday utopias of 
this book. It also poses the question of what it means to characterize such 
a project as an everyday utopia. Given the pragmatic, power-­laden pro-
cesses that states condense and invoke, placing a state-­centered project 
alongside the everyday utopias of civil society may seem questionable. 
Yet the notion of states mobilizing utopian thinking and utopian projects 
is not new or uncommon (e.g., Bauman 2003b; Wegner 2002). It builds 
on the idea of realistic utopias (see Levitas 2013) and resonates with 
many features of utopia explored in chapter 1. Casting equality, like 
other everyday utopias, is engaged in a hugely ambitious project, with its 
aspiration for a future better than the present, a future that it confidently 
seeks to procure. As Jonathan Rees, the director-­general of the Govern-
ment Equalities Office, declared, “Our vision is a fair and equal society 
for all. Equality is not just right in principle but necessary for individu-

48    Chapter 3
als, society and the economy. In the [last] year . . . we have made good 
progress.”3 At the same time, as an everyday utopia, equality governance 
conveys the prosaic and orderly character of the quotidian, with its pro-
cedures, rules, concerns, and worries.
But there is also a further way in which casting equality, as something 
both molded and molding, constitutes an everyday utopia, a way that is 
central to my discussion. This relates to the project’s paradoxical char-
acter as simultaneously powerful and powerless, absorbing and insig-
nificant. On the one hand, Britain’s equality agenda, during the period 
studied, appeared ubiquitous as it demanded that public sector reforms 
and programs take its mission into account. Unlike the sites discussed 
in later chapters, the state’s promotion of equality drew on a wide array 
of resources and powers. Authorized through law, nation-­state bodies, 
and European Union directives (as part of a wider transnational agenda), 
equality governance acquired forms of institutionalization many utopias 
would envy. In this sense, casting equality resembles those utopias of 
fiction that are able to procure the world they imagine—even if, in this 
case, the nomos (or normative world) procured was largely one of govern-
mental discourses, networks, and institutionalized ways of doing things. 
Yet while the proximity of equality governance to other state processes 
was critical to its authority and success, it also carried dangers. As with 
other everyday utopias, equality governance in 2009–10 was precarious, 
vulnerable to marginalization and defeat by other, more powerful state 
agendas. Thus while casting equality as a state-­led pursuit demanded 
attention, it was regularly evaded, pushed back, enacted superficially, 
deployed rhetorically, or simply ignored.
Taking touch as a lens through which to consider the everyday utopia 
of casting equality foregrounds several different ways of knowing. There 
is the observer, whose knowing and understanding come from surveying 
touch’s paths rather than from actually touching. And there is the state. 
The state may know its population in particular ways as a result of who 
and what it touches and how. But touch, as expressed in official docu-
ments, also provides a way for the state to represent the touch it imag-
ines. Touch, then, is not only generative in terms of knowing what is; it 
also provides ways of creating new forms of knowledge, from the state’s 
urging that different communities make contact in the form of “good 
relations,” to the potential to know the state differently through new 

Touch of State Governance    49
experiences of its touch. But what does it mean to talk about the state 
touching or being touched through its project of casting equality? I want 
to start by indicating some key aspects of the touch literature relevant to 
this discussion and then introduce the empirical terrain. Having done so, 
I turn to the ways casting equality represented itself as touching, along-
side those forms of touch, as a state-­based project, which it ignored. 
From there I consider other molds that casting equality made imaginable 
(and in some instances partially manifested) as a state-­led project that 
sought also to be touched and thus to “feel” differently. Finally, I turn to 
the problematic that following state touch—through casting equality—
raises, namely the problematic for progressive politics of the “touching-­
feeling” state.
Touch
Work on touch is richly varied, extending from philosophy, history, and 
cultural studies (e.g., Classen 2005; Derrida 2005; Josipovici 1996; Mas-
sumi 2002), to nudism, museum studies, and cyberspace (e.g., Cvetko-
vich 2003; Grabham 2009b; Hetherington 2003; Obrador-­Pons 2009). 
One useful text to weave together accounts and touch theorizing from 
different sources is Mark Paterson’s book, The Senses of Touch (2007). 
Taking as his springboard the classical claim that touch is the lowest, 
most bestial of the senses (particularly when compared to the ostensibly 
refined sense of sight), Paterson explores the significance of touch to 
embodied existence. He writes, “The feeling of cutaneous touch when 
an object brushes our skin is simultaneously an awareness of the materi-
ality of the object and an awareness of the spatial limits and sensations 
of our lived body” (2).
Paterson’s book provides an important tracing of many of the debates 
surrounding touch: its development in phenomenology; the intercon-
nections and struggles between touch and vision, from “seeing with 
one’s hands” to touch’s relationship to the “abstracted visualism” of ge-
ometry; the experience of touching (and being touched by) art; haptic 
technologies;4 and the use of touch in healing. Since this chapter focuses 
on how public and state bodies represent and enact touch (how they 
touch and how they confront being touched), those debates that focus 
on the specific character of human or animal touch are bracketed. How-
ever, five claims about touch are pivotal to what follows.

50    Chapter 3
	
1.	Touch is inherently and meaningfully reciprocal; unlike senses such 
as sight, touching always involves being touched. One consequence 
is that those who touch chance exposing their surface—or skin—
to what they touch (Manning 2007: 9). Both parties in a touch 
encounter thus risk being changed in the process; for example, a 
gallery painting may emotionally touch and transform the viewer, 
but the vulnerability of the painting to alteration is there in organi-
zational signs banning touch. The two-­way relationship touch in-
vokes does not mean, however, that touch is symmetrical. It can 
be, as when two hands or lips touch (Irigaray 1985); however, in 
other contexts, bilateral touch sensations may significantly differ.5 
The sensation that comes from one’s hand slapping a person’s face 
is likely to be quite different from the touch felt by the one slapped.
	
2.	Touching involves proximity and often intimacy. While this can be 
physical, it can also be emotional. This understanding of touch as 
affect, as a way of moving and being moved by what’s around (“I 
was touched by what they did”), is central to my later discussion. 
In contrast to sight, which can manage a degree of distance (in-
deed states use visual techniques to govern from a distance), touch 
closes space.6 Edith Wyschogrod (1981: 25) remarks, “Only touch 
requires contact, the proximity of feeling to what is felt.” But touch, 
or prospective touch, can also create new spaces and distances as 
Josipovici (1996: 69) explores in relation to pilgrimage: “For if the 
goal of pilgrimage was, and is, to make distance palpable, is that 
not still an instinct with us today? Is not the secular visitor . . . who 
touches the age-­old stones or the ocean . . . not so much bridging 
the distance between himself and these repositories of power as 
acknowledging their otherness and the awe he feels in their pres-
ence?”
	
3.	Touch is a way of thinking about bodies in movement; “the act 
of reaching toward, of creating space-­time through the worlding 
that occurs when bodies move” (Manning 2007: xiv). Movement 
includes inward- as well as outward-­oriented action. So touch en-
gages intracorporeal processes such as balance, movement, and 
proprioception (a felt sense of body parts’ location), which work to 
establish the body as unified or, conversely, as fragmented. While 
some writing emphasizes the distinction between inward and out-
ward touch, other work focuses on the movement or indistinct-

Touch of State Governance    51
ness between the two (Obrador-­Pons 2009; Paterson 2007; see also 
chapter 4).
	
4.	While touch can thwart or upset hierarchies, it frequently works 
to confirm and solidify relations of power. This may take a violent 
form, as with war, rape, and execution, but touch can signify au-
thority in other ways: a child’s hand grabbed to cross a busy road, 
the employer’s heavy avuncular pat on the shoulder, the healing 
power of the royal hand (Thomas 2005). At the same time, because 
of touch’s power and authority, touch often works through relays 
and intermediaries, from the use of utensils and handkerchiefs to 
manage and mediate contact with bodily secretions (one’s own as 
well as others) to the complex chains of bodies involved in state-­
directed governance.
	
5.	Finally, touch suggests particular kinds of knowledge and know‑ 
ing. According to Kevin Hetherington (2003: 1935), who draws 
on Cooper and Law (1995: 239), touch invokes “proximal knowl‑ 
edge”—“unfinished,” “approximate,” “partial,” and “precarious.” 
Hetherington writes, “Proximal knowledge . . . suggests a more 
fluid and uncertain composition . . . embodied, sensory and un-
sightly—it implies an out-­of-­the-­way, out-­of-­sight approach to 
knowing the world” (1935). In other words, even as touch gets con-
trasted with the kinds of knowing that vision generates, touch-­
generated knowledge often works through its sensory and idiom-
atic relationship to other senses, as I explore below.
Assembling Equality
Casting equality in Britain is a project that can be narrated in many dif-
ferent ways. There is the story of antidiscrimination law—the develop-
ment of a statutory regime attentive to “unequal” treatment in the provi-
sion of employment, goods, and services that began in the late 1960s and 
1970s. Starting with sex and race discrimination, equality law expanded 
over four decades to take in other axes of inequality, including disability, 
age, religious belief, and sexuality (Dickens 2007; Fredman 2011; Hepple 
2010). The year at the heart of this chapter, 2009–10, was a major mo-
ment for antidiscrimination law. It witnessed the passage through Parlia-
ment of an Equality Bill that addressed seven “protected characteristics” 
(otherwise referred to by the government as “grounds” or “strands”): sex, 
race, gender reassignment, age, disability, religion and belief, and sexual 

52    Chapter 3
orientation.7 While the Equality Act 2010 (as it became) addressed the 
standard terrain of direct and indirect discrimination, it also had, from a 
British perspective, several innovative features. These included the rec-
ognition of “intersectional” inequality, albeit limited to the “combination 
of two relevant . . . characteristics” (§14), and it placed a duty on public 
bodies to have regard to the desirability of reducing inequalities of out-
come arising from socioeconomic disadvantage (§1).8
The story of equality’s casting, of how the law developed to touch 
new forms of inequality or touch old forms in new ways—for instance, 
“protecting” gays rather than criminalizing them—sits alongside a sec-
ond story of changing governance forms. As promoting equality became 
increasingly mainstream and institutionalized, the instruments de-
ployed became increasingly juridical and increasingly oriented to gen-
erating and attaining external standards. To simplify a complex tale, in 
the 1980s with the Conservative Thatcher government in central office, 
the promotion of equality primarily took place in left-­wing urban coun-
cils, exploiting their discretion and local political legitimacy to develop 
“soft” legal measures, from new employment and service-­related poli-
cies to funding community initiatives, holding festivals, organizing 
training, and disseminating promotional publicity. By the early part of 
the twenty-­first century, and with a new Labour government, atten-
tion shifted back to more formal instruments as a developing outcrop 
of legislative measures combined with an intensive array of nationally 
developed targets, standards, and sector agreements through which dif-
ferent public bodies’ equality “progress” could be calculated and incen-
tivized. Evolving modes and instruments of governance thus coincide 
with a story of new institutional actors, and of changing relations be-
tween those bodies—public and otherwise—involved in equality’s pur-
suit. Progressive, Labour-­controlled councils in the 1980s pursued an 
equality agenda in and through relations of close proximity with mar-
ginalized groups, while remaining at a well-­publicized distance from the 
private commercial sector, from “repressive” state bodies, such as the 
police, and from the Thatcher central government. In the 1990s, when 
privatization could no longer be so easily disavowed and when Labour 
was looking to present itself as the party of respectability, local councils 
developed equality initiatives in partnership with a range of public and 
private bodies, including the police, local companies, and ngos (non-
governmental organizations). After 1997, when the Labour Party took 

Touch of State Governance    53
national office, local development of equality policies were in some mea-
sure overshadowed by a more visible national equality agenda, driven 
also by European Union directives, and the development of equality ini-
tiatives in the newly devolved nations of Scotland, Wales, and Northern 
Ireland (e.g., see Richardson and Monro 2012). Spearheading the new 
national agenda were new governance bodies. There was the Women’s 
Unit, which subsequently became the Women and Equality Unit, and 
eventually the Government Equalities Office (geo), based in the Home 
Office and responsible for the government’s overall equality strategy and 
priorities (see Squires and Wickham-­Jones 2002). And there was the 
much larger “arm’s-­length body” that it sponsored:9 the Equality and 
Human Rights Commission, a nongovernmental public body established 
by the Equality Act 2006. Introduced to replace the three separate race, 
gender, and disability commissions, and with a new unified structure 
that would recognize a wide array of inequalities, the ehrc was charged 
with protecting, promoting, and enforcing equality across the enumer-
ated grounds of gender, race, sexual orientation, and others; strengthen-
ing “good relations” between diverse constituencies; and promoting and 
monitoring human rights (see O’Cinneide 2007; Spencer 2008).
Imagining Contact
Anchored in these stories of equality’s state formation, how did cast-
ing equality in 2009–10 use touch to produce particular ways of know-
ing? In what ways was touch imagined, and with what intended effects? 
The fact that governance texts deployed haptic idioms suggests notions 
of touch were imported from elsewhere as common, everyday concep-
tual lines were redeployed to support the project of casting equality. But 
what kinds of material processes was this use of touch’s idioms intended 
to invoke and drive forward? And to what extent did this use of touch 
suggest a more utopian kind of haptic state? The discussion that follows 
draws on approximately thirty public documents produced mainly by 
(or for) the geo and ehrc between 2009 and 2010. A growing body of 
academic work exists on the political and bureaucratic stakes and pro-
cesses involved in generating official texts (e.g., Bedford 2009; Chilton 
2004; Escobar 1995; Hunter 2008). For my purposes, what is important 
about these documents as textual mediations of touch is that they are 
public documents (see Geisler 2001), generated to promote, advise, and 
consult on new developments in equality governance. In other words, 

54    Chapter 3
crafted with the intention to both guide and stand in for equality gov-
ernance, the documents discussed functioned as mechanisms of rule as 
well as symbolic statements of political compromises already reached.
In considering the documents the geo and ehrc produced, the 
prevalence of touch’s terms is striking. Official reports refer repeatedly 
to soft touch, hard to reach, embracing, unlocking, boosting, barriers, treat-
ment, balance, and tackling, as well as arm’s-­length bodies and working-­life 
tasters. Such terms of course might be dismissed as commonplace figu-
rative speech, the kind of language one would expect to find in gov-
ernmental documents. However, my argument is that the use of touch 
idioms was far more engaged than this suggests. While comparing gov-
ernmental documents between different state projects lies outside the 
scope of this discussion, the use of touch in casting equality had a very 
particular function. Touch wasn’t simply a neutral way of representing 
how equality governance operated but was itself a mode (or strategy) 
of enactment. In representing governance in a particular way, equality 
documents sought to generate particular kinds of effects, producing (and 
producing an impression of) a state-­driven network of animate, vibrant, 
vital bodies “think[ing] about the needs of everyone.”10 As such, cast-
ing equality as a mold that also sought to mold and stretch itself around 
public action invoked a political commitment to good contact, good re-
lations, and good geometries. However, as I go on to explore, the reimag-
ining of touch by statutory bodies during this period was not contained 
by (or limited to) the benign projects it foregrounded.
In casting equality, governance looked two ways: to the beneficiaries 
of its promise to bring forth a more equal society and to the bodies who 
would participate in its accomplishment. Thus documents emphasized 
the importance of making contact with those disadvantaged individu-
als and groups (women, disabled people, etc.) that constituted the key 
bearers of its “protected characteristics.” As one ehrc document states, 
“Local authorities must engage with local people and communities in 
order to identify and tailor equality priorities to local needs.”11 Alongside 
those ready to be touched, equality documents of the period also signi-
fied the need to contact those deemed “hard to reach”—once lesbians 
and gay men, now minority ethnic women.12 Using touch idioms, casting 
equality spelled out the links between contact, proximity, and visibility.13 
One geo report from the period declares, “Inequality cannot be tackled 
if problems cannot be seen.”14 Another similarly remarks, “We cannot 

Touch of State Governance    55
tackle discrimination if it is hidden. Shining a spotlight on the problem 
. . . will help employers and employees . . . take action.”15 In this way 
proximity and visibility become imagined as the entwined conditions 
that make a vigorous form of contact possible.
But such proximity, documents and interviews suggest,16 struggles 
with the impossibility of a direct relationship between those national 
bodies pursuing equality initiatives and their far more localized subjects. 
Touch may involve proximity, but several relays are required as a wide 
array of (intermediate) bodies get cast and mobilized. Forming a kind of 
“touch chain,” casting equality during this period imagines governance 
prosthetically, stretching out with increased power thanks to the bodies 
knitted in. These chains, formed through collaborative (and less collabo-
rative) modes of action, are described in numerous public documents, 
for instance:
To increase the number of women taking up and completing appren-
ticeships, the Government is working with the Equality and Human 
Rights Commission, the Learning Skills Council and sector bodies to 
improve information, broaden choice and explore more flexible . . . 
opportunities.17
The ehrc will . . . work with clg [the Department for Communi-
ties and Local Government] and the Government Equalities Office to 
make sure that public sector bodies are not just meeting their legal 
obligations but also adopting best practice in areas such as positive 
action and procurement.18
Describing their work on equality for disabled people, the ehrc re-
ported, “Considered around 100 enforcement . . . actions . . . Pursued 
a formal agreement with a multinational organisation in the hotels and 
leisure industry to enable accessibility . . . Advised the government on 
how to fill [a legal] gap . . . Successfully challenged four government de-
partments over [requested un Convention] reservations . . . [and] co-­
sponsor[ed] and participat[ed] at a Dignity and Justice for All of Us event 
with Disability Wales.”19
What these remarks reveal are the different kinds of touch at stake. At 
times only a “light touch” may be required; as the government declared 
in relation to the once planned statutory socioeconomic duty, there will 
be no threat of “heavy handed enforcement.”20 Such a light touch, as I 

56    Chapter 3
discuss below, is in many ways a signature of a new form of governance. 
But at other moments, casting equality asserts a more formal, challeng-
ing, or coercive contact, as it imagines a touch that follows and consoli-
dates hierarchical organizational lines, compelling subordinate agencies 
to bring their bodies into proprioceptive order. As Bob Hepple (2011: 
322) writes, “When persuasion and dialogue fail, progressively more de-
terrent sanctions are required until there is compliance.”
Alongside the asymmetrical touch that equality texts depict as nec-
essary between public bodies, equality documents declare the need for 
public bodies to be touched also by the disadvantaged other. There are 
echoes here of the aura, the power of certain objects to touch those be-
holding them especially when “enshrine[d] in the law” (see Josipovici 
1996; also Hetherington 2003: 1940).21 Invoking registers of voice and 
hearing as they combine to form a political aesthetics of sound, the ehrc 
writes in their 2009–12 Strategic Plan, “We tell people’s stories—and we 
learn from them. We listen and we deal with the world as it is.”22 Gover-
nance texts are clear. Those with “protected characteristics” are experts 
of their experience. They must be “consulted” and their words listened 
to (although, in some cases, even this may prove insufficient; then some-
thing more is needed, and documents speak of “involvement,” a meshing 
of human and state bodies that exceeds the bounded communication 
with its set touch, which consultation entails).23
Disadvantaged others are not expected within casting equality, how-
ever, to touch only the state. Good touch has another dimension that 
takes shape through the statutory language of “good relations,” a respon-
sibility placed on the ehrc to promote by §10 of the Equality Act 2006. 
“Good relations is a developing concept. It started as a responsibility 
for local government and the Commission for Racial Equality under the 
1976 Race Relations Act and has now been extended . . . to other diver-
sity strands: age; disability; gender; religion and/or belief; sexual orien-
tation; transgender; as well as race” (Wigfield and Turner 2010: v).
Drawing on theories of social capital, communitarianism, and human 
security, publicly funded reports imagine good relations in the way dif-
ferently identified residents might live better together, with more co-
operation, cohesion, and respect.24 Thus good relations take shape 
against two opposing narratives: of no relations, where people from dif-
ferent communities live “separate, parallel lives with little understand-
ing of each other”;25 and the left unsaid bad relations, where contact is 

Touch of State Governance    57
heated, rough, and pressured. Good relations also take shape against the 
unstated and to some degree uncontemplated possibility of a different 
kind of contact, one that fuses, merges, or undoes boundaries (see chap-
ter 4). The injunction to interact well is anchored in the ongoing sepa-
rateness of constituencies. What is sought is positive regard (or at least 
tolerance and civility). The Institute for Community Cohesion report for 
the ehrc refers to voluntary socializing, friendship, even going on vaca-
tion together, but not romantic partnerships.26 Desire, or losing oneself 
in alterity, is not part of good contact.
Casting equality may promise to enact a fairer, better society; as an 
everyday utopia it demonstrates how a state-­based regulatory touch can 
be expressly reimagined and redeployed. But the use of touch’s idioms 
also reveals something of the restraints such a project, as a state-­based 
project, is under. While casting equality has been unable to do much 
Delegates attending the 
ehrc event “Promoting 
Disabled People’s Safety 
and Security,” May 2009.  
© Equality and Human 
Rights Commission.

58    Chapter 3
about the ongoing ways that the state touches poor people and mi-
grants—coercively, on the one hand, and by the withdrawal or absence 
of welfare contact, on the other—I want to focus on three other haptic 
tendencies. What they share, along with government discourse on good 
relations, is a perception of contact as something that takes place be-
tween already established social forces and constituencies with a stable, 
defined, and separate existence.
The first concerns the lack of attention paid to an inner, constituting 
touch. On occasion, government bodies draw attention to their digestive 
system or innards, usually in relation to the uncomfortable dyspeptic 
effects of previous administrations. Mostly, however, the feelings that 
arise from internal systems remain unremarked upon. We can see this 
in relation to the economy. Documents, particularly from the geo, re-
peatedly hail business as a key partner, stakeholder, and audience, a sec-
tor that must be supported “to grow and compete through promoting 
fairness” and one that should not be weighed down by “undue” or “un-
necessary burdens.”27 Yet despite the clear power of the economy, it re-
mains external to casting equality—at most a rocky ocean upon which 
this particular governmental project bobs. Its interoceptive power to 
shape equality governance from the inside was, in 2009 to 2010, far less 
explicitly remarked upon.
This silence parallels a second one: the relative absence of powerful 
signifiers, such as masculinity, whiteness, and heterosexuality, in official 
equality statements. There are some exceptions, particularly when domi-
nant characteristics become linked to problems of underrepresentation, 
for instance, the declared need for more male primary school teachers, 
or where dominant characteristics combine with other social relations to 
denote alienation and underachievement, as, in the words of the ehrc’s 
chair, Trevor Phillips, “the growing underclass of poor white boys.”28 
Mostly, however, dominant social locations remain unmarked and unre-
marked upon. Indeed such attachments may really prove the hardest to 
reach characteristics within state equality projects, erased from discus-
sion, bracketed from lines of attention, in ways that orient equality gov-
ernance away from both culpability and social power.
The third troubling dimension of touch concerns the geometric 
models that casting equality (not always explicitly) relied upon during 
this period. In ways that parallel the notion of “good relations” as en-
counters between already existing, defined, and distinct groups, geomet-

Touch of State Governance    59
ric representations of inequality treat the grounds or protected char-
acteristics of gender, race, sexual orientation, and so forth as separate, 
contiguous shapes, able to be assembled together to form a whole.29
Describing the distinction between topology and a static geometry, 
Brian Massumi (2002: 184) explains the difference “between the process 
of arriving at a form through continuous deformation and the determi-
nate form arrived at when the process stops.” During the period studied, 
casting equality worked, at least in public documents (the views of par-
ticipants were more nuanced and complex), with a largely “stopped” ge-
ometry of imagined relationships.30 Here the experiential and sensory 
character of inequality in everyday life got abstracted, cleaned up, and 
converted into a fixed set of optical concerns. This had several effects. It 
stuck inequality to disadvantage (inequality’s beneficiaries, as I have said, 
were largely overlooked); it separated inequalities from other aspects of 
social life so that inequality became something that could be removed, 
leaving the rest of social life intact; and, in different ways, it separated 
inequalities from each other. But could casting equality as a state-­led 
project have operated with a differently imagined geometry? Could it 
indeed leave a settled geometry of conceptualized relationships behind?
The Feeling State
In exploring the authorized ways in which casting equality, as an every-
day utopia, became fashioned, my focus so far has been on touch’s idi-
omatic use as a way of representing and imagining relations between 
bodies—public, commercial, and private. Casting equality, as a gover-
nance project, imagined touch in very specific ways. These ways can 
be read as signaling a utopian social democratic imaginary operating 
within a neoliberal political environment, organized around the norma-
tive mandates of corporate power, responsible marketized subjects, and 
the disciplining of the irresponsible. This particular political context be-
comes vividly apparent when we consider the kinds of touch that re-
mained (at least publicly) unthought. But were these limits absolute and 
inevitable? Were there instances where touch was imagined differently? 
And can we draw on the experience of casting equality within the par-
ticular historical moment of Britain in 2009–10 to imagine other kinds 
of governmental touch? Asking these questions highlights the impor-
tance for a utopian conceptual attitude in considering what could be. This 
is not simply a form of day-­dreaming, inhabiting a social vacuum with 

60    Chapter 3
no relationship to the conditions from and through which thinking takes 
place. Rather, it means working prosthetically from what exists to imag-
ine, in Levitas’s (2010: 544) words, “society otherwise.”
Way-­Feeling
If being in touch suggests an attuned knowledge to what is around you, 
feeling your way suggests a more tentative process, less concerned with 
following a path that’s visible and known than with moving slowly along, 
trying to remain sensitive and responsive, even as (and perhaps because) 
the journey involves unexpected directions and unanticipated obstacles. 
In practice governments often feel their way as the way presses upon 
them.31 However, as an explicit epistemological stance, way-­feeling chal-
lenges the autonomic equation of governance with certainty. As an ehrc 
Strategic Plan proclaims, “Our role is to create a strong vision, to trans-
form culture and influence thought.”32
One important dimension to way-­feeling in relation to casting 
equality concerns how inequality is identified. This doesn’t mean letting 
go of the line that recognizes the inequalities associated with racializ-
ing, gendering, and economic processes, among others. However, way-­
feeling might involve letting go of the compulsion to attach inequality 
to identity-­based groups (even to groups at all) in order to recognize in-
equality’s more systemic character and centrifugal effects. It might mean 
reading inequality as a problem of practices, spaces, and ways of living, 
or it might mean recognizing how historically contingent and incom-
plete the list of grounds actually is, as other inequalities emerge as social 
facts and as political claims that resemble (or significantly may not) those 
inequalities already officially recognized (see Cooper 2004: ch. 3; Ben-­
Galim et al. 2007; Mabbett 2008).
Something of a way-­feeling approach is suggested in the ehrc’s 
Equality Measurement Framework, with its recognition that indicators 
may change,33 and with its concerns that insufficient data exist for cate-
gories such as Gypsies and Travellers, homeless people, prisoners, and 
others.34 But what way-­feeling also suggests is a governmental willing-
ness to acknowledge mistakes and failures, to be ready to change, to take 
risks, recognizing that some will fail, and to encourage others, particu-
larly other others, to guide. Unsurprisingly way-­feeling was not especially 
prominent in most of the governance texts I encountered. However, 
more tentative, reflective stances surfaced in the handful of interviews I 

Touch of State Governance    61
carried out. For instance, one senior policy officer remarked, “We don’t 
understand enough why prejudice becomes entrenched. . . . We might 
be better off to pilot some projects in the voluntary sector . . . than to go 
immediately for a regulatory action when we don’t know what we want 
the public or private sector to do differently yet.”35 I return to the ques-
tion of way-­feeling later, but first I want to explore two other ways in 
which touch-­as-­feeling gestures toward more radical forms of state-­led 
equality governance.
Being Touched
Emotions are suppressed because we’re trying to do all this in the frame‑ 
work of public policy and public policy is numbers, value for money, . . . 
the normal measures government applies. . . . You’re always encouraged to 
stand back from the emotional disturbance that equalities or inequalities 
will stir in you. . . . The prevailing wisdom is that’s the only way you can do, 
otherwise you’d be making policies, throwing money around without the 
substantial evidence that it’s the right thing to do. . . . There’s a clear need 
to package [emotions] and put them to one side and have the helicopter 
view of the unemotional rational, analytical . . . and it’s probably a good 
thing.
—Senior equality governance official
Despite this statement, mainstream equality governance, and the bodies 
cast in it, do not seem to lack demonstrable feeling.36 On the contrary, 
central to advancing equality as a state-­led project is the production of a 
buoyant sense of progress. Thus a report from the Department for Com-
munities and Local Government echoes several (including the ehrc 
Plan quoted above) in stating, “Over the last 60 years there have been 
landmark improvements in addressing the starkest aspects of inequality 
and discrimination.”37 But while such confidence reaches out to touch 
and embrace a public through a particular narrative of equality, we might 
think of the emotions that casting equality, as an everyday utopia, ex-
presses through its performance of being touched.
A touched state might be one that feels implicated, even sorry. In 
other contexts, this is something several national governments have 
indicated, including Britain, responding to prior (and recent) histo-
ries of persecution, state excess, or colonial takeover with formalized, 
official expressions of shame, regret, and apology.38 Several academics 

62    Chapter 3
have written critically about this “sorry” work (e.g., Ahmed 2004b; Barta 
2008; Goldberg-­Hiller 2012). Yet, however problematic, self-­serving, 
and boundary-­setting such institutionalized expressions might prove, a 
striking feature of mainstream British equality governance during the 
period examined is the paucity of this kind of expressed feeling. Far 
from being touched in ways that generate shame or apology, mainstream 
equality asserts a kind of emotional autonomy and calculating agency. 
Thus casting equality is repeatedly located within a historical lineage of 
constant values: tolerance, equality, fairness, and human rights—values, 
controversially, depicted as stable themes in the continuing expression 
of British national identity.39
Glimpses of other feelings, including annoyance, frustration, and 
crossness, do nonetheless emerge. These feelings speak to interior cleav-
ages and a more emotionally contactful state, where feeling isn’t simply 
a symbolic form of outward-­directed political expression but is gener-
ated through and by wider political events. One ehrc report illustrates 
this more responsive form of emotional touch.40 Read in the course of 
reading dozens of similar documents, two things about it as a public 
document immediately stand out. The first is its unusual signaling and 
pinpointing of “mistaken” thinking and “counterproductive” policies by 
other state bodies, here local authorities (4). The second is its directive 
clarity in instructing local authorities how to act. This is not to criticize 
the report. On the contrary, I was struck by how different (how frank, 
concerned, and assertive, how in a sense “everyday”) its tone appeared 
in comparison with the grandiosity or studied detachment common to 
governmental documents.
The report concerned funding of domestic violence services; it argued 
that funders need to recognize that targeted provision through female-­
only or race-­based groups might prove more effective than funding only 
provisions defined as universal: “Having an inflexible approach that as-
sumes it is better to fund mainstream services rather than single-­issue 
groups isn’t the right approach to begin with. . . . In the end, the effects 
of such flawed decision-­making only serve to bolster the barriers to well-­
being, participation and equality experienced by disadvantaged women 
. . . particularly hard to reach groups, such as ethnic minority women.”41 
In this example, the production of unexpectedly “un-­stately” feeling 
demonstrates the work done by touch chains, described earlier; such 
chains do not simply allow state bodies to touch but cause them also to 

Touch of State Governance    63
be touched, in this case through effective ngo action. For this report fol-
lowed the successful legal challenge of a decision by Ealing Council in 
London to cease funding the long-­established community organization 
Southall Black Sisters to provide domestic violence services.42 Thus we 
might read the commission’s guidance documentation as an affective ex-
pression of received touch, given shape and life by the relays of pressure, 
dissent, feminist politics, and judicial decision making at several inter-
connected scales.
Attentive Understanding
Reading the enactment of state-­based emotion as a mediated effect of 
social movement pressure takes me to a third kind of feeling: attentive 
understanding (see also chapter 5). What this emphasizes, in contrast 
to touch’s subject-­centered tendencies, is a giving over to what is felt.43 
Absorption, immersion, and empathizing with the other have been the 
subject of extensive, sometimes heated feminist debate, as writers worry 
over the implications for women, in particular, losing themselves in an-
other. However, the stakes are different when institutionalized bodies 
are involved, and immersion by the state does not necessarily mean 
merging. High levels of attention may be premised upon separation, 
where feeling is performed in order to understand the distant and un-
familiar, even as routine, overly familiar experiences may be rendered 
different and unknown by haptic forms of slow, detailed encounter.
In the context of equality governance, attentive understanding might 
entail several things. It might mean feeling the texture, tensions, heat, 
and shape of injustice. It might also mean, more reflexively, responding 
to the ongoing, historically extensive shape institutions and institutional 
actors have left on social justice politics, as the state that feels affects 
what is felt. Cvetkovich (2007: 465) comments, in ways that circle back 
to the question of state apology, “Affect is often managed in the pub-
lic sphere through official discourses of recognition or commemoration 
that don’t fully address everyday affects or through legal measures . . . 
that don’t fully provide emotional justice. The goal is something more 
than statues and monuments, something that involves ways of living, 
structures of feeling.”
Attentive understanding in this respect might entail being attuned to 
the different ways different inequalities operate. In relation to the last, 
during the period discussed the difficulties casting equality faced proved 

64    Chapter 3
particularly marked as the geometry of protected characteristics, with its 
pie chart depiction of inequality and Venn diagram approach to inter-
sectionality, suggested that different strands of disadvantage involved 
the same kind of thing (see also Grabham et al. 2009). At the same time, 
casting equality resisted an isomorphic approach to equality. Although 
official documents and interviews drew attention to connections and 
parallels between inequalities, emphasis was also placed on the distinc-
tiveness not only of each inequality but of each individual as well. An 
ehrc report declared, “We need to think beyond strands—there is a 
combination of factors that affect us. . . . In practice, this means taking 
a person-­centred approach. . . . Universal rights and values are best 
achieved through attention to the particular forms that discrimination 
takes and the specific realities of people’s lives.”44
Arguably, however, both individual and group-­based approaches to 
inequality are of limited value if their focus on attaching inequality to 
subjects means they treat the ways social life is organized as a second-
ary effect (Cooper 2004). Yet even if the dynamic forces generating in-
equality are understood as socially produced and driven, a state that feels 
the effects of inequality on subjects raises another set of problems en-
Prize winners display their work at the ehrc “Young Brits at Art” competition in which young 
people were asked to show “what the world would look like if we lived without prejudice.”  
© Equality and Human Rights Commission.

Touch of State Governance    65
demic to its fantasy of a benign state coming in close. How desirable is a 
touching-­feeling state?45
Opponents here come from all sides. Critics of the so-­called therapeu-
tic state, such as James Nolan (1998), charge that feeling has replaced 
rationality and objectivity in state discourse and action. Others, on the 
left, suggest the notion of a touching-­feeling state is hugely naïve, at risk 
of ignoring or forgetting—in its simplistic idea of a benevolent state up 
close—the concentrated power (and especially coercive power) states 
can and invariably do mobilize. Moreover even if the state could be on 
the side of subordinate constituencies, its advocacy of tentative thinking 
and nonrational feeling would do little to assist them. Thus a state feel-
ing its way on behalf of subordinate constituencies is either not going to 
happen or, if it did, would involve the state in giving up the very strength 
it could bring to bear on behalf of the poor or dominated.
I am sympathetic to these latter claims. However, to the extent they 
become a confident critique of the state in general (rather than particu-
lar state formations at particular times), they risk erasing the fact that 
the state is not a tangible entity. It is not a physical body or thing but a 
concept. What it means when we talk about the state coming in close—
to touch society’s organization and populations, and be touched, in turn, 
by them, including by their imaginations of what life could be like (as in 
the Young Brits at Art competition)—depends (at least in part) on how 
the state is conceptualized, a conceptualization that also shapes and ren-
ders intelligible where the boundaries of the state, and thus what is be-
yond the state, are deemed to lie. In the final part of this chapter, I turn to 
the question of state. My argument is that following the touch of equality 
governance, and particularly in considering the kinds of state touch that 
might appear more desirable, we need to revisit the state in terms of how 
it is imagined and how it might be remade.
Revisiting the State
Academics have adopted a range of approaches to the question of the 
state’s form, function, and spatial reach. However, conceptions of the 
state tend to assemble, in different ways and usually within a single for-
mation, functions of territorial control and coordination, a network 
of apparatuses, the means by which rule is coordinated and imposed, 
the provision of public goods, exclusive rights to legitimate organized 
violence, and national modes of representation and identity produc-

66    Chapter 3
tion. Critical scholars drawing on Marxist, feminist, and postcolonial 
approaches add other dimensions as the assemblage of the state is re-
thought to emphasize states’ central preoccupation with the reproduc-
tion of dominant social relations and their territorial reach beyond the 
nation-­state (e.g., Jessop 1990; Rai 1996).
In considering the state’s different facets—its bodies, work, purposes, 
powers, effects, responsibilities, and form—and in considering how they 
combine, connect, and become hierarchically ordered, progressive state 
practice (as a form of actualization) and thought paths derived from 
feminist scholarship (as a form of imagining) can prove useful. Progres-
sive state practice, including the everyday utopia of casting equality dis-
cussed here, upends conceptual assumptions about what is necessary 
or essential to the state by demonstrating contradictory tendencies and 
projects.46 Feminist theory, in turn, offers ways of understanding this 
more contingently assembled state through frameworks developed in 
relation to social subjects and personhood. Certainly feminist identity 
frameworks have been extensively criticized for essentialism and reduc-
tionism and for wallowing in a victim-­based affect (e.g., Brown 1995; 
Halley 2008). But if identity is taken as linguistic shorthand for think-
ing about the principal social dimensions and relations (of gender, race, 
and class, among others) through which subjects’ experiences, choices, 
desires, and positions are constituted and rendered meaningful, it may 
prove an instructive framework for thinking about those facets or rela-
tions that come together to constitute the state, dimensions that are also 
produced through their very assembling together as the state (see De-
Landa 2006: 34).47 Combined (or assembled), these identities gain tex-
ture and shape through a series of discursive appellations, including the 
welfare, security, workfare, colonial, ecological, or warfare state (e.g., 
Goldberg-­Hiller and Silva 2011).
As with the social composition of subjecthood, imagining the state’s 
identities raises certain core questions. These include the relationship 
between doing and being, appearing and performing, and between those 
identities readily recognized—whether by the subject or others—and 
those uncovered (or unmasked) through critical (some might say “para-
noid”) readings and encounters (see Sedgwick 2003). Yet if casting 
equality steers us toward (by inciting the need for) a more contingent, 
socially embedded conception of the state (as well as particular states),48 

Touch of State Governance    67
how does thinking about the state’s multiple “identities”49—and I in-
clude as identities those refused or declined identifications that never-
theless constitute the state relationally in different fields of violence, 
legitimacy, rule, bodies, and so on—help us think about the touching 
and touched state that casting equality both materializes and imagines? I 
want to approach this question in two parts. First, what effect has casting 
equality had on the identities of the British state? Second, what strategic 
possibilities does it suggest for how such identities might be assembled 
differently?
Casting equality may have affected social life in various ways; never-
theless its effects on the assembled British state seem limited. Certainly 
it provided a platform through which a differently imagined state could 
be expressed, illustrated by the somewhat remarkable statement from 
the Department of Community and Local Government in their pub-
lic consultation on equality planning: “Government is committed to 
making sure, in every community, in every corner of this country, people 
know we are on their side. No favours. No privileges. No special interest 
groups. Just fairness.”50 But this may be an instance of the phantom con-
ceptual lines discussed in chapter 2, imagined and narrated but unable 
(perhaps indeed not intended) to drive a resembling form of practice. A 
more realized revision in the British state’s identity, achieved by casting 
equality, might be instead the development of horizontal and facilitative 
forms of governing.
Equality governance, without question, made use of vertical tech-
niques of monitoring, requirement, and judgment, but it was weighted 
toward other modes of contact, involving encouragement, partnership, 
contract, training, and modeling. The public documents I studied were 
replete with references to such things as “pilot outreach programmes,” 
Exemplar Employers “sharing their best practice,” “trailblazer” public 
bodies as “champions, ambassadors and mentors,” even the statement, 
“Through an online tool, being developed with Ernst & Young, we will 
work with those involved in recruitment to help them learn to recognize 
and address any biases and prejudices they may have.”51 Partnerships 
with commercial bodies and grandiose claims may generate skepticism. 
However, the forms of horizontal governance depicted are not unique 
to casting equality. In many respects, they can be seen to echo wider 
shifts in the interorganizational relations of the neoliberal state (e.g., see 

68    Chapter 3
Clarke and Newman 1997; Newman 2001, 2007) variously explored and 
conceptualized as policy networks, the “hollowed out” state, and govern-
ing at a distance (Rhodes 1994; Rose 1996).
At the national level, then, it appears wildly optimistic to suggest that 
casting equality generated a newly manifest state, with different state 
identities assembled together in different ways. But can we make a more 
modest claim? Is it possible to see the conceptual lines of the state gen-
erated from following casting equality’s touch as suggesting certain new 
imagined strategies—strategies that, in turn, reframe the problematic of 
the touching-­feeling state?
Imagining state power in a country such as Britain suggests a force 
that comes from and is augmented by the tight intersections and for-
mative interconnections between different state identities. To put it at 
its strongest, state coercion and violence emanate from specific state 
apparatuses, linked by hierarchical techniques of state governance, with 
authority over a defined realm. But what happens if these interconnec-
tions are looser or partially dismantled so that the state is not a tightly 
interlocked composite entity but a concept whose imagining and actu-
alization reveal bits sticking out in all directions? In his discussion of 
British state sovereignty in relation to the EU, the legal scholar Neil Mac-
Cormick (1993: 17) poses a related question: “Can we think of a world in 
which our normative existence and our practical life are anchored in, or 
related to, a variety of institutional systems, each of which has validity or 
operation in relation to some range of concerns, none of which is abso-
lute over all the others?”
A contemporary British instantiation of such trends toward polycen-
trism or state fragmentation is privatization, particularly in its global, 
corporate form. Here “state” functions are performed by nonpublic 
bodies whose primary goals and interests are commercial, who can be 
domiciled beyond the state’s territory, and who may be inadequately 
controlled through modes of state rule. A similar trend is evident in Gui-
raudon and Lahav’s (2000) discussion of European nation-­states’ exter-
nalization (and delegation) of migration control as responsibilities were 
moved upward to transnational bodies, downward to local government, 
and outward to private partners (see also Gill 2009). Privatization and 
the delegation of migration control suggest a thinned and stretched out 
state, clearly antithetical to advancing equality, but might thinning and 
stretching have other, more progressive effects?

Touch of State Governance    69
British municipal socialism offers one such instance. In councils 
across the country, the Labour Left of the 1980s refused to comply with 
a host of central government edicts, denouncing hierarchical modes 
of rule and disavowing conventional relations between state bodies, to 
advance a series of agendas antithetical to central government that in-
cluded gay equality, local democracy, environmentalism, and workers’ 
rights (Cooper 1996; Lansley et al. 1989). Whether mainstream equality 
governance, even at its 2009–10 height, constitutes a similar instance 
of “thinning out” is debatable. Certainly some scholars have worried 
over this, concerned its imposition (rather than its bottom-­up deploy-
ment) reduces the vital linkages that critical proximity requires between 
equality as a project and governmental modes of power (Squires and 
Wickham-­Jones 2002). But does the thinned-­out state have unrealized 
political mileage when thinking through the touching-­feeling potential 
of casting equality?
Located within the thick state of liberal modernity, feeling as a state 
ethos brings, as I have suggested, a raft of problems. Fundamentally it 
appears too close and too dominating. Whether state power is mobi-
lized to feel people, objects, inequality, emotions, or its own way, the 
state seems too heavy and powerful not to destroy, radically transform, 
or upset those things felt in its wake. Advocacy of a weaker state is well-­
trodden ground within libertarian and anarchist writing (even as others 
condemn weak and failing states), but such advocacy is not my aim here. 
The material elimination or weakening of particular state identities 
might not diminish state power or authority overall. It could lead to mul-
tiple (quasi-­)states, with different identities (or differently configured 
identities), coexisting across the same territory; ditching certain state 
identities might protect or augment powerful others; and the decoupling 
or withering of specific identities might simply reflect emergent, newly 
dominating interests and projects (see Hansen and Stepputat 2001: 30). 
Even privatization, with its mobilization of profitability and commercial 
involvement, does not unequivocally support a declining state thesis.
But if we focus instead on the articulations and linkages between 
state identities, it becomes possible to imagine (and perhaps even to 
actualize) certain state identities free of their “normal” baggage. Earlier 
in this chapter, I explored the recasting of equality governance in terms 
of feeling—of a state feeling its way, expressing feeling, and feeling what 
is there. Associated with the thick British state, feeling seems troubling. 

70    Chapter 3
But what about feeling in the context of a thinned-­out state where spe-
cific state identities have been pulled away (stretched out) from their 
established articulations? If the ties between welfare and coercion were 
loosened or very differently articulated, we might imagine the state’s 
welfare identity (the reciprocating touch between citizens and govern-
ment) extending toward sensual pleasures, creativity, and human ful-
fillment (rather than work, security, discipline, and risk), without nec-
essarily bringing the penal state along too. Or if the state’s pedagogical 
ethos were less tied to the state’s role as regulator, welfare provider, or 
referee, greater reflexivity and tentative thinking (a state feeling its way) 
might not necessarily have the same repercussions for other aspects 
of its operation. Likewise if reassembling the state’s network of bodies 
(public organizations, commercial providers, ngos, partnerships) to get 
experientially closer to injustice had a far more mediated relationship to 
the state’s coercive and penal work, less might be risked for communities 
in getting closer to the state.
Stretching state identities in ways that cause some identities to over-
hang or to hinge differently to others suggests ways a more radical poli-
tics might be folded in, or brought into contact with certain state parts 
or elements, with less risk of hazardous forms of incorporation. But 
while we can imagine this, actualization is far more difficult. Decou-
pling, recoupling, or reforming state identities is a hugely complex task 
as a deliberate, progressive project. Indeed in some cases it might prove 
impossible as particular combinations, at particular temporal-­spatial 
junctures, are unable to be reformed, let alone pulled apart. Neverthe-
less what a strategy of stretching and rearticulating reveals is a way of 
engaging with the state that centers the imaginative and improvised pur-
suit of its re-­creation, and in imagining what this could be like, the actu-
alization that state-­based everyday utopias offer are important educators 
of desire and inspiration—if not guides.
Concluding Remarks
While states in the global North tend to be viewed as far from sensory 
formations, this has not discouraged academics from exploring them 
in this vein, focusing on the senses as both targets and techniques of 
rule. Work addressing the state’s use of vision, for instance, has explored 
how states can govern (or attempt to govern) at a distance by rendering 
people, things, and processes visible from far away. Sight also allows for 

Touch of State Governance    71
other forms of contact, including through weaponry, while the reality or 
threat from another’s scrutiny and surveillance habitually steers people 
into governing themselves (explored further in chapter 7). Governing 
through vision appears efficient, clean, asymmetrical, and fast. But what 
about governing through touch? How does touch structure relations be-
tween institutions, subjects, governmental technologies, and politics? 
In many respects, touch as a mode (or register) of governance seems to 
offer something of a counterpoint to vision. Where vision speeds up gov-
ernance, touch slows it down; vision can see panoptically, touch works 
serially; while vision may not be reciprocal (rendering the one who sees 
as vulnerable), touch always touches back; where sight takes, touch re-
flects; where sight is certain and finished in what it knows, touch is un-
certain, open, hesitant, and reflexive.
In this chapter I have adopted a less romantic approach to touch. 
However, rather than focus on the materially unequal ways in which 
states touch, how they consolidate social relations of inequality through 
the very practice of touching, my focus has been on the ways touch is 
imagined within a progressive state project. Casting equality did not 
imagine touch in a vacuum. Mediated by the politics of producing offi-
cial documents, the conceptual touch-­lines created were intended to 
have specific effects—legitimizing, informing, declaring, warning—in 
the course of expressing a vision of an animate, sensitive, responsive 
state. Thus official texts used the language of touch to touch in particular 
ways. But as active elements within the social democratic project of cast-
ing equality, these texts also did other things. As such, they reveal how 
notions of touch can be deployed to make certain things unknowable 
and unthinkable; they also offer glimpses and evidence of other kinds 
of touch. In this way, the public texts of casting equality open up other, 
more speculative, ways of imagining the touching state as one that is also 
touched—concerned, sensitive, and attentive to the harm and damage 
of systemic social inequality.
Yet while casting equality allows us to envision a transformative kind 
of state touch, imagining such touch poses troubling political ques-
tions, specifically, how touching-­feeling should the state be? Studies of 
the state’s deployment of vision foreground critical and analytical ques-
tions about how states work; focusing on touch in the context of casting 
equality as an everyday utopia opens up a series of normative questions 
regarding our relationship to the state and what it could be. These ques-

72    Chapter 3
tions require us to think again about how we conceptualize the state, a 
process that invokes the constant move, as I discussed in chapter 2, be-
tween actualization and imagining—between the specificity of particu-
lar state formations and fantasies of what a state is and of what it could 
be (in the light too of imagining different, other states also). This pro-
cess opens up various places where intervention might occur, including 
through the strategic pursuit of a thin or extended state, in which state 
identities are both reconstituted and reassembled.
In chapter 4 I continue to explore the development of an equality 
proj­ect in ways attuned to questions of touch. However, rather than 
focusing on equality as something that can be abstractly formulated and 
then delivered by top-­down state practice, I examine equality as some-
thing that is protean and always in formation. In particular, I explore 
equality as a normative concept expressed in everyday noninstitutional 
practices. My focus is the social terrain of nudism, particularly nudist 
appearances in public.

chapter 4
Public Nudism and the Pursuit of Equality
The vanishing of clothes has done more for human equality than all the 
philanthropists’ efforts, or the anarchists’ steel blade.
Dickberry [1904] 2006: 240
June 2011 in London witnessed two public naked events in a city 
that usually lives its life clothed. At the start of the month Un Peu 
de Tendresse Bordel de Merde! by the choreographer Dave St-­Pierre 
opened at the premier dance venue, Sadler’s Wells.1 In this work not 
only did dancers spend time on stage naked, but they also brought 
their nakedness quite literally into the hands and across the faces 
of theater audiences, as they clambered over people sitting in the 
stalls. One journalist commented, “As a group of blonde-­wigged, 
naked men scamper through the auditorium . . . we find ourselves 
being kissed, hugged, and sat on, up close and personal with the 
arses and genitals of complete strangers.”2 A week later, on June 11, 
the London part of the world naked bike ride passed through the 
city center. I watched it go with my partner and friends, quite un-
expectedly, as we were making our way around Westminster and 
stopped at a crosswalk while it passed. Several hundred people 
cycled through, stopping traffic, in a highly embodied form of ad-
vocacy for cycling and against the environmental damage caused 
by reliance on cars and oil. Strongly resonant of the dramaturgi-
cal aspects of carnival culture (see chapter 8), bodies went by in 
all shades of paint and attached accessories, as well as in the buff, 
women being noticeably less naked than men.3

74    Chapter 4
Public nudism, of course, has no special attachment to London. Media 
stories circulate globally about people appearing naked on streets, cliff 
walks, rugby pitches, and in public buildings, as well as at festivals and 
on beaches. While a limited range of naked performances are deemed ac-
ceptable, most are not. In Ontario, Brian Coldin, a naturist resort opera-
tor, was charged and prosecuted in 2011 for using restaurant drive-­thrus 
without clothes.4 In response, Coldin challenged the constitutionality of 
the law, claiming that the criminal offense of being nude in a public place 
or exposed to the public in a private one hindered his freedom of expres-
sion.5 Coldin’s challenge failed. Yet his prosecution was no isolated in-
stance. The discriminatory treatment of nudists, nudist organizations, 
and people who choose to live part of their lives naked raises serious 
questions for equality politics. Indeed nudists have long pointed to what 
they perceive as the unfair, preferential treatment of the “textile” world, 
those parts of society that take being clothed for granted.
In chapter 3 I considered equality as a governmental project, a mode 
of public address that indicates particular ways of thinking about re-
form, about the problems requiring solutions, and about the fantasies 
of what it is that is to be done will do. With the development of equality 
and antidiscrimination measures within large numbers of liberal states, 
the everyday utopia of state action striking at unfair disadvantage has ex-
tended and multiplied, even as it takes shape in close proximity to state 
action directed at quite other ends.
Conceptualizing equality as a project of ameliorative and regulatory 
action, undertaken by state and other powerful bodies in pursuit of an 
imagined better world, provides the ground for much academic writing 
on equality. Indeed the extent to which contemporary equality scholar-
ship is organized around the problematic of state action, whether in 
the form of philosophical thought experiments and modeled solutions 
or by engaging with law and policy, is striking. At the heart of much 
of this work lies the question: Which equalities matter, and for whom, 
when, and where (e.g., Dworkin 2000; Phillips 1999)? Responding to 
this question, writers have explored the composition of equality’s sub-
jects, whether it be individuals, groups, living beings, or humankind; 
they have debated what it is that should be equalized, whether opportu-
nities, resources, outcomes, or dignity; and they have explored equality’s 
role, remit, and animating conditions, from providing a vital dimension 
of democratic representational politics to shaping workplace relations, 

Pursuit of Equality    75
the use of public and commercial services, and the life course (e.g., Baker 
et al. 2004; Harding 2010; May 2010). In the process, writers have ad-
dressed the strategies, laws, and policies that equality’s pursuit requires, 
from treating like alike (which of course depends on knowing what is 
alike) to undoing systemic relations of power (Cooper 2004; Fraser 
1997; Young 1990), and they have addressed the question of equality’s 
“why” (or inequality’s “why not”), finding in nature, humanity, or prin-
ciples of social justice the rationale for reform.
One helpful contemporary framework to combine these different ele-
ments in a way that places systemic power relations at its heart is Sandra 
Fredman’s (2011). Anchored in the legal and policy operationalization 
of equality, Fredman argues for a “multi-­dimensional concept that can 
incorporate four overlapping aims.” She calls these the redistributive di-
mension “to break the cycle of disadvantage”; the recognition dimension 
“to promote respect for dignity and worth”; the transformative dimen-
sion, which “accommodate[s] difference and aims[s] to achieve struc-
tural change”; and the participative dimension to enable people to par-
ticipate fully, “socially and politically” (25).
Certainly there is a lot of very good work on equality, including Fred-
man’s (2011). However, with a few exceptions, recent discussion on 
equality has largely stuck to established paths, with little more novel 
work. In this chapter I want to move away from that more familiar ter-
rain of equality scholarship, which, by focusing on the who, what, where, 
and when of equality, treats equality either as a model for allocating re-
sources (or something else) or as a discursive frame for social movement 
or policy ambitions. Instead I consider equality as a set of normative 
organizing principles that wrap together actuality and imagining in the 
course of conditioning present practice and future (as well as past) fan-
tasies. Approaching equality when it takes shape as something that is not 
quite a project, discourse, or explicit set of political aspirations means 
we can identify equality’s presence in contexts where these other ele-
ments are not especially evident. This broadens the range of contexts in 
which equality can be identified and opens up possibilities for develop-
ing new conceptual lines.
To extend this process fully, this chapter deliberately focuses on a 
social practice—public nudism—that diverges from many of the con-
ditions that animate conventional equality theorizing. Understood here 
as the deliberate decision to be unclothed in shared (or publicly visible) 

76    Chapter 4
spaces,6 public nudism is something that is done rather than sought; it 
is often unorganized, and, in contrast to much left-­wing theorizing on 
equality, it concerns ways of living and appearing (rather than structures 
of domination). This is in no way to disavow equality analysis’s more 
usual focus on gender, class, race, sexuality, and disability. However, 
choosing to focus on public nudism offers a hopefully fresh perspective 
on what equality (or undoing inequality) might entail—one that may 
be helpful for thinking about better known forms of inequality as well.
Yet approaching equality through public nudism immediately con-
fronts a problem. For equality frameworks have been far from para-
mount in nudist activism, which has tended to prefer discourses of 
health, nature, rights, freedom, and expression. This begs the question: 
Why use nudism to think about equality? Wouldn’t nudism have more to 
say about those political discourses actually deployed?
Moving beyond a reliance on the effable may be particularly salient 
in relation to nudism, an experience that is often felt to elude or ex-
ceed verbal description (Obrador-­Pons 2007; see also chapter 5), and in 
chapter 2 I explored how concepts can be present and expressed even 
when they remain unuttered. In developing a utopian conceptual atti-
tude, decentering the conventional reliance on speech and texts, and 
being attentive to other ways of knowing—for both participants and 
observers—is important, opening up conceptual lines beyond those al-
ready verbally established. These conceptual lines can be driven by new 
forms of imagining or by practice. This chapter’s focus is the latter. Yet, 
exploring equality’s presence as a normative set of principles within pub-
lic nudism does not mean equality exists in any simple sense. Finding it 
rather depends on the movement between imagining and actualization 
as equality takes shape in three different temporally configured ways: as 
a presupposition, as something expressed, and as potential.
Presupposition concerns the norms required to be in place for a par-
ticular practice to be intelligible, appropriate, or possible. Such norms 
may become apparent only as new practices take shape; they may also 
be invented or asserted by those claiming legitimacy, as past conditions 
get imagined as already there in order to drive their future reality. As 
a presupposition, equality is particularly evident in the conditions ani-
mating nudist activism. The contemporary focus of nudist politics may 
largely revolve around rights and freedom, but these are authorized and 
gain meaning through notions of a moral equality between nudists and 

Pursuit of Equality    77
others. As Todd May (2010: 58) writes, discussing Jacques Rancière’s 
work, “The presupposition of equality does not have to be consciously 
recognized in order for it to be effective, in order for a democratic poli-
tics to occur.”
Nudists can speak because—at least from their perspective—their 
equality as speaking subjects is presumed. Moreover claims for nudists’ 
rights frequently deploy analogy in ways that, implicitly or otherwise, 
are premised upon equivalence. In other words, as many movements 
have done before them, contemporary nudist politics link nudists to the 
struggles of those now perceived as having acquired legitimacy and offi-
cial recognition. In doing so, nudists use these latter struggles to vali-
date their own in ways that largely disregard the political limits others 
have identified in such analogy drawing (e.g., Lamble 2012). So, Andrew 
Welch, a British Naturist representative, commented, after losing ac-
cess to a beach, “If we were an ethnic or religious group this sort of thing 
would never happen.”7 In a similar vein, an American nudist activist, 
Terri Sue Webb, remarked, “To be offended by another person on the 
basis of visual appearance is prejudice akin to racism.”8
Equality, then, appears as a presupposition, shaping and influencing 
nudist political claims despite being rarely invoked explicitly. Equality 
also appears as a presupposition in relation to the less instrumental 
forms of public nudist practice. Being naked in public asserts the foun-
dational claim that bodies have an equal entitlement to express them-
selves; and that it is legitimate for bodies to appear in authentic ways, 
namely as undressed. But equality isn’t manifested only as an imagined 
animating condition; it also takes shape as a form of expression consti-
tuted and conveyed by action. Within the context of postindustrial soci-
eties within the global North,9 there are limited authorized public places 
in which naked bodies can appear or gather. As a result, out-­of-­place 
nakedness, along with those places where public nakedness is allowed, 
become conveyors of meaning and force. Rancière (1995: 47) describes 
how strikes similarly can function as a translation and practical demon-
stration of equality. In the case of public nudism, what is expressed is 
not so much an equality already materialized as a set of organizing prin-
ciples that govern what is, but rather a set of normative claims about 
what could (and should) be.
The third way equality appears is as potential. This is not potential in 
the sense of what materially should be (as just described), but the con-

78    Chapter 4
ceptual potential of equality itself to be differently imagined and opera-
tionalized. As I discussed in chapter 2, potential combines temporalities 
in complex ways. It exists as a presence within the now that is predicated 
on an imagined future concertinaed back to uncover or re-­recognize 
what presently exists. Potential exists only to the extent it is found, and 
its finding is subject to what it could become if the conditions—­knowable 
and unknowable—proved to be right. Identifying equality’s conceptual 
potential to become other than it currently is, to disavow for instance 
the splits and divisions (between groups or subjects) that conventional 
equality thinking relies upon, depends on creating new conceptual lines. 
These may be mediated by nudist practitioners; however, when equality 
operates as a form of expression and potential, the conceptual lines that 
move from what is to imagining what could be importantly rely also on 
other interpretations, finding equality’s lines where others may not. This 
does not mean equality is completely free-­floating, able to be shaped into 
any pattern one desires. In all three cases—of presupposition, expres-
sion, and potential—the particular effects of context are vital to bear in 
mind. Equality as a set of normative principles is not hermetically sealed. 
It takes its shape from the norms, anxieties, systems, and ethoi it encoun-
ters and within whose terrain it resides.10 Recognizing the adulteration 
(or contamination) of normative concepts such as equality is important 
to avoid overidealizing what it is and what it could become. I do not want 
to produce a perfect conception of equality out of its imperfect practice 
(see chapters 2 and 5).
I begin with the everyday utopian character of public nudism, and the 
discrimination, even criminalization, that nudists and nudism routinely 
face. The rest of the chapter explores enactments of nudism through dif-
ferent registers of publicness; in doing so, I address the different concep-
tions of equality that various forms of public nakedness can bear. My ac-
count draws on diverse documentary sources, including contemporary 
nudist publications and media stories.11
Public Nudism: An Everyday Utopia
Over the past century, modern nudism—as the deliberate choice to be 
naked beyond transitional moments of dressing, undressing, and bath-
ing—has taken various forms. These include “associational,” “in shared 
space,” and “personal” nudism. Associational (or club) nudism developed 
as the public face of nudism in the early twentieth century, its presence 

Pursuit of Equality    79
being particularly marked in central Europe, although it quickly devel-
oped in Britain, the United States, and Canada, among other places. As-
sociational nudism proved distinctive for its highly organized and regu-
lated form, and, particularly in the United States (and to a lesser degree 
elsewhere), it strove to establish nudism as a family activity completely 
divorced from sex. In many countries, camps and other outdoor spaces 
owned by societies or pro-­nudist individuals provided private venues for 
weekend and holiday gatherings (e.g., Hartman et al. 1970). By the turn 
of the twentieth-­first century, associational nudism had branched out 
to infiltrate the usually clothed spaces of the textile world. Nudist soci-
eties organized group trips to tourist attractions, rented public pools for 
naked swimming sessions, chartered planes, and held clothes-­free shop-
ping nights.12
“Shared space” nudism, by contrast, refers to the diverse range of 
Naturists feeding 
meerkats at Newquay 
Zoo in England during 
a visit by nearly one 
hundred naturists in 
June 2011. This event 
was one of many during 
a weeklong naturism 
festival attended by 
350 people in Cornwall. 
Reprinted by permission 
of British Naturism. 
Image courtesy of  
Steve Betts.

80    Chapter 4
places in which collective nakedness occurs. These include nudist and 
clothing-­optional beaches, as well as commercial holiday venues, such 
as hotels, guesthouses, resorts, and even the occasional cruise ship. The 
expansion of commercial nonassociational nudism has been character-
ized as a growing feature of the contemporary nudist scene, particularly 
in the form of up-­market leisure facilities and venues (Woodall 2002), 
used by individuals, couples, and families who want to enjoy the occa-
sional clothes-­free environment. Participants may enjoy the presence of 
other nudists, but they don’t necessarily share a commitment to nudism 
as a social project in the way club members tend to, nor do they share 
a commitment to the norms, rules, and ethos apparent and enforced in 
nudist associations.
The third form of nudism, “personal” nudism, takes place in pri-
vate and public spaces, including the home, beach, or woodland. While 
other nudists may be present (including partners or family), their pres-
ence—and particularly the presence of naked nonintimates—isn’t nec-
essarily desired or deemed an enhancing dimension of the experience 
(see Schrank 2012). Availability of legitimate spaces for personal nud-
ism varies considerably between different jurisdictions, with continental 
Europe, for instance, being far more permissive than the United States. 
When it takes the form of solitary nudism, personal nudism is more 
likely than the other forms of nudism outlined to transgress normative, 
and often legal, boundaries, by venturing illegitimately into clothing-­
required spaces, as I discuss below.
Associational, shared space, and personal nudism identify the main 
forms nudist activity takes. However, since this chapter focuses on 
nakedness in public arenas, it also draws in other, more sporadic forms 
of festive, aesthetic, or protest-­based nakedness. These don’t necessarily 
involve people who regularly appear naked in public but includes those 
willing to undress to demonstrate their strength of feeling in relation to 
state or corporate action (and inaction) (Alaimo 2010; Misri 2011; Sut-
ton 2007), for carnival (Gotham 2005; Shrum and Kilburn 1996), or be-
cause they are taking part in a television show or art event. Other kinds 
of organized but infrequent forms of public nudism include cycling 
events, such as the world naked bike ride, festivals such as Michigan 
Womyn’s Music Festival (Browne 2009), nude lounging on town streets, 
and the dramaturgical deployment of nudity in the form of “guerrilla 
prank­sterism.”13

Pursuit of Equality    81
Different forms of public nudity, advocated and practiced by often 
very different kinds of groups and individuals, may seem to have little 
in common. However, bringing them within the frame of everyday 
utopia causes diverse gestures of public nudism to become instances 
of a loosely common form, a form that brackets those social nudists 
who equate legitimate nudism exclusively with private or commercially 
owned space. Public nudism’s utopian character lies in several features. 
It signals the fantasy of a better way of living, one that stretches dress in-
formality to the utmost in the nudist dream of a people living unclothed 
(less true for those who undress as one-­off moments of protest than for 
others). Introducing Frances Merrill and Mason Merrill’s book Among 
the Nudists, John Langdon-­Davies (1931: ix) remarks, “In the future all 
reasonable governments would insist, on grounds of public morality and 
health, on the removal of all clothes.”
In posing another way of being, nudism seeks to educate desire (see 
chapter 5), stimulating people, through the experience of nudism, to 
become far more attuned to their sensory, and especially tactile, rela-
tionship to the world around them. Public nudism also highlights the 
multidimensional character of everyday utopias’ relationship to time. On 
the one hand, it refuses to postpone the better, undressed society until 
some future, undefined moment. Yet to the extent that public nudism is 
Nudist beach carnival, Queensland, Australia, 1998. Photo by Ruth Barcan.

82    Chapter 4
part of a political project (as I discuss below), it is oriented to bringing 
about a different future. In that sense, it might be read as a prefigurative 
practice—a utopia in formation, where undertaking what appears to be 
novel (carrying out everyday activities naked) provides a way of experi-
encing, demonstrating, and bringing into being its more developed (even 
institutionalized) future reality.
Nudism also speaks to utopia’s signaling of the impossible, absent 
place. Like other utopias, nudism seems to function as a (multidimen-
sional) domain only when viewed from within. From outside, it may ap-
pear incredible or unbelievable. Too unusual or “freakish” to be taken 
seriously, public nudism is largely ignored in wider discussions of dress 
or appearance. Yet despite its utopian aspirations and regular disregard, 
in common with the other sites discussed, as a way of living (at least 
from the perspective of nudist regulars) nudism is firmly rooted in the 
textured concerns of the routinized everyday. Organized associational 
nudism, in particular, is replete with rules, conventions, and etiquette in 
an attempt to preempt external prejudices and to confront and resolve 
the micro-­problems of “normal” life deliberately lived unclothed. How 
to cook, deal with menstrual blood, manage sweat and other personal 
secretions, and make eye contact in nonsexual ways (discussed further 
below) are all the subject of nudist rules and customs. Yet, more than this 
book’s other sites, in some ways nudism centers that which is most quo-
tidian: namely, how bodies appear, making banal that which gets fetish-
ized elsewhere. As an article in Time magazine on American nudists com-
mented, “They . . . have learned to see the naked body as mundane.”14
Whether nudism is a good idea—whether it provides a means of 
emancipation from the restrictions imposed by clothes—remains 
largely, for reasons explored in chapter 1, outside the scope of this dis-
cussion. At the same time, in considering the transformative potential of 
public nudism’s conceptual life, it is important to recognize the difficult 
relationship associational nudism in particular has historically had to 
other equality projects. While early twentieth-­century European nudism 
embraced a spectrum of political affiliations from anarchist to far right,15 
a dominating concern was the good, healthy body, which for many 
nudists meant also the good healthy race. European nudists (and natur-
ists) argued that sun contact (heliotherapy) and physical exercise would 
improve bodies; some also suggested it would generate “better” spousal 

Pursuit of Equality    83
matches, as love, kindled by a more fully displayed beauty and by the 
development of bodily strength, would drive sexual selection (Kenway 
1998: 109; see also Jeffries 2006: 83; Peeters 2006; Ross 2005). Nud-
ism’s early, highly problematic associations with eugenics and racism 
are well established.16 However, later twentieth-­century developments 
continued to demonstrate associational nudism’s racialized imbrication 
within the global North, from the racism of nude aesthetics and naked 
parties in postwar East Germany (McLellan 2007, 2009) to the white 
bias of photographic imagery within mainstream nudist publications 
(Woodall 2002: 271–72).
Nudism also has had a complex relationship to progressive gen-
der and class politics. One promotional claim often made about asso-
ciational nudism is its practical commitment to minimizing economic 
status asymmetries. Commenting on a Socialist Party nudist club near 
Hamburg, Frances and Mason Merrill (1931: 130) remark, “The lack of 
clothing contributed, if anything, to the ease of everybody. One barrier, 
at least, was eliminated: there was no class distinction of dress” (see also 
Dickberry [1904] 2006). Maurice Parmelee (1929: 231) similarly states, 
“Dress is one of the principal means of making [class and caste] distinc-
tions.” Historically nudism has also been presented as promoting gender 
Relaxing in a naturist spa. Reprinted by permission of British Naturism. Image courtesy of  
Steve Betts.

84    Chapter 4
equality, challenging the hypocrisies of female “modesty” and support-
ing women and girls’ ability to move about freely without restrictive gar-
ments (e.g., Parmelee 1929).17
However, in recent years the equality-­extending claims of early nudist 
advocates in relation to class and gender have been countered by writers 
attentive to the historical and ongoing ways such inequalities structure 
nudist activities (Bell and Holliday 2000; Ross 2005; Woodall 2002).18 
In relation to gender, in particular, early twenty-­first-­century feminists, 
including those sympathetic to nudism, have challenged nudism’s claims 
to enhance women’s liberation, exploring how women’s bodies are sexu-
alized on nudist beaches and in naturist publications (see Barcan 2004; 
Holmes 2006). Less discussed but still strikingly apparent from nudist 
and naturist magazines and websites is the ongoing social and cultural 
orientation of associational nudism toward an able-­bodied heterosexu-
ality,19 whose contemporary racial and geographic politics (particularly 
as up-­market naturist tourism brings naked white bodies to the global 
South) largely remains unexamined. Equally unexamined is the groom-
ing that mainstream nudist bodies seem to receive, especially in the 
images used in nudist magazines (many of which rely on sales to a non-
nudist market). The Western aesthetic of hairless, smooth, shiny, taut, 
fair bodies suggests that, rather than simply seeing nudism as rendering 
the utopian everyday, we might see the everyday in a sense as having 
been made utopian—in some sanitized, racially gendered form.
The equivocal relationship between nudism and other progressive 
politics begs the question: Would we do better to read nudism (or at 
least organized nudism) as an everyday utopia of the right? While this 
argument can certainly be made about some historical (and contem-
porary) forms of associational nudism (including conservative Chris-
tian nudist communities active today in the United States), exploring 
equality through public rather than associational or club nudism, that 
is, through practices that legitimate naked bodies in publicly owned 
or publicly visible spaces (and not just private ones), may orient nud-
ism leftward. As a mode of public appearance, nudism encompasses a 
heterogeneous array of naked activities, including those one-­timers or 
annual participants who strip to cycle naked through London, take off 
their clothes at a women’s music festival, or participate in one of Spencer 
Tunick’s art events. Yet while these cultural contexts indicate public nud-

Pursuit of Equality    85
ism’s lawful face, much public nudism, particularly when it is ad hoc and 
individual, remains illegal.
Contemporary states in the global North seem able to disregard 
nakedness when it is an integral aspect of some established or recog-
nized creative project; however, the regulation of “inappropriately” 
naked bodies is extensive and intense. Nudity is forbidden in a range 
of locations, including streets, courtrooms, universities, and moun-
tain paths, and those who breach place-­based prohibitions by walking, 
cycling, or otherwise appearing undressed face official, as well as unoffi-
cial,20 sanctions (Arneil 2000; Valverde and Cirak 2003). While the legal 
regulation of nudism varies by jurisdiction, most postindustrial societies 
have some form of control over public nakedness. Indeed what stands 
out in accounts of nudist regulation is the severity of some states’ re-
sponses, notably toward people who repeatedly appear naked in pub-
lic spaces, and particularly in elite public spaces, such as courtrooms. 
Britain’s “naked rambler,” Stephen Gough, according to the Guardian, 
has spent “nearly all of the last six years in Scottish jails, including long 
periods in solitary confinement at Perth prison, after repeatedly being 
arrested for failing to wear clothes in public or in court. He was nude 
again at Kirkcaldy sheriff court on [August 23] to face another charge of 
breach of the peace.”21 Indeed the mass media is replete with narratives 
of individuals arrested, charged, tried, and in some instances jailed.22 
And these narratives don’t just invoke a dispassionate law telling people 
to put their clothes back on. One striking and disturbing feature of sev-
eral media reports, most notably in the United States, is the use of taser 
guns to make docile those naked bodies deemed, because they remain 
determinedly naked, out of control.23
Regulating nudism is a fast-­moving international domain, one not re-
stricted to the immediacy of confronting naked bodies with the criminal 
law. Other forms of regulation target associational nudism, such as the 
seizure and prosecution of nudist organization magazines (and other lit-
erature) on grounds of obscenity. Media and community websites also 
tell stories of nudist organizations facing hostile local residents over the 
establishment of proposed nudist communities, of discrimination from 
financial service providers, and of activities closed down or intensively 
scrutinized on the grounds of possible child sexual abuse.24 Even when 
nudism is lawful, opponents—whether community groups or public au-

86    Chapter 4
thorities—use legal, governmental, or grassroots means to undermine 
its development and enjoyment. And the stigma attached to lifestyle 
nudity in many jurisdictions, although not all, means it frequently re-
mains a covert choice.
The treatment of nudists and of nudism sharply and clearly belies 
any notion that nudism is an accepted way of living within the postin-
dustrial societies of the global North. Certainly there are nondomestic 
spaces where nudism is permitted, but internationally they are largely 
restricted to commercial or privately owned places. One tension, then, 
unsurprisingly, to arise between different nudist organizations, with im-
portant implications for equality principles, concerns the status of prop-
erty rights, a theme explored further in the rather different, educational 
context of chapter 7. Mainstream organizations have frequently sought 
to protect and legitimate nudism through ownership claims, arguing 
that as property-­holders and corporate bodies they should be treated 
like any other when it comes to contracts, licenses, and renting and 
when it comes to determining what people can do in privately owned 
land and buildings.25 Mainstream organizations have campaigned for 
access to public lands, such as clothing-­optional beaches and parkland 
(if to a lesser degree, certainly, in the United States than other groups 
might like). However, the politics and style of mainstream nudist politics 
distinguishes such organizations from more radical groups, such as the 
U.S.-­based Body Freedom Collaborative, which seeks not only to extend 
public nudist spaces and to affirm nudism’s social value but to use naked-
ness in the process as a political tool. As they state on their website, 
“Why not fight for body freedom by doing good in public while naked? 
We call this type of activity civil nudification.”26
Beach sunning, nude bike rides, swimming sessions in municipal 
pools, or stripping naked at meetings, on city streets, or in the theater 
can happen for many reasons. In the discussion that follows, I want to 
follow the path of being publicly naked in order to explore how equality 
gets manifested through practices that implicitly or explicitly challenge 
nudism’s marginality, subordination, and erasure. If public nudism con-
stitutes a utopia, or at least one in formation, it provides a place from 
which to critique what is and to instantiate a move toward what could be. 
Equality, in this sense, exists as an enacting presupposition that brings 
certain forms of nudist practice into being; it is expressed practically (if 

Pursuit of Equality    87
not verbally) by them; and it inheres as a more open, if nevertheless in-
terpretively found potential. But what content do these forms of equality 
when attached to nudism invoke? Drawing on parallel debates within 
feminist and queer politics, we might imagine nudist equality according 
to a range of possibilities that could include “equality of place,” where 
the nudist/textile divide concerns the fair distribution of dressed and un-
dressed spaces; “equality of entitlement,” making it possible for people, 
however they align themselves, to exercise their preference to be clothed 
or unclothed anywhere; and an “equality of who,” reducing the dressed/
undressed distinction to one of insignificance. But linking equality to 
plurality can also exceed this model of equivalence. As queer has done 
for sexuality, so nudism might invoke multiple forms of dressed and un-
dressed practice, exploding the clothed/unclothed distinction. It might 
also, like queer politics and lesbian feminism, open up and destabilize 
what is possible, sought, and desired, so that how people appear cannot 
be reduced to fixed, preexisting preferences.
Nudist equality can suggest many different things. And once we move 
away from a governmental account that treats equality as a program or 
project that is deliberately arrived at, enunciated, and then installed, 
the relationship between equality—whether as a presupposition, ex-
pressed norm, or potential—and the social context that gives it shape 
becomes far more muddy and entangled. This complexity is often omit-
ted in work on equality and public life. Despite the different ways public 
is understood—from geographical work on public spaces to social theo-
retical perspectives on the deliberative public sphere—the relationship 
between public and equality tends to be addressed in terms of the con-
ditions for inclusion; how people are treated in public once included; 
whether publics can encompass diversity; and the value of counter-
publics explicitly molded around minority interests and expression 
(Fraser 1990). In other words, equality is incorporated into discussion 
about public spaces and public spheres as a clear (often calculable) po-
litical project that will transform or revitalize public practice. However, 
what gets lost here is equality’s ability to be far more inchoately present 
in part because of the complex ways in which conceptions of equality 
(as the movement between imagining and actualization) absorb, adapt, 
and respond to the norms, pressures, desires, fears, and constraints of 
their conditioning social environments. Focusing on the environment 

88    Chapter 4
within which public nudity takes place rather than the environment con-
ditioning its interpretation, the absorptive character of equality is fore-
grounded in the discussion that follows.
Bringing Nudism into Mainstream Publics
Circulatory Publics
I start with the notion of circulatory publics, a term I draw loosely from 
Michael Warner (2002). Warner uses the idea of circulatory publics to 
characterize the creation of an open-­ended formation of strangers orga-
nized around and through particular circulating texts and discourses, a 
newspaper-­reading public being one obvious example. I draw on the idea 
of a circulatory public in order to explore the equality norms that inhere 
within the interactions of an open-­ended body of people, constituted as 
a public through the movement of a shared text or practice, which some-
how involves nudism. However, as the instances described below reveal, 
nudism can circulate in very different ways—with very different impli-
cations for equality norms.
In the first instance, a naked person privately engages with a circu-
lating text. To the extent the text remains unmarked by nudism, the so-­
called difference of the naked reader is contained, bound off from the 
rest of the public sphere. This kind of circulatory public captures the 
idea of an equality of inattention—familiar to feminist and sexual poli-
tics activists who have struggled both for and against an inclusion con-
tingent on the private management of one’s difference. In the second 
instance, the circulating text bears a discursive imprint of nudist brief-­
carrying—a letter to the editor, for example, from a naturist organiza-
tion. Here we see the equality of liberal public sphere politics. Differ-
ences constitute legitimate discursive positions or objects for debate so 
long as they comply with the conventions of proper form, being coher-
ent, intelligible, and restrained, and so long as they operate according to 
the conditions that signal an authority or legitimate right to speak and 
make contact.27
However, it is a third way of inserting nakedness into a circulatory 
public that most interests me, a way that combines speech and body, as 
when a naked writer’s picture is printed beside her or his article,28 or 
when naked participants take part in a predominantly clothed face-­to-­
face debate. Here the equality articulated is not only about what is said 
or written and by whom; it is also an equality given texture, sensation, 

Pursuit of Equality    89
and weight by bare, claims-­making bodies.29 Attaching naked bodies 
to nudist speech in the context of nonnudist publics troubles forms of 
nudist subordination (or minimal equality) that rely on the physical and 
sensory bracketing of that about which they speak reminiscent here of 
the embodied protest kiss-­ins of lesbian and gay politics in the 1990s. 
Bringing bodies right in troubles a vision of equality as allotted space 
that depends upon clothed and unclothed practices remaining apart.
Instead, as nudism circulates through nonnudist spaces, it speaks to 
a conception of equality that takes shape in and through desire. Like an 
earlier generation of revolutionary gay politics which identified gay sexu-
ality as a potential available to all that would gain equal value as more 
people chose it, desire here also passes, intensifies, and becomes trans-
formed as nudism stops being a minority preference and becomes some-
thing that engages many (see McLellan 2007: 64). As the young man 
who introduced the Americans Frances and Mason Merrill to 1920s Ger-
man nudism remarked, “If all the opponents of Nacktkultur could be got 
into a Freilicht park, undressed, just for a day, by evening there wouldn’t 
be any opponents” (Merrill and Merrill 1931: 11). Evert Peeters (2006: 
455) similarly emphasizes the experiential aspect of being won over 
in his discussion of nudism in Belgium in the early twentieth century. 
Echoing Obrador-­Pons’s (2007) account of beach nudism at the start of 
the twenty-­first century, Belgian nudists (almost a century earlier) be-
lieved the truth accessed by nudity couldn’t be lectured or taught; it 
had to be felt. The power of public nakedness as a sensation and experi-
ence is evident also in the comments of participants in the contempo-
rary mass naked art events staged and photographed by Spencer Tunick; 
more than one described the freedom that came from temporarily laying 
aside the burden of being more than “flesh.”30
A circulating nudism, then, gestures toward an equality that goes be-
yond the fair distribution of textile and naked spaces, challenging the 
notion of predefined subjects stably attached to one mode of appearance 
rather than another. At the same time, for those to whom nudism con-
stitutes a dangerously seductive harm, the force emanating from nud-
ism’s desirability and enticement underscores its threat; in David Scott’s 
(2003: 129) words, nudism can “infect us, like a plague.” Alongside the 
alarm posed from “catching” nakedness reside other contamination fears 
of catching something else from the circulation of sweating, leaking, un-
clothed bodies. In nudist clubs and venues, the profusion of hygiene 

90    Chapter 4
anxieties mean barriers, such as towels, come down to stop anything 
spreading. But beyond the nomos of associational nudism, the main fear 
of contagion concerns children. What will children catch from naked-
ness circulating? And is it (representations of) naked children that are 
circulating as well (see also chapter 7)?31
The anxieties and panics mobilized in relation to contemporary nud-
ism structure and, in the short term, seem to limit equality’s potential 
as measures are introduced to curtail what circulates and to whom. 
(Some public authorities, for instance, have prohibited children from 
being present during certain nudist activities, such as municipal swim-
ming sessions.) While the force and power of such anxieties obviously 
are shaped by time and space, what they reveal is the power of particu-
lar contexts to redirect equality’s potential. Rather than being carried by 
the spread of desire—as the infectious quality of nudism touches more 
subjects—nudist equality gets cornered and domesticated. In turn, the 
potential of nudism to bring forth new interests and desires among trans-
formed subjects becomes reduced to a restricted equality in which nud-
ism circulates freely only among a micro-­public of nudist participants.
Orientational Publics
A second form of publicness is constituted not by what circulates but 
by the relationships forged between a provider and a group of strangers. 
Orientational publics vary widely, from witnessed arts performances to 
welfare use. However, what they share is a reciprocating, projective rela-
tionship; as publics are turned toward a particular object (a play or public 
service, for instance), that object is also turned toward them.32 In orien-
tational publics, welfare providers, fundraisers, performers, and arts pro-
ducers attend to the social composition of their public, both imagined 
and actualized. To the extent that nudist constituencies come to function 
as a recognized category of interest (or need)—for instance, in seeking 
a mass bike ride permit, permission to use a public swimming pool or 
establish a nudist beach;33 less favorably, as objects of court or police 
scrutiny—this attention may extend to them too. At the same time, in 
contrast to circulatory forms of public engagement (where participants 
transact with each other through and in relation to the circulating thing, 
which might of course be their own or someone else’s nudity), orienta-
tional publics interact minimally—if at all—among themselves. Dem-
onstrating the kind of civil inattention that Goffman (1963) discusses, 

Pursuit of Equality    91
such publics rarely get to know one another and show little reflexivity or 
interest in themselves either as an entirety or part.34
What happens, then, when naked bodies appear within nonnaked 
orientational publics? While nudists may be recognized as legitimate 
public subjects, including by theatrical producers, unexpected audience 
undressing seems to trouble rather than support the undoing of nudist 
subordination. Anecdotal media stories suggest attendees who distract 
proceedings by undressing become spectacularized, the most frequent in-
stance being the sports field streaker. Undressing or undressed, they be-
come the temporary object of interest, amusement, annoyance, or anger 
as they reorient what counts as the show.35 Indeed one might specu-
late about the outcome at Sadler’s Wells if, during the naked clambering 
of dancers performing Un Peu de Tendresse Bordel de Merde! among the 
audience, members of the audience had started taking off their clothes 
as well.
Incidents of theater audiences undressing appear quite rare, how-
ever. But what kind of equality might be present as a presupposition, 
expressed norm, or potential if it did happen, particularly if the un-
dressing extended beyond individual acts? Certainly, in the context of 
current gender practices, the equality fantasy that imagines this as any-
thing other than a rather risky event is hard to come by. Yet in those 
contemporary contexts where the sexualization of gendered inequali-
ties do not predominate, such as a women’s music festival event (e.g., 
Browne 2009), we can imagine such side-­by-­side nakedness as express-
ing an equality framed by sensation—of the body that’s adjacent or 
proximate as limbs (moving and at rest) touch. Yet outside such liminal, 
other-­worldly (other-­normative) spaces, naked bodies’ presence in con-
temporary, predominantly clothed spaces—as a way of undoing nudist 
subordination (and the boundary between separate naked and clothed 
spaces)—seems likely to confront several obstacles or mediators. For the 
circulatory publics (constituted around communication, expression, and 
influence), exclusions (such as of those children) may operate to limit 
the infectiousness of naked bodies that appear too appealing, risky, or 
leaky. But what mediators exist in the case of orientational publics?
Certainly we can imagine other means being brought to bear to man-
age and temper nudity’s interjection into the relations between publics 
and their object, or between public members themselves.36 While skin 
could become, in a sense, a different kind of skin,37 signaling contact’s 

92    Chapter 4
necessary boundaries rather than any merger or blending (also chap-
ter 3), distance—both physical and functional—might also be drawn on 
to thwart and limit the challenge of proximate naked bodies. So a local 
authority considering a nudist group’s request for regularly scheduled 
swimming sessions might have in place a series of formalized expecta-
tions of how such a group should behave in making and following up 
their request, to maintain the council’s distance and separateness from 
the nudity in question.
Undoing nudist subordination through nakedness performed in non-
naked orientational publics thus confronts a series of tensions to do with 
contact and connection, distance and alienation. These tensions struc-
ture equality’s normative principles as nudists oscillate between de-
manding recognition from providers as a constituency of equal value 
to denying that the nudist/textile distinction is itself meaningful and 
worth retaining. In the first, equality is fashioned as a relationship of 
parity and equivalence between differently marked (client or audience) 
groups. This is the kind of equality presupposed in nudist claims for pub-
lic swimming sessions, justified in part because other “minority” groups 
have them also. But equality can also signal forms of relating in which 
individuals’ different (transient) markings—as dressed or undressed—
become bracketed as insignificant. Extended further in its normative 
scope, it also becomes possible to observe, in the side-­by-­side relations of 
touching bodies in public, the potential for an equality oriented toward 
connection rather than comparison, indistinction rather than separa-
tion.
What nudism as a case study begins to identify beyond notions of 
parity between different groups and beyond the transformation of desire 
that opens up nudism as a more widely desired as well as available choice 
is equality’s sensory potential. As Obrador-­Pons (2007: 128) remarks, 
“Nudism is first and foremost an expressive and affectual practice, a way 
of accessing the world through the body and a sensual disposition.” An 
equality of indistinctness is not simply equality between people judged 
to be the same; it is an equality attuned to connection, blending, and 
physical contact—to transformed sensory and tactile relations between 
people. Conventionally equality has had little to say about touch; this is 
no doubt unsurprising, given equality’s traditional deployment within 
debates on political representation and the distribution of social re-
sources, respect, dignity, and recognition (see chapter 3). Indeed as a set 

Pursuit of Equality    93
of conceptual lines, equality’s discursive history and continued juridical 
orientation toward comparison has caused it to assume (even perhaps to 
produce) divisions between the units of its gaze. Public nudism can cer-
tainly be read according to a politics of calculation and comparison given 
the preferential treatment clearly afforded to the textile world. How-
ever, taking seriously the materiality of naked bodies touching pushes 
us to consider what a more haptic version of equality might entail. This 
is a version of equality that doesn’t simply seek to make touch more 
equal but that approaches touch—as contact, feeling, and a reinflected 
interior space—as a core dimension of equality also.
Yet the notion of nudism as the harbinger of some more tactile, con-
nective version of equality should not be overstated. Processes of un-
doing subordination, like inequality itself, get forged compositionally, 
and the equality that animates and is created may also be one that seeks 
or depends upon other forms of distance or separation. Nudist clubs, 
especially in the United States, have historically used compensatory 
devices extensively as a substitute for clothes, from norms and rules 
about looking and touching to bans on alcohol use, sex talk, nude danc-
ing, photography, body accentuation (such as with makeup or jewelry), 
and single or unmarried male membership (see Smith 1980; Weinberg 
1965).38 These devices work to make the side-­by-­side contact of fellow 
members safe, respectful, and possible. But in doing so they limit the 
possibilities for new conceptual lines predicated upon the proximity of 
physical exposure to others and what this could mean.
Appearing in Public
Clothing is a language of publicity, folding the body in what is felt as the 
body’s own privacy.
—M. Warner 2002: 23
Underpinning the two public modes discussed so far is a concern with 
those norms governing public appearance. Certainly being constituted 
as (or in) public is not restricted to human subjects. Yet whether pub-
lic appearance concerns spaces, things, or people,39 it treats the accom-
plished subject as something (or someone) that cannot be assumed. As 
a stylized, normative way of being, appearing in public is regularly over- 
or underperformed. Nevertheless when people enter public space un-
expectedly naked (whether in an auditorium, meeting, or some other 

94    Chapter 4
arena), their accomplishment of being properly public is perceived to 
have broken down.40 Unorganized, ad hoc, public nudity is deemed a 
grave bodily mistake—that the body has become so forgotten or ne-
glected it has failed to be hidden (or tucked away) or, conversely, that an 
individual’s overvaluation has placed it deliberately on show.41
Out-­of-­place nakedness not only breaches social norms; it also fore-
grounds the power of proprioception (the internal sense of bodily move-
ment and location). The stigma and anxiety attached to unbounded, non-
organized forms of public nudity, that is, to nakedness outside of reality 
television or well-­publicized mass events, such as the world naked bike 
ride, reveals something of the significance of individual proprioception 
(sensing where your bits are) to modes of public appearance.42 But out-­
of-­place nakedness invokes not only the anxiety of misplaced body parts; 
it also invokes the power of a social proprioception, collectively attuned 
to the movement and location of parts of the body social. This goes be-
yond knowing the right place for particular forms of (clothed and un-
clothed) activity, to the social capacity to feel (and to regulate through 
feeling).
Proprioception, then, can be understood as the process by which 
norms relating to proximity, distance, contact, and place are experi-
enced, collectively and individually, as feelings and sensations rather 
than as obligations or right thought. While the positive sensation from 
experiencing nudism might encourage its growth, set against it is the 
power of social proprioception to inhibit a spatially random nakedness. 
Social proprioception doesn’t make nudist equality impossible. Never-
theless it inclines toward an equality of settled allocations, in which 
naked activity—wherever it occurs—occupies its own already proper 
space.
Linked to the social processes that recognize through feeling where 
things are and should be is a related process in which individuals and the 
social body sense or feel “right” and conversely “wrong” time (see also 
chapter 6). While the force of right time underscores the deviance asso-
ciated with temporally improper nakedness (e.g., outside church on a 
weekday morning or in a closed government building at night),43 it also 
gives such nakedness power, including the power to denote more than 
formal equality. In her discussion of whiteness, Sara Ahmed (2006: 131) 
draws on Merleau-­Ponty to suggest that bodies bear their whiteness as 
a kind of train that extends their motility and reach. To the extent that 

Pursuit of Equality    95
contemporary nakedness gets associated, positively or negatively, with 
infancy, sex, or transitional daily self-­management (getting out of the 
bath, undressing, etc.), untimely nakedness bears a train of other (often 
liminal) times. Inserted into the flow and circulation of the proper, these 
wrong times inject a phantom replay of other time-­spaces.
Proprioception, then, whether it relates to individual bodies, social 
spaces, or scheduled (or generational) time, identifies social strains, 
secures existing (as well as new) norms, and gives a troubling weight 
to improper nakedness. Clearly where nudism feels right can change, 
including through sustained acts of impropriety. Nevertheless pro-
prioception’s orderliness harnesses (and is fortified by) similar tenden-
cies within equality’s own normative principles. As a promise or set of 
claims, equality is usually mobilized when the worth of a constituency, 
place, or practice has already been identified. Equality claims may be 
rhetorically and instrumentally deployed against a marginality or sub-
jugation that becomes knowable through the very terms in which it is 
protested, but equality tends to remain a distant or weak murmur until 
constituencies, identities, or lifestyles cross a certain threshold of so-
cially recognized (or constituted) value. Nudists and nudism can, and 
in some places have, crossed this threshold. However, to the extent that 
undoing nudist subordination depends upon extending where and when 
nakedness appears, it comes up against equality’s governmental disdain 
for the improper (even when a nongovernmental equality is at stake). 
In this sense, public nakedness precipitates exposure—not only of the 
body overly undressed and overly present but of equality also—as public 
nakedness makes all too readily visible the limits in equality’s contempo-
rary imagining and scope.
Environmental Touch
I realized that mankind is most in harmony with nature when nude.
—Parmelee 1929: 18
Although views differ about suitable public nudist spaces, beaches and 
woodland have tended to be so coded (Daley 2005; Parmelee 1929; Sal-
danha 2005), as advocates forge nudism’s ideological and symbolic asso-
ciations with nature and celebrate the feeling of sun, wind, and sand 
on the body. Conceived as a desire for the prelapsarian—a re-­tuning 
to wilderness, purity, and what’s natural—nudism is unsurprisingly as-

96    Chapter 4
sociated with and located within imaginings of unspoiled or authentic 
rural idylls (Bell and Holliday 2000; Daley 2005; Peeters 2006). Thus in 
this context we might imagine nudist equality extending resonances and 
associations that already exist, perhaps by claiming (or legitimizing) new 
parts of the countryside for naked bodies. But what is at stake in thinking 
about equality as an allocation of spaces and options that goes beyond 
nudism’s association with the rural?
When it comes to urban spaces, the presence of naked bodies is, for 
the most part, intensely regulated and proscribed, including in countries 
with a more relaxed approach, in general, to social nakedness.44 Indeed 
nudism has often had an antagonistic relationship to the modern city. 
Discussing Australian nudism, Caroline Daley (2005: 155) explains how 
removing clothes symbolized the removal of the constraints and taint of 
modern urban living. While nudism’s relationship to the urban is a com-
plex and certainly racialized one, I want to suggest that expressed in this 
sense of incongruity is the unsettling touch deemed to move between 
body and built space. In contrast to the benign relationship of resem-
blance struck between the rural landscape and the naked body, in urban 
contexts it is the ostensibly nonresembling contact between body and 
place that unsettles, evidenced in the often harsh treatment of randomly 
naked adult bodies in public urban spaces. But beyond the fear of what 
touch carries is an anxiety simply about touch itself. Despite naturism’s 
claim to build hardier, less physically sensitive bodies (Peeters 2006), 
naked bodies are seen as vulnerable (see chapter 5). This is not simply 
fear that, in a densely thronged urban space, without clothing’s protec-
tive barrier, incidental physical intimacy might occur. It is also a read-
ing of the urban as itself touching (and debilitating through touching).
What kind of equality might naked bodies in urban space suggest? 
Certainly we might imagine naked bodies legalized on present-­day city 
streets, but given the character of urban design and street furniture—of 
uncomfortable, dirty benches and tarmac roads, of wind tunnels, nar-
row pavements, and looming high-­rises—this is an undoing of the tex-
tile/nudist divide arguably at the level of formality alone, since dressed 
choices would seem to remain far more comfortable and practical. Can 
urban nudism go any further? Can it express a version of equality that ex-
ceeds the “formal status” equality, which permission to go naked might 
enact?
Thinking with public nudity speaks to the presupposition, but also to 

Pursuit of Equality    97
the claim, that cities are for people in all their diversity, and this means 
accommodating naked living as a public practice too. Establishing cities 
that fit naked bodies begs all sorts of questions about the urban envi-
ronment, including its textures, materials, and temperature. Enacting 
nakedness within public urban environments is obviously not enough 
on its own to cause cities to be rebuilt (though see Dickberry [1904] 
2006: 244). However, regular events, such as the annual naked bike ride, 
offer forms of practice from which new conceptual lines might be drawn. 
These approach equality not as the fair allocation of nudist/textile spaces 
but as the basis for reimagining what is sought and desired in our urban 
environments, whether it is greater sensation or greater comfort.45 Thus 
public urban nudism has the potential to contribute to wider forms of 
social dreaming and to visions of better cities (Pinder 2002), for what 
might suit those who choose to experience urban space naked may also 
benefit others, such as the young, elderly, and homeless.
Concluding Remarks
While writing on equality politics focuses on explicit, calculated forms 
of action (and activism), this chapter has focused on the ways equality 
as a normative concept is actualized within a particular field of practice. 
Equality isn’t something to simply exist or not. Instead it takes shape 
in the ways past and future are narrated into and folded through the 
present. Public nudism, particularly unorganized public nudism, can be 
interpreted in different ways—as signaling mental distress, antisocial 
behavior, exhibitionism, disruption, and deviance. And read as such, the 
moments accounted for in this chapter are unlikely to herald the start of 
anything politically new, simply taking their place within a flow of inci-
dents that might be read as alienated, dysfunctional, ad hoc, random, or 
simply insignificant. What follows from this is the importance of the in-
terpretive frame brought to moments of public nudism. This is crucial 
to understanding the meaning such moments can bear and what they 
can open up.
As a presupposition, as that which animates public nudism, equality 
of rights and entitlement come to the fore. For public nudism depends 
on participants, in particular, perceiving themselves as subjects entitled 
to act, including by removing their clothes (even as who counts as a 
nudist subject can be restricted through status-­based prohibitions such 
as those imposed on child participants). A sense of entitlement does not 

98    Chapter 4
only foreground the equality presuppositions public nudism depends 
upon. It also can be seen as something that public nudism expresses, in-
cluding as a claim of what should be. But notions of the kind of equality 
that public nudism should be granted vary. As explored in this chapter, 
public nudism may express a moral right to inclusion within the public 
sphere, to a share of public resources, to the value of experiencing life 
undressed, and to the need for spaces, such as cities, to make different 
ways of living possible—equality rights grounded in the presuppositions 
of democratic politics, of individual freedom, and of the “natural” body.46 
At the same time, the equality that public nudity expresses cannot be 
separated from the other norms that saturate and circulate through its 
practice. These norms include propriety, orderliness, legitimacy, and 
harm—particularly the harm associated with contamination, and they 
very clearly structure what nudist equality can mean and entail.
Recognizing the presence and power of other norms is important to 
understanding what equality as a set of normative principles can express 
in a given context. However, equality is not limited to the normative 
principles that it currently bears (or expresses). Reflecting on equality’s 
potential within public nudism highlights how a practice can signal 
other, future possibilities. This does not simply mean that public nudism 
in the present can create (or gesture to) a form of future social organiz-
ing, in which nudism’s legitimate material place is other than it currently 
is, for that would simply be to repeat the promise of equality (or at least 
its normative claims) that public nudism expresses. Rather approach-
ing equality as potential indicates new future forms of imagining as well 
as actualization. What these will be is, of course, unknown. However, if 
we approach public nudism as a practice that gives rise to new imagin-
ings, albeit imaginings that require mediation, interpretation, and en-
abling since they cannot be assumed to take shape, these lines might 
take up the challenge public nudism proffers of an equality oriented to 
touch, plurality, and indistinction, disavowing the separation, order, and 
equivalence that conventional conceptions of equality rely upon.
Exploring potential ways of imagining equality that particular prac-
tices can generate is clearly speculative, as Ruth Levitas (2010) helpfully 
discusses (also Levitas 2013). Its value, however, lies not in its capacity 
to represent what is or will be, but in extending our imagination of the 
present, identifying generative aspects of a practice, such as public nud-
ism, routinely discounted by many on the left. But is it right to claim 

Pursuit of Equality    99
public nudism because of its rich potential as a source of new conceptual 
lines? Is this a form of appropriation, drawing on nudism to service some 
other political project? Or does it simply reveal the contingent and un-
determined character of change and transformation—that what things 
may come to be and mean do not belong to any particular constituency?
In chapter 5 I explore the politics of boundary drawing and belong-
ing in a different context. My discussion centers on the everyday utopia 
of a sexual bathhouse for women and transgendered people in Toronto. 
Building on the themes of touch, equality, pleasure, and sensation, I con-
sider what happens when a casual sex space for women meets feminist 
care ethics.

chapter 5
Unsettling Feminist Care Ethics  
through a Women’s and Trans Bathhouse
One of the things we talked about, if women are traumatized, should we 
have a room with a counselor and herbal teas. . . . It’s interesting we had 
the conversation, but we said no—women have to take care of themselves 
. . . . . . . One of the principles the organizing group articulated was we 
won’t police women [who are] already very policed.
Bathhouse committee member
Feminist care ethics (fce) has had a remarkable life since Carol 
Gilligan’s (1982) work on “a different voice.” Refusing “to relegate 
care to a realm ‘outside morality’” (Held 2006: 10), fce promised 
an alternative normative framework to the androcentric approach 
that dominated moral reasoning, epistemology, and psychology, 
with its valorization of rationality, autonomy, abstraction, impar-
tiality, and the public realm. Feminist perceptions that these values 
were not uncontestable or neutral and that they privileged mascu-
line life experiences generated a series of care-­based counternorms 
that, it was claimed, emerged from and, importantly, would vali-
date women’s lives. These counternorms converged around ideas 
of context, feeling, intimacy, and, importantly, (inter)dependency.
Since the late 1980s fce has developed in diverse ways, as schol-
ars brought care ethics into an ever-­expanding set of fields. By 2010 
these included international relations (e.g., Robinson 1999), femi-
nist jurisprudence (Drakopoulou 2000), the environment (e.g., 
King 1991), child caregivers (e.g., Cockburn 2005), and animals

Unsettling Care Ethics    101
(e.g., Donovan and Adams 2007), alongside more established domains of 
parenting or mothering (e.g., Held 2006; Ruddick 1989), nursing (e.g., 
Barnes and Brannelly 2008; Cloyes 2002), public welfare provision 
(e.g., Sevenhuijsen 2003), dependency work (e.g., Kittay 1999), and sup-
port for people with disabilities (e.g., Hughes et al. 2005). Feminist care 
ethics has not been without its critics (e.g., Beasley and Bacchi 2005; 
Cockburn 2005); however, the cluster of feminist texts that trouble 
fce’s claims and assumptions are largely drowned out by the torrent of 
work deploying its terms.
This chapter contributes to debates on feminist care ethics by reflect-
ing on its terms and premises from an unlikely caring site: a casual sex 
space for women and transgendered people. By exploring the assemblage 
of elements that come together as ethical care from the standpoint of the 
bathhouse as well as from feminist care ethics, I want to take forward the 
utopian approach to concepts developed so far. Specifically this chap-
ter builds on three themes: the importance of actualization within the 
minor stream spaces of everyday utopias to imagining concepts differ-
ently; the limits of idealist conceptualizing, in the sense of creating per-
fect normative concepts as well as developing concepts purely through 
thought; and the way conceptual lines can be forged through sensation 
and feeling rather than just through what is said.
Imagining care in relation to mainstream caring practices, feminist 
care ethics articulates a set of normative principles that include atten-
tiveness, responsibility, competence, and responsiveness (Tronto 1993: 
127–36). Developing these principles in ways that put pressure on pro-
fessional care policy and practice is valuable; so too are the explorations 
of what care ethics might entail in fields, such as international relations, 
largely governed by other norms. However, the rapid growth in feminist 
care ethics has caused it to solidify into a framework of judgment that 
parses everyday social caring according to its terms. In the light of this 
hardening, what contribution can the everyday utopia of a casual sex 
space make to thinking about the relationship between ethics and care, 
questioning and resettling the way ethics and care are articulated? To the 
extent a casual sex venue manifests both care and ethics, does it open up 
other conceptual lines and other forms of imagining? Approaching the 
Toronto bathhouse in this way emphasizes its value as a space of con-
ceptual creativity. As such, it is more than a passive terrain spread open 
for analysis; instead it is an active participant in a two-­way deliberative 

102    Chapter 5
encounter. Mieke Bal (2002: 24) makes a similar point: “Concepts can 
only do [their methodological] work . . . on one condition: that they are 
kept under scrutiny through a confrontation with, not application to, the 
cultural objects being examined.”
Adopting a contextual approach to care and ethics, I explore feminist 
and sexuality politics as they extend beyond the terrain of inequality, re-
situating both sexuality and gender in relation to pleasure rather than 
(or at least as well as) pain. While feminist concerns with oppression 
and discrimination circulate through my discussion of the politics of 
this particular bathhouse, focusing on care and ethics also places verti-
cal social relations (that is, relations of asymmetry) in a different light. 
Both care and ethics are engagements whose value lies in the differen-
tiated and in a sense unequal character of the encounter. The difference 
is that here, compared to other kinds of unequal encounter, inequality 
functions as a way of advancing equality (by empowering the subordi-
nated party) rather than sabotaging it. Feminist care ethics also un-
settles equality’s presuppositions of separation and division. While fce 
has generated considerable debate over the question of immersion and 
loss of oneself in the other, and while equality has the potential to cen-
ter touch and connection (as chapter 4 explores), care ethics’ orienta-
tion toward bonding and binding contrasts with equality’s inclination 
to locate equivalence in separation. (Things can be equal because of or 
through their difference.) The relationship between an ethics of care 
and a politics of equality (sometimes read as justice) has received con-
siderable attention within feminist care ethics (e.g., see Clement 1996; 
Cockburn 2005: Sevenhuijsen 1998), and I will not retread these debates 
here. Rather, centering a space oriented to pleasure in dialogue with an 
academic framework oriented to caring, I want to explore what’s at stake 
in how we think about and recognize care and ethics, both as these terms 
come together in the fused framework fce advocates and when they are 
otherwise articulated.
A Women’s and Trans Bathhouse
Much has been written about men’s bathhouses, particularly by soci-
ologists studying their practices, norms, and geographies in order to 
understand how sexual forms of conduct in a site oriented to brief and 
anonymous voluntary encounters can become familiar and even rou-

Unsettling Care Ethics    103
tine (e.g., Berubé 1996; Binson and Woods 2003; Tattelman 1999, 2000; 
Tewksbury 2002). Far less, however, has been said about women’s casual 
sex venues. In a sense this is hardly surprising since few such spaces 
for women exist. But as a consequence it is equally unsurprising that a 
thriving women-­initiated bathhouse, active for more than twelve years, 
would precipitate academic interest and a clutch of scholarship. Work 
has examined the site’s promotion of women’s sexual agency and erotic 
culture (Hammers 2008a, 2008b, 2009a, 2009b; Nash and Bain 2007), 
its governance ethos and distinctiveness (Cooper 2009), trans participa-
tion (Nash 2011), the methodological challenges involved in conducting 
field research (Bain and Nash 2006), and the police raid in 2000 and 
subsequent court hearing (Bain and Nash 2007; Gallant and Gillis 2001; 
Lamble 2009). This chapter benefits significantly from such earlier 
work. However, since my aim is to consider the bathhouse in relation-
ship to ethical care, my primary material instead comes from interviews 
with approximately thirty organizers, volunteers, and other bathhouse 
attendees over a period of about five years.1
The Toronto Women’s and Trans Bathhouse (twtb), initially known 
as Pussy Palace, opened in the fall of 1998 as an occasional event to be 
held at a local men’s bathhouse in Toronto, a city with a long history of 
bathhouse activity and a gay community with considerable experience 
in defending men’s bathhouses from the state.2 Initiated by women who 
were active in the city’s polyamorous adult sex education and sexual 
health networks, twtb aimed to promote a healthy, positive attitude to 
sex among queer women and, subsequently, among those who identified 
as transgendered. Organizers sought to celebrate the range and diver-
sity of sexualities; invest nonstraight female culture with a more overtly 
raunchy, “in your face” eroticism; and signal women’s sexual agency to 
wider society.
The Toronto bathhouse intrigued me from my first encounter, walking 
along a neighborhood street in North London with one of its founders 
in the late 1990s and hearing her ambitious, fully committed descrip-
tion of what the space was intended to be and to do. I was struck by her 
pedagogical ambition and by the idea that women (the focus of early 
bathhouses) would learn new sexual skills from volunteers offering lap 
dances and G-­spot orgasms. The Toronto bathhouse didn’t just dream 
about developing women’s sexual desires. In ways that echo the utopian 

104    Chapter 5
writer Abensour’s (1973) account of extending desire—to desire more 
and desire better—twtb sought to create a place where participants 
would acquire new sexual wants, learn new techniques, and develop 
new ways of being sexual subjects.
The Toronto bathhouse was also an everyday utopia in another re-
spect (see chapter 1). As a queer feminist space, it committed to modes 
of governance that were democratic, participative, and open. At the same 
time, aspirational norms of governance confronted the legal and social 
realities of running an innovative sexual space, one that encountered 
state attention and monitoring in several guises, including most sharply 
in the form of a police raid two years in. Out of the mix of concerns and 
pressures, organizers introduced a series of measures to ensure bath-
house nights ran smoothly, safely, and securely—from rules about where 
sex could happen to rules about alcohol, bdsm (bondage, domination 
and sadomasochism), and “oppressive behavior” (Cooper 2009). But 
perhaps the governance provisions that best exemplified the quotidian 
character of the bathhouse as an everyday utopia were the techniques 
deployed to get participants to be sexually proactive, to understand the 
etiquette of how to behave in a bathhouse, and the challenges volunteer 
sex providers faced in managing time, demand, and their own pleasures. 
As one volunteer told me, “When you’re volunteering, you need to make 
dates for after your shift ends, because you’ve a line up outside your door, 
and you’re there to serve a population.”
In exploring the bathhouse as an everyday utopia, as with the other 
sites, it is also important to recognize how the space evolved. The 
Toronto bathhouse changed in many respects between 1998 and 2011. 
As one organizer commented, “The first bathhouse, we had no clue how 
many people would come—we thought there might be twenty and there 
were four hundred. . . . There was such euphoria, women sitting out in 
the rain for hours [waiting to get in]. . . . From 1998 until 2000, it calmed 
a bit. We put more systems in place, how we organized volunteers, we 
put a lot down on paper, bathhouse etiquette, anti-­oppression stuff. . . . 
After the raid [in 2000] people attending got scared and cautious.” Many 
things changed after the 2000 raid. Alcohol was withdrawn to avoid the 
surveillance and regulatory vulnerability that came with holding a liquor 
license (the ostensible cause of the police raid), and rules prohibiting 
sex in publicly visible or “risky” areas were described by some interview-
ees as more firmly enforced (although others disagreed). Other changes 

Unsettling Care Ethics    105
were prompted by non-­raid factors. One was the challenge of dealing 
with institutionalized inequalities within the context of a casual sex 
bathhouse. Developing policies, procedures, and rules to counter overt 
bias seems to have been in large part driven by incidents and frustrations 
that put pressure on the organizing committee to respond as discussed 
below. Other developments were less reactive as organizers sought to 
stimulate sexual encounters for those attending and as new volunteers 
tried out new ideas, using the range of structured opportunities which 
the design of a male bathhouse made possible. Alongside a changing 
menu of “special interest” rooms, other kinds of bathhouses also started 
to be organized after the initial flurry. These included service-­free bath-
house “lites” and the Sugar Shack for women and trans people of color.3
Bathhouse Care
While the ethical care of fce is relatively narrow in scope, when I asked 
bathhouse interviewees whether care happened, examples were plenti-
ful. Participants drew on conceptual lines imported from other contexts 
in order to recognize, and in some cases re-­recognize, a wide sweep of 
actions and encounters, especially between people unknown to one an-
other. One participant said, “Well, I think it was definitely very caring. . . . 
Organizers definitely put a lot of thought to making us comfortable with 
each other and enjoying ourselves . . . providing supplies for us to use, 
lubes, you know, condoms for our dildos and things like that. . . . There 
was a lot of thought put into that. . . . There were numbers so we could 
leave messages for women . . . and even workshops [in advance of the 
event] on how to meet people in the bathhouse.” Alongside references 
to the care organizers showed, participants described individual acts of 
kindness and consideration among those attending. They commented on 
the range of services provided by volunteers and on the importance of 
taking care of oneself.
In the light of my earlier work on the Toronto bathhouse (Cooper 
2007, 2009), I want to focus here on three particular care constellations: 
vertical care providing, horizontal stranger care, and the problem of too 
much and too little care. The first I take from the perspective of volun-
teer service providers, the second from the perspective of sex between 
attendees unknown to each other, and the third in relation to the orga-
nizing committee’s response to charges of racism.

106    Chapter 5
Providing Sex
Between 2005 and 2010 I spoke to a range of volunteers performing 
roles from security duty and cleanup to organizing and working the butt 
room, G-­spot room, and breast play space. In talking about care, these 
unpaid erotic service providers emphasized the importance of their role 
and the responsibilities that flowed from it, specifically that they were 
engaging in erotic play in order to provide a service, not to satisfy their 
own desires. One volunteer explained, “While I really enjoy doing it, it’s 
definitely a bit of a role. So, it’s not being aroused with somebody. The 
intimacy at the end where [the client] wants to hug and kiss me; it’s not 
me, it’s a persona. . . . It feels a little inappropriate. . . . You haven’t really 
had sex with me.”
As service providers, volunteers were required to be impartial, ser-
vicing all who presented themselves, unless there was a good reason to 
say no. Bathhouse attendees, in general, could not demand that others 
attending should desire or have sex with them, but they could expect 
“public” service providers to treat them equally. This distinction became 
particularly explicit in relation to nonsurgical trans women participants. 
Organizers worried that despite the institutionalized injunction that dis-
crimination and intolerance were unacceptable, trans women (with pe-
nises) might find it hard to attract a sexual partner. Volunteers, however, 
could not turn them down. An organizer explained, “We spent a lot of 
time talking about [volunteers’] comfort levels . . . and at the same time, 
making sure they really understood their role. . . . This wasn’t at all a 
place where they could offer different services depending on their attrac-
tion levels. While at the same time being very clear about the importance 
of them trusting their guts and being able to say no to certain things 
. . . to help women and men doing the volunteering to think about what 
their boundaries might be ahead of time. . . . So if a trans man came up 
and you wouldn’t lap-­dance for him, don’t do lap-­dances.” In other con-
texts, however, volunteers were allowed considerable discretion to set 
their own parameters in managing sometimes awkward scenarios. For 
example, a volunteer told me, “I had one customer . . . and [she] came 
in, got up on the bed, bent over, and she was quite dirty. And that was 
one moment in which I was, like, what do I do? Do I tell her to go clean 
up and come back, but fortunately, at that time I’d been supplied with 

Unsettling Care Ethics    107
these wipes . . . and so I just put on some gloves, and just said something 
like, “hmmm, you know I’m going to have to give you a wipe.” . . . And 
it was not pleasant . . . but in the moment that was my choice: do I just 
take care of it . . . or send them off?”
Stranger Interactions
While volunteers stressed a caring that was vertical and client-­oriented, 
participants described a more horizontal, reciprocating kind of stranger 
care, even as the idea of strangers in a casual sex space used mainly by 
women was an equivocal one. One woman described it as like “dozens 
and dozens of circles of friends.” Another remarked, “Our community 
is so small, so there’s no such thing as real strangers, but . . . it’s defi-
nitely like, you know, somebody that’s not in your immediate circle. . . . 
It could be . . . somebody you’ve seen passing around the community a 
few times and haven’t got a chance to talk to because you don’t run in 
the same circles.”
While some came to have sex with lovers or friends, having sex with 
people not already known was highly vaunted. Elsewhere I have discussed 
the stress participants placed on self-­care on these occasions (Cooper 
2007). Many I spoke with said that their sexual parameters would vary 
depending on how well they knew someone or whether someone else 
could vouch for the person. Thus they might choose not to venture into 
a private room, avoid transmission of body fluids, and ensure they were 
not in a position of vulnerability or restraint, such as being tied up. A 
participant described the situation this way: “You are in a room full of 
strangers so I think you have to have your wits about you. . . . You’ve 
got to play safe and not get yourself in a situation with people you don’t 
know and give them trust when they really haven’t done anything to 
earn it. . . . It’s an environment where there are a lot of people having 
sex and there are body fluids going around and you don’t know every-
body. . . . So, it’s just being smart and putting down a towel before you 
sit . . . and [if] you are having anonymous sex . . . you know, use gloves, 
use things.”4 However, the care mobilized in relation to strangers was 
not just a self-­care enacted by participants determined to protect them-
selves from harm. Participants also, importantly, described the ways sex 
with unknown others created feelings of caring, in part through shared 
experiences of intimacy.

108    Chapter 5
A wall gets dissolved when engaging with someone in that way. . . . 
[You] are no longer a stranger—when I see them again, even if we 
don’t talk—it never feels like a stranger. (Participant interview)
If someone comes because of what you’re doing to them, it’s very inti-
mate . . . how to get me off, know the sounds I make . . . things not 
normally disclosed so casually. (Participant interview)
In ways that resonate with the other main stranger space of this book, 
Speakers’ Corner, several participants commented that sex with an un-
known person was exciting because you didn’t know where such an 
erotic encounter might lead. Foucault (1988: 328) characterizes such 
excitement or attentiveness as care—a curiosity about what might exist. 
One participant told me, “It’s still exciting but still more exciting for 
those who’ve never been before; who knows what will happen if you get 
an erotic massage or pick someone up.”
Yet openness to the unknown, and its risks, lay somewhat in tension 
with a key bathhouse norm: that sexual encounters should follow the 
lines of what had already been verbally agreed upon. Interviewees de-
scribed the importance of taking care and of ensuring that all partici-
pants—in what one interviewee described as a “contractual negotia-
tion”—got what they sought, even as they recognized not everything 
could (or should) be pinned down: “Everything needs to be consensual; 
we flirt, talk about what we want, say limitations and then figure things 
out. Sex might follow what’s agreed, but you still don’t know the other 
woman so it’s exciting.”
Participants also spoke at some length about the less contractually 
negotiated issue of postsex care between sexual partners unknown to 
each other. Such care ranged from how to end a sexual encounter on the 
night and whether to exchange names and contact details (something 
attendees said became easier to negotiate and avoid through growing 
familiarity and ease with bathhouse sex)5 to how to behave in subse-
quent chance encounters or sightings of a sex buddy: “I know that some-
times I’ve got the name of someone and it’s not their real name, it’s their 
play name. . . . But to me I prefer that because, well, now I know where 
you stand. I know you’re probably not out. I know you obviously have a 
persona when you’re in here so if you saw me in the street you probably 
wouldn’t want me running up to you in front of everyone going, ‘Hey, 
remember the other night? That was fun.’ You know, things like that. It 

Unsettling Care Ethics    109
really lets you set the stage and lets you know what the boundaries are 
basically.”
Being Careful with Inequality
In building a bathhouse community, sexual exchange was not the only 
thing at stake. Also vital, since the community in question was femi-
nist and queer, was a demonstrated commitment to an anti-­oppression 
politics. The Toronto bathhouse expressed this commitment verbally, in 
its texts, in ventures attempted, and in various other ways. A foremost 
commitment here was the evolving emphasis on trans inclusivity. Anti-­
trans behavior was explicitly prohibited in the bathhouse’s rules, and 
trans participation was flagged in the bathhouse’s changing name and 
identity as the organizers sought to provide a relevant welcoming place 
for people with diverse gender identities. The Toronto bathhouse also 
recognized the challenge many disabled people faced in participating. 
Organizers commented that the lack of available venues for hosting the 
bathhouse, since many men’s bathhouses seemed unwilling to accom-
modate an occasional female event, meant the primary space they could 
use—a multistory, old house—was not good for people with mobility 
difficulties. Bathhouse organizers tried to compensate with volunteer 
helpers, portable toilets, and ramps; they also tried to reduce the costs 
facing people with other disabilities, offering free entry for attendants 
and signers for deaf participants. Many I spoke with praised twtb for its 
open, plural “beautiful bodies” norms (a point addressed also by Ham-
mers 2008a). One participant commented, “At the bathhouse, there was 
like, ‘look at my chub, who cares’? And it was lovely. . . . There was a 
real celebration of the female body and shape and size—sort of anything 
goes.” However, while bodies may have varied, interviews suggest that 
participation by people with disabilities remained limited.
The ability of organizational care to secure a diverse, egalitarian, 
democratic bathhouse was also challenged from a different direction. 
Early in twtb’s life, concerns were expressed that women and trans 
people of color were not fully welcomed and involved. While many 
interviews, particularly with white participants, conveyed the emo-
tional charge of racism’s allegation rather more than the details of spe-
cific events, a series of incidents appears to have sparked a conflagration 
that burned at different levels of heat, particularly among organizing 
committee members, for some years. Incidents described to me included 

110    Chapter 5
a carding episode, where some women of color were turned away for 
lack of identification, while white women without identification were 
simultaneously let in; incidents of rudeness or abruptness by white par-
ticipants to people of color at bathhouse events; and early publicity with 
images of white women only.
As I talked with bathhouse volunteers and organizers about racism, 
accounts and perspectives varied; however, the question of what consti-
tuted racism seemed a central area of contestation. One woman com-
mented that while no one would deny that racism was a structural ele-
ment of the bathhouse, there was more disagreement about what could 
be attributed to racism and what could not. Sarita Srivastava (2005) 
identifies similar tensions over naming racism in her research in other 
Toronto feminist and women’s organizations. She argues that in many 
organizations, white women saw the charge of racism as challenging 
their identity as feminists, and as participants engaged in alternative 
politics: “The effort to maintain an ethical, innocent, and nonracist face 
often produces an emotional resistance to antiracism” (40–41). At twtb 
the social, cultural, and psychological difficulties involved in recognizing 
incidents as racist was something on which several interviewees com-
mented.
While interviewees disagreed on how to characterize incidents and 
on what to do—could a feminist bathhouse, for instance, ever tackle 
racism adequately?—they converged in their accounts of the remedial 
measures taken. These included increasing representation of women of 
color on the organizing committee and in publicity; bringing in a facili-
tator to try to resolve some of the organizational tensions racism’s charge 
had generated; ensuring those attending were clear that racism and 
other forms of discrimination would not be tolerated by giving brief talks 
and disseminating rule sheets to participants as they arrived; and hold-
ing bathhouse events specifically for women and transgendered people 
of color.
Writing about the struggles over racism within the Toronto bathhouse 
is complicated by many factors, including the not surprising reluctance 
of many of those most deeply involved to discuss events with a white, 
academic outsider. Yet in thinking about care, what stands out in rela-
tion to the charges of oppression, and the many measures introduced in 
response, is the question of what care can (and cannot) do. In her dis-
cussion of feminist care ethics, Kristin Cloyes (2002: 10) argues, “Care 

Unsettling Care Ethics    111
is seen as an antidote to . . . [domination and oppression], and the con-
clusion is drawn that if only the world were more caring . . . then there 
would be less power used in the world, or it would be used more justly, 
more equitably.” Cloyes’s discussion of remedial care is salient here. The 
Toronto bathhouse stands out from the other sites I discuss for the in-
tensity of its expressed concern to do something about racism and in 
the measures taken. And caring—as a practice, orientation, affect, and 
hailing of the self—was clearly evident. Certainly racism wasn’t the only 
process to generate care. There was care shown in relation to the in-
clusion of trans men and women and the inclusion of people with dis-
abilities; bathhouse attendees were careful about other people’s feelings 
and, to varying degrees, about their own and other participants’ sexual 
health. But while emotional and physical safety may indicate care’s more 
straightforward application, the risk in seeing care as the way of dealing 
with inequality, which racism’s charge exposed, lies in the negative cycle 
that failure can generate. Some care may be helpful: being attentive to 
who gets noticed and who gets ignored, to who is welcomed and assisted 
to have a good time. But the risk, as interviewees in different ways iden-
tified, is that expecting solicitous behavior, feelings of investment, and 
attentiveness to others to undo inequalities such as racism may eventu-
ally turn care—when it fails to do what it is supposed to do—inward. So 
caring as a practice or relationship with another can segue into a surfeit 
of carefulness oriented to protecting the self, now understood—at least 
by the self—as vulnerable, from (further) perceived attacks.
“Caring for equality” raises profound questions for feminist care 
ethics. While some critics of the turn to ethical care focus on the prob-
lem of fce’s asymmetry, with its risk of diminishing the one cared for, 
particularly when this gets mapped onto wider systemic inequalities, 
other challenging questions also arise. These include the temporal di-
rection care takes—backward to meet existing needs or forward to what 
might be created; the question of what need is when it comes to in-
equality; the power of interpersonal interactions to enact, exacerbate, 
or undo systemic processes; and the power of particular sites to make 
good the injuries generated by wider webs or formations. More gener-
ally, using care to tackle oppression foregrounds the troubling relation-
ship between the caring dyad (or network) and the social environment 
in which it is enmeshed. This relationship sits at the center of the dis-
cussion that follows.

112    Chapter 5
Recognizing an Ethic of Care
Caring by service providers, between fellow participants, and in rela-
tion to structural inequalities are some key ways bathhouse participants 
identified the care taking place. But to what extent do such practices 
constitute care from the perspective of feminist care ethics? Do the lines 
fce draws between imagining and actualization converge with those of 
bathhouse participants? And if they do not, does this matter? Or can 
we find in this divergence some fruitful challenges for how we imagine 
ethical care?
Care Relations and Conditions of Vulnerability
For Berenice Fisher and Joan Tronto (1990: 40), caring, at its broadest, 
is everything “that we do to maintain, continue and repair our ‘world’ 
so that we can live in it as well as possible.” However, for the most part, 
fce has been interpreted more narrowly, including in subsequent work 
by Tronto. Accounts of care tend to be organized around two axes: care’s 
registers, which include caring about, caring for, taking care of, caring, 
and care; and the elements that combine to produce these registers, 
namely attentiveness, responsiveness, responsibility, competence, re-
spect, and needs (Engster 2007; Sevenhuijsen 1998; Tronto 1993). Varia-
tion in how care is conceptualized interconnects variation in fce’s mis-
sion. In a sense, the aim of early work, such as Gilligan’s, was to revalue 
context-­specific, relationship-­based moral reasoning. However, for the 
most part, fce has moved away from simply revaluing “different voices” 
or ways of living to designating and advocating particular values and prin-
ciples. Virginia Held (2006: 10), for instance, writes, “The ethics of care 
stresses the moral force of the responsibility to respond to the needs of 
the dependent.”
Care is fundamentally grounded in the premise that we all have needs 
and thus need care, to varying degrees at different times, to survive but 
also to flourish (Sevenhuijsen 2003: 183; Tronto 1993). According to 
Daniel Engster (2007), the general moral principle to care derives from 
our desire to be cared for. Since we believe others should care for us 
(when we need it) and since we know we may rely on their care, we must 
see care as a good (40–51). He writes, “We all have made use of the gen-
eral moral principle that capable individuals ought to care for individu-
als in need” (49). Grounding an obligation to care in our own valued or 

Unsettling Care Ethics    113
accepted dependency means certain groups can’t be morally excluded 
from care simply because they lack the power to reciprocate.
At the same time, Engster, like other feminist care ethicists, supports 
a differentiated approach to care responsibilities. Drawing on Robert 
Goodin’s (1985) model of “assigned responsibility,” Engster (2007: 
55–58) advocates a framework of care obligations based on concentric 
rings. Here individuals’ primary responsibilities are for themselves, then 
for those intimately known, after that for those with whom there are 
looser relationships, or circumstantial dependency, and finally for “dis-
tant strangers.” Engster writes, “Caring is best practiced in particular re-
lationships where caregivers can be attentive, responsive, and respectful 
to those needing care” (55). A concentric rings model of care obliga-
tions, however, has not received unequivocal support among feminist 
writers on care or among those drawing on feminist care ethics. Un-
surprisingly several writers have been disturbed by the notion of care 
obligations decreasing as social, emotional, and geographical distance 
grows, and there is a growing body of critical work on care across uneven 
geographies (Raghuram et al. 2009; Silk 2004). However, as Engster’s 
approach represents the mainstream within fce, I want to stay with 
this tranche of work to think about the ways the Toronto bathhouse re-
fracts—in the sense of splitting and illuminating—different aspects of 
these care obligations.
Feminist care ethics draws on different relational paradigms of caring, 
including friendship and sisterhood. However, for many, underlying a 
relational approach to care is an idealized, deliberately utopian model of 
motherhood or parenting. According to Virginia Held (2006: 26), “The 
ethics of care . . . takes the experience of women in caring activities such 
as mothering as central.” If we associate care with relationships, par-
ticularly those organized around warmth, affection, and intimacy, bath-
houses might appear to be a kind of anticare, deliberately established 
so sex can happen outside of (and unrestrained by) the other-­centered 
focus of long-­term, dutiful, obligation-­generating coupledom. Weinberg 
and Williams (1979: 165), for instance, discuss the men’s bathhouse as 
a pure case of impersonal sex, in which partners are fungible and inter-
action moves easily from one person to the next as participants pursue 
purely sexual objectives. But not all work on casual men’s sexual spaces 
characterizes them so exclusively as self-­oriented market exchanges (see 
also chapter 8). Tattelman (1999: 90) comments on the presence of re-

114    Chapter 5
lationship: “The surprise is the willingness one finds, a willingness to be 
touched, to be connected, to be put into a position one would not nor-
mally be in.”
Connections like these surfaced in many of my interviews. Particu-
larly for those most involved in developing twtb, the care shown ap-
peared deeply tied to commitments to both sexual freedom and com-
munity. Indeed there are interesting resonances here with professional 
care scenarios where the primary, enduring commitment and loyalty 
is to an occupational community or set of intangible norms and values 
rather than to the specific one cared for. A similar resonance was ap-
parent also in the shared reliance between professional caregivers and 
bathhouse service providers (as well as some bathhouse participants) 
on time-­demarcated commitments. The temporal boundaries placed 
on bathhouse encounters were described, with perhaps brutal honesty, 
by one participant, who remarked. “For me, I’d say that . . . [empathy] 
would extend only so far as, you know, we’re doing something together 
and when that ends, that’s it—don’t expect anything from me after that. 
I wouldn’t treat it as [if] we’re friends after or anything like that.”
The Toronto bathhouse also converges with fce more generally in its 
shared concern with vulnerability. Feminist care ethics has taken for-
ward Robert Goodin’s (1985) claims that we have a moral duty to protect 
individuals who are vulnerable to our actions and, importantly, to our 
omissions to step in and act—duties that extend beyond the particular 
time and place of professional responsibility. At the bathhouse vulnera-
bility may not have had the same standing as a moral justification, but it 
proved a commonly deployed discursive rationalization for acts of kind-
ness and compassion. As one participant said, “People are a lot more 
conscious [at the bathhouse] that everybody is feeling pretty vulnerable 
and I think they tend to be a lot more conscious of that and . . . more 
kind, I think, than they would in a club environment. . . . Once you get 
everybody stripped off and in a towel, you know, everyone is a lot more 
caring to each other.” Participants recognized their own (and others’) 
vulnerability in the risk of rejection, of being undesired, and in the pos-
sibility that interactions would prove unsatisfying, awkward, and even 
harmful. Yet while bathhouse vulnerability, as manifested and imagined 
by participants, resonates with fce’s concern for those whose ability to 
manage is fragile, in significant ways the two also diverged.
First, in contrast to fce’s emphasis on the asymmetrical character of 

Unsettling Care Ethics    115
vulnerability, at the bathhouse vulnerability was seen as widespread and 
shared, even as “newbies” (bathhouse first-­timers) were deemed particu-
larly susceptible. Second, vulnerability was seen as acquired. At the bath-
house people became vulnerable to infection, embarrassment, or outing 
by deciding to participate. While organizers especially went out of their 
way to help people feel safe and secure, by, among other things, provid-
ing safe-­sex kits and guidance such as that what happened at the bath-
house should stay there, vulnerability was nevertheless seen as arising 
from choices consciously made.
Organizers’ encouragement to participants to seek out a kind of ver-
tigo—as vulnerability was largely understood (also chapter 8)—suggests 
a major distinction between the bathhouse and fce. In care ethics, vul-
nerability comes largely from existing relationships. Feminist care ethics 
is positive about the relationships even as it sees the vulnerability that 
relationships produce as a problem; it isn’t good to feel exposed, disori-
ented, or fragile. A sexual environment, however, inverts these norms, 
and in doing so suggests a more ambivalent, or multivalent, conception 
of vulnerability or exposure. Interviewees described the disorientation, 
unsettlement, and nervousness that comes from “playing on the edge” 
as integral to the site’s success as an exciting educative space (New-
mahr 2011; also chapter 8). One organizer commented, “The bathhouse 
is boring if you don’t take a risk, if the situation isn’t new. . . . You could 
just be in a social area, which feels a lot like a dyke bar.”
Revaluing risk may be one reason why care theorists have sought 
to keep sex outside of care ethics. If domination, pain, control, lack of 
control, and uncertainty are sexy (albeit if only for some), then bath-
house care may validate interactions (if not relationships) that fce 
would strongly eschew. Cloyes (2002: 210) makes a related point; she 
argues that care ethics seeks to “fix” and domesticate power, “what is 
thought of as the harsh masculinism of sheer politics and the starkness 
of power, where power is always conceived in negative terms: power 
is bad, and care is good. This approach fails to illuminate the ways in 
which care tacitly enacts power on multiple levels.” At the bathhouse 
interpersonal power is managed, as in other edgy sexual events, through 
a care that is focused on consensuality. Willingness to experiment with 
one’s own limits is encouraged, safeguarded only by the requirement 
for agreement-­reaching conversation and the inalienable right to say no. 
Thus sexual vulnerability is treated very differently from other forms of 

116    Chapter 5
bathhouse vulnerability, such as discrimination or prejudice, where the 
bathhouse’s retrospective approach, oriented to remedying or protecting 
existing vulnerability, resembles care ethics far more closely.
Counting as Needs
Just as the bathhouse sought to create and sustain a space of erotic vul-
nerability, it also sought to sustain and to some extent create needs; in-
deed vulnerability can be read as such a need, in the sense of an im-
perative required for bathhouse encounters to be successful. In thinking 
about needs and the obligations placed on others to meet them, I want 
to briefly consider two questions that arise from the way the bathhouse 
coincides with but also challenges feminist care ethics. First, whose 
needs count? In particular, do self-­needs count? Second, what counts 
as a need? Specifically should sex count? These questions are central to 
thinking about twtb as an ethical space.
For the most part, feminist care ethics has developed in ways that 
center the largely naturalized needs of the cared for. Held (2006: 10) 
writes, “The central focus of the ethics of care is on the compelling 
moral salience of attending to and meeting the needs of the particular 
others for whom we take responsibility.” Within fce caregivers’ needs 
are recognized, particularly those needs that arise out of or need to be 
met in order to sustain caregiving. However, with its focus on relational 
understandings of what makes human life viable and livable, care ethics 
pays little attention to one’s own needs-­meeting. This doesn’t mean that 
action to meet such needs is morally wrong. For many care ethicists, self-­
care is primary, and an entitlement to receive care from others comes 
only when one’s own needs exceed one’s ability to meet them. However, 
in contrast to fce’s rich elaboration of what caring for another entails, 
the limited attention paid to self-­care, and the equivocation on whether 
and when such care is ethical, is striking.
What does this mean for the bathhouse? Does its orientation toward 
self-­care on the part of participants place it outside the scope of how 
fce imagines ethical care? At twtb self-­care took several forms. In 
some instances, such as organizers’ support for volunteer bathhouse sex 
workers, the care that was shown resembled fce’s focus on nourishing 
and aiding caregivers so they could provide good, sustainable care. In 
other cases, as when participants halted sexual encounters for reasons 
of their own health or safety, the interests of self and other appeared, at 

Unsettling Care Ethics    117
least superficially, to diverge, making it harder for a care ethics formally 
oriented to the vulnerable other to provide an adequate moral structure. 
Yet whether care ethics should include self-­care, and how it might go 
about doing so, begs a prior question: What purpose does care ethics 
serve? Is its aim to influence public policy, promote relational under-
standings of people’s interconnected lives, legitimate an already existing 
“different voice,” or figure out how people (and other bodies, including 
states) should behave? Arguably feminist care ethics encompasses all of 
these strands, causing self-­care to be in turn ignored, downgraded, pre-
sumed, and partially included. But in thinking about whose needs count, 
we also need to consider a related issue: What needs count?6 Specifically, 
can and should care ethics embrace sex, whether this means providing 
nonsexual care to support sex-­based “needs,”7 providing sexual care to 
meet other needs (such as for self-­esteem), or meeting nonsexual needs 
nonsexually in a venue dedicated to sexual adventure?
With its orientation to the sighs of suffering rather than of pleasure, 
for the most part fce ignores sex. Tronto (1993: 104), however, writes 
explicitly that the pursuit of pleasure, play, and desire does not gener-
ally constitute care. For Engster (2007: 26) too, sexual activity “falls out-
side the scope of caring on the grounds that it is not essential to survival 
and functioning.” Given Engster’s focus on core, universal, obligation-­
generating wants—wants that are serious and impose enforceable duties 
upon others, including governments—it is hardly surprising that sex 
is excluded. But is there a good reason to read the need underpinning 
care ethics so narrowly? A narrow reading might be advisable if particu-
lar nonconditional obligations on others, and especially governmental 
others, are intended to follow, but if definitions of need carry less policy 
weight, or if what follows from being designated a need is not already 
determined, are there still good reasons to exclude the erotic?
When I started talking to bathhouse participants, I expected to hear 
many women describe sex as a need. However, for the most part this 
didn’t happen. Indeed I was struck by the ambivalence women demon-
strated in talking about their need for a bathhouse. For example, one 
participant said, “As a one-­off event, it plants the seed for the idea that 
women’s sex does extend further than what our perceptions of it have 
been to date, but because it’s a one-­off event it doesn’t carry through, 
. . . whereas with the men’s bathhouse, you know, it’s open twenty-­four 
hours seven days a week, where men can go if they want to have sex. . . . 

118    Chapter 5
It’s there and expected, right? It’s that idea that men have that need and 
it’s an immediate thing that needs to be filled, whereas you don’t get that with 
women.”8 Here I encountered something of a paradox. On the one hand, 
participants described a variety of vulnerabilities and bathhouse needs 
and the caring work carried out to meet them. On the other hand, sex—
the bathhouse’s primary focus—was largely not described as a need. 
Does this suggest we should read care, and its relationship to needs, dif-
ferently? Rather than identifying care as a way of meeting needs that are 
already in existence—needs with a tendency in the context of sex to be 
stabilized around (and in turn to stabilize) categories of sexual orienta-
tion and gender—does the bathhouse suggest a value in attaching care 
to potential needs (see chapter 4)? Can we think of care as forging or re-
sponding to what might emerge, to needs being built, including by being 
met? One organizer suggested something of this formative process when 
she commented, “We’ve a need to celebrate our community.”
At the bathhouse games, rules, services, and individual acts of kind-
ness were performed to help women and trans people develop more 
sexually confident subjectivities and more sexually expansive, proactive 
repertoires. Certainly some feminists would question the direction 
of such empowerment, with its celebration of fucking, erotic display, 
power games, and phallic simulations. It is too simple to celebrate new 
capacities, wants, and needs simply because they become asserted. But 
for reasons explored in chapter 1, I don’t want to go down the path of 
politically and critically evaluating the sex project that the Toronto bath-
house advanced. Instead I want to use fce as a provocation to think dif-
ferently about bathhouse ethics, focusing on ethics (like needs) as some-
thing created. Yet while creating needs suggests the establishment of 
something imperative and urgent, of something that must be met, ethics 
by contrast focuses on the creation of dilemmatic responsibilities—ways 
of reflecting, feeling, and deciding that emerge and are shaped by the 
social practices within which they arise.
From Care Ethics to Bathhouse Ethics
Feminist care ethics and care at the Toronto bathhouse both foreground 
key elements associated with ethical care: connection, vulnerability, 
need, and self. Yet while bathhouse participants positively identified 
normative forms of care as present in many aspects of bathhouse life, 
many of these forms of care exceeded fce’s ethical care framework. As a 

Unsettling Care Ethics    119
normative framework, oriented to how individuals, communities, policy 
actors, and governments should behave in responding to those with less 
power and greater need—those detrimentally affected by others’ ac-
tions—fce has little time for a venue organized around sex, stranger 
interactions, voluntarily assumed vulnerability, self-­pleasure, and the 
creation of new needs. Of course, it is possible to extend how we imag-
ine care ethics so that more bathhouse activities and norms come within 
its scope, but this is not my goal. Rather I want to use the situated in-
stance of the bathhouse to suggest another way that care and ethics can 
combine, a way that offers more promise for thinking about the ethical 
lines generated through everyday utopias.
One of the main limitations of feminist care ethics, despite repeated 
claims by advocates to the contrary, is its inadequate situatedness.9 This 
contextual inadequacy is evident in two main ways. First, it can be seen 
in care ethics’ sanitization of body work. Feminist care ethics repeatedly 
refers to the situated body and to situated embodied care, but there is 
a notable absence of real descriptions of embodied encounters—with 
their odors, textures, and discharges—and the dilemmas that uncon-
tained bodies can pose for ethical care in the contemporary era, as illus-
trated in my example of a bathhouse volunteer confronting a dirty bot-
tom. This was not the only such instance to emerge during interviews. 
Although sensory distaste didn’t dominate people’s accounts, several 
participants commented on the ethical and practical dilemmas of bad 
breath, genital infection, loud noises, semen odor, chlorine smells, dirt 
in the whirlpool, and unappealing surfaces on which to sit. Emissions, 
dirt, and smells are central to much care provision and a key factor in 
caregivers’ low status. Yet despite the strong and persistent claim within 
feminist care ethics that care work should be revalued, scholars im-
plicitly confirm care work’s stigmatization in their own apparent unwill-
ingness to “lower” their scholarship to the bodily functions care both 
responds to and produces.
This lack of odor and grit reveals a second problem, which surfaces as 
a result of fce’s inadequate material anchorage. This problem is certainly 
far less evident in more applied care ethics accounts. However, for moral 
and normative philosophers in the field, despite their repeated emphasis 
on the importance of context, the ethical principles that are to guide or 
define ethical care are treated as if they can be generated from without 
(e.g., Engster 2007; Noddings 2002).10 This does not mean contexts are 

120    Chapter 5
altogether absent. As discussed in chapter 2, mainstream contexts are 
often drawn on explicitly or implicitly as academics contemplate con-
cepts such as care. But if feminist care ethics works with idealized con-
ceptions of care abstracted from mainstream care practices, what value 
can it have for approaching care in other contexts, particularly contexts 
that are unconventionally normative, such as the everyday utopias dis-
cussed in this book? In such circumstances, what legitimacy and worth 
can externally wrought and imposed principles—the “moral guidance” 
Held (2006: 12) refers to—have?
This question echoes a host of similar ones generated in recent de-
cades, as feminists and others, with varying degree of heat, have debated 
the legitimacy and value of an “external” normalizing judgment (e.g., 
Deckha 2011). Notions of domination-­free communication are rightly re-
jected by feminisms attentive to social power and its impact on what can 
be known, thought, and said. But if an ethics of care is not simply to be 
imposed from the outside, what other options exist? Certainly we might 
think of care ethics circulating hermetically within its own authoring 
communities or as emerging and taking shape within individual deci-
sions or in those decisions made more collaboratively within care rela-
tionships. But can we think of ethical practice as being open to multiple 
possible decisions, while being simultaneously less bounded by decision?
The Toronto bathhouse is clearly an ethically porous space, involv-
ing participants with a vast array of normative dispositions, including 
those emanating from feminist and new age politics, as well as those 
brought in from other queer sex-­play spaces. The bathhouse is also a 
space in which ethical practice is closely tied to sensory experience and 
affect. Consequently thinking about ethics through its actualization at 
the bathhouse supports a move not only away from ethics as external 
guidelines and asserted moral principles but also from the assumption 
that ethics is only about decision. Selma Sevenhuijsen (1998) claims that 
judgment and responsibility in relation to ethics can involve delibera-
tion rather than applying rules; she writes, “Ethical issues arise in con-
crete situations, in the form of questions such as ‘how to act?’, or ‘how 
to lead a good life?’” (37). However, I also want to trouble the notion of 
deliberation itself. One perhaps surprisingly useful resource for thinking 
about ethics in this way is the work of Michael Oakeshott (1962, 1990), 
which resists a rationalist approach to morality in which the good or 
right thing is predetermined and laid down. For Oakeshott (1990: 63, 

Unsettling Care Ethics    121
64, 79), morality is practical, “a vernacular language of colloquial inter-
course . . . a continuously extemporized dance whose participants are 
alive to one another’s movements and to the ground upon which they 
tread. . . . It is learned only in being used. . . . It is only in books . . . that 
moral conduct appears as an incessant lurching from perplexity to per-
plexity. . . . Moral conduct is not solving problems . . . but a practice in 
terms of which to think, to choose, to act, and to utter.”
Oakeshott’s practical morality is firmly tied to a conservative politics 
intent on protecting “tradition” and accepting, at most, slow, gradual, 
organic change. Ardently opposed to radical transformation or deliber-
ate, programmatic political action, Oakeshott’s work offers little help 
for thinking critically about mainstream moralities within the global 
North. Yet in relation to new emergent spaces (or communities) based 
on new moral principles, Oakeshott’s approach is useful. Leaving to one 
side what Oakeshott might think of a casual sex bathhouse, his empha-
sis on moral practice allows us to think about ethical development as 
something that is not entirely reliant upon, indeed exceeds, speech and 
rational thought, as it also exceeds what can be known and laid down.
Oakeshott’s (1962, 1990) focus, however, is morality. Still, I want to 
draw on his practical approach in order to locate ethics as one part of 
a broader mosaic of value-­based practice. Thus my aim isn’t to be for 
ethics (and against everything else) but to locate ethics within a wider 
assemblage of normative practices, entwined with morality, politics, and 
values but having its own particular cast. Specifically I want to use ethics 
to foreground agentic responsibility, reflexively forged in contexts of un-
certainty, dilemma, and indecision. In this sense ethics diverges from 
Oakeshott’s emphasis on moral habits; it also diverges from the growing 
top-­down use of ethics to identify organizational codes intended to pro-
cure employee compliance with broader institutionalized projects. “By 
getting organizational members to commit themselves to the corporate 
ethical standards and values of the company, the responsibility for ethi-
cal behavior becomes a collective effort shared by all members of the 
organization” (Rossouw and van Vuuren 2003: 398).
Certainly there are many occasions and many issues wherein the 
value of doing what is expected or agreed seems more important than 
the burden of being ethical (as this takes shape through the cultivation 
of open-­ended, uncertain choice or feeling). At twtb community prin-
ciples, from avoiding racist and trans phobic conduct to not bringing in 

122    Chapter 5
alcohol, coercing someone to have sex or having sex in unauthorized 
spaces, were treated with considerable seriousness. Bathhouse rules 
stated, “If you do not respect the rules of the Pussy Palace, you will be 
asked to leave and your money will not be refunded.”11 The distinction 
between rule-­based obligations and (ethical) choice as it took shape in 
a space governed by queer feminist norms was made explicit by one vol-
unteer, who commented, “We say this is the kind of space it is, and this 
is what we won’t accept. You can fuck your brains out but no oppressive 
behavior.”
Thinking about ethics as a dilemmatic practice indicates the cen-
trality of care. For fce, ethics certainly seems all about care, but this 
is care as a way of behaving ethically—care as a filling in of ethics’ sub-
stance. Care as a register for behaving morally and well was much in evi-
dence at the bathhouse, as I have explored. But if ethics centers on un-
certainty and the weight of being pulled in competing directions, then 
the place of care shifts. It is no longer how to be ethical but instead pro-
vides the preconditions for its practice.
Elsewhere I have suggested understanding care as “weighted atten-
tive action” (Cooper 2007, 2009),12 a reformulation based on “taking 
care” or “exercising care” that draws more explicitly on care’s Old Eng-
lish roots as cearu, with its invocation of sorrow, anxiety, or serious 
mental attention. Exercising care or attentiveness can be directed to the 
needs of others, as fce suggests (Tronto 1993: 127–31).13 But it can also 
be directed to oneself, including as the awareness of one’s own preju-
dices, biases, and limits (Bowden 1997), as well as in less moral forms 
of self-­interested attention (Cooper 2007). What care centers is a close, 
observant engagement with what’s around, with meaning-­making (that 
draws on what is occluded and to come, as well as what is currently wit-
nessed). As one participant remarked, in ways that highlight the chal-
lenge of rendering the bathhouse a disability-­positive space, “You get a 
sense with a lot of them, when you talk to them and look them in the eye. 
That’s one thing you don’t get with Internet dating—looking them in the 
eye; that can say so much.”
Care, then, involves sensitivity, including, in the bathhouse context, 
to both one’s own and others’ eroticism (see Hammers 2008a, 2008b). 
But it also suggests responsiveness. While one might be an attentive voy-
eur, attentiveness is arguably incompatible with passivity (see Koehn 
1998: 103). Attentiveness means bringing oneself into events, a close-­

Unsettling Care Ethics    123
knit, dynamic, and interactive form of engagement with what is happen-
ing and changing (see chapter 9). The care that attentiveness can gen-
erate thus emerges fully in relation to challenging forms of novelty that 
also matter, as participants navigate and seek productively (and prop-
erly) to inhabit unfamiliar activities and places. Care arises when things 
break down, when things that should work don’t. Attention in overdrive 
was something several bathhouse interviewees alluded to, even as the 
focus of their attention—other people’s behavior, their own feelings, the 
“messages” they and others were “giving off,” their sensory experiences, 
anxieties, and the venue—varied and as the stakes (or things that mat-
tered) varied also.
If twtb, as a playful space of disorientation, surprise, challenge, and 
stimulation, constitutes a space in which considerable care was shown, 
we can see how care, as weighted attentive action, supports ethical en-
gagements. Choosing, deliberating, agonizing, and second-­guessing, 
feeling regret, pleasure, anger, annoyance, or self-­worth—these features 
of ethical encounters are enabled by the attention that navigating and 
doing well, in a new kind of highly sociable and contactful space, en-
gender, where things are not as they normally are. One instance of care’s 
occurrence, mentioned earlier, concerned how to end encounters. The 
desire to avoid rejection, brusqueness, objectification, and disposal in 
the light of different people’s interests in prolonging the connection or 
in treating it as an overture to something else (and more) battled with 
a desire to do casual sex expertly and efficiently. As one volunteer com-
mented, “There’s a little bit of a risk being a volunteer in the service 
rooms, where you might end up with people who don’t know how to 
navigate the bathhouse, and on the one hand that’s fine, but you don’t 
want to end up being their date for the evening.”14
At the bathhouse participants found it hard to shake the anxiety or 
tension invoked in doing casual sex well. At the same time, because di-
lemmas were, in some larger sense, chosen and open-­ended, they be-
came important to participants’ evolving, projected sense of self. During 
interviews I was struck by the number of people who used examples of 
their own caring practice to demonstrate the kind of person they hap-
pened to be. In the desire to be ethical that their words expressed, we 
can hear echoes of Foucault (1997: 267) on “the kind of techniques you 
use in order to . . . constitute yourself as a subject of ethics.” At the same 
time, I would be reluctant to read the moral agency given voice as a nar-

124    Chapter 5
cissistic forging or gratifying of the self, where participants’ ethical ac-
tions principally operated as a way of displaying, proving, and improv-
ing on their goodness—something Srivastava (2005) identifies in her 
work on antiracism in Toronto’s feminist organizations. Moreover ethi-
cal practice isn’t only something that individuals do. To the extent that 
agency is expressed through an assemblage of players or through action 
built up from multiple interconnecting encounters, the ethical “subject” 
may be equally composite. Thus I take on board Rosi Braidotti’s (2010: 
44) claim that the “ethical instance” may be located “in a set of inter-
relations with both human and inhuman forces.” The bathhouse’s de-
velopment of its antidiscriminatory rules, then, is an example of how 
rule-­making can be an ethical practice for complex organizations even 
if individual compliance may lack the necessary elements of tension or 
undecidability.15
Ethics, then, includes conscious, deliberate choosing in dilemmatic 
situations. But an important dimension of a utopian understanding of 
concepts is the principle that concepts are not restricted to the effable 
(or what is uttered). I want to draw on the discussion of more-­than-­
linguistic concepts in chapter 2 and Oakeshott’s claim that moral prac-
tice can be retrospective, interactive, and nondeliberative to move ethics 
away from the exclusive domain of things that get talked about and de-
cided. Ethical practice, of course, often takes this latter form. But as the 
bathhouse clearly demonstrates, dilemmas can arise and be expressed 
in other ways, including as feelings or emotions that, whether arising 
simultaneously or after the fact, do some of the work of deliberative rea-
soning on which ethics theorists tend to rely. This was something several 
participants described, from one volunteer’s uncertainty about whether 
she had pressured two women to have sex with each other (or just made 
a positive opportunity available: “I wanted to encourage it and move it 
forward”) to another volunteer’s annoyance at being let down by others 
who failed to show for the post-­bathhouse cleanup (but who decided out 
of feelings of responsibility [trumping fairness] to just do it herself) to an 
organizer’s expressed regret that the bathhouse may have allied itself, in 
the aftermath of the police raid, with affluent gay men rather than mar-
ginalized and poorer lesbians (see Cooper 2009).
Feelings are not simply the expression or consequence of ethical de-
cisions already taken. Rather, just as choice may become apparent only 
in retrospect—embedded in interactions in ways that only make sense 

Unsettling Care Ethics    125
after the fact—so ethical dilemmas within ongoing and complex social 
practices may also only become known, indeed in some cases may only 
get constituted as ethical dilemmas, through feelings that subsequently 
become generated or felt. This was graphically described by one partici-
pant who commented that she would never again have oral sex with un-
known women at the bathhouse after the experience of smelling, in her 
words, like “another woman’s pussy when my lover arrived—it was em-
barrassing and disrespectful.”
It is tempting to describe the bathhouse as a highly ethical space, and 
in many ways the extent of the ethical dilemmas, as well as the move-
ment between the undecidability of ethics and the solidification of moral 
guidelines and rulings, is striking. But what is also striking and impor-
tant about the bathhouse is the extent to which, as a space of casual sex, 
it moderated the injunction to be at one’s best by bringing other values 
and goals into play. Within the business ethics literature, moving up the 
ethical ladder has been a central goal (e.g., Rossouw and van Vuuren 
2003). At the Toronto bathhouse ethics’ presence and practice were un-
even and deliberately tempered.16 Organizers wanted and encouraged 
people to do well, yet “doing well” was about accomplishment as well 
as morality, and often the first trumped the second. So it didn’t mean 
having sex with people undesired out of a sense of fairness or kindness, 
nor did it mean staying with the same person all night or disclosing to a 
sex partner your real name and contact details if asked for. To the extent 
that bathhouse ethics involved a working on the self, that here included 
the collective and organized self, the ethical call was both encouraged 
and held in check (as the quotation opening this chapter illustrates). 
Having fun and taking risks constituted a bathhouse form of excelling 
that could take precedence over caring about others. Moreover while 
the bathhouse as an organization continued to develop and regulate its 
own distinctive ethical temperature, individual practice both exceeded 
and undershot it, contributing in the process to the evolving ethics and 
morality of the bathhouse itself.
Concluding Remarks
The Toronto Women’s and Trans Bathhouse provides a rich site for think-
ing about ethics. As an event provocatively geared to casual, no-­ties sex, 
it is saturated with ethical practices, feelings, and dilemmas in ways that 
beach feminist care ethics as an overly idealist set of obligations imposed 

126    Chapter 5
on life (as it is lived) from a sanitized distance. At the same time, the 
contribution that ethics, as discussed here, can make to a transforma-
tive politics is uncertain. While feminist care ethics has developed into a 
framework of principled conduct—what should happen and be done—
a more dilemmatic approach to ethics emphasizes uncertainty. As such, 
ethics cannot be deployed, as business organizations attempt to do, to 
engineer programmatic change. But that does not mean a more dilem-
matic ethics disavows politics. Rather what it contributes is an emphasis 
on situational responsibility as actors try to respond in ways that they 
perceive as right, drawing on varying principles from other domains, 
principles that (temporarily at least) become imported into the bath-
house site. What a dilemmatic ethics also contributes is an emphasis on 
complexity, concern, attentiveness, feeling, and uncertainty (principles 
associated also with the feeling state, see chapter 3).
Feminist care ethics has proven to be an immensely influential femi-
nist framework, extensively deployed by feminist writers and regularly 
alluded to by nonfeminists as an intuitively correct set of norms. Con-
sequently it has come to monopolize the terrain of ethical care. The ex-
ample of twtb, however, shows that care and ethics can combine in 
other ways, that care can be the basis for ethical practice rather than 
its substance. Yet in centering ethics rather than care, there is a risk 
that ethics becomes the terrain of normative idealization, with care just 
the means of its arrival, so everything good then gets piled onto ethics. 
But do we want ethics to hold so much of value? Do we want care to? 
What’s at stake in the tendency of normative theorizing, as instantiated 
by care ethics, to build up particular concepts as the repository of all that 
is good?
Inflating concepts in this way is not limited to conventional norma-
tive theorizing. Similar tendencies can be found in critical writing that 
works, not always consciously, to build terms such as queer, feminism, 
even touch in idealized ways—that is, in ways drawn from the world of 
thought (rather than from other kinds of social practice). As those in-
volved commit themselves to particular concepts, such as care ethics, 
these concepts grow in nuance and complexity. Advocates fortify their 
concept’s boundaries, determining the exact relationship between care 
and justice or care and love, as they determine whether self-­care, volun-
tarily assumed vulnerability, pleasure, and sex can fit within their ethi-
cal perimeter. In the process, a host of questions get closed down as aca-

Unsettling Care Ethics    127
demic debate fixes on the flaws, contradictions, and subsequent repair 
of the concept in question. Energy flows into justification—why care is 
the best way of conceptualizing and carving out good relationships—and 
successful concepts move into, and indeed sometimes colonize, new dis-
cursive terrains.
In thinking about the contribution of concepts to transformative 
change, would it be better, then, to work with “thinner” concepts, ones 
that are less idealized, lighter in their attachments and investments, and 
more equivocally constructed? Care and ethics are easily valorized as 
inherently and only good things. Yet caring practices can be excessive, 
providing aid, intimacy, support, or attention that is undesired (see Dahl 
2000). Ethical responsibility may also be unhelpful, regressive, or insuf-
ficient, where the responsibility assumed works to disempower others 
or is unfair to the self (which might also be the collective self), where 
lack of institutional authority renders the ethical subject too weak, or 
where agonizing about what to do and second-­guessing what has been 
done paralyze or deplete all the pleasure and vitality an everyday utopia 
can and should manifest. In developing a utopian conceptual attitude, 
I have argued against the drive to build idealized normative concepts. 
While this might seem a paradoxical claim given the popular associa-
tion between the utopian and perfection, in earlier chapters I explored 
how utopian studies and utopian texts have moved away from notions 
of flawless, static ideals to a concern with process, change, and conflict. 
Earlier discussion also emphasized the importance of material practice 
to concept building—that concepts should not be understood as cog-
nitive ideas alone. In chapter 2 I described concepts as the formative 
oscillation between imagining and actualization. The problem academic 
scholarship confronts, as a social practice, is when it ignores this inter-
relationship. For the risk of its disregard, and particularly the disregard 
of actualization (or how concepts are practically manifested) when it 
comes to the development of everyday normative concepts, such as care 
or ethics, is that concepts can grow without restraint within the social 
imaginary. This is not simply an argument that concepts need to be ap-
plied or properly anchored within their (separate and nonconceptual) 
material settings. The importance of actualization is that it shapes what 
concepts come to mean as I discussed in relation to equality in the pre-
vious chapter.
Recognizing that normative concepts are necessarily imperfect—that 

128    Chapter 5
they are part of a multitude of imperfect concepts—does not lead, how-
ever, to a diluting of political, ethical, or value-­based commitments; on 
the contrary. Overinvestment in any particular concept, whether it be 
equality, touch, or care, can be problematic when it reduces the ability 
and willingness to recognize a concept’s limitations and, perhaps more 
important, when overly elaborate terms and dimensions impede activ-
ist and academic ability to work through and across different, overlap-
ping terms. In their work on men’s bathhouses, Styles (1979) and Tattel-
man (1999: 73) identify casual sex spaces as gestational sites for multiple 
communicative repertoires—repertoires that include looks and posture 
as well as sometimes speech. Participants at twtb may have proven, in 
the main, less experienced and less ready to rely on nonverbal modes 
of casual, erotic communication, depending more on conversation to 
build connection and desire. Nevertheless what talking with organiz-
ers, volunteers, and participants revealed was a multilingual openness, 
motivated by the desire to forge an inclusive and diverse community 
event and by the desire to communicate erotically with (often unknown) 
others. The readiness of bathhouse participants to communicate across 
and in different registers raises interesting questions about what it might 
take for others, including theorists on the left, to incline similarly—
treating normative (or good object) concepts in a similarly provisional, 
multilingual manner.
In the three chapters that follow, I continue to develop a situated ap-
proach to normative concepts, but I do so across different terrain. While 
the first three case studies, with their focus on touch, equality, and ethi-
cal care, have centered concepts that progressive forces and scholarship 
tend to avow, the next three chapters, on trading, property, and markets, 
tackle concepts about which the left has traditionally been more sus-
picious. But if drawing materially embedded conceptual lines through 
everyday utopias unsettles typically progressive concepts, can it also 
open up more positive ways in which to reconfigure typically conserva-
tive ones? My discussion starts with the challenge of creating new local 
monies and trading networks in order to rebuild community economies. 
My focus is Local Exchange and Trading Schemes, an ambitious and in-
spirational local currency network project that captured international 
attention in the 1990s.

chapter 6
Normative Time and the Challenge  
of Community Labor in Local Exchange  
Trading Schemes
I joined to meet people in the community, and because a friend who does 
things for me, it made me feel less indebted paying in . . . the local cur-
rency. And her partner also did stuff for me, drilled holes in my wall, 
and he wasn’t a friend so it was easier. We have one trading day a month. 
People bring food and sell goods; about eight people go to trading days. 
Not much trading of services happens. I wanted help with gardening and 
offered lifts to the airport. There was a question about whether I’d be in-
sured using my car as it wasn’t in the course of domestic use. I was once 
asked for a lift and couldn’t do it. I never asked for gardening. I felt diffi-
dent asking someone to do something who I didn’t know, unless they’d 
asked me already. At trading days, we’d lament no one was trading ser-
vices but nothing much was done about it.
lets member, North Midlands
Local Exchange Trading Schemes (lets) were the big local cur-
rency story in Britain in the 1990s, an ambitious venture in 
which people would exchange goods and services with those 
living nearby using community currency checks. One person 
might walk the neighbor’s dogs and use the credit gained to pur-
chase local handicrafts, a massage, or fresh bread. A brilliant in-
stance within a far longer and broader story of alternative eco-
nomic networks and community currencies (North 2007), lets 
promised to relocalize money as a medium of exchange so people

130    Chapter 6
could obtain the commonplace things they needed, along with goods 
and services that were harder to access, all the while developing friend-
ships and social networks on their doorstep.
In many respects, lets exemplify the notion of an everyday utopia, 
of quotidian practices performed in an organized, ambitiously counter-
hegemonic manner. In a context such as Britain, where national cur-
rency reigns supreme and where money remains intricately tied to 
modes of capitalist accumulation, the creation of currencies intended 
to operate only as a means of facilitating exchange is a bold and striking 
move. But lets were also utopian in another key respect. At the heart of 
their vision of good community life was the dream of revitalizing neigh-
borhoods through the development and strengthening of sociable, mutu-
ally supportive, economic ties.
Given the tremendous amount written about lets, and local curren-
cies more generally (e.g., Aldridge and Patterson 2002; North 2006; 
Seyfang 2001a, 2001b; Williams 1996a, 1996b), the ambition to develop 
grassroots, locally controlled money has inspired and intrigued many. 
Yet despite the sometimes esoteric scholarship to which community 
money has given rise, lets proved in many ways a homely structure ad-
dressing everyday needs—house repairs, cleaning, laundry, gardening, 
car lifts—even as the goods offered, and largely wanted, presupposed a 
certain kind of propertied life.1
In the light of lets’ ambition and optimism, this chapter centers 
on the challenge British lets faced, and ultimately seem to have lost, 
in turning an imagined ideal, “community labor” (with its promise of 
sociable trading that would build community), into actuality. Focus-
ing on failure may seem contrary to a utopian ethos. However, utopian 
thinking is not dreamy-­eyed. To go beyond wishful thinking it is neces-
sary to understand the relationship between existing social conditions 
and change possibilities. And the failure of particular conceptual lines 
to take shape is an important part of this process. In interviews, lets 
documentation, and secondary texts, the virtuous cycle imagined for 
community labor was repeatedly expressed. As Jill Jordan remarked in 
a foundational lets speech in 1991, “It’s a tool which rebuilds our com-
munities again. It re-­unites people; it’s relationship trading.”2 Organiz-
ers and activists argued that success was assured as economic exchanges 
and services provided by neighbors for local money would build ties of 
friendship and acquaintanceship that would, in turn, develop commu-

Normative Time and Community Labor    131
nity feeling and further willingness to trade. This didn’t happen; the con-
version of community labor from promise to actual practice proved far 
harder to accomplish than advocates imagined.
Exploring reasons for this failure to convert, I want to build on my dis-
cussion of earlier chapters, which has considered from different angles 
the relationship between concepts’ imagining and their actualization. 
Here I ask, What happens when there is no actualization (or very little)? 
Of course, actualization can simply involve the expression of imagined 
ideals or the presence of potential, as discussed in chapter 4. However, in 
the case of a virtuous cycle, where mutually interacting practices are in-
tended to reinforce and build upon each other, the work imagining does 
is very different from the work actually materialized practices perform. 
Indeed for lets, the difference between the concept of community labor 
expressed as a vision (and promise) and actually operationalized proved 
to be the difference between failure and success. Without community 
generating trades and trades generating community, lets could not 
grow and flourish. Why did this virtuous cycle prove impossible? Why 
were lets unable to manifest or actualize community labor in anything 
like the form advocates imagined? This chapter focuses on one particu-
lar set of factors: the normative temporalities lets mobilized, crafted, 
and ultimately depended upon. Focusing on the two temporalities to 
most prominently surface—community time and labor market time—I 
explore their centrifugal force in pulling community and trading apart.
The Promise of lets
The origin of lets as a particular kind of local currency system can be 
traced back to the work of Michael Linton and others who founded the 
Comox Valley LETSystem in British Columbia, Canada, in the 1980s. 
The aim of the system was to enable local people to exchange goods 
and skills, despite the depressed, cash-­starved character of their econ-
omy at that time. From there the momentum to establish lets networks 
internationally quickly grew. Colin Williams and his coauthors (2001: 
121), conducting an extensive survey of British lets in 1999, found 303 
networks with an estimated 21,800 members and estimated turnover of 
£1.4 million.
While British lets varied in some respects, as I discuss below, the 
basic premise was that all members within a scheme (which might be 
anywhere between seventy-­five and five hundred people) would identify 

132    Chapter 6
things they both wanted and could offer: such as plumbing, dog walk-
ing, language lessons, fresh vegetables, and computer use. All wants and 
offers would be regularly publicized to members, usually through the 
production of a monthly newsletter, with lists indicating who wanted 
and could provide what. Trades performed would be immediately paid 
for (“acknowledged”) with a check (or credit note) given to the seller, 
who would send it off to the lets administrator to enter on a spreadsheet 
that made everybody’s balances visible. As a “no interest” scheme, people 
could go into debit (“commitment”) without cost. Thus the network 
could, and was intended to, be kick-­started by demand-­driven activity. 
While most British lets were member-­led and organized, a smaller 
number were initiated or significantly resourced by public bodies as part 
of their local economic development or antipoverty work. These latter 
schemes tended to focus on particular constituencies—public housing 
tenants or mental health service users, for instance—and were often 
heavily dependent on funded workers to run the networks and facilitate 
trading. Public bodies were also involved in limited ways as members 
within other schemes. Alongside a handful of associational and commer-
cial members (such as health food co-­ops), local councils offered ser-
vices, such as printing and room rentals, that could be paid for with lets 
currency. The involvement of firms and public bodies as network mem-
bers was seen by some activists as an essential aspect of lets growth, 
extending the items that could be brought into the lets economy. Yet 
the involvement of the for-­profit sector, in particular, divided lets mem-
bers, forming part of a wider schism within the British lets commu-
nity as two (mutually antagonistic) models emerged: lets schemes and 
LETSystems (Lee et al. 2004; North 2006).
Disagreement between the two models fundamentally revolved 
around whether lets were exclusively currency-­based structures or 
sociality structures as well. System advocates, including the founder 
Michael Linton, argued strongly for a pure self-­regulating monetary 
system, on the grounds that the social benefits of community building 
depended upon and would follow getting the currency right. Linton is 
quoted as saying, “A money system that needs grants or volunteers to 
operate is a boat that don’t float.”3 Scheme advocates, by contrast, felt 
local money was only one part of a wider, integrated project. Currency 
systems alone could not develop people’s skills and economic confi-
dence, nor could new money by itself craft an alternative economy (see 

Normative Time and Community Labor    133
generally Lee et al. 2004: 606–11). While trading networks were central 
to community building, scheme advocates also believed that successful 
trading networks depended on establishing social connections between 
members, a process that involved some level of organizational activity, 
coordination, and stimulation.
As everyday utopias, schemes—to a greater extent than system net-
works—cohered around an explicitly countercultural vision of the “good 
society,” in which pro-­ecological practice was linked to egalitarian, trust-­
based, and communal forms of work and trade. Thus schemes encour-
aged people to offer work they enjoyed; aimed for greater parity in terms 
of rates for the “job”; and organized a wide array of complementary so-
cial, cultural, and educational activities as a means of encouraging trade 
and as part of their community enhancement function. Yet while dis-
agreement between scheme and system advocates proved a major force 
field running through the world of British lets in the 1990s, in practi-
cal terms distinctions were often less sharply rendered. Many lets net-
works combined or moved between the two approaches over time, and 
individual members did not necessarily sign up to (or always know) the 
orientation of their particular network. In the discussion that follows, I 
draw on a paradigm of LETS situated somewhere between the two ex-
tremes—that is, neither highly interventionist and proactive nor com-
pletely dependent on currency systems alone to get things right.
Beyond lets Potential
I began researching British lets in 2001, as it became increasingly clear 
that early heady expectations had proven overly optimistic. By the turn 
of the twenty-­first century, lets in Britain appeared in free fall, with 
many networks having folded, been abandoned, or struggling to sur-
vive as membership levels plummeted and trading collapsed.4 My aim 
was to interview a cross-­section of members from different networks 
around the country to understand better what had gone wrong. Between 
2001 and 2010 just over fifty interviews were conducted with coordina-
tors and lets participants.5 While many remained optimistic about the 
future of lets, others saw survival as an ongoing struggle. A former orga-
nizer and participant of a North Midlands lets commented, “It’s been a 
great journey for me; I’m not bitter, I’m just sad that it hasn’t swept the 
country. . . . [to himself] Get real . . . it hasn’t swept its own back yard! We 
all got carried away about the excitement and potential of lets; I’ve read 

134    Chapter 6
hundreds of chapters on the Internet about the potential of lets. But no 
one has written about why people don’t join and why people don’t trade.”
Academic and policy writers have certainly not been idle. Work on 
lets has addressed its contribution to new monetary systems (e.g., 
Robertson 2005); its value as a means of combating local poverty, unem-
ployment, and social exclusion (Aldridge and Patterson 2002; Williams 
1996a, 1996b; Seyfang 2001b); its contribution to alternative economic 
development strategies (Purdue et al. 1997); its relationship to environ-
mental sustainability (Dauncey 1988; Seyfang 2001a); and the demo-
graphic background, values, beliefs, and commitments of lets members 
(Barry and Proops 1999; North 1999). However, as the North Midlands 
ex-­organizer quoted above said, with some notable exceptions, such as 
Aldridge and Patterson (2002) and Evans (2009), British lets scholar-
ship has been far better at explaining lets economic and environmental 
potential and participants’ hopes and optimism than addressing in any 
detail the fundamental challenges organizers and members faced.
Among organizers, however, accounts of the difficulties in sustain-
ing lets proved plentiful. One former organizer from southwest Eng-
land whose scheme had folded remarked, “People get the impression 
that nearly anything they might want to have done or obtained can be 
obtained through lets. We didn’t have many people providing services, 
and a lot of people were looking for somebody to fix their car or do some 
plumbing or wiring and other diy. I mean most of the time, people that 
have those skills are actually fairly fully employed and getting a living 
from that. So a lot of the services being offered were all very similar—
and some complimentary therapy-­type things.” Another coordinator 
from west England said, “We’ve had new members, but we haven’t been 
able to give them jobs they want to do or provide for their needs, so that’s 
been a bit of a failure. We had an artist who offered to do classes but we 
don’t have enough people . . . who have the free time to take that offer. So 
it’s really difficult; you really need a lot of people to make it successful.”
Writing about lets, Aldridge and Patterson (2002) identify several 
factors that retarded success: the limited range of (largely nonessential) 
goods and services available; the risk for welfare claimants that lets 
income might generate benefit deductions; psychological barriers, par-
ticularly of indebtedness by purchasing services in advance of earning 
(something lets encouraged); the costs of participation, which, while 

Normative Time and Community Labor    135
relatively low, remained excessive for some; insufficient administrative 
support, causing directories of wants and offers to be out of date; and 
lack of trust and community feeling between members in many lets 
networks. These factors are important. However, in my own research, 
exploring with interviewees why membership and trading levels flagged, 
one theme that repeatedly emerged was that of time. Interviewees com-
mented on the difficulty in finding people with time to participate (and 
even more to help run the network); on the time involved setting up a 
trade; on problems of no-­shows and tardiness by both clients and pro-
viders; and on excessive time spent traveling to the one traded with. 
These interviewees weren’t particularly negative about lets overall; 
indeed many were strikingly positive. However, alongside complaints 
about the lack of diversity in lets goods and services, time was a con-
stant source of complaint.
At first glance, these problems appear mainly to concern inadequate 
resource time—a familiar problem for many community projects. How-
ever, what became increasingly apparent was the fact that time diffi-
culties weren’t simply those of scarcity. What people’s complaints and 
dissatisfactions also indicated was the presence, indeed the competing 
presence, of two normative temporalities: community and labor market 
time. In relation to local currency networks, community time signaled a 
relaxed, generous approach to time’s rhythms and duration, often with 
a nostalgic relationship to the past. By contrast, labor market time em-
phasized the importance of efficiency, economy, and reliability, includ-
ing the need to overcome the hindrances of the past in order to procure a 
thriving, expanded, work-­based future. The force of these different tem-
poralities has been explored in other contexts, as writers address how 
community time and work (or capitalist) time get enacted, organized, 
managed, and experienced as both contemporary and historical pro-
cesses (e.g., Crow and Allan 1995; Gross 1985; Rau 2002; Rifkin 1987). 
For the purposes of this discussion, two particular dimensions of these 
temporalities are important: normativity and plurality.
The concept of normative time, as both imagined and actualized, 
combines material and ideational dimensions. On the one hand, it is ori-
ented to notions of good, legitimate, authorized, or right time, how time 
should be organized, managed, and experienced—including, impor-
tantly, also the possibility of time being nonnormative, of being resisted 

136    Chapter 6
and organized in other ways. Yet normative time isn’t just about values 
or temporal preferences, however significant and visible these may be in 
the things people say. Normative time is also centrally concerned with 
the standard ways time’s rhythms, tempo, signaling, duration, phasing, 
interconnections, and distributions materialize, and the impact of this 
materialization on the shape, legitimacy, and force of what is considered 
to be “right” or “proper” conduct.
While time frequently acquires a normative, often institutionally en-
forced cast, in a country such as Britain, normative temporalities do not 
take shape as unitary assemblages monopolizing the entire social field. 
Multiple temporalities coexist—combining and colliding in complex, 
constantly shifting ways—as time’s accrual, signaling, passage, rhythms, 
and other features get stitched and restitched together. To consider this 
process in more detail, as I do below, I draw on the parallel schema of 
legal pluralism, an area of legal anthropology and sociolegal studies that 
focuses on the coexistence of multiple legal orders (e.g., Merry 1988; 
Kleinhans and Macdonald 1997). While there has been considerable de-
bate within legal pluralism over what counts as a legal order and whether 
legal and normative orders can be usefully treated as equivalents (e.g., 
Tamanaha 1993), what is particularly useful for my purposes is the way 
legal pluralism centers the interactions between orders, as, for instance, 
in the ways state and customary (or religious) law combine and interact 
within particular contexts, or, as I discuss in chapter 7, how a school’s 
organization of property relates to the property order of state law.
According to Sally Merry (1988: 873), “plural normative orders are 
found virtually in all societies. . . . At the center of investigation [is] the 
relationship between the official legal system and other forms of order-
ing that connect with but are in some ways separate from . . . it.” She 
continues, “Research . . . emphasizes the way state law penetrates and 
restructures other normative orders . . . and, at the same time, the way 
nonstate normative orders resist and circumvent penetration or even 
capture and use the symbolic capital of state law” (881). These kinds of 
reciprocal interactions between diverse normative orders are central to 
my discussion of time. At the same time, recognition of temporal recip-
rocation needs to also incorporate recognition of unequal power. Legal 
pluralism (usually) acknowledges that some forms of ordering have more 
power than others, even as it is committed to exploring the effects of 

Normative Time and Community Labor    137
their interconnections (without assuming in advance what these will 
necessarily be). Normative temporalities, likewise, coexist unequally. 
Liberal postindustrial capitalist society may generate diverse temporali-
ties, but these temporalities are far from evenly matched in their social 
force. This unevenness penetrates microsocial spaces, such as lets, too 
as they become compelled to manage the flux and flow between the tem-
poralities they create and those wider temporalities they confront.
Imagining Community Labor
Sociability is important, but it needs to be based on a trading. It’s not just a 
friendship; it’s people doing things for each other, and I think you need one 
for the other to take off.
—lets Coordinator, West England
The promise of community labor lay at the heart of lets’ autofantasy in 
which its value and ability to build both an economy and a community 
through mutual interaction was assured.6 While the co-­constitution (or 
reciprocal embedding) of sociality and trading are well-­recognized fea-
tures of any economy, lets gave this relationship particular prominence 
as something to reimagine and foreground.7 This reimagining had four 
primary dimensions: friendly trading, friendship through trading, social 
contact as a prerequisite of trading, and forging community through 
labor.
The first, friendliness as a trading norm, directed exchanges to be con-
ducted in ways attentive to the voluntary character and pleasant cama-
raderie expected of lets encounters. In conditions of equality, unlike 
conventional capitalist relations, friendliness meant neither patronage 
by the purchaser nor an obligatory supplement by the provider but a 
mode of relating expected of both. Because lets trading was not essen-
tial to members’ economic survival, interviewees suggested people could 
(and would) skew their trading toward those who made the experience 
pleasurable (see North 2006). Friendly trading, then, can be seen as an 
integral part of building and being attentive to the cultural and symbolic 
meaningfulness of exchange-­as-­contact, in contrast to narratives of rou-
tinized, disengaged trading cultures in the global North.
Second, sociality, in the form of hospital visits or befriending, could 
be the service explicitly offered or sought. Yet as a community-­building 
network, lets more commonly encouraged people to trade other goods 

138    Chapter 6
in order to make friends or social contacts. One participant and coordi-
nator from an East Midlands lets commented, “By being involved with 
someone else you start to build a relationship.” Interviewees from my 
own and others’ research described how establishing social ties and 
overcoming isolation were major motivations for joining lets schemes, 
especially in the case of newcomers to an area. One ex-­organizer from 
Wales described how she and neighbors decided to establish a lets be-
cause they were conscious of an influx of people to their district without 
local ties: “It allows people coming into the area to join up and make out 
a few people and get friendly with them and so they don’t get isolated; 
that was the reason for setting up in the beginning. . . . There was a lot 
of people coming into this area . . . and they seemed to be a bit left out 
. . . and some of us, we were thinking about [it] and we got a bunch of 
people who’re always thinking about these things; and we thought about 
what we could do and thought if we had a lets scheme it would help 
them to resettle.”
While trading was seen as a way to build social contacts and friend-
ship networks, prior contact was also characterized as a prerequisite for 
lets trading (an interesting contrast to the case of the bathhouse in 
chapter 4, where erotic desire and sex were stimulated by a lack of prior 
interpersonal contact):
Trading tends to go on more when people know each other, or can put 
a face to a name . . . than between two strangers. (Participant and co-
ordinator, East Midlands)
I do like people to come to a meeting and get to know each other be-
cause I think really the whole point of lets is that you need to know 
people before you ask them to your house to do anything. (Coordina-
tor, west England)
Recognizing many people’s unwillingness to trade in lets currency with 
unknown others, schemes organized trading days, ice-­breaking socials, 
cultural events, and fairs to help people make social contact.8 Some 
schemes also introduced volunteer brokers, a strategy institutionalized 
further in Time Banking.
Finally, community labor designated work that was socially conscien-
tious, community-­based, and nonalienated, where labor and exchange 
formed the cornerstones to deliberate, realizable community building 

Normative Time and Community Labor    139
through the performance of trust and the experience of mutual benefit 
(Dobson 1993: 125). In a useful article on informal transactions within 
both poor and more affluent neighborhoods, Williams and Windebank 
(2001a) explore how both bonding and bridging social capital—­involving 
ties of friendship as well as weaker forms of acquaintanceship—could be 
generated through alternative trading networks. These collective bene-
fits were keenly promoted within the lets literature and later on lets 
websites.9 “This is a great way to get the help you need, support local 
people to use their skills and make new friends as our trading events are 
good fun too!” one lets coordinator wrote.10 Schemes portrayed local 
trading and work (in conditions of nonalienation) as a vital community-­
building device. At the same time, many schemes struggled with the ten-
sion between a community orientation toward affinity and an economic 
need for diversity.
A Tea and Tarts Party in 2008, Cambridge. Members were invited to bring a tart and give  
2 lets (a local currency) to the host, who provided the tea and the venue. Image courtesy  
of Cambridge CitiVillage.

140    Chapter 6
lets Time
In talking about the failure of community labor, it is important to dis-
tinguish between community labor as a thin account of the mutually 
constitutive, inherent interconnections between economic and so-
cial life—that economic relations are always social relations—and the 
thicker, deliberately normative form promised by lets in which com-
munity labor constituted a self-­perpetuating upward cycle where trade 
would enhance community relations and feeling, and community would 
strengthen and energize local trading. Certainly as an expressed idea, 
the upward cycle of community labor appeared both logical and viable. 
However, as a material practice, more was required. To explore this fur-
ther, I want to start with the temporal orders constituting lets, and 
then consider how they knit—or, more precisely, how they didn’t knit—
together.
Community Time
lets community time took shape against a particular version of capi-
talist time. While academics have explored capitalism’s own internal 
discrepancies and conflicts (e.g., Gibson-­Graham 2006a; Hope 2009), 
lets worked with a particular vision of capitalist money-­time as simul-
taneously compressed, calculating, roller-­coaster erratic, alienating, and 
controlling, dominating other (particularly nonwork) temporal registers 
(Pacione 1997).11 Against this vision, and surrounded by other move-
ments also oriented to more attentive, sustainable, slower ways of living, 
lets sought to develop a radically different temporal model from that of 
global capitalist trading, interpreted by some as a “gift relation” (Dobson 
1993; compare Raddon 2003; see also chapter 8).
Central to understanding lets as a gifting structure was the bestowal 
of labor time in a context where currency constituted a means of en-
abling and representing the flow of favors rather than a mechanism for 
capital’s accumulation and labor exploitation. For this to work, however, 
members’ labor time needed to be valued with some degree of parity. 
Consequently schemes variously introduced thresholds, ceilings, and 
norms to limit earning disparities between different people’s work. lets 
also adopted an approach to resource time that inclined toward pleni-
tude. Certainly schemes and members expressed awareness of the com-
peting demands on people’s time. Nevertheless norms of not complain-

Normative Time and Community Labor    141
ing, socializing with others while they worked for you, and being relaxed 
about delays in setting up trades or no-­shows pointed to an expectation 
of resource time ease (also North 2006).
Against the speed, compression, and exhaustion associated with capi-
talist time,12 lets trades manifested a slower rhythm. Unlike mainstream 
capitalist norms, which value money for its capacity to accelerate the 
gratification of desire, in lets gratification was often delayed in the face 
of other commitments and the need to build a relationship. At the same 
time, lets exchanges inclined toward mutual satisfaction or enjoyment. 
lets foregrounded the pleasure involved in spending time with others, 
whether through trading, working on joint projects, or participating in 
lets events.13 In this sense, labor time was less substitutable since expec-
tations that purchasers would interact socially with providers meant that 
paying someone for a service didn’t necessarily release the purchaser’s 
own time. Nor was providing a service for others intended as a means of 
accumulating leisure time later on. Opposed to future-­oriented modes 
of living in which the present is simply to be churned through or treated 
as an envelope for resource accumulation before one’s “real,” better life 
started, lets schemes (more than systems) emphasized the importance 
of doing what one enjoyed now, whether this was repairing bicycles, pro-
viding driving lessons, baking cakes, growing plants, dog walking, giving 
massages, or home decorating.
This emphasis on the present didn’t block off other times, however; 
lets folded in very particular narratives of both the future and past (see 
also chapter 9). In one sense, lets can be read as an ambitious forward-­
facing initiative, intent on establishing closer, stronger, more self-­
sufficient communities—even as the incessant emphasis on localism 
sometimes obscured the political stakes involved in disparaging more 
global forms of trade. At the same time, lets’ community was explic-
itly anchored in a multilayered past. This emerged as a practical effect 
as well as a culturally imagined one. Mending, for instance, represented 
a salvaging that refused to waste previously satisfactory items in pursuit 
of an unsustainable faddish consumerism in which things lived trun-
cated lives among temporally truncated communities (see generally Ap-
padurai 1986). lets’ emphasis on patched and recycled goods also spoke 
to a sedimentary vision of multiple generations reworking and leaving 
their trace upon things as, through this reworking, the extended life of 
things became visible. Also rendered visible were local geographical his-

142    Chapter 6
tories. lets sought to embed their economies within situated stories 
of the past, albeit stories oriented to certain narratives rather than to 
others. This was most publicly visible in the naming of currencies (tales 
in Canterbury, bobbins [for spinning] in Manchester) and in the naming 
of schemes, such as Avalon lets in Somerset. Through their deployment 
of imagery and symbols, lets told particular, often nostalgic stories of 
pasts worth recuperating within instantiations of the local present.
It is easy to read lets as a community experiment intent on coun-
tering the out-­of-­control, strained, precarious, and alienated character 
of social and personal time under capitalism. However, this is not the 
whole story. I now turn to a different instantiation of normative lets 
time. According to this second account, far from presenting an antidote 
to capitalist temporality, lets demonstrated, in its centering of trade, 
Plants sale, 2008. Image courtesy of Cambridge CitiVillage.

Normative Time and Community Labor    143
accounting, skills enhancement, calculation, and instrumental ratio-
nality, the authority, legitimacy, and breadth of labor’s commodification 
and capitalism’s empire.
Labor Market Time
Central to lets practice was the valuing of time as labor time. While par-
ticular modes of valuation, as I have suggested, may have distinguished 
lets from conventional capitalist labor markets, and while the value of 
lets currency was not that of state money, lets depended on the utility 
of time as a resource that could be bought or sold. Indeed a key claim of 
lets advocates was that items and services, impossible to buy in other, 
more formal trading contexts, could be purchased through lets. Idio-
syncratic offerings such as help buying a van, personalized services and 
hobbies such as tarot card reading and ear candles, and amateur skills in 
home repair were all brought within lets economies, as members were 
encouraged to think outside the box in terms of what they could offer 
and in terms of what they might need. With its nonscarce currency, re-
jection of deferred purchasing, and organizational injunction to partici-
pate economically, lets encouraged members to see their network as an 
effective alternative to the mainstream economy. In lets a wide array of 
items could be easily and competently purchased; likewise a wide array 
of skills could be sold.
lets’ complementary value as a supplement to mainstream labor 
markets did, however, raise substitutional concerns for some com-
mentators and observers, who feared that underemployed adults might 
spend their work time in informal, peripheral economies, such as lets 
(which could not undo their impoverishment), rather than in more 
mainstream (economically sustaining) employment. Yet little evidence 
exists of lets schemes actually functioning in this way. What lets advo-
cates emphasized instead was lets’ contribution to contemporary labor 
self-­management—a role that not only emphasized lets’ proximity to 
mainstream economic markets but also sought to insert lets within the 
patchwork formation of working life. Aldridge et al. (2001), for instance, 
describe lets as part of a wider diversification strategy, while Williams 
and his coauthors (2003) consider lets within a context of full engage-
ment rather than full employment.
The blurring of work/home boundaries, described by a number of au-
thors, including Brannen (2005), Maher (2009), and Tietze and Musson 

144    Chapter 6
(2002), underpins both descriptions and certainly shaped lets norma-
tive culture. While people could say no to trading requests, and while 
many organizers recognized lets as a “spare time” activity (particularly 
in those more middle-­class lets schemes revisited in 2010), lets’ logic 
frazzled the perimeter around personal time as something lying outside 
of the market’s reach. Given the organizational impetus to increase trad-
ing levels, the “good” lets member was generally available. While lets 
were certainly not a major force in wider moves to “full engagement” or 
“stitched together” labor time, their successful functioning was tied to 
this growing entrepreneurial momentum with its “responsible worker” 
norms.
Yet while members and activists may have been attracted to new, less 
bounded models of work, lets’ early appeal to state-­based economic de-
velopment agendas was somewhat different. Here lets were valued less 
as a permanent supplement to mainstream labor markets and more as a 
temporary support during times of economic crisis—a support that, im-
portantly, established pathways for the unemployed and underemployed 
into work. Those I spoke with described a progression in which members 
might initially offer a service in local currency, with the aim of subse-
quently offering it within the mainstream economy. However, when net-
works pursued municipal funding and commercial interest, they empha-
sized employability rather than self-­employment, which tended to also 
mean employment within the private rather than public or ngo sectors 
(see Peacock 2000: 74). With its (implicit) promise of creating reliable, 
workable workers refamiliarized with the expectations of formal mar-
ket employment—which depended upon efficient and punctual work—
lets presented itself as a regeneration practice oriented to and ratio-
nalized by a particular vision of a reinvested, hopeful future, involving 
skilled, employable people and stable communities (see generally Bour-
dieu 2000).
However, while the enhancement of mainstream employability posed 
a particular normative blending of present and future, lets’ economic 
strategies were also underpinned by narratives of enduring harm, as cer-
tain individual and collective histories—of poverty, mental ill health, 
and female oppression—left a residue of poor confidence, inadequate 
skills, and limited work adjustment that would impede present-­day em-
ployability. As a consequence, several targeted (and publicly funded) 

Normative Time and Community Labor    145
networks were introduced for poor communities (e.g., Pacione 1997), 
while a few others targeted women (including one specifically aimed at 
Asian women) and mental health system users (see Manley and Aldridge 
2000). Here, in contrast to lets’ deliberate attachment to particular, 
valorized historical narratives of place (discussed earlier), capacity-­
building strategies sought to detach particular constituencies from what 
was seen as their injury-­bearing past. In ways that resemble the equality 
governance discussed in chapter 3, funded lets sought to break the hold 
of histories that were deemed to keep repeating.
Incompatible Temporalities
We can read lets’ time, then, according to two different normative ten-
dencies. In the first, lets functioned as a community-­building, gift-­
based alternative to the alienated rationalities and social recklessness of 
capitalist time. In the second, lets’ proximity to, indeed its imbrication 
within, the mainstream economy necessitated and, in turn, consolidated 
mainstream temporal norms, as efficiency and reliability were presented 
as helping to free workers (and potential workers) from the stranglehold 
of their nonliberal past. In the rest of this chapter, I want to explore in 
more detail the tensions that arose from seeking to combine these two 
distinct normative constellations. Proponents and organizers tied lets’ 
success to its ability to forge community labor, not simply as an imagined 
process but as an actualized one—where community would generate 
trading, and trading would build community. But this depended on the 
successful combining of two very different normative temporalities, a 
combining that failed to take place.
In common with other researchers, my interviews disclosed a range 
of difficulties facing community labor. These included the problems 
mentioned earlier: of inadequate resource time to participate fully (par-
ticularly as an organizer), the time involved organizing a trade, problems 
of no-­shows and tardiness, and “unreasonable” travel time in getting to 
the one traded with. Other grumbles and difficulties included overexact-
ing friends demanding jobs be repeatedly performed until “perfect”; 
purchasers absorbing and having to deal with damage caused by insuffi-
ciently skilled or negligent providers; parties not returning calls; and the 
confusion of social cues that sometimes arose over whether an invitation 
was a friendship-­motivated gift or the first part of a trading-­motivated 

146    Chapter 6
exchange. Finally, interviewees grumbled about the problems overly 
homogeneous, sociality-­based networks generated, with their limited 
diversity of offerings (see also chapter 8).
These problems were far from invariable or constant. For some mem-
bers and some schemes, lets realized (perhaps more than realized) its 
promise. Nevertheless despite the fact that pursuing community labor 
generated problems other than those relating to time,14 interviewees 
commented frequently about time being wasted, given away, taken ad-
vantage of, or misunderstood, as different norms and expectations of 
signaling, tempo, duration, and rhythm collided. Why couldn’t lets’ two 
normative temporalities meld, cohere, or at least more comfortably co-
exist? Without denying those instances when some kind of fusion or 
consensus emerged, three factors stand out: lack of a clear, strong or-
ganizing framework or design so that one normative framework would 
structure (or trump) the other; the expectation and requirement that 
individual members would manage competing temporal pressures; and 
the relationship of lets time to times beyond its networks.
Organizational Design
lets promotional literature ceaselessly asserted the compatibility and 
fusion of community sociability and trade. The lets development agency 
letslink U.K. described it as “like having a hundred friends,” “access to 
. . . goods and services many of which are rarely available in the nor-
mal market,” and “opportunities to turn your unused time, skills or re-
sources into assets.”15 Yet when it came to the practical question of how 
this articulation was supposed to work, tensions to do with time rarely 
got elaborated. One striking aspect of the way lets networks depicted 
the relationship between sociality and work—and the relationship be-
tween community and labor market time—was the lack of an ascribed 
hierarchy, particularly a consistent hierarchy, between the two. In the 
desired fusion of community with labor, neither side, nor its accompany-
ing temporality, seemed intended or established as the instrument, ter-
rain, component, or corpus of the other.
Lack of hierarchy may sound like a strange concern. However, lets’ 
assumption that community and labor would carry an equal normative 
weight distinguishes lets from many other settings in the global North 
in which community and labor market values and time cohere in large 
part because design or expectations clearly establish one side as subordi-

Normative Time and Community Labor    147
nate or functional to the other. We can see this process in two contrast-
ing examples. In the case of the Toronto bathhouse labor market norms 
were clearly subservient to community ones (see chapter 5). While sex 
volunteers were supposed to be attentive to managing the time taken in 
any single encounter and to maintaining a steady through-­put of (ideally) 
satisfied clients so as to avoid lengthy queues, sexual labor was unequivo-
cally in aid of (and subordinated to) community. A very different logic 
can be found in the party selling of sex toys or Tupperware (McCaughey 
and French 2001; Vincent 2003). Here duration, rhythm, and tempo 
may mimic social gatherings—a group of friends, for instance, enjoy-
ing each other’s midday company. However, while the temporal aesthetic 
of party selling is community-­based, it is motivated, underpinned, and 
rationalized by commercial imperatives. The economic interests of the 
company (enacted through the role of the dealer and volunteer party 
hostess) structure and repeatedly intrude upon the party’s rhythm, tim-
ing, and end point, as guests are shown items and encouraged to buy—
not least so the host can earn herself a “party gift” as recompense for her 
labor and the venue she has provided.
In these cases, as with many others where community and labor mar-
ket temporalities successfully combine, the integration of two normative 
orders proves intelligible—indeed the practice itself is rendered intel-
ligible—because integration takes a very specific shape.16 In different 
kinds of exchange, purchasers and providers know which aspects of the 
temporal order—timing, tempo, duration, rhythm, and so on—are gov-
erned by which normative framework. While there may be, and per-
haps always is, some ambiguity or confusion of cues when norms of af-
finity and trading cohere in the contemporary global North, and while 
participants may exploit or play with this confusion, as Bird-­David and 
Darr (2009) entertainingly describe in Israeli customers’ rejection or 
attempted renegotiation of their retail “gift,” usually one side or other 
dominates. In other words, people know whether it is a commercial 
transaction or a social one, even as this knowing may change at different 
moments or be complicated by various relations of overlayering. lets’ 
difficulty was that, in trying to give community and labor (or exchange) 
equal weight, not only did people not know (or else diverge in knowing) 
what the deal was, but organizational design failed to help. Oriented to 
an upward cycle of community labor, lets’ design did not give adequate 
attention to how the normative temporalities brought into play would 

148    Chapter 6
cohere. Nor was sufficient attention given to the effects any lack of co-
herence might have on lets’ success.
In part, then, failure came from organizational design narratives 
simply missing the mark. Absorbed in lets’ promise and the need to 
explain lets’ monetary structure, designers paid insufficient attention 
to the challenge of actually combining community and labor market time 
in practice, an omission made worse by the fact that both temporalities 
were constructed as normative, that is, as defining proper (and, as impor-
tantly, improper) behavior. However, organizational neglect was exacer-
bated by a second problem: placing responsibility for trading norms on 
individual members.
Individual Normativity
While those lets established by economic development workers (and  
governmentally funded) operated somewhat differently, in most schemes 
(and especially in LETSystems) members were left entirely (or almost 
entirely) responsible for the terms of trade—for determining when, for 
how long, and with what ethos and value community labor would oper-
ate.17 Pricing was a major factor here. One northeastern coordinator 
commented, “A lot of jobs are between 6 to 10 [currency] an hour . . . 
and professional jobs like therapies would be more like 20 or 30 . . . an 
hour. We’ve left it like that. People can charge what they’re happy with 
really. . . . We’ve had a lot of people discussing, saying, ‘Well, all jobs are 
equal, aren’t they . . . ,’ but we’ve found that whoever is doing the work 
can charge what they like.” Jill Jordan, in her inaugural lets talk at Find-
horn in 1991, commented similarly, “You’ve got to set the price, your con-
ditions, your standards. . . . The lets system . . . takes no responsibility 
for quality of trades, or the way the two traders get on.”
Certainly in some cases, norms, including temporal norms, were 
shared as traders came to the exchange with similar expectations and 
compatible practices. However, divergence among members was perva-
sive, as those who saw in lets a community-­oriented means of connect-
ing with others in conditions of temporal plenitude and relaxed timing 
(away from the obsessive measuring and credentializing of work time), 
came up against others for whom lets was, fundamentally, a pathway 
into the economic mainstream or an affordable means of getting goods 
and services within a normative structure of disembedded providers ap-
proximating (as best they could) hegemonic market norms (see Cooper 

Normative Time and Community Labor    149
2004: ch. 8). This divergence, left in its raw state by the absence of or-
ganizational intervention, had widespread effects on lets’ vitality. The 
range of problems and complaints participants described affected levels 
of trading and growth as many members reduced or terminated their in-
volvement; it affected how members talked about lets to nonmembers; 
and it affected levels of interest among potential new recruits.
Why didn’t trading activity generate new norms, potentially hybrid-
izing community and labor market time? In the light of work in legal 
pluralism on the bottom-­up development of new norms (e.g., Kleinhans 
and Macdonald 1997), what is striking in this research was lets’ diffi-
culty in actually creating temporal norms. One piece of the puzzle was 
the limited trading activity more generally taking place. In most lets, 
only a small fraction of members were significantly active, and even they 
rarely traded more than a couple of times a month.18 While norm-­making 
does not depend on dense, repeat activity alone, minimal trading com-
bined with member passivity—unsure of the terrain on which they were 
operating—worked to restrict the creative as well as the habitual dimen-
sion of establishing and settling new norms.19
New norms, however, do not only derive from successful practices. 
Elsewhere I have argued, in line with others, that mistakes, miscommu-
nications, and breaches can also be norm-­generating (Cooper 2009). 
Here, again, this did not appear to happen despite incidents of nonper-
formance, of delay, perfectionism, exclusion, unfriendliness, and unde-
sirable (or unwanted) offers. One factor distinguishing lets from other 
contexts, such as Internet communities or casual public sex spaces, 
where mistakes often lead to norm growth, was the absence of an audi-
ence or witnesses. At the Toronto bathhouse, for example, norm learn-
ing and norm development were enabled by misunderstandings being 
watched or overheard by others, by participants discussing their own 
and others’ mistakes in the aftermath of bathhouse events, and by orga-
nizers’ swift intercession—either on the night or subsequently (for in-
stance, through new bathhouse policies, etiquette suggestions, or rules).
Despite being a highly irregular event, the Toronto bathhouse was 
very much a pedagogical site. lets, however, demonstrated a much 
more ambivalent attitude toward member education. While in some re-
spects lets were pedagogic, particularly in relation to the idea of local 
currencies, they (and especially letsystems) proved far more hands-­
off when it came to the terms of actual trading. Thus alongside limited  

150    Chapter 6
levels of exchange, lets’ stress on autonomous individual exchanges led 
mistakes to be privatized. While there was some licit sharing of repu-
tations within schemes—who to avoid, who provided a good, skilled 
service—and while many people assumed a responsibility to act ethi-
cally (see also chapter 5), when it came to knowing, defining, and build-
ing shared community expectations and entitlements, people stumbled 
around. When was slow performance, for instance, a legitimate target 
for complaint? When did complaint represent un-­community-­like im-
patience? With minimal institutional guidance, and with considerable 
divergence in member perspectives and preferences as to lets’ pur-
pose (was it mainly to make friends, to live one’s politics, or to trade?), 
too little consensus existed to consolidate what would count as a breach 
below a certain high threshold. While interviewees described a range of 
dissatisfactions, few suggested that new hybrid norms had emerged as 
a result.
What of the converse effect, of norm differentiation? Did the cleavage 
between community and labor market temporalities intensify, as practice 
(or at least expectations) solidified along contrasting normative lines? 
Such an argument is tempting, but my interviews don’t clearly support 
this conclusion. It’s not apparent that members became increasingly 
aligned with community or labor market temporal norms. Indeed many 
members continued approvingly to describe the virtuous cycle of com-
munity labor even as their actual involvement suggested otherwise. But 
in a context where exit carried far fewer costs than voice, unmet expec-
tations led trading to decline as members pulled back or left. One former 
organizer and participant from the North Midlands remarked, “Say I’m 
trading with you and I do a job for you that isn’t that good, and you’re 
also caring-­sharing. You want to say I’ve done a crap job, but you like me 
so much you can’t actually bring yourself to say it. . . . You go away with 
a sense of dissatisfaction. Two trades down the road you think, ‘I’m fed 
up with lets and want to leave.’”
Wider Temporalities
Central to networks such as lets is their open, multilayered interaction 
with the world around them, a web of relations accentuated by the regu-
lar passage of participants to and fro (see chapter 1). Alternative currency 
networks are not spatially distant utopias involving long, arduous jour-
neys. And for most lets participants, getting there required little more 

Normative Time and Community Labor    151
than a bus or car ride, although for some participants even this proved 
too much. But geographical proximity (between participants) wasn’t the 
only or even the most important kind of connection. lets’ contact with 
and proximity to other economic systems was also important. The opera-
tion and experience of lets as a new kind of local currency network, 
including, specifically, its temporal operation, was shaped by and tied to 
the experience of other economic places. And as a supplementary rather 
than self-­sufficient economic structure, lets’ success depended heavily 
on how it intersected with mainstream economic time.
This relationship was not wholly antagonistic. To the extent that par-
ticular lets networks forged pathways into work, their temporal aspi-
rations were compatible with mainstream economic norms even if, for 
the most part, such temporal norms remained inadequately actualized 
within lets themselves. Local currency networks also proved compat-
ible with mainstream temporal arrangements to the extent the latter cre-
ated “spare time” envelopes for particular constituencies to participate 
in trading, often due to their enforced exclusion from mainstream work. 
Refugees, chronically disabled people, those without employment, and 
pensioners could, at least in theory, make use of lets’ opportunities to 
practice new skills, gain otherwise unattainable goods and services, and 
develop or sustain social networks (Seyfang 2001b; Smets and ten Kate 
2008). Moreover when lets were located in geocultural localities that 
shared their slower, relationship-­prioritizing, consumption-­reduced 
rhythm, they seem to have been more successful. As one organizer in 
southeast England commented, “When it really works and works well, 
is when it’s in your life and it’s in balance.” Peter North (2007: 137) 
reached similar conclusions in his New Zealand research: “Green dol-
lar exchanges worked for those who understood their rhythms; whose 
livelihood strategy . . . was strengthened through membership of the 
network.”
Yet for the most part, in Britain lets’ combination of a loosely actual-
ized community time and unattained labor market time placed networks 
in tension with the wider temporal norms members had either internal-
ized or felt forced to accommodate as they tried to stitch lets’ threads 
into the not fully chosen temporal fabric of a much more complex life. Of 
course, sewing different temporalities together, or managing their inter-
action and copresence, is not inherently problematic. Carmen Leccardi 
(1996: 177) writes, “Qualitative, non-­homogeneous different times co-

152    Chapter 6
exist in a sort of constantly reconstructed equilibrium”; we can identify 
this coexistence in how people choose activities, such as leisurely dining 
or fast, high-­adrenalin sports, for the contrasting tempo and rhythm they 
offer. Yet with restaurant eating and sports, timing and duration are, for 
the most part, relatively bounded and clear. Certainly some participants 
experienced and understood lets also as a contained leisure activity, 
but lets’ own temporal structure was, as I’ve described, more ambi-
tious. lets required members to be available for work outside of “office” 
hours and to respond flexibly to requests as and when they came in. The 
lets advocate Liz Shephard (1997: 25) commented, “You can fit lets 
exchanges around a busy schedule.” lets asked members to repeatedly 
consider, and when necessary to revise, their offers and wants, to ensure 
trading happened—part of a shared, collective obligation to keep the 
local economy flowing.
Some participants no doubt appreciated the “other time” lets en-
abled, even produced, with its more relaxed tempo and socially oriented 
attentiveness. But for many, lets’ slower, less clock-­based working prac-
tices constituted simply another, voluntarily acquired, but nonetheless 
demanding “to do.” Amid the complex planning, sequencing, coordina-
tion, and compression of daily life, this was a “to do” that only created 
time—in the sense of inserting new activities into the day—at some 
cost, as a lets organizer from southwest England explained: “It came to 
a point where two of us who were on the admin team and had been on 
the admin team for ages just felt that it was time for us to stop and that 
it was taking too much of our time. And when the two of us pulled back, 
unfortunately nobody else came forward, and so I think that was kind of 
the beginning of the end.”
Moreover while those members with more income and less free time 
may have applauded lets for its community-­building (rather than trad-
ing) potential, questions of time efficiency and effectiveness—not just 
in trading but also in building sociality through trade—emerged. For these 
members (and, even more, potential members), lets time got carved out 
of the high pressured remainder of nonworking hours, and while trading 
might build social relations, it was not necessarily considered the best 
way of doing so. As a coordinator from northeast England commented, 
“People get quite busy and are quite happy to join in on a social basis. . . . 
They’re not that bothered about the trading aspect. . . . We have a few 
members [who] just like the idea of lets and don’t actively trade.” An 

Normative Time and Community Labor    153
organizer from the North Midlands similarly remarked, “I think people 
are either socially orientated—wanting to make friends; economically 
oriented—they want to trade; or politically orientated—they’re looking 
for an alternative kind of lifestyle community-­type thing. . . . The top two 
would be political or social so they’re not actually bothered about trad-
ing; it’s all a bit of an excuse to make friends or prove that they’re doing 
a political thing. . . . We’ve all got a mixture of the three motivations, but 
trading is always a sad third, it’s always Cinderella.”
Concluding Remarks
In a context where lets, through the momentum of community labor, 
seemed guaranteed to thrive, this chapter has considered why British 
lets failed to grow, centering on the part played by discordant tempo-
ralities. In the inattention paid to time within lets’ design, in the reli-
ance placed on individual members to establish norms of good conduct, 
and in the force of wider temporal pressures on lets practice, we can 
find reasons why community and labor time did not cohere. But while 
discordant temporalities pulled against the virtuous cycle lets’ propo-
nents promised, to what extent was community labor truly absent? Cer-
tainly as an idea, community labor was expressed in many forms and 
forums, verbal and documentary. And as an expressed idea, community 
labor had effects. The promise that trading would build community and 
that the social connections to result would, in turn, enhance trading was 
exciting and infectious; it inspired many people to join lets. But, alone, 
however much this idea was expressed, it was not enough to sustain the 
optimistic interest and participation lets required to grow. Something 
else (or more) was needed—namely community labor’s practical actual-
ization.
The suggestion of this chapter is that community labor, as an actual-
ized cycle, failed to take shape. When we search for something resem-
bling the claims lets’ advocates made, we cannot find it. But does this 
mistakenly assume that actualization will replicate what is desired or 
promised, in other words that conceptual lines are lines of resemblance? 
What if actualization necessarily differs from what is imagined, as Eliza-
beth Grosz (2005) explores? Certainly a version of community labor, 
resembling some of the claims made about it, was evident in practice. 
Those I spoke with described instances of friendly trading, and consis-
tently people talked about trading happening far more between people 

154    Chapter 6
known to each other. But if, for the most part, trading did not precipi-
tate social connection leading to further trading in any extensive way, 
can we find community labor actualized in a different form, namely in 
its failure? Was community labor in some sense present in the patchy, 
thin character of the virtuous cycle realized, in the inability of such a 
cycle to grow, and in the actions lets members took as a result of their 
networks’ lack of lift-­off?20 In other words, did a form of actualization 
(that did not resemble the community labor imagined) exist, a form that 
generated new, intensified forms of imagining that, in turn, produced 
further practical efforts to do more? Finding community labor in this 
dynamic loop of increased effort reminds us that community labor (like 
other concepts) is not a freestanding finished state—an autonomous, 
self-­sustaining phenomenon—but a process. As such, perhaps commu-
nity labor can exist in the problems and challenges faced and in the urg-
ing, endeavors, and efforts repeatedly put by some into its achievement.
Yet while it is worth remembering that failure can be a kind of action, 
and certainly can be an action with consequences, identifying commu-
nity labor’s presence in such manifest failure begs the question: What 
follows? For the value of the community labor imagined and expressed 
lay in its promise that lets would grow and flourish through the upward 
cycle assured. If community labor exists instead in a very different ma-
terial form, for instance, as failure or as intensified effort, its effects are 
then quite different. While we cannot know what the effects would have 
been had the community labor actualized resembled its imagining, what 
did clearly emerge were the effects of community labor’s struggle to take 
shape: in demoralization and participant withdrawal; in the difficulties 
that attempts to generate a significant influx of new members faced; in 
organizer fatigue; and in the spinning off of lets socializing as members 
enjoyed the events and activities that organizers put on but felt no impe-
tus (other than sometimes guilt) to actually trade.
This chapter has focused on the factors shaping conceptual lines, par-
ticularly the movement from imagining to actualization. In the chapter 
that follows I reverse direction as I continue to explore the life of con-
cepts within everyday utopias. Focusing on a concept that was actual-
ized, but in very different ways from how it was explicitly imagined, 
chapter 7 explores the community development work performed by 
property at a free school.

chapter 7
Property as Belonging at Summerhill School
It’s my room, it’s my space, and I have the right to say I don’t want any-
one here, or actually I’d like to talk to [name] who’s an adult, or actually 
I have [children’s names] here and we’re having a nice cup of tea. . . . It’s 
like if you lived on a street and you had people from across the street over 
having tea . . . and then people walk down from three doors down and just 
walk in to your . . . basically you invited these people for tea . . . and so you 
just don’t let anyone walk in off the street. . . . I’d say, “We’re just having 
tea. If you want to have tea, see me tomorrow.”
Summerhill School teacher
In work on intentional communities, stories of property are com-
mon (e.g., Metcalf 1995; Sargisson 2010). Yet particularly in con-
temporary writing, these are often tales of anxiety and disap-
pointment, as people misuse shared things, fail to work hard in 
the absence of any material incentive, and feel overregulated, out 
of control, and exhausted by the constant negotiation and debate 
property’s frictions generate. Metcalf’s (1995) Australian collec-
tion is striking in its account of the gravitational pull toward indi-
vidual ownership within many intentional communities as a way 
of dealing with communal property’s problems. But are there other 
solutions? And how much is this narrative of collective ownership’s 
failure and private property’s rise contingent on a particular con-
ception of property?
This chapter focuses on property, what it is and what it does 
within a residential, intergenerational community. In contrast to

156    Chapter 7
the previous chapter, which explored the failure of imagining to take 
effect, as narrated conceptual lines were stymied from materializing, 
this chapter explores a concept, property, that did take effect, even as it 
failed to be imagined. Or, to put it more precisely, property was imag-
ined, but the conventional form this took did not capture the more inno-
vative and embedded ways in which property was actually practiced. 
Trying to render innovative social practice intelligible (or imaginable) 
is, as I discussed in chapter 2, a key dimension, but also a key challenge, 
for utopian conceptualizing, which doesn’t start from scratch, but enters 
into the middle of conceptual lines already drawn from which it does its 
work. In contrast to those conceptual approaches that focus on the work 
concepts do when they are unrecognizable and unsettling, here intelli-
gibility is oriented to creating forms of imagining that can re-­present 
practice in ways that are empirically recognizable (the “ah yes” moment) 
even if unorthodox. My aim though is not simply to capture the property 
relations at work in the school—a capture that is intrinsically interpre-
tive, selective, and purposive. I also want to explore what it is that the 
property relations I have identified actually do.
The stage for this discussion is Summerhill School, a predominantly 
residential, private school, established by the influential education theo-
rist A. S. Neill in the early 1920s and still flourishing almost a hundred 
years later, on the outskirts of a small Suffolk town, Leiston, on the south-
ern part of England’s eastern seaboard.1 With between sixty and ninety-­
five children attending at any one time,2 Summerhill’s fame (or notori-
ety) rests on two primary principles. First, classes are optional, and the 
decision whether or not to attend rests entirely with the child. Second, 
community rule-­making and dispute resolution involve the school as a 
whole through its meeting, committee, and ombudsman structures. One 
striking feature of Summerhill is the extent to which children as well 
as adults use the school meeting to raise grievances and establish new 
“laws,” whether these relate to others’ behavior at bedtime, use of one’s 
things, or getting the community’s permission to be exempted from par-
ticular requirements (or prohibitions). Underpinning these principles 
of optional classes and community adjudication is Summerhill’s founda-
tional commitment to democratic self-­government and children’s free-
dom.
Summerhill School has often been dismissed by critics as a dystopic 
Lord of the Flies kind of place, where an infantile rule of tyranny and law-

Property as Belonging    157
lessness prevails (see Jessop 2009). But it can also be read as an every-
day utopia. Both readings frame the school as a place of self-­regulating 
children and collective governance; however, what a utopian reading 
also emphasizes, in the face of dystopic characterizations of Summerhill 
as a place of chaos, is the careful, reflexive actualization of an ambitious 
dream about how children should be raised and educated. Summerhill 
has long been an iconic and inspirational site globally, despite being 
largely ignored by Britain’s educational establishment. As the head 
teacher (principal), Zoe Readhead, commented when I interviewed 
her, “From time to time . . . South Korean education ministers will pop 
in, but English ones—never.” Since its inception, Summerhill has also 
motivated other educators, internationally, to create schools along simi-
lar lines (see Ho and Hindley 2011), and pupils attend Summerhill from 
many places, including Israel and Brazil, as well as continental Europe, 
Japan, and South Korea (Korn 1990).
Together children and adults create and experience home life. As a 
residential community, Summerhill provides a place of dwelling in the 
commonsense meaning of the term: somewhere lived in, comfortable, 
and generative of multiple interpersonal attachments. For the teacher 
quoted at the start of the chapter, what Summerhill resembled most 
keenly was a small village, with its flows, casual interactions, and engen-
dered sense of familiarity. Children and adults certainly pass regularly 
through the school gates (when going into town, out on school trips, or 
once they have finished their education or employment there), but for 
the period during which they are members their lives are lived in and 
around an old Suffolk house and its assorted buildings nestled in wooded 
grounds. In this way Summerhill differs from sites such as lets, where 
community trading time occurs in heteronomous spaces and as such is 
dependent on what can be carved out of an already busy life. As a resi-
dential community, Summerhill establishes its own space and creates 
its own time divisions. Moreover with its family-­like ethos, and strong 
boundaries between inside and out, the school contrasts with the other 
sites of this book. Yet in certain respects there are similarities. Summer-
hill is very much an everyday utopia, and, like the other sites explored, it 
operates through routines, laws, and ways of doing things that have sedi-
mented over time in response to the many practical challenges of run-
ning a successful boarding school.
A criticism often made of community life is that it imposes sameness 

158    Chapter 7
upon members. As an empirical claim about Summerhill School, the 
allegation of homogeneity clearly misses the mark. Certainly the school 
has unifying elements in its development of strong attachments, shared 
values, and effective external boundaries. At the same time, the school is 
a space of variation. Not only is it home to children and adults of very dif-
ferent backgrounds, interests, and ways of behaving, but it is also a space 
strongly committed to what I refer to in this chapter as a variegated social. 
Summerhill is not organized around a singular mode of communal living 
in which all practices and relations, for instance, are public, visible, and 
accountable. Nor does it go to the other extreme and demand that mem-
bers live lives of solitude, great intimacy, or individualism. Rather the 
school manifests a spectrum of relations, norms, and practices. These 
can be thought of as variegated in the sense that streaks of difference 
coexist; as Neill (1945: 33) remarked, “Everyone should be in a position 
to have . . . a community life and a private one at the same time. . . . I 
. . . have day dreamed of a school where every child could have a private 
and public life.”
Yet building and sustaining a variegated social is no mean achieve-
ment in a close-­knit intergenerational community. Drawing on field re-
search diaries and interviews with school members,3 I argue that a key 
The main school building, during the school’s 90th birthday celebrations, June 2011. Image courtesy 
of Zoe Readhead, head teacher, Summerhill School.

Property as Belonging    159
factor in its accomplishment is Summerhill’s property structure and 
practices. On the surface, Summerhill emulates the turn toward indi-
vidual ownership and personal control within many residential commu-
nities as mentioned at the start of this chapter. Indeed one of the things 
that most struck me during early interviews at the school was the level 
of control that individual teachers had over their classrooms and the im-
portance given to this control within the school’s organization. Teachers 
established the rules, policies, and tone for their teaching spaces, with 
the right to exclude children who did not conform. One teacher told 
me, “It’s very gratifying and nice to know this [classroom] is my space 
and I have a say over how it’s used and by whom.” While the classrooms 
seemed particularly subject to individual authority, managing space by 
making particular people accountable for its use seemed to have a more 
general application. Another teacher remarked, “There’s times when the 
library was a communal space but there was no one responsible for it. . . . 
It was trashed, so if you assign someone as responsible for a space. . . . 
then people will respect it more because it’s tied to the person respon-
sible for it.” Neill (1968: 133) makes a similar point about the care of 
communal things:
I concluded that what was wrong was that the tools were used com-
munally. “Now,” I said to myself, “if we introduce the possessive ele-
ment . . . things will be different.”
I brought it up at a meeting, and the idea was well received. Next 
term, some of the older pupils brought their own kits of tools from 
home. They kept them in excellent condition and used them far more 
carefully than before.
Yet despite these explicit assertions of the importance of individual 
possession and control, the way property works at Summerhill is not 
simply about belongings. Underpinning and woven through more con-
ventional notions of ownership are other forms of belonging. Of course, 
these can be understood as something other than property. But the ar-
gument of this chapter is that recognizing their entanglement in and 
sometimes substitution for the more conventional, propertied subject-­
object form makes possible a more complex and fuller understanding of 
how Summerhill works. It also, importantly, provides a conception of 
property that challenges the disembedded, fungible, neoliberal form that 
dominates in the global North. In other words, reimagining property in 

160    Chapter 7
terms of belonging can contribute productively to a transformative poli-
tics that has tended to get stuck in questions of property’s distribution 
at the expense of rethinking its form (a limitation of equality thinking 
also; see chapter 4). However, property as belonging is not a new ideal; 
its limits are important also, as I explore.
Approaching property as belonging, I should stress, did not reflect 
the explicit ways ownership was discussed by those I interviewed. At the 
same time, it did cohere with school members’ more idiomatic use of 
property and ownership’s terms. In a sense, this more figurative resem-
blance is unsurprising. For it is in the idiomatic language of commu-
nity members—in the drawing of concepts from other contexts and the 
hybridized creation of new ones—that the distinctive ways in which a 
particular community works can be identified. The nuance and atten-
tiveness grasped through idioms contrasts with the more formal use of 
concepts, which (as here with property) betrays the power and influence 
of mainstream discourse.
A Property Framework
To understand property at Summerhill, I want to start with a rather dif-
ferent property paradigm, that of conventional private ownership. Here 
a single actor has (almost) unlimited control over a thing or land, with 
rights and powers that range from access and manipulation, to sharing, 
selling, and destroying. Conventionally such property is legally under-
stood as a relationship between the owner and the rest of the world in 
terms of a thing (or space) that is recognized and protected by state law. 
Organized around exclusion or noninterference by others, this model 
of property ownership bestows the (absolute) right upon a human sub-
ject to determine how and by whom the thing is used and treated. Cer-
tainly in contemporary practice this Blackstonian model of mastery or 
dominion is complicated in all sorts of ways. There are limits on what we 
can do with the things we own, which vary according to what is owned; 
property rights are often divided, so one person might have rights of use, 
while another has rights to sell (or destroy).
Applied to Summerhill, a conventional model that incorporated the 
complexities and limits of contemporary legal ownership would tell 
us something about how property works at the school. In particular it 
would shed light on the power vested in individual forms of ownership, 
from school members’ ownership of their personal effects to the school’s 

Property as Belonging    161
ownership of their fees and the head teacher’s ownership of the school. 
However, it would also miss a lot of what goes on. It would miss the 
legal orders recognized and enforced by the school (but disregarded by 
the state); it would miss the overlapping character of property rights, 
powers, and freedoms as rights variously granted by state, school, and 
community custom meet and fold over each other; and it would miss 
the ways relations of property and governance blur into each other. Ap-
proaching property at Summerhill in conventional terms would give us, 
in short, a disappointingly thin picture of school life, missing much that 
is innovative and effective about the school’s practice. How else, then, 
might we think about property?
Belonging
According to the original sense of “property,” the thing possesses me,  
I belong to it and am identified by it. But according to the modern sense  
of “property,” I possess the thing, it belongs to me.
—Graham 2010: 27
While belonging is conventionally seen as descriptive of the already prop-
ertied relationship, as in “this house belongs to me,” I want to treat be-
longing as central to the formation and assumption of property relation-
ships, decentering in the process the pivotal role conventionally given 
to exclusion. But what kind of belonging is this? In this chapter, three 
variants are in play. The first is the one conventionally (and exclusively) 
associated with property. Here an object, space, or rights and freedoms 
over it, are held by (belong to) the owner. Property scholars often think 
of this form of belonging through the metaphor of a “bundle of sticks,” in 
which the different powers and rights that property can bestow are imag-
ined as discrete sticks; one stick might be a right of access or possession; 
another might be the right to sell or to destroy.4 This approach means the 
range of sticks and the thickness of the bundle can vary depending on 
the nature of the belonging—in some cases near to “full-­blooded” (Har-
ris 1996), in other cases as much more limited.
What stands out about belonging as a bundle of sticks, for my pur-
poses, is the ease of severability. Rights can be pulled apart, and both 
rights and the thing over which rights are held can be separated from the 
owner (see Penner 1997). This means sticks can be distributed among 
participants, including (as experienced at Summerhill) in interlock-

162    Chapter 7
ing and mutually dependent ways, where the use of one stick, such as a 
right of access, depends on others’ use of their sticks also, including their 
rights to sell, improve, or destroy. But what this “bundle of sticks” form 
of belonging also suggests, in contrast to the two other sorts of belonging 
outlined below, is fungibility. The right or thing is replaceable, but so too, 
in a sense, is the rights’ holder, since a change of owner is assumed not to 
lead in itself to a change in the right or thing that is owned. I shall refer to 
this first kind of belonging as subject-­object belonging to highlight the in-
strumental, hierarchical relationship that is imagined between the actor 
and the severable right, thing, or space.5
Belonging, however, can take other, less instrumental and less obvi-
ously agentic forms. Part-­whole belonging, for instance, identifies a 
constitutive relationship between two (or more) bodies, where the for-
mation of each is dependent on the relationship itself, as when a child 
“belongs” to a family or a garden “belongs” to a residential dwelling. To 
talk about belonging as a constitutive relationship means something 
broader than Margaret Radin’s (1993) “property for personhood,” a for-
mulation in which certain propertied relationships are deemed vital to 
the expression and development of self. Radin’s influential approach 
largely centers on items already in the (potential) property category. By 
contrast, this chapter works from the premise that other social relations 
can be thought of in this way, including child-­family, citizen-­nation, and 
religion-­cultural formation. While these forms of belonging often take 
an asymmetrical form, a child belongs to a family in ways that aren’t 
quite reciprocated (Does a family belong similarly to the child?), what 
matters is that the relation is dynamic and mutually formative. In other 
words, each part takes shape in and through the other. In this way consti-
tutive belonging has some resemblance to understandings of property as 
the attributes, qualities, or characteristics of a thing—that which allows 
it to extend itself into or imprint upon the world. Whiteness might be 
(and has been) read as one such property, indicating a social character-
istic that gives some people power to act (or be in the world) in particu-
lar ways.6 Other racialized positions might also generate other kinds of 
property, for what counts as property is socially dependent upon wider 
networks and relationships, as Sarah Keenan (2010) discusses.
The third kind of belonging, proper attachment, relates closely to con-
stitutive belonging and is sometimes used to characterize the subject-­

Property as Belonging    163
object relationship. Here belonging (as in “I belong here,” “my country 
belongs to me,” or “he belongs with his mother”) identifies a relation-
ship of proximity, attachment, or connection. Floya Anthias (2006: 21) 
writes, “To belong is to be accepted as part of a community, to feel safe 
within it and to have a stake in the future of such a community of mem-
bership.” We might think of this kind of belonging through the notion 
of proper or rightful place: where you belong, or what you belong to, is 
shaped by who else belongs. And, as I discuss below, through belonging 
organizations, nation-­states and neighborhoods can hold property (or 
expectations of propriety) in their members. Yet attachments can also 
be forged counterhegemonically, through political projects oriented to 
generating new kinds of legal belonging. Campaigns, for instance, advo-
cating lesbian and gay relationship recognition might be read as counter-
normative versions of the “we” that belong (legally, socially, emotionally) 
together, an attachment that can also generate property in the other—as 
critiques of gay marriage for privatizing welfare responsibilities attest 
(Boyd 1999; Barker 2012). In the rest of this chapter I will refer to this 
form of belonging as proper attachment.
Recognition
Belonging may be central to property relations, but not all forms of be-
longing count. Working across the relations actualized at Summerhill 
School, as well as wider propertied imaginings, we can think of prop-
erty’s conceptual lines as requiring not just belonging but also authorita-
tive practices. These practices, formal and informal, collective and indi-
vidual, singular and routine, give recognition and entitlement to some 
relations of belonging, while ignoring, discounting, or rejecting others 
(Alexander 1998); indeed we might think of property’s necessary recog-
nition as the actualization of imagining based on imagining what is actu-
alized.
Bestowal of recognition has both a formative and an entrenching 
character. It encodes things, relations, and claims as having become prop-
ertied, as well as confirming, through adjudicative and other practices, 
those relations of property deemed already to exist—even as such rela-
tions may be creations (back-­filled) at moments of conflict or dispute. 
In other words, recognizing property relations may institutionalize or 
authorize informal past practices of collective or intersubjective prop-

164    Chapter 7
erty acknowledgment. They may also produce such propertied pasts as 
ontologically necessary, in the way some creationists claim God, like a 
set designer, created fossils to invoke a seemingly older world.
Yet while creationists focus on the one God, Summerhill practice sug-
gests property recognition is far more pluralistic. I suggested earlier that 
to notice only state-­recognized property relations at the school would 
miss a great deal. Consequently I want to approach property at Summer-
hill as a web of relations that hold a legally pluralist shape (see gener-
ally Griffiths 1986; Merry 1988; Tamanaha 1993; also chapter 6). The 
state may recognize property, in the sense of constituting or respond-
ing to certain relations of belonging (and their infringement). However, 
from the vantage point of the school, official state law is supplemented, 
displaced, and sometimes directly challenged by school bodies engaged 
in “legal” declarations or law-­like practices. Such practices include un-
official, but still formal, declaratory acts by the school meeting or head 
teacher, as well as the informal, regular intersubjective sayings, doings, 
and expectancies that express and sustain the school’s property ethos 
and culture.
The value of legal pluralism to opening up a more layered understand-
ing of Summerhill’s property practices can be seen in a few short ex-
amples. The first two highlight Summerhill’s capacity and commitment 
to create and recognize property beyond state law; the third focuses 
on the relationship between different law-­making bodies. Probably the 
most important property entitlement Summerhill members acquire 
when joining the school is a vote at its meeting, which takes place at 
various points weekly. While this property is obviously not recognized by 
the state and only figuratively identified as property by school members, 
owning one’s vote is nevertheless central to Summerhill’s ethos. Equally 
central are the constraints placed on what such ownership means; votes 
cannot be bought or sold. Readhead commented, “Everyone knows it’s 
one man one vote.” She went on, “One of the most serious things you can 
do is give people a hard time because of how they voted” (a reference to 
a case brought up at the meeting the day before).
A second example of property’s establishment concerns not what the 
school allocates but what it recognizes as having emerged. In conven-
tional schools, children regularly acquire presumptive property rights 
to the things they create, such as paintings, essays, and sculptures. But 
at Summerhill this liberal mode of property creation is taken further 

Property as Belonging    165
as children gain a form of locally recognized ownership over certain 
physical structures. One teacher explained, “Some kids built huts [in 
the woods], and they become the property of the builder.” These kinds 
of rights are of course limited; they don’t include the right to sell a hut 
to a non-­Summerhillian or to retain it after leaving the school. How-
ever, within these parameters, the rights are recognized and internally 
justiciable. Indeed, claims to land can be “brought up” at a school meet-
ing if they appear excessive.7 One teacher described a case where a boy 
claimed possession of a part of the school grounds that he had cleared 
of nettles. He was brought up at a school meeting on the basis that the 
space he had recoded as settled was too large, its boundaries too expan-
sive.8 However, after discussion, the school meeting declared that the 
boy’s labor and property assertion had transformed and redefined the 
space, which was now temporarily his.9
While Summerhill creates and recognizes property rights and free-
doms far more fine-­grained than those recognized by the state, its prop-
erty framework is also affected by state law in numerous ways. Perhaps 
the most straightforward of these is the power given to school members 
whose property is officially recognized; the rights vested in Readhead, 
the school’s legal owner, is one obvious example of this. A more subtle 
instance of how Summerhill ownership is affected by the state can be 
seen in the case of the school’s laws. An important part of the Summer-
hill tradition is the ability of the meeting to vote down any, including 
all, of its laws and to live without them until they are gradually voted 
back in (see Appleton 2000: 112–15). In that context, I was struck during 
one research visit by the account of a recently arrived teacher who tried 
to abolish the laws and found it impossible because state-­driven health 
and safety concerns meant many laws had to remain in place and could 
no longer be abolished. When interviewed, he commented on the frus-
tration he thought children felt from having lost ownership (or perhaps 
authorship) of the laws. What remained to the school, he suggested, was 
mere ownership over the means of implementation.
clarification, Simplification, and Definition
If property is about the authoritative recognition of different relations of 
belonging, processes of simplification become important as they work to 
clarify and define.10 Simplification also takes shape through codification, 
as complex processes and networks get reframed to appear as things in 

166    Chapter 7
relationship (Strathern 2004). In this sense codification flattens social 
life so it becomes intelligible even as a legally pluralist approach recog-
nizes and works with multiple overlapping and intersecting codes. But 
property is not simply an intangible form of ordering. It also works as a 
coding that marks, from the fences around land that demonstrate owner-
ship to the requirement in many boarding schools that children have 
name tags in their clothing (a policy that in its differentiated signaling 
of the school, family, and children’s own identity gestures to the plural 
character of children’s ties of belonging).
Coding simplifies and clarifies. It produces greater definition, estab-
lishing contours and boundaries around propertied things (Underkuffler 
2003: 21–23), as well as around relationships to them. Gray and Gray 
(1998) comment that conceptual clarity and definitional boundaries are 
particularly important when property rights are understood as intan-
gible abstractions rather than physically verifiable items—relations to 
others, for instance, rather than things. At Summerhill many relations 
and forms of belonging take on the solidity of property only when con-
testation or conflict causes definitional processes to become activated. 
These definitional processes aim to sort out and establish the contours 
and limits of the propertied relationship—how rights, freedoms, and re-
sponsibilities are distributed in relation to particular things and spaces. 
Nevertheless in the process, the familiar, habitual complexity of every-
day school life comes into sharper relief.
Power
If a central aspect of property is the social work it performs, power as a 
dimension of property becomes important. In other words, property’s 
coding as object, attachment, or part depends on the capacity of such 
coding to make a difference. Gray and Gray (1998: 15) describe property 
as “an abbreviated reference to a quantum of socially permissible power 
exercised in respect of a socially valued resource.” This does not mean 
that spaces, things, or relations are fully without power when recogni-
tion as property is denied. Nor does it mean that property’s power is 
necessarily effective or accomplishes what is expected. Nevertheless the 
force that property relations and practices possess (or acquire) identifies 
an organized quality capable of generating both constitutive and more 
mediated effects.

Property as Belonging    167
At Summerhill, however, the nature of such effects when it comes 
to exercising power over the propertied things themselves is fairly re-
stricted. From the perspective of the school (as opposed to the state), 
there are few contexts in which the owner is sovereign, with dominion 
over a sphere of indefinite and undefined activity, where little is prohib-
ited. Teachers may have dominion over their classrooms, but they can-
not sell or destroy them. Even in the case of personal possessions, when 
it comes to children’s things, age-­based restrictions limit the ability to 
sell, loan, or give them away, a strategy that protects, but also limits, 
children’s property rights. Yet property’s power isn’t just about what can 
be done to propertied objects or the way power is expressed within the 
relationship itself. It also concerns property’s “extroverted” power—its 
capacity to act on other processes and relations, as I explore below.
Intimate and Personal Life
As I suggested earlier, Neill (1968) saw private ownership as a way of pro-
moting commitment and care in the use of things. Drawing on property 
as belonging, I want to consider property not as a means of maintaining 
well-­looked-­after things and spaces, or at least not entirely. Rather my 
interest is in the way authorized and defined relations of belonging (that 
is, property) contributed to Summerhill’s character as a variegated social 
space, combining (in close temporal-­spatial proximity) personal, public, 
and boundary relations.
For intentional residential communities, the challenge of combining 
privacy and publicity has often been fraught. While some secular com-
munities may prioritize members’ private life, more common to progres-
sive twentieth-­century communal living has been a championing of pub-
lic norms (e.g., Kanter 1973a). Yet, as with common property, attempts 
to live publicly have given rise to community strain; kibbutzim are far 
from the only instances where, over time, the balance of living has re-
verted toward more private modes of living. Even where residential com-
munities desire to sustain simultaneously both private and more public 
norms, doing so can prove challenging, particularly where people live, 
sleep, work, and play in the same contained space. As one Summerhill 
teacher commented, when discussing whether bedrooms were more pri-
vate than other spaces, “My own bedroom has kids in it on a daily basis 
because we’re watching a film or something.” How, then, can intimate 

168    Chapter 7
life be protected and enhanced when members live in close proximity to 
others? While mainstream property scholarship is attentive to property’s 
many applications, when it comes to protecting and supporting intimate 
life, private ownership is depicted as essential. But within a property-­as-­
belonging framework, how important is this individual subject-­object re-
lationship to maintaining an intimate life? Do other things do this work 
instead? Or is intimacy supported by conventional forms of property 
ownership embedded within wider networks of belonging?
Being Alone
There’s quiet withdrawal space everywhere. There’s lots of places you can 
be alone.
—Zoe Readhead
While certain school activities are required to be undertaken privately 
(urinating and smoking, for instance, both involve restrictions on who 
else can be present), rights and powers over space can also be deployed 
to achieve a more voluntary seclusion. One such instance referred to by 
many I interviewed concerned the right of adults and older children to 
be alone in their bedrooms. One teacher stated, “It is the one place they 
can go to have some privacy and get away from community control.”11 
For younger children, required to share bedrooms, such seclusion or 
alone time has to be achieved in other ways, such as curtaining off the 
bed or asking roommates to temporarily withdraw.
Yet while school members may attempt to use their recognized rights 
over bedroom space to achieve privacy and alone time, success is far 
from guaranteed. Children and adults I spoke with commented on the 
respect shown for each other’s privacy; at the same time my visits wit-
nessed several occasions in which children “brought each other up” at 
school meetings for unwelcome intrusions. According to Readhead, 
“Children are in and out of each other’s spaces all the time, although 
there is always that right to ask someone to leave, and that’s one of the 
main cases that come up regularly at the meeting, that people won’t get 
out of my room.”
Rights holders’ adjudicative success on such occasions did codify the 
space as already theirs according to a subject-­object relationship of be-
longing. At the same time, to the extent that challenges proved frequent, 
rights holders’ practical ability to keep others out was more limited. Thus 

Property as Belonging    169
the practical accomplishment of seclusion often involved other kinds 
of space, bringing into play a more complex fabric of belonging than an 
entitlement to control or exercise dominion over a particular space or 
thing.12 One such other kind of space was the school’s wooded grounds. 
A teacher commented, “You can walk in the woods and imagine being 
lost. . . . The landscape allows being alone.”13
Summerhill’s grounds highlight the interlinked character of differ-
ent forms of belonging. On the one hand, the grounds belong legally to 
the school’s owner as part of her state-­recognized property. At the same 
time, the grounds also belong constitutively to the school—in the sense 
of constituting and forging its symbolic and physical landscape. Chil-
dren belong in the grounds because the grounds are for them, consti-
tuting their proper place as well as a legitimate, recognized attachment. 
In part, children’s place and attachment come from their emotional 
connection and identification with Summerhill. But it comes also from 
members knowing what the grounds are, what they represent within the 
school’s symbolic code.
Addressing seclusion as an effect of particular school spaces (or as 
emerging from a proper attachment to them) takes us away from the con-
ventional propertied relationship between land ownership and privacy. 
Here, within the envelope of state law, it is not principally the legally 
recognized right of some to manipulate their soil or things that makes 
privacy possible. Rather being alone is, in Keenan’s (2010) words, “held 
up” by a network of material and symbolic practices, forms of belonging 
that are defined, recognized, and empowered to generate effects.
Affection and Dislike
A second way individual property is conventionally deemed to support 
personal life is through its ability to create and signify partiality or affec-
tive distinctions: who is liked better or deferred to at any given moment, 
through the access and use they are offered in one’s land and things. 
In this way property becomes a mechanism through which friendship, 
hierarchy, intimacy, hostility, and distance get forged and demonstrated. 
As a boarding school community, Summerhill members’ ability to per-
mit others to enter their bedrooms and to share or gift at least certain 
things provided a means of revealing not only long-­standing affective 
distinctions but the ebb and flow of particular ones.14 One teacher com-

170    Chapter 7
mented, “Obviously, there’s the whole friend and not friend, and ‘I don’t 
like you at the moment so you’re not going to get anything.’ . . . It’s quite 
an important way to define a social group here. . . . If you give a group 
of people free access to your skateboard lying around, and someone else 
still has to come and ask you, you’re demarcating who’s in your friend-
ship group.”
While saying no (or having the power to exclude) dominates aca-
demic accounts of private property, what was striking in my interviews 
with Summerhill members was the important role of permission. It 
wasn’t simply that some were denied access but that some had to ask for 
it. One teacher remarked that new children and teachers had a difficult 
time managing such requests, feeling a social obligation to say yes and 
lend their stuff freely without knowing or seeking to find out the reputa-
tions of those who asked to borrow things. But while children and adults 
learned from the time they spent within the school community how to 
say no, strong norms of sharing were also remarked upon.
Tensions between the right to exclude and norms of inclusion high-
light the ambivalent and complex relationship between commodified, 
constitutive, and attachment-­based forms of belonging. On the one 
hand, property variously depicts things and spaces as belongings that 
also define who belongs where, while having the capacity to extend and 
mark attachments (that I belong with you because I let you belong in 
here with me). On the other hand, inclusion norms tie belonging to the 
collective “we.” So bedrooms belong to the community both in the sense 
of forming a constitutive aspect of community life and in the sense that 
they are something Summerhillians (as people who belong together, if 
casually and sometimes with friction) will generally share. One effect of 
this, interviewees suggested, was that control over space and things was 
not much used to organize and disclose affective relationships in any 
stable or absolute sense. While “spite” chuckings-­out reveal the tempo-
rary and transient use of dominion, school members commented on the 
importance of sharing things, and especially space, regardless of how 
well people got on. Thus rather than ownership and property rights being 
used to demarcate relationships, other practices did this work instead. 
One practice mentioned by several people concerned choices about who 
to socialize, play, or spend leisure time with; one teacher commented, 
“You surround yourself with the people you like. . . . In my free time I do 
choose [those] I’ll hang out with.”

Property as Belonging    171
Selfhood
According to many conservative and liberal property theorists, the con-
tribution of ownership, possessions, and the power to manipulate or re-
make things and places in the production and expression of selfhood 
is a major reason for valuing (private) property. For Radin (1993), it is 
through the ongoing (creative) relationship with particular, meaning-
ful spaces and things—through the control and the self that is vested in 
them—that people develop as persons. At Summerhill liberal concep-
tions of the possessive individual as proprietor of her person and capaci-
ties were regularly voiced, particularly when it came to children’s con-
trol over their time and schedule. According to Neill (1968: 27), “The 
function of the child is to live his own life.”15 His daughter, head teacher 
Readhead, similarly remarked, “When you’re not in class, you’re your 
own person.”16
In contrast to several of the other sites discussed in this book, particu-
larly Speakers’ Corner and the Toronto bathhouse, at the school wearing 
masks or fabricating the self is not encouraged (on the natural self, see 
also chapter 4). According to Stronach and Piper (2008), Summerhill is 
a place where you cannot pretend to be someone else. Others described 
how the school made it possible for children to find themselves, to real-
ize what they liked and didn’t like and what kind of person they were be-
coming. Readhead remarked, “I think it’s being able to find that part of 
you which lets you be the person you really feel is you.”
In supporting the development of selfhood through the establishment 
and protection of a sphere of personal autonomy, children’s ownership of 
their bodies proved to be a significant aspect. This is clearly not owner-
ship in the commodified sense; Summerhill children cannot sell their 
body parts, nor do they sell their labor. Rather what it identifies is prop-
erty according to the two other senses of belonging: as a constitutive 
relation of part and whole and as a proper attachment. Children are en-
couraged to feel emotionally connected to, not alienated from, their bod-
ies—a connection seen to derive from control, confidence, and practical 
activity. Thus Summerhill students have far more freedom over where 
their bodies can go than in most schools, including the freedom to stay 
out of the classroom. They also have freedom to partake in “risky pas-
times . . . the sort of games which other children participate in outside 
school hours.”17

172    Chapter 7
A different area of corporeal belonging concerns rights of touch.18 At 
Summerhill all members have the complete right to control who can ac-
cess or touch their body. The entitlement of children to deny access to 
their bodies, whether to educators or to other children, is of course no 
longer educationally unusual. What stands out at Summerhill, however, 
is the right to allow touch. Indeed the school has long adopted the prin-
ciple that nonsexual physical contact is an unexceptional part of school 
life, granted and initiated between adults and children at appropriate 
times. A school policy statement in 2002 commented, “Hugging, sitting 
on laps and other physical displays of affection are an accepted and much 
valued part of community life.”19
Yet, notably, during the period of this research, physical contact had 
come under strain as the result of official pressure on the school to ac-
commodate and respond to wider cultural child sexual abuse anxieties 
(see Stronach and Piper 2008; also chapter 4). Education inspectors in 
1999, for instance, reported that “some of the physical contact between 
staff and pupils could be misconstrued and as such is ill-­advised.”20 At 
least partly in response, the 2000 school staff handbook stated that staff 
visited by pupils at night must ensure that their door is open or that 
someone else is in the room.21 The measures introduced by the school, 
alongside teachers’ frustration at government policy,22 highlight the con-
trasting understandings of propertied belonging at play. In a sense, state 
institutional fears about child abuse speak to a commodified conception 
of property in which children come to belong to adults inappropriately 
and as objects. In contrast, Summerhill expressed a conception of be-
longing far more rooted in notions of proper place and proper attach-
ment, querying the idea that children at a school, where self-­ownership, 
confidence, and democratic governance were affirmed, could become 
the commodified objects of adults’ pleasure. At the same time, as this 
book has identified, when different conceptual lines come into conflict, 
certain lines may prevail. It would be too simple to say that the state’s 
feared belonging trumped the school’s more benign approach. However, 
the state’s conception of children as at risk of objectification affected the 
school’s ability to present—in both practical and documentary ways—
children and adults as belonging together.

Property as Belonging    173
Producing Community Life
So far this discussion has suggested that, in contrast to liberal property 
claims, it is not primarily ownership (or control) over things and spaces 
that makes an intimate life at the school possible. From a property-­as-­
belonging perspective, other kinds of relationships matter also. These 
include proper attachment: what belongs with what, as well as the con-
stitutive relationship between parts and whole. Different kinds of autho-
rized and recognized belonging come together to form intricate webs 
that are important to approach holistically rather than being split—as 
property jurisprudence tends to—into propertied and nonpropertied 
forms. But if belonging, rather than belongings, does much of the work 
of developing and sustaining a personal life within the school, what 
about that other main aspect of a variegated social world: community 
life? Property (or at least private property) is often placed in conflict 
with communal and public concerns, as if living in common undermines 
both individual ownership and the personal life such ownership is osten-
sibly there to protect. But if intimate and more communal ways of living 
are able to coexist (as they do at Summerhill), and even to support each 
other, what contribution, if any, does property make to building and sus-
taining this more collective dimension?
To understand the challenge of building such a collective life, we need 
to consider the kind of communal environment Summerhill sought to 
create. In contrast to some of the spaces discussed in this book, the 
dominant trope at Summerhill was that of family. According to a former 
teacher, Matthew Appleton (2000: 90), “The sense of being part of a 
huge family is a very strong one. For some kids it will be the place they 
have felt most at home in life. I have often heard older kids talk about 
their friends being like brothers and sisters.” Adult Summerhillians I 
spoke with variously described the school as a family, a community, a vil-
lage, and as a tribe. But did all children belong equally? What social fac-
tors might generate unequal forms of connection? When I asked adult 
school members, I was told, perhaps not surprisingly, that distinctions 
of national identity, class, and gender didn’t impact significantly on chil-
dren’s relationship of belonging to the school. However, this didn’t mean 
belonging wasn’t seen as a process.
In the discussion that follows, I want to explore the process and place 
of becoming Summerhillian in relation to two principal dimensions of 

174    Chapter 7
the school’s community life: the development of a collective identity and 
the governing of public spaces and private activities. My focus is the con-
tribution made by property rights and relations, as conceptual lines cen-
tered on belonging.
Collective Identity
At Summerhill School personally owned things can be used to estab-
lish collective identity in several different ways. One is through the visi-
bility and informal territorialization that taking control of particular 
spaces with one’s things makes possible. On several visits I was struck 
by the way younger boys used their skateboards and bicycles to struc-
ture and dominate the social economy of the forecourt. In the light of 
Neill’s (1968) focus on young boys, I asked one teacher whether the boys’ 
visible presence allowed them to capture Summerhill’s collective iden-
tity. He demurred, remarking, “They’re the most visible part of Summer-
hill. They’re the ones that cause the most trouble. They’re the ones you’ll 
hear and see most of the time. . . . But the majority of the school are not 
those boys, and they also live their lives here.”
A second way property can be used to establish a collective identity 
is when groups of children (again, often young boys), without permis-
sion, hide or ruin each other’s or the school’s things. These kinds of prop-
erty infractions constitute a way of generating alternative, unauthorized, 
temporary networks of belonging; they also, importantly, provide rituals 
through which children (and sometimes adults) become Summerhillians 
(Neill 1968; Popenoe 1970). The school’s response to property breaches, 
in turn, reestablishes a different collective “we.” Adjudications at school 
meetings work to present a community that is utilitarian, nonpunitive, 
and inclusive, where members, importantly, recognize everyone at some 
point will break the law and where, through acknowledgment of wrong-
doing and acceptance of a fine, Summerhillians are immediately reincor-
porated back into the polity.23
This sense of a community brought into being through practices 
such as adjudication establishes Summerhill as an entity that is held in 
common. At one level, certainly, the school belongs to Readhead; one 
teacher remarked, “I say [to Readhead], ‘You’re the boss, tell me what 
to do.’” He then went on to describe the difficult time teachers had who 
came thinking the school was a democracy: “This is a family-­owned busi-

Property as Belonging    175
ness. . . . It’s not a workers’ commune.” At the same time, to treat the 
school as only a family business, or commodity, within a subject-­object 
relationship misses not only Readhead’s and her family’s noncommodi-
fied relationship to the school but, more important for my purposes, the 
other relationships of ownership and belonging that exist. These might 
not be recognized by the state, but they are recognized by the school and 
form a key aspect of the school’s identity as a democratic community. As 
Readhead commented, “Yes, it belongs to me, but it is the community 
that owns it. . . . When I’m talking to people . . . about the community, 
it is actually an entity, the community is some thing. . . . The meeting, 
to me, is us, and it’s a tangible body. . . . The things that anger me a lot, 
in the school, are when pupils are not participating in that process on a 
regular basis. . . . Coming to Summerhill is . . . being a practicing mem-
ber of the community.” Another teacher similarly remarked, “[Children] 
need to feel ownership of the school to accept certain laws and limits on 
what they can and can’t do.”
Readhead’s focus on the school as belonging to its current (and past) 
members was echoed by several people with whom I spoke. While Neill 
(1945: 35) himself wrote, “Summerhill is not mine: it belongs to a col-
lective movement that embraces many,” at the time of my research in 
2011, this sense of a wider progressive educational community, to which 
Summerhill belonged, did not seem widely shared within the school. 
Teachers I spoke with commented on the lack of a broader supportive 
presence beyond occasional donations and help at times of crisis. Yet 
in ways that resonate with my discussion of giving in chapters 6 and 8, 
Readhead also described the school as “a gift; a working model of a very 
clever educator. . . . It’s really important the school is here to show what 
actually Neill meant.”
Thinking about those to whom the school belongs highlights the over-
lapping and intersecting character of different property formations; it is 
not a zero-­sum relationship in which the property claims to the school 
by some detract from the propertied rights of others. But while proper-
tied forms of belonging invariably raise questions of identification and 
attachment, they also go beyond this. It’s not simply that school mem-
bers are Summerhillians because the school belongs to them (or that 
being Summerhillians gives them property in the school). As important, 
if not more important, is what this propertied relationship is used to do. 

176    Chapter 7
One important dimension of this involves practices of stewardship. For 
official state bodies, it is Readhead who is the school’s primary guard-
ian,24 a role teachers in the school confirmed: “Zoe still has the final 
word on things, so if she sees something happening that could damage 
the existence of the school, she can say no . . . it’s not going to happen 
anymore” (teacher interview). But the school has sought to continue 
Neill’s legacy in collectivizing (to some degree) this stewardship.
Children’s participation in the stewardship of Summerhill has been 
an important element of the school’s success. Indeed when I asked Read-
head what children’s ownership meant, her reply centered on what such 
ownership did: “They will defend the laws and they take on responsi-
bilities beyond what they would like to do.” But while stewardship is a 
propertied relationship that involves work, it is also a relationship that 
both produces and depends upon belonging. Children’s stewardship is 
anchored in their attachment and deep knowledge of the school—in the 
ways they belong to it. But through belonging to the school as a consti-
tutive part, the school also belongs to them as something precious and 
potentially fragile with which they are entrusted.
The trust and reliance placed in children’s stewardship was demon-
strated with particular symbolic clarity when the school appealed against 
the Education Secretary’s “notice of complaint,” which would have re-
moved Summerhill from the private schools register.25 Summerhill went 
to court to challenge the government’s decision; the government pro-
posed a compromise settlement,26 and the school asked for time to con-
sider it. They took over a courtroom and held a school meeting to deter-
mine collectively whether the government’s offer should be accepted. 
Appleton (2000: 266) wrote, “There really is something extraordinary 
about this case in which High Court proceedings are stopped and gov-
ernment officials are forced to wait, while a meeting of children decide 
whether or not to accept their proposals.” Of course, the decision to 
allow the school meeting to play this role lay with Summerhill’s owners. 
But it should not be dismissed, I think, as an empty gesture. Asserting 
the school’s signature character in the face of government attempts to 
make Summerhill less extraordinary, the decision also reflected a rela-
tionship of trust in which the school community, guardian-­like, was en-
abled in holding that most valuable property: property in and property 
of Summerhill’s future.

Property as Belonging    177
Democratizing Governance
Beyond such external symbolic moments, children’s stewardship of the 
school is perhaps most evident when it comes to governing its common 
spaces. For Summerhill, sustaining its identity over time as a demo-
cratic, self-­governing community has depended upon groups of children 
playing this role; in those periods when responsible children have not 
existed in sufficient numbers, Summerhill has had temporary difficulties 
in maintaining its ethos and principles of operation (see Appleton 2000: 
73; Segefjord 1970). For while some spaces and things are under the pur-
view of particular adults, civic spaces and things tend to be governed 
by groups of kids. Organized by committee structures, Summerhillians 
manage the use of sensitive equipment and organize events, deploying 
differentiated property rights, including those of access, to do so.
Property rights also come into play in the governance of Summer-
hillians. Direct forms of governance can be seen in the health and safety 
committees, ombudsmen, “beddies officers,”27 and investigation com-
mittees that are empowered to enter particular spaces to carry out norm-­
maintenance work. One teacher, discussing the investigation commit-
tee, remarked, “They have the right to search people’s rooms. . . . We as 
staff couldn’t go into people’s rooms in the middle of the night . . . which 
the investigating committee can do.” But alongside those rights of access 
tied to particular responsibilities are the more indirect ways regulation 
at Summerhill happens. Echoing Jane Jacobs’s (1962) work on informal 
surveillance—her “eyes on the street” (although suggestively at odds 
with prevailing public management strategies which tend to keep older 
children out of areas, such as playgrounds, used by younger ones)—
Summerhill has used access rights to keep older children in younger 
children’s spaces. Yet the presence of older children who might act as 
a moderating force depends upon more than mere permission (or en-
titlement). As Readhead remarked, it may be insufficient, for instance, 
for older teenagers to feel common spaces belong to them as part of the 
school community, if other, more desirable spaces belong to them spe-
cifically.
Using property rights and practices to create visible subjects at 
Summerhill is mediated, at least in part, by subjects’ willingness to be 
visible, as with the young boys skateboarding in front of the school de-

178    Chapter 7
scribed earlier. This does not mean only, or even primarily, creating an 
environment in which members choose to comply—a Foucauldian ver-
sion of governing through the agency of subjects. What it means, in the 
Summerhill context, is giving members options, for the terms and condi-
tions of students’ belonging to the school is at odds with a policy of con-
stant scrutiny. Against the conventional school logic of (potentially) un-
trustworthy subjects necessitating relentlessly visible, governable spaces, 
Summerhill offers members access to secluded time-­spaces where un-
ruly acts are possible, as well as to spaces of managed publicity. As one 
teacher remarked in relation to the woods, “We know what’s going on 
in general terms but that’s their place—they disappear into the woods, 
and then they come out.” At the same time, he described the variety of in-
door spaces that allowed children to access noisy, buzzy places as well as 
quiet, calm ones. Rights to access and, indeed, to shape particular spaces 
certainly make this kind of variegation possible. Yet central to the time-­
space distribution of activities is the forging of belonging. This is not the 
belonging emphasized in more conventional schools, where children be-
long at specific times in specific places. Rather it is the belonging of ac-
tivities and behaviors to their own “proper time-­space” as a property (or 
Summerhill School students hanging out in the school’s woods, circa 2003. Image courtesy of Zoe 
Readhead, head teacher, Summerhill School.

Property as Belonging    179
part) of Summerhill School—even as such allocations are periodically 
challenged, disregarded, revised, or overturned.
Boundaries
Summerhill is a place outsiders frequently enter. While a few outsiders 
come without license or permission, causing the school to invest in 
security measures to protect its spaces, things, and people, most enter 
invited. Education inspectors, other officials, tradespeople, and pro-
spective parents are regular visitors. However, the group that I wish to 
consider involves those who attend purely out of a social, political, or 
educational interest in the school.
Members and Visitors
Outsider interest is something intentional communities regularly con-
front (Sargisson 2000; Skinner 1976), and communities have different 
means of managing it. At one extreme are those rare communities who 
deny an insider-­outsider distinction. As Kanter (1973b: 402) describes, 
such communities “wish to be open to all comers . . . where everyone 
is welcome. . . . Some of these communes do not even make a member/
nonmember distinction; whoever is there at the time ‘belongs’.” This ap-
proach, however, has proven less common in recent years as intentional 
communities work instead to differentiate between insiders and out-
siders. At the same time, many communities remain keen to model their 
spaces, practices, and structures. Some incorporate visitors into their 
work schedules, thereby gaining some limited labor support while simul-
taneously enabling people to experience community life. A less com-
mitted mechanism (on both sides) involves scheduled visit days.
Educators, academics, and other progressives from across the globe 
continue to visit Summerhill, keen to witness its educational innova-
tions firsthand. One-­time visitors are formally welcomed on designated 
open days and looked after by a Visitors Committee member. However, 
in ways that echo the “limited common property regimes” described by 
Rose (1998: 139), which function as a commons within and a property 
regime without, a host of property rules work to mark, maintain, and 
communicate community boundaries (see also Blomley 2004a).
Management of visitors through property rules and practices is an im-
portant contributing factor in the reproduction of Summerhill as a de-

180    Chapter 7
fined and bounded community. During one set of visits, I noticed a large 
sign at the entrance informing visitors they could not have meals at the 
school, swing on the Big Beech, or use the swimming pool. Similarly 
school laws prohibit visitors from remaining after 5 p.m., going upstairs 
in the main building, or entering people’s rooms without permission.28 
Undoubtedly the most symbolic marker of visitors’ outsider status is the 
school meeting. Even repeat visitors have to wait behind the closed door 
of the large gathering space until their entry has been proposed by a 
school member and a successful vote taken.
The practical and symbolic demarcation between insider and outsider 
clearly has a host of effects. Yet at another level, it breaks down, unable 
to ensure the practical excludability it depends upon (Gray 1991). Once 
visitors are allowed in, spatial and temporal prohibitions can only par-
tially cordon off sights and sounds. As a consequence, a reversal of be-
longing threatens in which visitors shift from being the excluded to be-
coming the subjects of the property relationship, with Summerhillians 
as their objects. This reversal, anchored in the permeability of bound-
aries (as well as, perhaps, being an inevitable effect of their production), 
reveals how subject-­object and more co-­constitutive forms of belonging 
may not only coincide but morph into each other. Inviting outsiders in 
and trusting supporters to enhance the school’s mission unsurprisingly 
risk bringing into being more commodified forms of belonging, as per-
missions granted to sympathetic visitors to look, listen, and ask ques-
tions turns the school into an object of scrutiny. This commodified form 
of belonging is certainly unauthorized by the school; Summerhill does 
not institutionally recognize or underpin such visitor power. Neverthe-
less it cannot eliminate its effects. Alongside the impression a constant 
flow of visitors has had on the school community, wider effects are also 
apparent as filmmakers, reporters, educators, and academics extract and 
re-­present the school’s meaning and practices in ways that do not always 
coincide with the interests and agenda of the school.29
Leaving the School
Asymmetries of access and use between school members and outsiders 
identify who belongs, in the course of determining what belongs and is 
available to them. However, equally central to the marking of bound-
aries are the property relations that come into play when Summerhill 
members leave the school grounds. Conversations with Summerhillians 

Property as Belonging    181
revealed a range of exterior market exchanges, from shopping, eating, 
and attending the cinema to using public transport and taxis. For the 
most part, these external transactions proved relatively formal, individu-
alized, and self-­interested, highlighting, as one might expect, the norma-
tive boundary members cross on leaving the school.
But while school members clearly exercise ownership rights when 
engaging in property transactions, does the school also exercise rights 
of ownership? Can children be usefully described as the effective prop-
erty of Summerhill—a claim that resonates with the idea of “borrow-
ing persons” that Marilyn Strathern (2010) explores? Unsurprisingly, 
when asked, members balked at the idea that they were property. And of 
course, the school does not meaningfully exercise ownership of its mem-
bers in ways that would allow it to use, give away, or sell them. How-
ever, several examples arose in conversations about the ways children 
belonged to the school and the effects that followed from these recog-
nized (if not always desired) modes of connection.
One instance concerned the harassment children feared from stand-
ing in for Summerhill. Echoing an older “siege mentality” history (Croall 
1983: 187), students talked about the hostility they received in the local 
town of Leiston. Readhead likewise told me, “Inevitably, there are times 
when people can be hostile to Summerhill kids—particularly other kids, 
teenagers.” She added, however, “I know the local tradespeople are very 
supportive of our children because they say what nice kids they are.”
Making a good impression in this way indicates how children’s belong-
ing, enacted through representing the school, can lead to what we might 
call reflexive “property-­limitation” rules, as children’s self-­management 
is mobilized to generate conformity to particular behavioral standards 
when out in town—standards that (unlike in many schools) differ from 
those governing behavior within the school itself. One teacher remarked, 
“When going into town . . . we have a whole set of laws about how they 
should behave. . . . They do become representatives of the school. . . . 
While the community cannot control their actions, you try to steer them 
to behave favorably towards the image of the school.” Readhead makes 
a similar point, telling of a boy with unbrushed curly hair who set out 
to visit the doctor: “I said . . . ‘You can’t go to the doctors, they see that 
and they assume that we’re not looking after you. You can’t go with your 
hair in a mess. . . . Next time if you want to go to the doctor you have 
to clean up.’ . . . It’s not a school law but it’s very acceptable for me to 

182    Chapter 7
say. . . . And I’d be very happy to bring it to the school meeting. We’re all 
aware of our image and the image we portray. . . . [Children] carry the 
responsibility of Summerhill with them and, certainly, ex-­pupils feel that 
very strongly.”
In these examples, children’s mode of belonging to the school—as 
members of a community and, in some respects, as resources in a family 
business30—provides an important medium through which the bound-
aries between inside and out get drawn and mobilized. Undoubtedly the 
children are an essential, perhaps the most essential, part of what makes 
Summerhill distinctive, enabling and strengthening its wider brand rec-
ognition. At the same time, the distinctiveness of Summerhill as a com-
munity, along with children’s felt sense of belonging to it, reveals the 
value of conceptual lines that stretch property beyond the subject-­object 
relationship to encompass other kinds of institutionalized belonging. 
These other recognized relations of attachment, constitution, and place 
entwine with property’s more conventional fungible form to shape how 
the division between inside and out will operate. As representatives—in 
the sense of being both delegates and reflections of the school—­children 
extend Summerhill’s presence and impact beyond the school gate, af-
fecting perceptions of the school both positive and negative. But treat-
ing Summerhill children as belonging to the school suggests also, for 
the most part, that they do not belong to Leiston—just as local Leiston 
people do not, for the most part, belong at the school. In this way, as the 
school mobilizes property in its members, boundaries are not only rec-
ognized and deployed but brought into sharper definition.
Concluding Remarks
I opened this chapter with Neill and others’ assertion about the impor-
tance of individual possession, an assertion heard regularly at the school, 
whether it related to Readhead’s ownership of the school, individual 
items belonging to school members, or the spaces over which particu-
lar teachers or children had dominion. Yet my argument is that while 
conventional forms of ownership are asserted and undoubtedly matter, 
when it comes to understanding the work of maintaining a variegated so-
cial involving personal, communal, and external life at the school, these 
mainstream conceptions of property are too limited. Even if we add a 
legal pluralist dimension, conventional property frameworks still have 
us looking for mastery, dominion, exclusive control, or particular rights 

Property as Belonging    183
and powers over (or in relation to) spaces and things, if now extended to 
include those propertied practices authorized and upheld by community 
law and custom as well. Certainly including school laws and norms gets 
closer to the way property works (and is imagined) at Summerhill, but 
it still draws a line around a set of practices in a manner that places too 
much emphasis on exclusion and control, on the one hand, while seem-
ing to disregard the embeddedness of practices (the network of relations 
and rights that belonging invokes), on the other.
Belongings undoubtedly are used to produce effects, as I have ex-
plored, but the subject-­object connections between people, things, and 
spaces cannot be easily separated from the work of belonging as a consti-
tutive relation of formation and as proper attachment. In this chapter I 
have sought to trace how a set of movements around belonging can come 
within property’s gravitational orbit—indeed, more than this, can come 
to constitute a core part of how we might conceptualize property. Link-
ing belongings to belonging, as complexly intertwined processes, is useful 
beyond its capacity to capture something of the governmental technolo-
gies through which Summerhill works. As a way of imagining property, 
belonging emphasizes the place of connection and relationship. Radin’s 
(1993) “property for personhood” approach offered a step in this direc-
tion; however, it is limited by its tendency to restrict property to things 
and relations already imagined as commodifiable—understandable in 
the context of right-­wing moves to make everything ownable. As such, 
and in tune with property law more generally, property for personhood 
works to extract certain law-­like relations from a much wider web. The 
approach in this chapter, by contrast, has sought to re-­embed belongings, 
extending and thickening property relations by reframing what property 
is understood to entail. At the same time, it does not treat all relations 
of belonging as property; recognition, power, and definition are also sig-
nificant dimensions.31
As I suggested at the start, property has been deemed one of the most 
troubling issues for the development of a utopian attitude (see chap-
ter 2). Not only is it a site of tension for utopian communities, but it is 
also a concept particularly subject to wishful thinking in contexts where 
idealistic imagining and actualization appear particularly far apart (as 
radical fantasies of its sought-­after disappearance replace individual day-
dreams of personal accumulation). Yet despite the disjuncture between 
radical fantasies of what property could be and conventional experiences 

184    Chapter 7
of actual property relations within the global North, these two perspec-
tives also share common ground in that they presuppose a concept of 
property rooted in relations and practices of exclusion and control. The 
difference between utopian thinking (to the extent it eschews eliminat-
ing property altogether) and mainstream manifestations thus revolves 
around whether property is privately, publicly, or collectively owned and 
whether as a social structure it is deemed beneficial, inevitable, danger-
ous, or redundant.
In contrast to this conception of property, the conceptual lines com-
munities such as Summerhill facilitate, oriented to belonging rather 
than to control, gesture toward other ways of approaching property, 
ways that may hold value in other contexts. This does not mean the con-
ception of property developed here should be just extracted and applied 
elsewhere as if its conceptual lines were detachable from the specific 
practices of Summerhill School. While these lines are informed by prop-
erty thinking and struggles in other contexts, especially in relation to in-
digenous people’s land claims, squatting, and public land disputes, they 
also—like these other lines—have a specificity and location that is im-
portant. At the same time, Summerhill offers resources for property’s 
reimagination. It also provides an example of how new property lines 
can be generated from a site whose main contribution to a transforma-
tive politics appears to be something quite different. Property as belong-
ing is not intended to posit a new ideal (in part for reasons discussed in 
chapter 5; see also Cooper and Herman 2013). Relations of belonging for 
some are also relations of nonbelonging and conditional belonging for 
others. Property’s need for authoritative recognition and clarity, even if 
undertaken by communities themselves in democratic ways, reveals too 
the inherent challenges in treating congealed forms of belonging as a 
source of power, as those relations and resources recognized as proper-
tied are used to generate specific effects.
Yet approaching property as belonging does also make possible other, 
more critical reversals in how social relations are imagined. For if be-
longing constitutes the heart of property, does this not also mean that 
property is a key dimension of belonging? Posing this question encour-
ages us to look at relations of belonging differently, whether the belong-
ing in question involves a nation, family, community, spouse, ethnic 
community, or other kind of place (see Anthias 2006; Cooper 1998; 
Yuval-­Davis 2006). It encourages us to look at the “rhetorics of terri-

Property as Belonging    185
tory . . . through which we are daily urged to construct our maps of loy-
alty” (Massey 2005: 185), and it incites us to inquire about the property 
that is granted subjects by such relations. This is not necessarily (per-
haps not usually) property as commodity (although of course slavery is 
exactly this). However, it would be naïve to assume that those collective 
forms of belonging that are conventionally celebrated don’t bear their 
own propertied nexus, whether it is the authorized right of a parent to 
control his child, of a spouse to alimony, of a state to conscript its citi-
zens, or of Christianity to make claims on England’s culture and laws. 
Exploring the kinds of property to which different relations of belong-
ing give rise thus draws our attention to the agency that property grants 
those persons, entities, and also communities that attract and hold the 
belonging of others.
In chapters 6 and 7, I have explored in different ways how social 
economies generate (or don’t generate) community. In chapter 8, the 
last of my six studies, I maintain this focus as I examine how “trading” 
words can generate and be integral to a community of strangers involved 
in pleasurable, sometimes risky, sometimes theatrical encounters. The 
chapter’s focus is Speakers’ Corner. Drawing on the well-­established 
trope of a marketplace of ideas, I consider the relationship Speakers’ 
Corner delineates and makes actual between markets and play, address-
ing how this relationship can take multiple coexisting forms with very 
different implications for thinking about the politics of the marketplace.

chapter 8
Market Play at Speakers’ Corner
It’s spitting rain intermittently, and Speakers’ Corner is relatively quiet. 
About nine men are speaking, most on stepladders. One sings; another 
stands silently holding the Good News Bible. A woman rants at a large 
crowd. All I can hear is the same word over and over: disgrace. A younger 
Marxist talks about investment, strikes, profit, and the destruction of 
capital. A cluster of men listen to him thoughtfully. He pauses and asks 
for questions and contributions.
Field notes, June 19, 2011
Despite extensive use as a trope for open public debate and as a 
marketplace of ideas, Speakers’ Corner has generated surprisingly 
little scholarship. Academic work that does exist tells the story of 
the most prominent Corner in London’s Hyde Park (Coleman 1997; 
Roberts 2000, 2001, 2008) and the stage it sets for polyphonic 
speech (McIlvenny 1996a, 1996b; Roberts 2008). Elsewhere I have 
explored Speakers’ Corner as a place of social contact (see Cooper 
2006b), arguing that the prevailing academic focus on the Corner 
as a place of oratory and debate neglects the work such speech does 
in generating social relationships and unexpected stranger encoun-
ters. This chapter takes a different approach. Anchored in utopian 
studies’ emphasis on improvisation, creativity, and play as key di-
mensions of change—in terms of the world that is sought, with its 
imaginative, noninstrumental pleasures, as well as how to get there 
(Sargisson 2012)—I want to explore Speakers’ Corner as a place 
where play redirects and reframes how the market is manifested.

Market Play    187
My reasons for doing so are twofold. First, in the light of narratives of 
the market’s ever growing empire, I want to consider the way play might 
reorder and refashion how we think about the market. Left-­wing writers 
and activists have long engaged in a very thoroughgoing critique of the 
market, including as a process, formation, and ideology, whose essence 
(despite appearances) is organized around commodities, exploitation, 
competition, and alienation. Jameson writes, “the rhetoric of the mar-
ket has been a fundamental and central component of this ideological 
struggle [over social democracy], this struggle for the legitimation or de-
legitimation of left discourse” (1991: 263). Yet alternatives—­particularly 
alternatives outside the traditional sphere of goods’ distribution—have 
been more hesitantly posed, despite interesting work on the commons, 
cooperatives, and community economics (e.g., Gibson-­Graham 2006b; 
North 2007). In chapter 6 I considered lets as one small-­scale eco-
nomic alternative to mainstream market relations. This chapter takes 
a different tack. While it remains with traditional markets in the form 
of face-­to-­face embodied interactions, my focus is not primarily on the 
challenge of creating more egalitarian and fairer modes of generating 
and exchanging goods, services, and money. Rather I address what mar-
kets can do when located within another domain, namely that of play. 
I am not concerned, however, with how play has become commodified 
or subject to market relations. Rather, I am interested in what it might 
mean to recuperate the market, and specifically the marketplace, as a 
structure, ethos, and mode of interacting through play.
In doing so, and this is my second aim, I want to explore how concepts 
combine and articulate together. According to Mitchell Dean (2008: 
26), “Concepts are terms within a network of differences, distinctions, 
and oppositions, and therefore do not make sense without each other.” 
How concepts combine or interact becomes ever more complex once 
we recognize the material dimensions of this process; that conceptual 
articulations don’t just happen in the realm of imagining. Chapter 6 ad-
dressed the difficulty of getting two concepts, community and labor, to 
practically combine. Here my focus is on two concepts that did. How-
ever, the combining of markets and play at Speakers’ Corner did not take 
a single form but was simultaneously actualized in multiple ways. Or, 
to put it another way, rather than drawing a single conceptual line, as 
I did in relation to property at Summerhill, this chapter explores the 
multiple lines made possible when concepts are actualized, particularly 

188    Chapter 8
when they are actualized in ways that remain relatively unformulated at 
the level of speech. In the context of Speakers’ Corner, play functioned 
as a tool for attracting “customers.” But it also provided a mode of inter-
action through which market relations could be critiqued and satirized, 
while simultaneously fusing with the market architecture of the Corner 
to produce a distinctive kind of enjoyable and stimulating social practice.
Recognizing the presence of different articulations is important to 
grasping the complexity of a site such as Speakers’ Corner. But it is 
also important to understanding the power and effects of conceptual 
plurality, the way different conceptual articulations intersect, and—­
although this is beyond the scope of the chapter—how and when certain 
articulations come to dominate, impelling particular conceptual lines at 
the expense of others. To develop my analysis, the discussion that follows 
draws from a series of observational field visits to Speakers’ Corner be-
tween 2003 and 2012, alongside conversations with different speakers 
(which ranged from banter to listening to debate) and about thirty inter-
views with regular participants, speakers, and one-­time (or occasional) 
listeners.1 The Corner was unquestionably one of the easiest spaces I 
researched in which to find participants wanting to talk (perhaps un-
surprising since talk is what the Corner is about). In most cases, simply 
opening a notepad was sufficient to generate interest from regulars, who 
would ask what I was writing about. Regulars were also striking in their 
willingness to host me for short periods of time, taking me around the 
Corner, commenting on different characters present, and introducing 
me to those they thought would have something interesting to say (see 
also chapter 1).
Speakers’ Corner
For many, Speakers’ Corner constitutes a foundational, internationally 
recognized, liberal trope, a symbol of free expression and the market-
place of ideas. Yet this reading of Speakers’ Corner, while influential, 
ignores the specificity of London’s Corner as a geographical place, as it 
also risks ignoring Hyde Park Corner’s radical and proletarian origins. 
Today many venues throughout the globe get characterized as speakers’ 
corners, and at the turn of the twenty-­first century open-­air public speech 
spaces existed in Singapore and Sydney, among other places. Planners 
often design or promote speakers’ corners, not necessarily with success, 
as part of revitalizing and rebranding delineated urban spaces. Speakers’ 

Market Play    189
corners can also be found in the form of highly mediated and controlled 
“right of reply” outlets within the mass media. But the Speakers’ Corner 
at the center of this discussion is the most famous. Located at the north-
east corner of London’s Hyde Park, the Corner covers a relatively small 
scrap of land, one that is easy to miss. However, on Sundays it is filled 
with speakers, hecklers, and crowds, listening, asking questions, argu-
ing, observing, and using the venue as a place in which to meet others. 
On a warm Sunday there may be thirty speakers at any one time, and a 
thousand or more people—one-­timers and regulars, Londoners and visi-
tors—passing by in the course of a day, with a couple of police officers 
sometimes stationed in case of complaints or trouble.
Speakers’ Corner signifies an everyday utopia in several respects. Like 
Summerhill School, it is very much a defined, physical place, whose spa-
tiality allows it to create symbolic and practical boundaries that here 
come into play once a week.2 While Speakers’ Corner is largely subject to 
the same statutory prohibitions as other public spaces in terms of what 
can be said, it functions within the cultural imaginary as a place of free 
speech, where anything can be uttered. Yet in my view, what is striking 
about the Corner, in ways that resonate with the discussion of bathhouse 
sex in chapter 5, is its utopian norms of contact. At Speakers’ Corner you 
can start a conversation with anyone. Against conventional etiquette, 
which suggests politics and religion should be avoided with strangers, at 
the Corner these form the heart of conversation. In addition, Speakers’ 
Corner substantially disavows external status differentials. In ways that 
A crowd listens to a speaker at Speakers’ Corner, Hyde Park, London, 2011.  
Photo courtesy of SBImagery.

190    Chapter 8
resonate with the norms of many twentieth-­century U.S. nudist clubs, 
where occupational and status signifiers were supposed to be bracketed, 
at the Corner credentials bearing wider cultural capital, such as quali-
fications and occupation, carry little or no weight. As one speaker told 
me, “A rich person or someone who is somebody famous . . . can easily 
be put down by a homeless person in a meeting, so in that way there’s 
an atmosphere that can undermine hierarchical power. . . . It’s a very 
leveling atmosphere.” In this respect, Speakers’ Corner might be read 
as a utopian public sphere, a place that rejects the credentials and pro-
fessional capitalization of expertise that pervade contemporary middle-­
class publics.
Yet the Corner is far from flawless. Aside from the relentless, ubiqui-
tous abuse routed through scatology, Speakers’ Corner is a venue where 
right-­wing, sexist, and xenophobic remarks form a regular part of the 
mix. Arguably the fact that a space is right wing does not exclude it from 
operating as a utopia, and various scholars have written on conservative 
utopias (or collective longings; e.g., Fitting 1991; Herman 1997). How-
ever, given this book’s orientation toward the progressive qualities of the 
spaces examined, my discussion of the Corner centers on the critical 
marketplace it established, even as its libertarian discursive ethos makes 
it an uncomfortable domain, and one that is often hard to like as more 
extreme versions of everyday prejudice get freely voiced. Speakers’ Cor-
ner is also a very male space. Most speakers and almost all the hecklers 
are men, and the style and content of discussion is structured accord-
ing to conventionally gendered norms of aggressive, combative debate 
and what is deemed appropriate public conversation (Cooper 2006b). 
One speaker told me, “There’s a lot of male egos about, and the male ego 
is pushy, upfront, and penetrating,” adding (for reasons not altogether 
clear), “So is the male penis.”
Yet while homophobic, xenophobic, and sexist remarks, often uttered 
deliberately to provoke, seem to gesture toward conventional, if not fully 
authorized opinions, in other respects Speakers’ Corner constitutes a 
space rooted in social and cultural marginality. For many regulars (al-
though not all), Speakers’ Corner offers a place of debate, proselytism, 
recreation, networking, and socializing for those who for reasons of eco-
nomic, national, ethnic, or political powerlessness, or mental ill health, 
have less access to more established or conventional spaces. Regulars 

Market Play    191
I spoke with commented that the Corner provided a weekly home for 
eccentric characters and for people (largely men) with mental health 
problems. While some alluded to “crazy people” generating a spectacle 
that others came to watch (and consume), interviewees also remarked 
that the Corner was an important place for solitary, lonely, or unwell 
people to experience camaraderie, support, and attention.
The culture and social accessibility of the Corner, in large part due to 
its central location within the capital, has also facilitated its use by mi-
grants and refugees. One speaker I interviewed, one of very few women 
to give regular orations, told me that in the 1940s German refugees met 
there. In contemporary times, groups of young Middle Eastern men 
gather. While some listen and engage with the more theatrical public 
orators, many use the space as a place for serious deliberation. These 
semiprivate conversations, involving small clusters of men, are a feature 
of the Corner usually ignored by commentators (and in the public imagi-
nary) since they trouble the Corner’s iconic portrayal as a place of public 
oratory and debate. Yet it is in these smaller gatherings that more serious 
speech happens, as one regular explained: “The most quiet meetings are 
where you get intellectual stimulation; the bigger crowds are fluff and 
nonsense. If you want to gauge this place, look at the small meetings.”
Speakers’ Corner is a complex, contradictory place. In some ways it 
appears to be a typical site of male camaraderie and casual misogyny, yet 
simultaneously it is a place where those lacking social capital or other 
forms of recognition have gathered. With its Hyde Park base,3 the Corner 
is rooted in a long history of dissent. In his account of the Corner, Cole-
man (1997: 4) locates its origins in the scholars (or fools) who wandered 
through towns and villages in the Middle Ages, “making witty observa-
tions about ecclesiastical and secular orthodoxy.” Later, Coleman argues, 
the radicals of the English Revolution made for the streets, forging “a key 
part of the founding of the outdoor speaking tradition in Britain” (6). But 
the specific siting of Speakers’ Corner at Hyde Park’s Marble Arch origi-
nates with Tyburn, an infamous place for public hangings until 1783. Be-
fore people were killed, they were allowed to address their final words to 
the gathering crowd (25–30). While this was expected (and indeed was 
often used) as a chance to repent, some offenders took the opportunity 
to defiantly defend their actions. John Roberts (2008: 107) writes, “Dur-
ing the seventeenth and eighteenth century . . . ‘last dying speeches’ at 

192    Chapter 8
Hyde Park became a place for public dialogue about diminishing custom-
ary rights against the growing imposition of capitalist social relations 
and the rule of private property.”
For the discussion that follows, it is important to recognize the loca-
tion of Speakers’ Corner within a history of popular, diffuse challenges 
to capitalism. According to Roberts (2000: 281), “The carnivalesque 
behaviour of the condemned, the mocking of the law, the transgression 
of governance, the inversion of codes and conventions, in short, scaf-
fold culture, repealed the sober nature of an emerging bourgeois law.” 
From 1783, public executions were relocated away from Hyde Park to 
the far less observed environs of Newgate Prison. However, the late eigh-
teenth and nineteenth centuries witnessed a series of changes and devel-
opments that brought the modern Speakers’ Corner into being, as Hyde 
Park itself became increasingly used as a space of protest, with fiercely 
fought, sometimes internationalized conflicts taking place there around 
the franchise, economy, and statehood. The struggle to gain Hyde Park 
as a place for lawful expression of popular dissent was also part of a 
more general nineteenth-­century movement to sustain open working-­
class spaces of assembly, speech, and protest. According to Antony Tay-
lor (1995: 394), “Agitations for rights of access [to spaces such as Hyde 
Park] were conducted almost entirely outside the sphere of contempo-
rary liberal politics. . . . In this sense they represented a genuine expres-
sion of the long-­standing, independent, metropolitan radical tradition 
and demonstrate the uniquely plebian nature of the concern for public 
space in London.”
Beginning in the mid-­1870s, with the passing of the Parks Regula-
tion Act in 1872, Hyde Park’s Speakers’ Corner emerged as a legally rec-
ognized and important site for public debate. Yet while its origins lay 
in the struggles of radical forces to express dissent effectively and law-
fully, as a modern venue the Corner has faced other challenges. Accord-
ing to Coleman (1997), at one time any politician wishing to be suc-
cessful in the electoral marketplace needed to present his or her views 
at mass meetings held in indoor and outdoor venues such as Speakers’ 
Corner. But the status and significance of open public speech spaces 
changed radically with the advent and subsequent ubiquity of radio, 
television, and then the Internet. Speakers’ Corner survived while other 
national, open-­air venues fell into disuse. But even at the Corner, use 
contracted to a Sunday event at which a limited range of public poli-

Market Play    193
tics would get aired. Many Corner advocates I spoke with described its 
decline from a “university of the working class” to a space of triviality, 
mockery, and cheap entertainment. Elsewhere I have questioned this di-
chotomy (Cooper 2006b). Here I am interested in addressing a different 
dimension of the Corner’s political potential, one not based on the eru-
dition of what is said but on the Corner’s ability to manifest and open up 
more critical conceptions of the market (or marketplace) by articulating 
markets to play. I want to start with the kind of market the Corner en-
acted, and then consider how it got tied to play. My discussion draws on 
four forms of cultural expression that got assembled at the Corner (and 
through which the Corner itself took on shape): carnival, tasting, con-
tact zones, and edgework. These forms provide the mediating practices  
through which market play, in quite different ways, was both enacted 
and expressed.
A Marketplace of Ideas
A man in his early thirties stands on a crate; the audience is packed tight 
around; in the front are two older male hecklers. The speaker reads from 
typed, large-­font pages about the movement of industry to China. “What 
injection have you taken?” one heckler shouts. The speaker ignores the 
interruption and, swaying slightly, asks his audience, “Does anyone agree 
with this theory?” The heckler says he does, that his earlier objection 
was based on a misunderstanding. “Bring back plastic toys,” he calls. The 
speaker announces, “I’ll go back to my first point.” “Oh no,” says the second 
heckler, “not again; you’re on a continuous loop.” Later the second heckler 
says it makes a change to hear a sensible speaker, but that he should put 
down his pages and stop reading. The first heckler sees that I am writing 
notes and calls out, “Why are you taking the speaker so seriously?” The 
audience laugh.
—Field notes, February 26, 2012
When I asked speakers if the Corner was a marketplace, they largely 
thought it was not, since nothing was bought or sold. Nevertheless the 
concept of a marketplace where ideas compete, without necessarily 
being or becoming commodities in any conventional sense, has proved 
an enduring one. Accounts often start with U.S. Supreme Court Justice 
Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.’s famous dissenting opinion in Abrams v. United 
States; there he stated, “The ultimate good desired is better reached by 

194    Chapter 8
free trade in ideas. . . . The best test of truth is the power of the thought 
to get itself accepted in the competition of the market.”4 Truth, on this 
reading, is not harmed from being surrounded by falsehood. Rather it 
is in the competition between ideas, in the presence of speech’s worst 
offerings, that truth will emerge and become known (see Peters 2005). 
This valuation of ideas battling against each other resonates profoundly 
with defenders of Speakers’ Corner. Many agreed that the tussle of ideas 
would enable the truth to win and that “bad ideas” or false claims should 
be deliberatively crushed rather than politically suppressed.
Advocacy of a marketplace in ideas is not restricted to the claim that 
bad speech brings stronger good speech to the surface. Other arguments 
in its favor relate to moral rights to self-­expression, societal improve-
ment and education, and the benefits individuals gain from being able 
to access not only the goods they need and want but the ideas they need 
and want also. Yet it is in this analogy between a market in ideas and 
one in goods and services that many critiques of the former are situated. 
Over some decades scholars have questioned the value (and reality) of 
a free marketplace in ideas, noting the legal restrictions that invariably 
exist in relation to certain kinds of speech as well as the harm or trauma 
some speech can cause (Lawrence 1990; Matsuda et al. 1993). Writers 
have questioned the assumption that markets in ideas lack transaction 
costs,5 given that even neoclassical economists acknowledge goods and 
A speaker talking to a regular attendee at Speakers’ Corner, 2010. Photo courtesy of SBImagery.

Market Play    195
services markets have such costs; they have highlighted the inequali-
ties of power and visibility among those who generate and consume 
ideas; they have questioned whether “good” ideas actually benefit from 
being surrounded by bad ones; and they have challenged the notion that 
all that good ideas need is a permissive environment (e.g., see Blocher 
2008; Brietzke 1997; Ingber 1984).
Yet while legal writers, in particular, have extensively debated the nor-
mative claim that a free marketplace in ideas is possible and advisable, 
they have paid far less attention to the actual form and character such 
a marketplace might assume. Certainly there are commercial market-
places transacting in ideas, and these have received some attention, but 
if the marketplace of ideas extends beyond the commercial realm to in-
clude other spaces where ideas freely compete, how should we think 
about these kinds of markets? In contrast to the dearth of writing on the 
character of marketplaces wherein ideas are traded for free, a rich vein 
of writing exists within geography, tourism studies, social anthropology, 
and sociology on other kinds of sociable marketplaces.6 Such work has 
considered the distinctive character of local markets as informal places 
where interpersonal contact happens and community is forged; the par-
ticular camaraderie of casual rather than more intense or intimate inter-
actions; the economic regeneration and tourist flows of staged or festive 
marketplaces; and the way class and ethnicity cohere in trading sites that 
range from suburban malls to indoor flea markets and bazaars.7
Speakers’ Corner shares many features with such goods-­based 
marketplaces. It is a regular, weekly event in a defined place, facilitat-
ing lively face-­to-­face interactions. It involves a diverse array of speech-­
based “products,” with different speakers competing for attention and 
interest. Like street and community marketplaces, the Corner reveals 
considerable diversity in the ethnic, educational, and economic capital 
of its users, who include one-­timers, occasional attendees, and regulars. 
And like many other marketplaces (or spaces of exchange), the vary-
ing regularity and intensity of participants’ presence shapes the quality 
and quantity of attention received in return (see also chapters 5 and 6). 
Moreover, in common with other markets, Speakers’ Corner has a strong 
self-­regulating dimension. Although it is formally governed by state law, 
the character and ethos of the Corner owes much to its own evolving 
norms, even as, like other marketplaces, it is not a fully compliant or 
orderly space. Despite restrictions on particular kinds of speech—such 

196    Chapter 8
as swearing, blasphemy, sedition, and hate speech—transgressions 
occur. Similarly prohibitions on selling pamphlets and other materials 
are breached, as are, occasionally, prohibitions on physical assault.
Yet despite some similarities, Speakers’ Corner, in common with lib-
eral jurisprudence’s imagined marketplace of ideas, reveals one major 
distinction from the marketplaces that social anthropology and social 
geography conventionally explore. At the Corner, for the most part, no 
formal trading takes place. Certainly other marketplaces aren’t solely 
concerned with things exchanged or sold. Thomas Tiemann (2008: 475), 
writing about the social quality of farmers’ markets, talks about “old-­
timers” who come with little to sell but who are able to “add much to the 
conversation.” Crewe and Gregson (1998: 41) also comment, “We thus 
need to move away from a utilitarian view of exchange, to see consump-
tion as a social experience as well as an economic transaction; as explo-
ration as well as exchange; as full of fun and sociality.” However, what 
kind of marketplace can it be where no trading takes place at all, where 
there is no payment, transactional moment, purchase, or withdrawal 
from circulation of the acquired thing?
Certainly, examples exist of markets without paying customers; the 
transformation of British welfare provision since the 1980s is one prime 
example (Clarke and Newman 1997; Newman and Clarke 2009). Along-
side the influx of private, commercial service providers, the development 
of public markets forced state providers to compete for clients and users 
(against other public providers as well as, increasingly, commercial for-­
profit bodies). The intelligibility of these arrangements as markets sug-
gests a direct transaction involving payment is not necessary for a field 
to be imagined as a market. But if markets are imagined within main-
stream thought as encompassing more mediated forms of exchange, 
where individual recipients don’t directly purchase a service but pay-
ment comes instead from another (usually state-­based) source, can mar-
kets (or marketplaces) meaningfully operate when no payment takes 
place at all? Chapter 6 considered the case of lets, a trading structure 
that has been characterized as gift-­like despite its use of local currency 
payments. If gifting can happen when things are paid for, can a market 
exist even when things are given away?
In William Morris’s ([1890] 2003) utopian novel of the future, News 
from Nowhere, markets have become little more than distribution points 
for food and other produce (see also Levitas 2013). The notion of markets 

Market Play    197
as places where goods are collected, without payment, offers one way of 
reimagining what marketplaces might become. But does a lack of pay-
ment or direct exchange necessarily mean that nothing comes back in 
return? Approaching the concept of the market through Speakers’ Cor-
ner, we might look beyond the direct encounter to other, more mediated 
forms of circulation and return, resonant of the circulatory and recipro-
cal structures explored within scholarship on the gift (e.g., Hyde 1979). 
When I talked with Corner regulars about what they received back, one 
speaker wryly remarked, “People do give—quite a lot of grief.” While 
audiences do not pay for the privilege of listening to or of engaging with 
the speakers, and while they do not offer gifts in return, it would be 
wrong to ignore what they contribute. We might point to the spread of 
new ideas, the way audience members enable particular words to tra-
verse Corner space, bringing worth to the speaker in terms of reputa-
tion and recognition (see also Schroeder 2004). In a more general and 
extended sense, audiences are also essential to the Corner’s viability and 
vitality, providing listeners, potential new speakers, hecklers, converts, 
and the energy that comes from physical movement and a flurry of cross-­
conversations.
But whatever comes back to the orator cannot be measured against 
the speech that is given. Unlike lets, where local currency is used to cal-
culate the relative value or contribution of different people’s goods and 
labor in order that people should have a fair bundle of transactions over 
time, Corner exchanges are not formally governed by norms of equiva-
lence. At the same time, in ways that parallel the place of reputation at 
Summerhill School, the asymmetric value of what different speakers in 
particular bring to the Corner is marked by the size of crowds and re-
marked upon by regulars, several of whom also remarked that they pre-
ferred to speak with people who were their “equals” to ensure a commen-
surate or at least worthwhile exchange.
Thus to the extent that giving away involves a deferred, undetermined, 
or nonequivalent transaction, it resonates with the idea of a marketplace 
in which ideas are exchanged and spread. But does giving away have to 
involve something flowing back to the one who gives? In his challenging 
and provocative reading of the gift, Derrida (1992b: 12) writes, “For there 
to be a gift, there must be no reciprocity, return, exchange, countergift, 
or debt. If the other gives me back . . . there will not have been a gift. . . .”8 
In the discussion that follows, I want to follow the conceptual line of a 

198    Chapter 8
marketplace in which organized orderly forms of reciprocation are un-
important. This does not mean there are no exchanges or returns of value 
to those offering up their wares. However, what is important about the 
exchanges that take place, and about the relations between marketplace 
participants, eludes conventional forms of accounting or value. But if the 
marketplace is not structured by trading and equivalence, what might 
take their place? I want to consider here three other core characteristics. 
They are: selection, diversity, and tension.
Selection and choice are important dimensions in mainstream con-
ceptions of the market. While usually tied to payment or exchange, both 
public welfare markets and the marketplace of ideas suggest selection 
and choosing can be separate from both (Newman and Clarke 2009: 
79–82). Yet different market sectors understand the process of selection 
very differently.9 While regular street marketplaces may not usually en-
tail the agonizing of some public sector markets, particularly when the 
good to be chosen is a school, a hospital, or home, research on everyday 
marketplaces foregrounds the thick and diverse interactions that selec-
tion entails. Goods may be chosen equivocally or with certainty, happily 
or anxiously; they may be fingered, tasted, or fully consumed, actively 
tested or passively absorbed. And selection is not simply the act of the 
one who buys. Stall holders also select customers, particularly in condi-
tions of time scarcity or when other pressures mean only “good-­quality” 
customers are sought. Producer-­led selection was certainly evident at 
the Corner, where speakers exercised a considerable degree of choice. 
While orators on a stepladder or box could not explicitly exclude people 
from listening, they did make a series of calculated and deliberate deci-
sions about which questions they would recognize or answer, who they 
would insult or play with, and how much attention they would give to 
different participants.
Tied to the question of selection is that of diversity. For the former 
depends on the presence, or at least the perceived presence, of the latter. 
And as the experience of local trading networks makes clear, building 
vibrant, sustainable economies can be difficult if only a narrow range of 
wants are met (see chapter 6). What diversity means, however, varies. 
Markets may be specialized and, as with Speakers’ Corner, deal in only 
one thing, such as speech. However, if all stall holders had identical 
goods, if differentiation and judgment (however fine-­tuned) proved im-
possible, there would be little interest in circulating, and if all those cir-

Market Play    199
culating engaged with offerings in identical ways, stall holders might 
lose interest or at least stop paying attention. The ennui of this kind of 
marketplace can be imagined in the unlikely hypothetical scenario of a 
place filled only with McDonald’s restaurants. Certainly this degree of 
uniformity was far from present at the Corner; however, several regulars 
expressed concern that isomorphic tendencies were leading to an excess 
of religious speakers and far too few political ones (see also DiMaggio 
and Powell 1983).
The third dimension we might locate in the trade-­less market is that 
of tension. In ways that resonate with Tsing’s (2005: 5) discussion of fric-
tion as the necessary “grip of encounter” in the context of awkward and 
conflictual global interactions, we can think of market tension as some-
thing like the tautness of a rope when subject to countervailing weights 
or forces. We can also think of the market shifts that emanate from the 
interplay of tension and ease, somewhat akin to the coordinated tension 
and release of sexual power play (Newmahr 2011) or when playing eroti-
cally with strangers (see chapter 5). At Speakers’ Corner tension ema-
nated from the unpredictable and singular experience of encounters. 
One regular speaker commented on this, as we sat on a bench having tea, 
watching a family enter the Corner: “What they’re going to encounter in 
the next minute or two minutes, it’s unique. . . . Who knows who they’re 
going to meet now or if they’re going to stop or not stop.” While play also 
invokes tension as Huizinga (1970: 29) describes, what the conceptual 
lines of the marketplace, in particular, mark out is the centering of ten-
sion in the selected encounter. This may seem to highlight the meeting 
or exchange that actually happens, but equally important, and certainly 
foregrounded in experiences of the marketplace, is the encounter (or 
exchange) that’s avoided or missed: the quality customer who gets away, 
the time-­waster who got in the way, the desirable item that isn’t spotted 
or is sold out, used up, or gone. Thus an important aspect of market ten-
sion is caring, in the sense of something mattering or being at stake, 
where an outcome, livelihood, or feeling is on the line, even if only for a 
moment (see chapter 5).
Taking Speakers’ Corner as my anchor, this discussion has traced 
some of the elasticity in conceptions of the market within the global 
North. But how do these different dimensions of the market—of ex-
change, giving, selection, choice, and tension—interrelate? How do 
Corner practices, particularly of play, support and give rise to particu-

200    Chapter 8
lar forms of market imagining? Focusing on play has several benefits 
for a utopian enquiry into the contribution markets might make to a 
transformative politics beyond their more familiar terrain of resource 
allocation. It allows us to consider how markets work to enhance plea-
sure in domains not conventionally read as economic, and how markets 
are worked, how they provide structures for creativity and invention, 
and how they can be expressed and critiqued. Thus I am interested in 
those practical articulations of market play that reconfigure the market 
in more progressive ways, as well as those articulations that work to illu-
minate and critique how neoliberal markets operate.
Market Play
At first glance, play and markets may seem conceptually some distance 
apart, one a voluntary leisure practice, the other an instrumental struc-
ture for meeting interests or needs. Yet this apparent polarity has been 
undermined in several ways. Alongside accounts of marketplaces and 
other marginal exchange spaces that emphasize the pleasure and play-
fulness of these spaces (e.g., Gregson and Crewe 1997), market play has 
also become institutionalized. From “playing the markets” to economic 
game theory; play as a commodity or consumer experience; the insertion 
of markets within play worlds, such as the cyberspace world of Second 
Life (Boellstorff 2008); and markets as dramaturgical structures, involv-
ing staged, sometimes spectacular performances (Agnew 1986; Giesler 
2008), it is clear that play and markets cohere and combine in multiple 
different ways. Yet in thinking about Speakers’ Corner as a market play 
space, it is important to note how many orators approach it seriously, in-
tent on conveying religious and political opinions, even as others may 
find their performances entertaining. One speaker remarked, “Some of 
these people think they’re serious . . . these Christians and such, but 
frankly they’re a joke.” At the same time, approaching play through the 
Corner troubles any simple equivalence between play and jokes or triv-
ial amusement.
Following the conceptual line between play as imagined and its Cor-
ner actualization (see chapter 2), I want to approach play as an activity 
and attitude that involves creativity, some quality of pleasure, concentra-
tion, and absorption as it pulls participants out of their ordinary worlds 
into one with different rules, norms, moves, and concerns (Huizinga 
1970). As Henricks (2006: 1) remarks, “To play fully and imaginatively 

Market Play    201
is to step sideways into another reality, between the cracks of ordinary 
life.” In this way play involves improvising as well as rituals. It also in-
volves invention, which may include inventing or reinventing the self—
taking up, removing, or varying who one is (Schechner 1985: 300) as 
quotidian social relations, buying, selling, or getting professional advice 
are enacted in another key (Henricks 2006: 161). Yet in the course of 
play, the threat of ordinary life’s intrusion remains ever present, trump-
ing the largely noninstrumental character of play with more purposive 
activities and goals. As a result, one of play’s main challenges can be-
come keeping the game in play (Caillois 1961; Huizinga 1970), ensur-
ing players are sufficiently matched in terms of skill that success (or 
defeat) is neither too swift nor too certain. For part of the pleasure of 
play comes from not knowing what the outcome will be, and heavily 
unequal matches are often uninteresting. But not all play is adversarial. 
The pleasurable disorientation and delight often associated with play can 
also come from unexpected encounters or from testing or experimenting 
with one’s own skill, luck, and courage. In the discussion that follows, I 
explore four cultural assemblages that mediate play’s relationship to the 
market. Exploring them reveals the very different purposes to which  
A regular speaker at Speakers’ Corner, 2010. Photo by Kathy.

202    Chapter 8
the market can be put as a social practice and structure. It also reveals 
the multiple lines and forms of imagining that the articulation of mar-
kets to play can produce.
Carnival
It’s very hot and sunny, with fewer speakers but quite large crowds.  
A man stands still with Jamaican-­styled armbands, a Jamaican flag, and 
what looks like New Orleans Mardi Gras beads on a foot-­ladder. He’s 
completely still—waiting for what? The Christian atheist is present again, 
with a placard around his neck saying “Christian atheism.”
—Field notes, July 13, 2003
In his hugely influential book Rabelais and His World, Bakhtin (1968) ex-
plores the changing nature of the historic European carnival. Central 
to his discussion is the medieval carnival, a defined and delimited time 
in which norms of decency and etiquette were put aside, secular and 
religious authorities mocked, relations of power temporarily inverted, 
and the body foregrounded as a sexual and digestive domain that was 
open, fertile, and porous. And there in the midst of the carnival was the 
marketplace (Bakhtin 1968): “the place where the city provisioned itself 
[was] the place where it envisioned itself” (Agnew 1986: 33).
In recent years scholars have taken up Bakhtin’s image of the carnival 
to explore resonant qualities within contemporary sociocultural prac-
tices and institutions (e.g., Gregson and Crewe 1997; Langman 2002; 
Smith 1993).10 While some work focuses on those contemporary events 
actually characterized as carnivals, much writing addresses other prac-
tices in which a bawdy, folk-­based, joyous, often transgressive inversion 
of power and authority are evident (e.g., Ferrell 2001). Yet the wide-
spread use of carnival to affirm a diverse range of contemporary prac-
tices has been criticized on several grounds. While some, such as James 
Twitchell (1992), object to the affirmation of vulgarity and bad taste as-
sociated with “carnival culture,” others, like Chris Humphrey (2000), 
have more methodological objections.11 As a result, recent scholarship 
has moved to highlight historical and contemporary carnival’s more 
contradictory and ambivalent character. As such, carnival is not only 
a place where folk culture and “an alternate conception for the order-
ing of human society” are expressed; carnival also provides “a bulwark 
of authority, built into the fabric of communal governance . . . [one that 

Market Play    203
was] permitted, even fostered, by those very authorities” (Ravenscroft 
and Gilchrist 2009: 37).
Speakers’ Corner is not a carnival space in any simple sense. Its weekly 
character, participative unevenness (many come simply to observe or as 
a pleasant short-­cut through Hyde Park), and value for some speakers as 
a place of serious or proselytizing argument temper its carnival qualities 
(Cooper 2006b). However, I want to explore further how carnival as a 
cultural formation delineates a particular set of articulations between 
markets and play.
At the Corner the disavowal of formal politeness and the bawdy ir-
reverence associated with carnival are immediately evident. Regulars, 
familiar with Corner norms and practice, will approach strangers, lean-
ing in close to ask questions, to elicit reactions, or to make claims. Talk, 
particularly when performed for an audience that is incited to talk back, 
is deliberately vulgar, hyperattentively concerned with the sexual and di-
gestive body. Two well-­worn Corner insults, for instance, are “Stand back 
a bit, that breath is getting worse” and “I was homosexual, then I saw 
you, I changed my mind” (McIlvenny 1996a: 53).12 Speakers’ Corner also 
shares with carnival an emphasis on the standpoint of the people (with 
all its biases and exclusions), the valuing of good argument and quick 
wit, and the use of masks, costume, and dramatic performances (Cooper 
2006b). More resonant with the bathhouse, perhaps, than with other 
spaces in this book, such as Summerhill School and nudism (given their 
ostensible privileging of authentic contact and naturalistic presenta-
tions), Corner orators use theatrical devices to gain attention and, more 
generally, to create the “distance from the self” that Richard Sennett 
(1992: 264) suggests is necessary for play with strangers to happen.13
If Speakers’ Corner brings into being relations and practices that reso-
nate with those of carnival, how does this structure the articulations the 
Corner actualizes between markets and play? At its simplest, we might 
think of carnival as a kind of market strategy, in which speakers attempt 
to capture listeners’ attention through the use of outlandish garments, 
flags, and other paraphernalia. Bawdy talk, jokes, and insults play a simi-
lar role; speakers use these techniques in calculated and often highly 
skilled ways to draw a crowd, and then to retain their interest once 
gathered. But carnival indicates other market play forms, which cannot 
be reduced to audience hooks.

204    Chapter 8
One market play form that maintains the contingent relationship be-
tween markets and play (as two separate practices) treats carnival as a 
playful register through which an “exterior” market is satirized and cri-
tiqued. Carnival here may highlight the location from which critique 
takes place as “the people” take aim at the elitist interests of corporate 
global capitalism. Or carnival may gesture to the place of wit, laugh-
ter, and skilled imaginative performance and costuming in leavening the 
critique. But play and markets can also combine in other ways. For in-
stance, the market may be playfully, if unsettlingly, simulated by the sus-
tained competitive circulation of nonsense speech. Paralleling Agnew’s 
(1986: 37) discussion of the festive forms of medieval marketplace life, 
Speakers’ Corner offers a place in which the market’s negative associa-
tions with unequal exchange, rivalry, and exploitation can be replayed in 
heightened tones as speakers bully and ridicule their audiences. At the 
same time, while mainstream market relations may provide a shadowy 
norm against and in relation to which Corner play takes place, during 
my research visits economic market relations were not overtly flagged 
as something to be parodied. What was more explicitly signaled was 
the combination of market and play as a particular type of playful prac-
tice that drew on the architectural scaffolding of the marketplace. In 
ludic battles between speakers and hecklers, in the mock seriousness of 
speakers disclosing their wares, and in the flow of those attending as they 
traded in and moved among participants discharging accusations and in-
sults, carnival at the Corner provides a mode of cultural expression that 
mediates and thus gives shape to play. This is play as an exuberant, im-
provised, open-­ended, and irreverent activity, enacted in and through the 
tense, selective formation of a competitive, exchange-­based (but non-
monetary) marketplace.
Yet while carnival may structure how market play is actualized (using 
the marketplace format to organize play), what carnival produced most 
keenly was a particular form of uncertainty.14 Were jokes funny or insult-
ing? Was the outlandish costume or bizarre sign wit or insanity? Were as-
sertions to be taken seriously or played with? While audience members 
sometimes interpreted orations in ways that worked against the grain 
of what was said, treating serious remarks as entertaining and witty re-
marks as insulting, what speakers intended often remained oblique. This 
sense of being toyed with, familiar to many Corner attendees, gestures to 
something that lies at the heart of the uncertainty generated: the ques-

Market Play    205
tion of worth. Earlier I considered markets as places where things are 
given away in conditions where reciprocity or giving back may be re-
quired or, conversely, disavowed. The enactment of carnival at Speakers’ 
Corner manifests the ambiguity (or ambivalence) over return in the 
Corner’s multiply folded relationship over what is given and given back. 
Tony Allen (2004: 43) captures this in his account of a summer spent 
orating at Speakers’ Corner: “Paul [another speaker] . . . reckons that 
nothing changes here. The speakers have nothing to say and they are say-
ing it to people who aren’t listening.”
While the political calculation involved remains uneven and largely 
unstated, as a place of playful giving, in which the conventions of mar-
ket exchange are both troubled and impersonated, the economic value 
of what is given is repeatedly remarked upon. At the same time, such 
value is regularly and determinedly misassessed or denied, as the worth 
of what is bestowed (moving in all or any direction) remains contested 
and in doubt. For if speakers don’t take themselves seriously, what value, 
if any, inheres in their speech? Does the oratorical form, with its impli-
cation that something of substance is being bestowed, misleadingly en-
case worthless material? Speakers frequently decry others’ dismissal of 
the Corner as a place of mere triviality, insulting an audience who, they 
imply, have received something but given nothing in return. Yet under-
pinning this allusion to an unfair exchange is the sense of a joke played 
out on the bodies of the audience who expect to receive a good and in-
stead are deliberately given (or may feel they have received) a worthless, 
and therefore gift-­less, gift.
Tasting
If carnival primarily signals the culture and ethos of a site engaged in 
market structured play, tasting addresses the individual experience. Tast-
ing is a common activity in marketplaces where sellers attract prospec-
tive customers by offering a sample to try. It has also become increas-
ingly popular as both a specialized and mainstream tourist activity, most 
prominently for wine. While vineyard tourism has become especially 
popular (Hall et al. 2000), other venues also encourage visitors to try 
out the goods on offer. At farmers’ markets cheese, olives, jams, and oils 
are commonly sampled, as those attending browse different stalls.
Ideas of browsing, tasting, and sampling suggest the emergent aspect 
of wants and desires, where consumers don’t know what it is they truly 

206    Chapter 8
seek until they find (or taste) it. Indeed in ways that echo the bathhouse 
participants discussed in chapter 5, browsers hope to be surprised by the 
piquing and accentuation of desire stimulated by the unexpected find. In 
the process traders assist (or enable) the development of consumer wants 
and agency as consumers become coproducers of an experience that is 
enhanced by the (developing) expertise or skillful knowingness—the 
calculation and judgment—of the one who tastes (see generally Callon 
et al., 2002; Petrini 2001). Such norms and rhythms of discernment—
the attentive pause of a sensory assessment—are prominently mobilized 
in contemporary wine tasting, with its investment in the challenge of 
what can be learned (or told) from a single sip. In contrast to public 
play norms that depend on a distance from the unknown other (Stevens 
2007: 47), in tasting intimacy and proximity come to the fore as what is 
other gets ingested and incorporated into the self (see chapters 3 and 5).
Powers of taste have long been associated with class and other biases 
(Howes and Lalonde 1991), as well as with the accumulation of a cultural 
capital that can then be deployed within other markets and spheres. At 
the Corner playful forms of tasting express and generate their own non-
elite expertise.15 Regulars contribute to the production of Corner goods 
as they take advantage of the Corner’s participatory structure. But the 
coproduction of one-­timers is also important as they sample what’s 
offered, asking questions, commenting, soliciting the views of others, 
and providing marginal annotations (as they turn to a neighboring lis-
tener) and as they clap, laugh, or risk a heckle.
To think of Speakers’ Corner as a place of tasting and browsing indi-
cates ways play can be used to entice passersby to stop other than the 
more flamboyant, attention-­demanding hooks associated with carni-
val. Speakers do not have to rely on the audacious, provocative, or out-
landish gesture; those attending can be pulled in by the opportunity to 
taste what’s available—a pleasurable way for onlookers to sample with-
out commitment. But tasting is not simply a form of consumer capture; 
it also suggests a way of thinking about market play as a fused or hybrid 
formation quite different from the mockery and ambivalent distance of 
carnival play. Certainly tasting and carnival overlap. Tasting (like car-
nival) can involve competition between stall holders (as it can also in-
volve competition between audience members in their response or re-­
presentation of what is tasted). And both tasting and carnival are hugely 
sensory, with their direct (and implied) appeal to sights, sounds, and 

Market Play    207
smells.16 But tasting also suggests a distinct kind of pleasurable engross-
ment or attention (see chapter 5). One dimension of this is tasting’s re-
lationship to uncertainty and novelty as a new or untried offering—from 
a different seller or from a different harvest—is sampled by those whose 
palate can appreciate what is tasted. Such appreciation is an important 
feature of Speakers’ Corner play, made more challenging by the dis-
avowal of credentials within the Corner’s talk-­based economy; the hard-­
to-­map character of many speeches; and the idiosyncratic character of 
many speakers. The ability to swiftly recognize orations—to know where 
they’re coming from and where they’re going, at least in part to lob an 
effective argument back—is highly rated, even as the skilled orator may 
play with her or his audience by making such knowing extremely diffi-
cult.
One claim made in play studies is that the spoilsport is more disrup-
tive than the cheat (e.g., Huizinga 1993). The latter simply tries to win in 
illegitimate ways; the spoilsport challenges (and undermines) the entire 
premise of play. Although this point is often associated with role-­playing 
or rule-­based games, it also has salience for tasting-­based forms of play. 
Tasting benefits from variety, not only in what’s available but also in the 
preferences of different tasters, and disliking what’s been tasted is cer-
tainly an acceptable response. However, while sampling or tasting does 
not require that everything be liked, it does depend on valuing the tast-
ing process, being willing to try stuff, and not assuming in advance that 
everything sampled will be useless or worthless. At Speakers’ Corner, 
similarly, tasting doesn’t mean valuing the Corner in particular ways, for 
instance, as a space of free expression; nor does it depend on valuing par-
ticular speech acts within it. But it does rely on treating Speakers’ Cor-
ner as having some kind of worth against the spoilsport’s dismissal of the 
space as too inconsequential, boring, or crazy to bother with.
Tasting as a cultural mediation of the market’s relationship to play 
suggests possibilities for new conceptual lines. Rather than the market, 
as conventionally understood, structuring the kind of play taking place, 
playful tasting, such as that actualized at the Corner, opens up more 
utopian ways of imagining the market. It is not simply that the Corner 
creates a pleasurable marketplace. Rather Corner tasting, as it inclines 
Speakers’ Corner toward other market spaces where browsing and sam-
pling also happen, suggests ways of rethinking what markets might be. 
Beyond the enjoyable aspects of some commercial, competitive trading 

208    Chapter 8
environments, the delight in tasting—with its invocation of trust, selec-
tion, and ingestion—carries with it the potential to drive reimaginings 
of the market as a sensory, attentive structure, where things sampled 
are discussed, where new things are tried and tried out, and where the 
one who offers recognizes her gain in the interest and appreciation that 
others show in what she has brought to the market.
Contact Zones
I listen to a fundamentalist Jewish speaker talking to a small pro-­
Palestinian group that has gathered. No, my mistake, he’s not Jewish  
but a messianic Christian. . . . The discussion is heated, but moderately 
good-­natured. A child walks through the cacophony with her hands over 
her ears.
—Field notes, June 22, 2003
I take the term contact zone from Mary Louise Pratt (1991, 1992), who, 
in turn, draws it from linguistic accounts, where the idea of a contact 
language referred to the improvised lexicon that traders from different 
places often used to communicate. According to Pratt (1992: 6), a con-
tact zone is “the space of imperial encounters . . . in which peoples geo-
graphically and historically separated come into contact with each other 
and establish ongoing relations, usually involving conditions of coercion, 
radical inequality, and intractable conflict.” The notion of a contact zone 
is an interesting one for Speakers’ Corner, highlighting the space’s global 
reach even as it foregrounds the Corner’s location within the colonial 
heartland. It also complicates the Corner’s other sociality frame, that of 
a “third place.” Ray Oldenburg (1989), who developed this latter term, 
identified third places as supplements to home and work, where people 
(usually men) forged acquaintanceships and became mates. At third 
places men do not pursue intimate relations or overly personal conver-
sation. Talk is in groups and usually concerns impersonal matters or the 
affairs of nonparticipants, and while particular individuals can become 
nodal (or prominent) figures, the emphasis is on the fluctuating collec-
tive rather than individual members or friendships. Elsewhere I have 
considered Speakers’ Corner as a third place (Cooper 2006b); here I 
want to think about how Corner encounters constituted and took shape 
through the site’s enactment of a contact zone and the kinds of market 
play realized as a result.

Market Play    209
Contact zones may suggest spaces of asymmetrical heterogeneity at 
the periphery of an empire and so some distance from the third places 
of the global North. However, as a particular kind of marginal space, 
Speakers’ Corner bears witness to “the interactive, improvisational di-
mensions of [unequal] encounters so easily ignored or suppressed” 
(Pratt 1992: 7). While the notion of third places speaks to the camara-
derie among regulars, the Corner is more than a place where regulars 
gather. As a contact zone, located within a city that bears the human and 
physical traces of its colonial past and contemporary position as a major 
thoroughfare, London’s Speakers’ Corner also provides a permissive, 
sometimes stimulating, often challenging space of conversation among 
people not only unknown to each other but who dwell in geopolitical 
regions where contact between them (perhaps for reasons of religion, 
nationality, or class) might be prohibited, difficult, or practically impos-
sible. One experienced speaker commented, “If you wander over there 
now, you’ll hear five or six conversations between people taking place 
who simply wouldn’t be in communication otherwise. I don’t think 
there’s any doubt.”17 Most such conversations are horizontal, in the 
sense of being between audience members. However, they are often ver-
tically facilitated by speakers or other regulars. The familiar camaraderie 
among regulars, common to third places, is important in making a con-
tact zone at Speakers’ Corner possible, even as the energy and unpredict-
ability of a contact zone, in large measure due to one-­timers’ presence, 
which others play off of, provides much of the stimulus for regulars’ pres-
ence as well (Cooper 2006b).
Thinking about Speakers’ Corner as a contact zone resonates easily 
with notions of the Corner as a marketplace (in which exchanges take 
place among a circulating, selecting crowd) but less clearly coincides 
with notions of play. Indeed Somerville and Perkins (2003) use Pratt’s 
idea of a contact zone to talk about a discomfort zone, “an unresolved 
space” where “intervals of differences” are preserved (262) through what 
Tsing (2005: 4, xi) describes as “the awkward, unequal, unstable, and 
creative qualities of interconnection . . . where words mean something 
different across a divide even as people agree to speak.” Certainly this 
discomfort is apparent in many Corner conversations and debates, as, for 
example, when American tourists find themselves compelled to justify, 
defend, or apologize for their nation-­state’s global geopolitical actions. 
Yet on another level, even these awkward exchanges can be read as a 

210    Chapter 8
form of play. Observation suggests they are absorbing and noninstru-
mental, an end in themselves that engages skill, tension, and uncer-
tainty. While they may not always be fun, they are voluntarily chosen 
and appear on some level satisfying. Unlike the serious clashes that take 
place between unequally situated people within other contact zones, at 
Speakers’ Corner clashes get reperformed as verbal sparring. One Corner 
speaker remarked, “The argument is preferred over the chat. . . . Those 
in the audience who are arguing with each other . . . have their eyes on 
other people surrounding them. . . . They’re doing it in front of others. . . . 
It’s a public argument.” Often hosted or incited by the provocative wit 
and taunts of speakers and hecklers, clashes at the Corner take shape in 
a nonphysically combative key. It’s not simply that they are enacted ver-
bally rather than as a fight; more than this, the wit of observing regulars 
works to regulate and contain a conversation that might otherwise get 
out of hand.
Whether conversations across the contact zone take the form of ver-
bal sparring or more serious debate, like other forms of play such conver-
sations are temporarily and spatially bounded. In this sense Sundays in 
a small, crowded, graveled corner of Hyde Park, surrounded by railings, 
with heavy traffic flowing close by, provides a space of almost magical 
disinhibition where people can talk to others about matters and in ways 
that would not be tolerated in most other public places. Thus play as a 
form of verbal touch, based on the proximity and attentiveness of bodies 
to each other, is enabled by the marketplace Speakers’ Corner enacts, 
even as the (neoliberal) market also provides a discursive focus for many 
such temporary encounters. In ways that resonate with the circulatory 
publics discussed in chapter 4, the market structure of the Corner, with 
its constant movement, provocations, exchanges, and encounters, en-
ables unlikely forms of pleasurable stranger contact. And like the bath-
house, Corner interactions provide a lattice or network through which 
the touch forged by verbal attention can, as a kind of gift, circulate.18
Edgework
I don’t belong to your world, where everyone is a friend.
—Speaker to heckler, February 26, 2012
I have considered the contact zone as a space principally organized 
around horizontal relations; however, at the Corner, it also takes an-

Market Play    211
other, far more asymmetrical form. In this we can see the cultural en-
actment of edgework as a very particular kind of play. The term edgework 
comes from Hunter Thompson (2005 [1972]) and has since developed to 
describe sporting, voluntary risk-­taking that explores or plays with vari-
ous edges, including sanity/insanity, life/death, and lawful/illegal. Edge-
work is often associated with extreme sports, where approaching the 
edge brings pleasure and satisfaction as well as risk (Lyng 2005a: 4–5). 
This complex sensory and affective encounter with danger that edge-
work articulates has led it to be set against a modernity characterized as 
rational, safety-­obsessed, and instrumental, a modernity that leaves little 
room, in Lyng’s (2005b: 21) words, for the “vibrant experience of unex-
pected and unimagined sensual realities.”
Yet in other ways, edgework is, if not modern, then certainly contem-
porary in its focus on individual control, self-­responsibility, skill, and 
risk-­taking (themes explored in relation to the bathhouse). According 
to Jeff Ferrell (2001: 84), “Edgework embodies . . . the anarchy of au-
tonomy and self-­invention.” In some respects, it parallels too Caillois’s 
(1961: 24) description of ilinx, a type of play in which vertigo is pursued. 
Through scary torquing physical movement, perceptual stability is tem-
porarily destroyed. Quentin Stevens (2007: 41) suggests vertigo provides 
an escape from normal bodily experience and normal perceptions of the 
world. Yet while edgework may seek to approach the edge or limit, it is 
not in search of death. And it is here that the skill and technique of the 
player become centrally important. Johan Huizinga (1970: 29) suggests 
that play tests a player’s “courage, tenacity, and resources.” In the case 
of edgework, this is particularly evident. Ferrell (2005: 76) describes 
how edgework involves precision, even as it also plays with the vertigo 
of abandonment.
At first glance, edgework may appear to be a strange concept to 
find actualized at Speakers’ Corner, a place dedicated to the art of talk 
rather than physical risk. Yet surveys indicate that public speaking is 
more commonly feared than death (e.g., Miller and Stone 2009). And, 
as with other markets in which bargaining requires “skill, perseverance 
and steely nerves” (Buie 1996: 227), edgework can be found in the volun-
tarily acquired, and to some degree pursued, risks of unscripted, uncon-
ventional discursive encounters between people. These edges can arise 
in conversations between people hailing from adversarial geopolitical 

212    Chapter 8
locales, as they can also arise in conversations among people with vastly 
different political perspectives or backgrounds. But in the horizontal en-
counters of the contact zone, getting close to the edge, taking risks, and 
the free fall of disorientation are not necessarily what makes such con-
tact play. For play here resides in other factors, which bring participants 
up against the risk rather than dwelling within it.
Instead it is in the vertical exchanges between orators, hecklers, and 
audience where edgework appears most apparent, including as a source 
of thrill-­seeking pleasure.19 While risk might take shape in the shy audi-
ence member who pushes herself to ask a question and thus straddles 
the edge of her own comfort zone, more commonly edgework is per-
formed by hecklers and orators. In this sense, as a form of emotional risk-­
taking whose boundaries vary according to individual participant sensi-
tivities, edges take three, often combined forms. In the first, speakers 
toy with risks to themselves, for instance, by making claims that cannot 
be substantiated, through jokes that fall flat, and at a more heightened 
level by speaking publicly and very visibly to an audience that may fail 
to materialize. Tony Allen (2004: 45) evokes the fear this last challenge 
elicits: “There is a nightmare scenario and it goes as follows: Stood on 
the ladder with no-­one listening, everyone sees me with no audience—
alone and friendless . . . and assume that I’m deranged or deadly boring.”
In the second form, the edge is extroverted. Like the sex play Staci 
Newmahr (2011) discusses in her interesting ethnography of a sadomas-
ochist community, speakers create disorienting, emotionally risky play 
for others through insults, sexualized slurs, and deliberately provoca-
tive remarks about national identities and race (which, unlike sexist 
remarks, get played out in all directions; see also McIlvenny 1996a).20 
However, in this relation of challenge and response, with its dares and 
tests, the speaker on the stepladder is not necessarily the one who exerts 
control. Sometimes hecklers and audience members will dare or pro-
voke the speaker to take further risks or to walk the edge of losing con-
trol, as Allen (2004: 27) describes. Challenging self and other also pro-
duces a third edge, of the gathering or venue of Speakers’ Corner as a 
whole: How near can an argument get to a fight without tipping over? 
What skill is required to get close while keeping the fight from happen-
ing? One speaker commented, “You can abuse someone . . . and that 
happens, that’s one of the most regular features—an abusive discourse 

Market Play    213
without a fight. . . . [It’s] the influence of the crowd and the concept of 
free speech. . . . You can push parameters beyond the norm.”
In thinking about market play through the mediating structure of 
edgework, what appears to be central is the exchange: the feared or 
actual exchange of my first two edges and the more general exchange-­
based architecture of the third. While exchange appears to foreground 
the transaction, emphasizing exchange moves away from the conven-
tional premise of neoclassical economics that market exchanges should 
have minimal costs; indeed exchanges should be already over (with re-
sources allocated to their best use) since energy expended in the process 
of exchange is inefficient. By contrast, in edgework as a form of market 
play, exchange is the very site of pleasure. The centrality of exchange 
is also present in relation to carnival, contact zones, and tasting; how-
ever, what edgework in particular emphasizes is the pleasure that comes 
from a difficult, risky transaction. Unlike lets, the exchange that edge-
work enables is not one of friendly sociability, a shared pot of tea while 
one lets member performs domestic tasks for another. In edgework the 
pleasure of the exchange is closer to a pugilistic model of play—of play as 
battleground rather than marketplace. But while fighting-­play involves 
skill and technique to defeat the opponent, in edgework skill and tech-
nique are deployed to sustain the other, whether this is to keep the ex-
change going or to make future or other exchanges possible.
Concluding Remarks
Speakers’ Corner has long been known as a marketplace of ideas, as it 
has also increasingly been tagged as a space of entertainment, if not 
play; however, these two terms, market and play, are rarely combined in 
this context. In this chapter, I wanted to explore how markets and play 
might assemble together as part of a project of transforming what mar-
kets might be understood to be. Speakers’ Corner offers a productive 
site for thinking about markets. As a culturally rich site, where forma-
tions established elsewhere, such as carnival and the contact zone, get 
reassembled, the Corner enacts the market in several different ways. 
My focus has been on those modes of enactment involving play. In part, 
this is because play provides a key register through which the market at 
Speakers’ Corner is performed. But play is also important politically, be-
yond its heavily criticized investment in parody and pastiche (e.g., Ebert 

214    Chapter 8
1992–93). It provides a form for collaborative experimentation and in-
vention that motivates and generates the energy and attention needed 
for creating new practices; it provides a way of enacting concepts, such 
as the market, that twists and reshapes what such concepts can become; 
and it provides a mode of critique that draws people in.
In this chapter, I have focused on three ways that play and markets 
combine. The first, play as a market tool, places play within a market-
place as stall holders use play deliberately, and with calculation, to gain 
attention, clients, or followers. This use of play was the one Corner ora-
tors most frequently identified. Sporting varying degrees of gravity and 
humor, speakers saw themselves as competing for an audience; enter-
tainment, wit, and cleverness were used strategically and tactically 
to attract and keep it. Yet while play as a market tool proved the most 
deliberate application, in its instrumentality and investment in market 
competition it is the least interesting for my purposes. Of more interest 
is the second articulation, in which market and play fuse. Such fusion  
at the Corner took various forms, from the competitive fun of carnival 
to the pleasurable discernment that tasting and browsing items offered, 
the verbal sparring and intense debate of the market-­structured contact 
zone, and the risky, disorienting exchanges and transactions that edge-
work relied upon. In these diverse forms, the market can be seen as 
providing and variously moving between offering an ethos, architectural 
structure, flow, and set of encounters, around and through which play 
takes place.
But actualized as market play, the concept of the market can also 
shift. The market (or marketplace) may identify combat and competi-
tion, but it can also signify selection, tension, and variety. In this sense 
Speakers’ Corner generates a reading of markets that ricochets off domi-
nant understandings and practices. As market play, it works with prevail-
ing conceptions of the market and marketplace; as a noncurrency-­based 
form of sampling and tasting, where skills, pleasure, and the assessment 
of produce are shared, it also functions as a micro-­assault on the tenacity 
of what the market means and does. This was particularly apparent in 
the Corner’s tasting practices, with their emphasis on the pleasures of 
an attentive, evaluating encounter, and in the skillful, tense exchange 
between speakers and audience. In both cases, trust functioned as an 
important feature. While conventional markets have been criticized for 

Market Play    215
their exploitative, self-­serving features (even as others emphasize their 
collaborative qualities), market play as tasting and as edgework depends 
on trusting oneself and the other to avoid real harm (see chapter 5).
The equivocation between replicating key features of mainstream 
markets and replaying the market in a different key is evident in market 
play’s third main articulation. Here the two terms are not conjoined to 
identify a distinctive form of activity. Instead play presents an empower-
ing, pleasurable, and largely safe structure through which markets, and 
particularly the market structures of global capitalism, can be critiqued. 
This may take shape explicitly—the play of satire, for example. How-
ever, it can also work in more subtle or nuanced ways. At Speakers’ Cor-
ner carnival provides a mediating structure through which worthless ex-
change can be generated (and posited), parodying market relations in 
the process. Here the market is not recuperated as a progressive struc-
ture but is signaled, in its conventional appellation, through a critical (if 
not always deliberately intended) form of replay.
This chapter has been animated by a methodological and conceptual 
interest in exploring what markets (and marketplaces) can be, going be-
yond those approaches that make this question purely ideational or ab-
stract or something that can be answered in a single unitary fashion—
that this is what the market or marketplace is. For reasons discussed in 
chapter 5, my objective is not to determine the best market concept. 
Rather, in a context where debate on the left over the market has largely 
been oriented to comparing capitalist markets to economic alternatives, 
including public ownership, cooperatives, and the commons, this chap-
ter has sought to spin the market around, to face the world of play rather 
than economic growth and resource allocation. This is not to discount in 
any way the importance of restructuring economic relations. However, it 
may be through reorientations such as this one that not only other con-
ceptions of the market but also other uses can be found.
In chapters 6, 7, and 8, I have explored the possibilities for more pro-
gressive conceptual lines in relation to markets, property, and trading. 
In different ways, each of these chapters begs questions about the ability 
of change to take place. My discussion of lets addressed the challenges 
faced in actualizing the imagined virtuous cycle of community labor. 
This chapter on Speakers’ Corner, like that on Summerhill School, has 
worked from what is actualized (an actualization, of course, that de-

216    Chapter 8
pends on particular forms of imagining) in order to explore new ways 
of thinking about markets. But establishing and embedding new imag-
inings is a complex task. What contribution can everyday utopias make 
to it? More specifically, how does the conceptual richness of everyday 
utopias relate to wider processes of change? This question drives my 
final chapter.

Conclusion
Conceptual Lines and the  
Temporal Place of Change
Actual utopia . . . signifies that utopian possibilities are established in the 
concreteness and openness of the material of history. . . . This is the objec-
tive—real possibility which surrounds existing actuality with tremendous 
latency, and affords the potency of human hope its link with the potenti-
ality within the world.
Bloch 1971: 172
In her essay on paranoid and reparative reading, Eve Kosofsky 
Sedgwick (2003) takes issue with the tendency of many progres-
sive and critical academics to engage in paranoid readings, which 
persistently seek to uncover the socially damaging structure, 
effects, or unjust motivations underpinning even the most seem-
ingly benign actions. Of course, critique is important, as is a skep-
tical attitude toward the claims of the powerful and a readiness 
not to take everything at face value. At the same time, if everything 
is wrong, if yesterday and tomorrow are just like today, corrupted 
by politics’ relentless (if far from original) sin, investing energy in 
action to pursue a transformative politics seems pointless.1 Thus 
underlying Sedgwick’s essay is the importance of considering the 
effects of academic scholarship—not just what scholarly work says 
but what it does.
With its emphasis on longing, hope, and desire for another, 
better world, contemporary utopian scholarship is some distance 
from the paranoid readings of social life that Sedgwick critiques.

218    Conclusion
Yet writers such as Levitas, Bloch, and, from a somewhat different trajec-
tory, J. K. Gibson-­Graham are not interested in advancing an unbounded 
wishful thinking. Rather they seek to engage with material and artistic 
practices anchored in the real possibilities of the social conditions of 
their time. This book is situated within a similar current. As innovations 
forged and in formation, everyday utopias perform quotidian acts of gov-
ernance, appearing in public, having sex, trading, learning, and debating 
in challenging, inventive ways. More than a flash in the pan, they form 
richly productive and important sites for social change politics, even as 
they also reveal the compromises, accommodations, and practical dilem-
mas of counternormative ways of living.
In a context of growing interest in socially experimental practices and 
a rapidly expanding body of scholarship on the utopian, this book has ex-
plored the conceptual contribution everyday utopian sites can make to 
a transformative politics oriented to more democratic, equal, and free 
ways of living. But how does such a contribution happen? Indeed, has 
it already happened? Or is it still to come? And if it remains before us, 
what work, what effort, might be required for such an everyday utopian 
contribution to take place? Everyday utopias support modes of thinking 
that posit change as lying ahead (and as such, make change conditional 
on specific mediating activities); however they also, importantly, plural-
ize and complicate this forward direction, challenging as they do so the 
notion that change lies only ahead. The complexity and multidirection-
ality of change is particularly evident in relation to everyday utopias’ con-
ceptual lines, and understanding it is crucial both for a utopian concep-
tual attitude and for thinking politically about everyday utopias.
Orienting Forward
The problem about contemporary utopias is not that it is difficult to 
produce imaginary maps of the future, but that it is difficult to produce 
adequate maps of the present which permit images of a connected but 
transformed future.
—Levitas 1993: 257
Contemporary utopian scholarship, like many areas of recent social 
theory, is drawn to the change that lies ahead (whether it lies ahead of 
the academic writer or ahead of the text or practice discussed). Conse-
quently much work focuses on the relationship that utopian practices 

Conclusion    219
have to a desired or imagined future. For some, the utopian provides 
the aspiration, ambition, or dream that motivates and directs present 
struggles. For others, the work performed by utopia is prefigurative, ma-
terially enacting in the present a future that is longed for in order to both 
gain the benefits of this longed for future and hasten its arrival. Other 
work, meanwhile, focuses on what is latent within established practices 
and texts, identifying here the seeds or kernels of something that is (still) 
to happen, as Marx ([1871] 2001: 84) famously commented in his address 
on the Paris Commune: “The workers . . . have no ideals to realise, but to 
set free the elements of the new society with which old collapsing bour-
geois society itself is pregnant.”
This book has explored the forward orientation of conceptual change 
in two primary respects. The first concerns the movement from imag-
ining to actualization as a temporally extended movement that requires 
work. In a sense, this conception of change is the one most commonly 
associated with the utopian, with its premise that once dreams of a 
better society have taken imaginative shape, their material fulfillment 
can then be pursued. While Marxist utopians, such as Bloch, emphasize 
the importance of dreams being embedded in what is possible, this book 
has taken up this trajectory to explore the challenge that is involved in 
moving from imagining to actualization. One instance of this difficulty 
was addressed in chapter 3, in relation to casting equality. While gover-
nance bodies may depict state touch as benign, concerned to make con-
tact with the dispossessed and hard to reach, far more is required than 
documented words to make it so. A different instance of this difficulty 
in manifesting what is imagined can be seen in efforts to actualize com-
munity labor within lets. While proponents of Local Exchange Trading 
Schemes dreamed of community labor as a virtuous cycle in which trade 
and community would each build the other, attempts to operationalize 
this fantasy foundered.
At the same time, the difficulties—and sometimes searing impossi-
bility—of moving from dreams to practice (a process which of course 
reshapes imagining in turn) reveals not so much the pointlessness of 
dreaming as the difficulty in shaping and directing the process of change. 
This is the difficulty Levitas alludes to, and it is one that has been ex-
plored by theorists within and beyond utopian studies, as they consider 
the political implications of a far more contingent and uncertain politi-
cal movement “forward” (e.g., Garforth 2009). Uncertainty here is not 

220    Conclusion
simply the result of opposing forces or social obstacles; rather it comes 
from a radically revised view of time and change in which the future is 
no longer solidly and predictably connected to the present but erupts 
suddenly and without notice (see Grosz 2005: 110).
In this book the contingent character of change has largely been ex-
plored through the frame of conceptual potential—the temporally ex-
tended process of moving beyond concepts as they currently are by 
imagining what they might become. Focusing on potential, particu-
larly in unexpected places, reveals something of utopian scholarship’s 
optimistic character; its hopeful attitude toward a world that in many 
respects appears so unpromising. But potential is not just about what 
could be. Drawing on Agamben, Muñoz (2009: 9) suggests that read-
ing gay love into a poem written in the 1960s identifies a potential “that 
is present but not actually existing in the present tense.” This book has 
been attentive to similar glimpses, exploring the potential that resides 
within different nows as they gesture toward different futures. One ex-
ample of this is the latent potential within public nudist practice to 
bring forth new ways of imagining equality. Potential here is not simply 
about what equality as a normative organizing framework could be (or 
even do) but as well what it could come to mean. Yet unlike the virtuous 
cycle of community labor, whose positive and expansive future was per-
ceived to be self-­generating according to its own internal logic (even if 
the movement from imagining to actualization required work), poten-
tial suggests a future that needs with effort to be identified, imagined, 
and pursued. While the practice in which potential is found may have 
some self-­realizing force, potential cannot be relied upon to simply roll 
out along some linear, temporal continuum. Rather potential draws (on) 
a complex and contingent relationship between temporalities, as it also 
draws (on) a complicated relationship between what is actualized and 
what is imagined. Potential may inhere within the present, but only be-
cause a future is imagined and brought to bear on imagining and guiding 
what is manifested in the now.
The capacity of innovative and progressive practices to drive (or at 
least to support) new forms of future imagining is at the heart of a uto-
pian conceptual attitude that foregrounds materiality and does not treat 
utopian change as emerging from dreams and fantasies alone. As under-
standing, a utopian attitude emphasizes sensation and affect—that con-
cepts can be known in nonlinguistic ways—and it recognizes the dif-

Conclusion    221
ferent ways imagining and actualization entwine. A key argument of 
this book has been that there is no single conceptual line that captures 
what practices mean within a given context. Particular practices make a 
multitude of different conceptual lines possible, and, as I explored in re-
lation to market play at Speakers’ Corner, this goes for the articulations 
between concepts as well.
In this book, I have argued against an intellectual politics oriented to 
seeking out or forging flawless concepts. A utopian conceptual attitude 
does not mean building a future in which idealized normative concepts 
are realized. At the same time, from a progressive perspective not all con-
ceptions are of equal worth. While the conceptions that prove produc-
tive may depend on the specific conditions faced and the task at hand, 
property as belonging seems preferable to property as exclusion or objec-
tification, for instance, with its orientation to noncommodified attach-
ments and the co-­constitutive relationship between parts and wholes. 
Yet property as belonging is still premised on relations of nonbelonging 
as well as on the capacity of recognized relationships (to things, people, 
or places) to express the interests of some (rather than others) and to im-
press upon the world and to make a difference. Likewise while a concep-
tion of equality oriented to undoing social distinctions, including (but 
not only) the nudist/textile divide, may challenge relations of unequal 
power far more substantively than the mere redistribution of permitted 
spaces, this is not intended as a perfect rendition of what equality should 
entail. The conceptual contribution of everyday utopias to transforma-
tive politics does not depend on investing in particular concepts or con-
ceptual lines, hunkering down, and defending the concept against all 
threats upon it (see chapter 5). Aside from the fact that notions of per-
fection have been thoroughly questioned as ideals, including within uto-
pian studies, the very materiality of the framework adopted here works 
against the drive to idealization (which is easier to sustain—although 
still problematic—when concepts are treated as generated by thinking 
alone). As I argued in relation to public nudism, approaching equality 
as something manifested means recognizing the ways conceptual lines 
are structured by practice—how, in this case, the equality that public 
nudism expresses absorbs surrounding norms, including norms of sepa-
ration, legitimacy, contagion, and the proper. For everyday utopias are 
neither temporal nor spatial islands. Their proximity to mainstream life 
is a defining feature of their existence, of what they are capable of achiev-

222    Conclusion
ing as well as the constraints under which they operate. Certainly, we 
can speculate about equality’s potential to mean something utterly dif-
ferent than it currently does, but to the extent it is a potential anchored 
in the present (and of course new conceptual lines can erupt without 
warning), we cannot ignore the other norms that structure its existence 
and as such may condition its (imagined) futures too.
Relating to the Past
Certainly, the conceptual lines explored in this book have largely been 
oriented forward, to those new forms of imagining or practice that the 
conceptual instability generated by oblique and queer encounters makes 
possible. But everyday utopias also face what is passed and do so in sev-
eral ways.2 They may pursue a “cut-­off” past, refusing or blocking con-
ceptual lines in order to hand them over to a previous time, from the 
body modesty that the Toronto bathhouse sought to dispatch to the dis-
ciplining of children, which Summerhill School sought to eliminate. Pro-
ducing boundaries between what we do now and what they did then is 
a common theme in utopian literature, often marked by the dialogic re-
lationship (or interior dialogue) of visitors and utopian hosts. Visitors 
remark on the novel practices they encounter, seeking to make sense 
of the utopian present through the norms and knowledge of their own 
(past) society, while those they meet express a range of feelings, from 
disbelief and shock to alienation, fascination, and sometimes utter non-
interest in those earlier, archaic practices now left behind. Unlike the 
future-­oriented worlds of fiction, however, which promise or stimulate 
desire in the reader for a life wherein much of what is now taken for 
granted has vanished, in everyday utopias it is the making-­past of con-
ceptual lines that needs working. Histories of particular sites may sug-
gest such pasts have been achieved, but for many sites the production of 
what is past is an ongoing (and contested) project, as illustrated in the 
persistent conflicts around how to treat sexed bodily distinctions at the 
Toronto bathhouse.
A transformative politics does not have to mean creating road blocks 
or ditches behind us, however, as if to ensure the past does not catch up 
as we travel the temporal highway into the future. Many writers have 
commented on the ethical importance of maintaining a relationship to 
past injury and trauma, citing what is owed to the ghosts of the dead for 
a progressive or critical politics to develop (e.g., Derrida 1994; Gordon 

Conclusion    223
1997; Valverde 1999). And in the case of everyday utopias, the past is not 
always identified as what is wrong; indeed it may also be what needs re-
cuperating. Regulars at Speakers’ Corner spoke longingly about a time 
when the Corner was a “university of the working class.” Likewise pro-
moting community time within lets asserted a conceptual line that 
involved drilling down through a less than satisfactory present to re-
cover past modes of neighborly generosity as conventional imaginings 
of Britain’s past were deployed to help steer and stimulate new forms 
of contemporary practice. But the past can also work to legitimate the 
present. In the British governance project of casting equality, reimagin-
ing the past in the terms of the present was used to justify and support 
equality work. Equality became conceptualized as something always al-
ready there, as the remarks of the Equality and Human Rights Commis-
sion chair, Trevor Phillips, exemplify: “The principles which continue to 
provide the essential character of the relationship between individuals 
and the state . . . fairness, respect, equality, dignity and autonomy—
have been developed and enriched in Britain over the centuries.”3 While 
many would seriously doubt Phillips’s words, the struggle to secure and 
validate everyday utopias’ present is a centrally important theme, one 
often lost by placing the change to which everyday utopias contribute as 
lying someplace else.
Securing the Present
As experiments in living that necessarily involve prefigurative practice 
(in the sense of enacting today that other world which is sought, a world 
that may reside in the future but also may not), everyday utopias assert 
the importance of maintaining and sustaining what is, rendering the 
pursuit of further change secondary to securing and protecting existing 
forms of innovative practice. This emphasis on maintenance is an im-
portant dimension of everyday utopias and other experiments in living. 
For those who feel the current world falls far short of what they desire, 
it is tempting to locate change for the better in some other and—usually 
for optimistic projects—future time. This impetus, however, can under-
mine the importance of protecting and maintaining more progressive 
practices and organized networks that already exist, practices that may 
be largely oriented to sustaining and insulating their present against cur-
rent or future threats, as Summerhill School found themselves doing 
as a result of the turn-­of-­the-­century Labour government’s insistence 

224    Conclusion
that they change key, signature aspects of their practice.4 Indeed when 
I asked Zoe Readhead, Summerhill’s head teacher, about her long-­term 
ambitions, she replied, “We can’t really have ambitions more widely be-
cause we don’t really have the time or the money . . . so really it’s still 
about survival. I think for Summerhill it’s about ticking along, and doing 
what we do, and having the number of kids that we have, and making 
sure the school survives because it’s such an important place.”
The emphasis on stability, clearly, is not only about concepts. How-
ever, the conceptual dimension of this process is important lest the con-
ceptual lines of everyday utopias be seen as only geared toward what lies 
“ahead” (or “behind”) as new forms of actualization or imagination drive 
change. Community labor in relation to lets provides one example of 
what we might call a continuous or sustained present. While the move-
ment from imagining to actualization invokes a future time, and while 
the logic of the virtuous cycle, as imagined, stretches and expands into 
the time to come, the concept of community labor itself depends on sus-
taining a momentum in which present values and good practice endure, 
albeit in ever more intensified form. More commonly, perhaps, sustain-
ing and protecting the present works through concepts in which imagin-
ing and actualization appear to converge. Closer inspection may suggest 
that they do not in fact converge or that we cannot really ever know quite 
how or whether they do (see chapter 2). Nevertheless stasis appears 
present when neither imagining nor actualization impels or provokes the 
other (or are impelled or provoked themselves) into significant change. 
This may be because each has sufficient elasticity to absorb changes in 
the other or because no mediating practices have intervened to redirect 
or rupture relatively stable conceptual lines. We might read Summer-
hill’s general approach to democracy and to pupil self-­governance as two 
such areas. Both have played a major role in maintaining continuity in 
school practice and belief, despite (and perhaps also because of) the 
challenges they have faced. While the imagining and actualization of 
democracy and self-­governance are open to being pulled apart or pushed 
in different directions, and while both can be interpreted in ways that 
center upon their mutual divergence, the school has gained legitimacy 
and stability from the fact that the movement between imagining and 
actualization appears to be mutually reinforcing. In other words, prac-
tices such as the school meeting reflect, shape, and consolidate notions 
of democracy organized around responsible (at least in the long run), 

Conclusion    225
engaged children and adults prepared to abide by (and work within) ma-
jority decision-­making processes. Voluntary lessons reflect, shape, and 
consolidate notions of self-­governance organized around the rational, 
self-­possessed child.
It is tempting to treat this present-­focused orientation to sustain-
ing what is as inherently conservative, regardless of whether it is the 
continuous present of dominant social formations or the already trans-
formed present of everyday utopias. And indeed there is a conservative 
dimension in the resistance of many of these sites to engaging with new 
political currents and movements, as there is also a hegemonic dimen-
sion in the conceptual lines that prevail, even within everyday utopias, 
over others. At the present time, public nudism, for instance, within 
the global North appears more likely to express an entitlement to equal 
spaces rather than an undoing of the nudist/textile distinction; state 
touch appears more likely to revolve around top-­down forms of contact 
than attentive kinds of feeling. Observers may be able to draw an infinite 
number of conceptual lines from particular social practices as my discus-
sion of property at Summerhill School and markets in Speakers’ Corner 
makes clear (even as an infinite number of other lines will remain un-
thought or implausible). However, the capacity of concepts to condense 
the movement between actualization and imagining means some lines 
will socially triumph over (potential and actual) other ones.
Yet while there may be a conservative dimension to everyday utopias’ 
orientation to stable conceptual lines, to dismiss out of hand the signifi-
cance and value of the continuous present ignores the precarious char-
acter many organized experiments in living (and governing) face. For 
controversial ventures with little security or power (including those ven-
tures, like casting equality, whose power is vulnerable to withdrawal), 
the legitimacy, distinction, and intelligibility that comes from stable con-
ceptual lines is crucial as what is imagined and what is done reinforce 
each other.5 But if this is the case, if practice and imagining cohere in 
ways that are functional or purposive, what risks (or, conversely, bene-
fits) lie in activities that destabilize such lines? If Summerhill, for in-
stance, deliberately and consciously deploys commonsense notions of 
property and ownership in order to create a better governed, more man-
ageable school, where children treat others’ belongings and spaces with 
respect, knowing the penalties of not doing so, what is at stake in advo-
cating new conceptual lines oriented to a wider, transformative politics?

226    Conclusion
New Conceptual Lines
An important premise of this book has been the conceptual creativity 
of a multitude of spaces as the conceptual lines of everyday utopias are 
forged and mediated by practices, forces, and actors in many different 
places. Social movement activists, for instance, may identify themselves 
strongly as being outside of the state, but their actions may also come 
to shape the state—in terms of how it is imagined and how it is materi-
ally actualized.6 At the level of conceptual creativity, there is no simple 
dichotomy between inside participant and detached observer without 
a perspective, able to view all. I have said that there is no single per-
spective or conceptual line. This is important when it comes to the criti-
cism that forging new imaginative lines undermines existing functional 
ones. If many different conceptual lines can coexist, this means not only 
that property at Summerhill, for instance, can be understood in multiple 
simultaneous ways, but that these multiple ways can simultaneously do 
different kinds of things. So, the school can practically deploy notions of 
individual ownership, while at the same time providing a site from (and 
through) which other more radical kinds of property can be imagined.7 
But what happens to these other, more radical lines? Stable lines may 
consolidate the practices of everyday utopias in ways that have wider 
effects. But if innovative forms of practice are to generate or drive new 
forms of imagining, where do these forms of imagining go?
Contemporary utopian studies has tended to pay most attention to 
questions of critical distance, focusing on the capacity of (temporally, 
spatially, and aesthetically) remote (or estranged) sites to provide a loca-
tion from which the status quo can be interrogated. By contrast, this 
book has paid more attention to relations of critical proximity. The sites 
I have explored do not exist in some other, distant place, but nearby 
and near to hand. Everyday utopias’ closeness to (even, at times, their 
nestled place within) the mainstream may affect the capacity of sites 
to develop new, radical conceptual lines (in terms of what they imagi-
natively express as well as what they actualize). At the same time, it is 
this proximity which facilitates the development and movement of lines 
across different spaces (rather than remaining the exclusive undertaking 
of particular utopias themselves) and which has the potential to give new 
conceptual lines force.

Conclusion    227
This force is not guaranteed, of course. How particular conceptual 
lines travel, indeed whether they travel at all or remain as phantom lines 
that loop around and go nowhere, depends on their take-­up, what holds 
them up, channels, thwarts, and redirects them (see Keenan 2010). 
For the reach of concepts depends on what they do and on how they 
travel—how, for instance, the playful markets of Speakers’ Corner can 
impress on other markets, a process that may indeed defer explicit ques-
tions about how markets are imagined in the course of generating more 
material effects. Or market play, as an explicitly cultural concept, may 
travel, if it gets supported in its capacity to pollinate—generating new 
life, which will also be a different life, elsewhere.
The effects of conceptual lines—their force and limits—are shaped 
by many factors. For those conceptual lines anchored in the innovative 
practices of the everyday utopian spaces discussed, these factors include 
the systems, procedures, rhythms, and rationalities of wider social life. 
Nevertheless in considering the power new conceptual lines can exert, 
the recognition they receive—whether from social forces or institu-
tional bodies—also plays a part. And here I mean recognition of every-
day utopias as well as of the conceptual lines everyday utopias establish 
and incite. The approach adopted in this book—with its orientation to 
different mediations, to critical proximity, and to the conceptual lines 
that get forged collaboratively, interactively, and in ways that draw, 
pinch, and poach from what is around—is geared, perhaps foremost, 
to such recognition and the challenge of its strengthening: how every-
day utopias and other experiments in living and governing can be given 
their due. Recognition of adventurous social spaces, and their power to 
effect what we can imagine, as something that goes beyond the “ah yes” 
moment shown toward the accomplishments and innovations of others, 
takes many forms. It can involve regard or attachment; it can involve 
creative participation in building and experimenting with new concep-
tual lines; it can involve skepticism and distrust. But fundamentally it is 
about noticing, about identifying the conceptual lines of everyday utopias 
as relevant to the project (which is, of course, an ongoing project) of 
forging a social justice politics of change.


Notes
Chapter 1
	 1.	Names have been changed to maintain interviewees’ anonymity.
	 2.	Everyday utopias aren’t restricted to the global North; however, the backdrop 
of particular kinds of national social formations—here liberal postindustrial 
nation-­states—is important to understanding the relationship everyday utopias 
have with where they dwell, as well as to understanding the particular kinds of 
conceptual pathways that get generated.
	 3.	Scholarship on such sites includes work on agricultural cooperatives (Gibson-­
Graham 2006b), the World Social Forum (Fisher and Ponniah 2003; Santos 
2006), protest camps (Butler et al., 2011; Roseneil 1995), and alternative festi-
vals such as Burning Man (Doherty 2004) and Michigan Womyn’s Music Festival 
(Browne 2009).
	 4.	See also Michael Gardiner (2006: 2), who draws on the intersection of “every-
day” and “utopia” to indicate “a series of forces, tendencies and possibilities that 
are immanent in the here and now, in the pragmatic activities of daily existence.”
	 5.	See Russell Jacoby (2005: xiv–xv), who draws a distinction between “two currents 
of utopian thought: the blue print tradition and the iconoclastic tradition. . . . 
Iconoclastic utopians . . . dreamt of a superior society but . . . declined to give its 
precise measurements.”
	 6.	To “teach desire to desire, to desire better, to desire more, and above all to desire 
in a different way.” See Abensour (1973: 330), quoted in Thompson (1977: 791).
	 7.	This is not always performed consciously. It can also take shape through the 
potential that inheres within the practices themselves; see also chapter 4.
	 8.	Drawing on Louis Marin and Thomas More, Fredric Jameson (1977: 9) explores 
the process of neutralization, the way utopian texts “point-­by-­point” negate the 
world of their author, an “entity . . . understood as a sub-­text, itself constructed 
(and then neutralized) by the Utopian text itself.” While everyday utopias may 
be founded and developed as a critique of particular dominant practices, such as 

230    Notes to Chapter 1
the critique of mainstream education by A. S. Neill, the founder of Summerhill 
School, their critique may be less comprehensive or “point-­by-­point” than those 
proffered by utopian literary texts.
	 9.	This may seem less true for equality governance, which has become a pervasive 
dimension of state government discourse in Britain and other countries. How-
ever, its fundamental tension with other, more powerful state projects suggests 
it is likely to be disregarded and ignored as a meaningful aspiration (even if de-
ployed as a rationalization) when it comes to other state action.
	10.	As Felski (1999: 16) writes, “Everyone, from the most famous to the most humble, 
eats, sleeps, yawns, defecates.” On the everyday lives of nonelites, see Highmore 
2002. Even during crises or transitions, customary, regular, habitual activities 
and sensations bind people to what once was, and to what is coming, as Śliwa and 
Riach (2012) explore in relation to the evocative power of smell in transitional, 
postsocialist Poland.
	11.	Bhatti and colleagues (2009: 62), for instance, in their discussion of gardening, 
remark that “everyday life is full of enchanting encounters that work to provide 
creativity, emotional attachments, and prosaic pleasures.”
	12.	While the sites discussed have their moments of unexpected action, in which a 
conjuncture of events disrupt and transform what is planned, the account offered 
in this book focuses on patterned, organized practice—that is, with regularities 
of action and with cyclical rather than disjunctive time.
	13.	For further discussion, see Ruth Levitas 2013.
	14.	A similar account is given by Barthes (1977: 17) in relation to Sade’s novels, in 
which he relates everyday utopianism to very detailed, organized, and orderly 
space and to “an economy of the passions” carefully and attentively instituted. 
He writes, “For the mark of the utopia is the everyday; or even: everything every-
day is utopian: timetables, dietary programs, plans for clothing, the installation 
of furnishings, precepts of conversation or communication” (17).
	15.	This does not negate the significant ways in which the sites also invoke wishful-
ness. Sites such as Speakers’ Corner and Summerhill School have a wider sym-
bolic power that can generate forms of desire and longing—to speak freely, to 
be educated in a democratic school—which take shape at a distance (spatially, 
physically, affectively) from the sites themselves. However, the focus of this book 
is not on the wider circulation of social dreams or ambitions that the sites dis-
cussed symbolize, though these are important, but on their practical, tangible 
experience.
	16.	These themes have also been extensively explored outside of utopian studies; for 
example, see Comaroff and Comaroff (1992: 7) and Thrift (2008: 14).
	17.	For a critique of the distinction between fast and slow food and on class bias in 
relation to organic food, see Guthman 2003.
	18.	This nostalgia, however, does not mean that the everyday utopias in question 
are conservative in the sense of seeking to sustain hierarchy and inequality, as 
Michael Gardiner (1992: 23–24) suggests.
	19.	These include heterotopias, Temporary Autonomous Zones, real utopias, criti-

Notes to Chapter 2    231
cal utopias, and concrete utopias; see Bey 2003; Bloch 1986; Hetherington 1997; 
Moylan 1986; Santos 2006; Wright 2011.
	20.	This does not mean actualization and imagining are in fact identical, for reasons 
explored in chapter 2. However, it suggests that they appear to resemble one an-
other.
	21.	All interviews were carried out by me with the exception of two sets of struc-
tured interviews with lets members in 2007 and 2010, carried out by Ryoko 
Matsuno and Stacy Douglas respectively, along with earlier introductory inter-
views carried out by Jenny Smith. Some interviews were face-­to-­face, some by 
phone; some, such as those with passersby at Speakers’ Corner, were short, on-­
the-­spot and hurried, and others were set up in advance and far more leisurely.
	22.	It is also important to remember, as others have discussed, that government 
documents are creative assemblages produced in specific ways for specific pur-
poses. See Bedford 2009; Freeman and Maybin 2011; Hunter 2008.
	23.	There are similarities here to Gell’s (1999: 34) “sustained thought experiment” in 
working with conceptual lines that do not already exist but that are in the process 
of being forged and built. What is important here is the work of particular media-
tors who, through different kinds of collaborative formations or interdependen-
cies, bring social practice and imagining into a particular relationship with each 
other (see chapter 2).
	24.	The conceptual creativity and innovation of nonacademics also forms an impor-
tant dimension of this book. As I discuss in chapter 2, theoretical work often dis-
misses the intellectual contribution of nonacademics to concepts’ development, 
treating them instead as merely passive, unaware concept users or, to the ex-
tent participants themselves become the academic focus, the field of study from 
which concepts are academically abstracted or to which concepts generated else-
where are practically applied. This book, by contrast, starts from the premise that 
we all do conceptual work, albeit attuned to different concerns and problems in 
different time-­spaces, and people involved in establishing or taking part in ex-
perimental social spaces are especially active in this regard.
Chapter 2
	 1.	Utopian studies approaches method and epistemology in various ways. While I 
draw on a number of scholars, the approach adopted in this book is particularly 
indebted to the work of Ruth Levitas. Levitas (2010) has developed a method 
called the Imaginary Reconstitution of Society, which has three modes (see also 
Levitas 2007, 2013). In its archaeological mode, it seeks to uncover, critique, and 
debate implicit notions of the good society within different political positions 
and programs; in its architectural mode, it seeks to construct alternative models 
of what society could be like; and in its ontological mode, it seeks to establish dif-
ferent ways of being. While this book does not work explicitly with these three 
different modes, it is influenced by Levitas’s overall ambition of developing aca-
demic methods that combine analysis with reconstruction, based on the specu-
lative premise (and promise) of society imagined otherwise.

232    Notes to Chapter 2
	 2.	The work of “opening our theoretical imagination” is often associated with phi-
losophy, including in its more adventurous forms (e.g., see Colebrook 2002: 
14–17). Two iconic figures in this regard are Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, 
who identify philosophical concepts as being somewhat autopoietic creations, 
distinct from the concepts of everyday life. Deleuze and Guattari (1994: 22) write, 
“The concept . . . has no reference: it is self-­referential; it posits itself and its ob-
ject at the same time as it is created.”
	 3.	Emphasis added.
	 4.	In the global North, this frequently means tracing terms from classical Greece 
and Rome through Christian Europe in ways that establish terms as the offspring 
of very particular places, conjunctures, and thinkers.
	 5.	Although Chakrabarty continues, “When we translate them . . . into our lan-
guages and practice, we make them speak to other histories of belonging, and 
that is how difference and heterogeneity enter these words. Or, in thinking about 
them and self-­consciously looking for places for them in life-­practices we have 
fabricated using them, we sometimes rediscover their own plural histories in the 
history of European thought” (Dube 2002: 865).
	 6.	Patton’s discussion of this point relates directly to Derrida’s work on justice, 
apology, gift, and hospitality. However, for the purposes of my argument, I want 
to depersonalize the method to capture something of its wider conceptual reso-
nance; for an interesting use of Derrida’s work on hospitality in relation to com-
mercial hospitality, see Bell (2007).
	 7.	Utopian scholarship also concerns itself with dystopia. On the complexity of the 
relationship between blueprint utopias and dystopia, see Jacoby (2005: ch. 1). 
Moylan (2000) explores “critical dystopias,” creative mediums that contemplate 
what escalating horror might look like, yet leave the reader or viewer with some 
hope of how to transcend or avoid it (Geoghegan 2003). For discussion of the 
interconnections between dystopia and eutopia (the “good” society), see Sargis-
son (2012).
	 8.	For discussion of dystopic and utopian themes in Agamben’s work, see Salzani 
(2012) and Whyte (2010); on Bauman’s dystopian thought, see Featherstone 
(2010).
	 9.	Warnings of approaching calamity are also used strategically and calculatedly by 
states to justify (military) intervention; see Carr (2010).
	10.	Narratives of dystopia in the present have also been commonly deployed to 
counter what were perceived as more idealistic, often naïve portrayals of par-
ticular societies and states. This was a dominant feature of critical accounts of 
so-­called socialist states in the twentieth century.
	11.	From outside feminist standpoint epistemology, Paul Gilroy (1993: 3–7) argues 
strongly for the importance of recognizing how knowledge and understanding 
are syncretic, being hybridized through people’s intercultural social location and 
multiple relations of belonging.
	12.	On understanding the body, see, for instance, Ahmed 2006; Cohen 2009; Gatens 
1996; Grosz 1994; McRuer 2006; Shildrick 2008. On understanding property, 

Notes to Chapter 2    233
see, for instance, Blomley 2004b; Peñalver and Katyal 2010; Staeheli and Mitchell 
2008.
	13.	Thanks to Courtney Berger for clarifying this point.
	14.	Although see Jacoby (2005: 33) in relation to an iconoclastic, largely Jewish-­
inflected utopianism: “They did not visualize the future, they listened for it. They 
did not privilege the eye, but the ear. . . . If they were against images of the future, 
they sought hints of it in music, poetry, and mystical moments.”
	15.	For a selection of relevant contemporary texts that usefully explore these themes, 
see Gardiner 1992; Levitas 2013; Moylan 1986.
	16.	For discussion of other approaches that explore the nonconceptual or material di-
mension of concepts, see Bernstein 2001; Cook 2005; Martín Alcoff and Shomali 
2010.
	17.	Presence or actualization does not have to involve “real” life; concepts can be 
actualized through other kinds of practice, such as in utopian literature. How-
ever, for this to be a form of actualization rather than simply the expression of 
imagining, manifestation needs to exert some separate and distinct conceptual 
force or traction that comes from the process of materialization rather than being 
co-­identical with the imagining that produced it. This materiality largely comes 
from the real material conditions of the utopian creator’s world, but it can also 
get inflected through the process of trying to combine utopian design with a dy-
namic narration of events; see also Jameson (1977: 16–20).
	18.	An additional challenge is the impossibility of fully accessing either how concepts 
are imagined and actualized or how one dimension drives or shapes the other. 
The movement between imagining and actualization can take different forms; in-
deed critical work is often about revealing how lines that present themselves as 
lines of truth (where imaginings accurately represent what is) are instead lines 
of mystification, distortion, legitimation, or denial. Yet how do we know what 
these lines actually are? Technologies of estrangement may provide some needed 
distance from the process, but it is impossible to get behind either imagining or 
actualization to observe what it is they do, as if they are capable of being viewed 
from some detached exterior position. These difficulties highlight the value of 
utopian studies’ emphasis on the speculative (see Levitas 2010). This book ap-
proaches the way concepts are actualized, and the force this has on imagining, 
by means of the “middle,” through speculative tracings of conceptual lines, and 
through the mutual enfolding of imagining into actualization (and vice versa).
	19.	The pressure on conceptual lines, however, can also work against the established 
or emergent hegemony of new utopian spaces and practices. Both accounts of 
imagined places and actual social experiments are attentive to the challenge of 
dissidents who express new, antinormative (or counternormative) ideas or de-
velop new oppositional practices.
	20.	Indeed there is something of the fractal or Russian doll effect, in the way each 
bequeaths the other in an endless, increasingly microscopic process of refinding 
or refounding.
	21.	The imaginings of actors that affect how the state is actualized are of course not 

234    Notes to Chapter 3
restricted to public officials but includes as well the numerous other actors whose 
fantasies and dreams of what the state is (and could be) have an effect upon it. 
For discussion of this theme in relation to social movement actors’ engagement 
with the state, see Gill 2010.
	22.	This does not mean sensations of sourness are experienced as objective facts un-
mediated by imagined categories and ideas, but that things can be conceptually 
known in ways that are not purely linguistic.
	23.	Although, as conceptual art explicitly reveals, concepts can be expressed in many 
other ways.
	24.	While some of these processes depend on conceptual lines that are lines of differ-
ence, in other cases conceptual lines seek to represent what is (and is evolving). 
Yet even with such representational strategies, importantly, there are choices. 
And mediators will pursue certain lines over others as an interpretive but also as 
a more material process, oriented to particular tasks and purposes.
Chapter 3
	 1.	Of course, much state scholarship implicitly concerns questions of touch; how-
ever, writers tend not to locate their discussion within a wider touch literature.
	 2.	Department for Communities and Local Government, “Creating a Single Equality 
Scheme for 2010–2013, Consultation” (London, December 2009), 9.
	 3.	Government Equalities Office, “Making Progress: Delivering the Equality psa” 
(London, October 2009), 2.
	 4.	Haptic comes from the Greek word haptesthai, meaning related to the sense of 
touch or tactile sensations. For further discussion, see Paterson 2007: 4.
	 5.	For further discussion on this point, see Derrida’s discussion of Husserl 2005: 
168–71.
	 6.	See also Mbembe (2003: 37), who explores the power of proximity in relation to 
suicide bombing, a technique that depends on coming as near as possible to the 
body of the enemy.
	 7.	In addition provisions were introduced protecting people from discrimination on 
grounds of marital (and civil partnership) status, pregnancy, and maternity.
	 8.	Within weeks of the Equality Bill’s becoming law, the Labour government of thir-
teen years was thrown out of office and replaced by a Conservative-­led coalition, 
which brought into force the more conventional, consolidating aspects of the 
Equality Act 2010 provisions but made it quickly clear that certain innovative 
aspects, such as the socioeconomic equality duty, would be explicitly “scrapped” 
while the dual discrimination provision was indefinitely postponed.
	 9.	Government Equalities Office, “Turning Policy into Action Business Plan 2010–
2011” (London, March 2010), 22.
	10.	Government Equalities Office, “A Fairer Future—The Equality Bill and Other 
Action to Make Equality a Reality” (London, April 2009), 30. For further discus-
sion of the embodied equality state, see Cooper (2013).
	11.	Equality and Human Rights Commission, “Cohesion and Equality: Guidance for 
Funders” (London, October 2009), 9.

Notes to Chapter 3    235
	12.	For example, Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic Women Councillors’ Taskforce 
Report, October 2009; also Equality and Human Rights Commission, “Cohesion 
and Equality Guidance for Funders,” 4, 7, 14.
	13.	At the same time, as with Josipovici’s (1996) discussion of secular relics, being 
hard to reach suggests not only physical distance (or being out of sight) but also 
the intangibility (untouchable because not fully touched) of constituencies that 
remain tantalizingly just beyond the boundaries of governmental order.
	14.	Government Equalities Office, “Working towards Equality: Achieving Equality 
for Women and Men at Work” (London, October 2009), 19.
	15.	Government Equalities Office, “A Fairer Future,” 15.
	16.	A small sample of interviews with national policy officials and ngo leaders was 
carried out for this chapter. However, the main source material for this chapter 
is publicly available government documents.
	17.	Government Equalities Office, “Working towards Equality,” 16.
	18.	Department for Communities and Local Government, “Tackling Race Equality: 
A Statement on Race” (London, January 2010), 17.
	19.	Equality and Human Rights Commission, “What Our Plans Mean for You” (Lon-
don, October 2009), 7–8.
	20.	Equality Bill Impact Assessment Version 3 (House of Commons Report Stage), 
November 2009, 34.
	21.	Government Equalities Office, “A Fairer Future,” 9.
	22.	Equality and Human Rights Commission, “Our Strategic Plan: 2009–2012” (Lon-
don, June 2009), 14.
	23.	See Equality and Human Rights Commission, “Cohesion and Equality: Guidance 
for Funders,” 7; Equality and Human Rights Commission, “The Public Sector 
Equality Duties and Financial Decisions” (London, March 2009), 5. “Under the 
Gender Equality Duty, public authorities must consult staff, service users and 
other relevant bodies. Under the Disability Equality Duty, authorities must pro-
mote disabled people’s participation and involve disabled people. Involvement 
requires much more active engagement of disabled stakeholders than consulta-
tion.”
	24.	See Nick Johnson and John Tatam, Institute of Community Cohesion, “Good 
Relations: A Conceptual Analysis” (London, autumn 2009); also Equality and 
Human Rights Commission, “What Our Plans Mean for You,” 24. For discussion 
of the cluster of terms surrounding community relations, social cohesion, and 
good relations, see Forrest and Keans 2001; Lewis 2005; Worley 2005.
	25.	Department for Communities and Local Government, “Tackling Race Inequality: 
A Statement on Race” (London, January 2010), 9. See also Cook et al. 2010.
	26.	Institute of Community Cohesion, “Good Relations,” 39.
	27.	See Government Equalities Office, “Turning Policy into Action Business Plan 
2010–2011,” 11; Government Equalities Office, “Equality Bill: Assessing the Im-
pact of a Multiple Discrimination Provision” (London, October 2009), 2; also 
Government Equalities Office, “Turning Policy into Action Business Plan 2010–
2011,” 10; Dickens 2007.

236    Notes to Chapter 3
	28.	See Equality and Human Rights Commission, “Positive Action Briefing Note” 
(London, July 2009), 9; Trevor Phillips, “Poor White Boys Are Victims Too,” Sun-
day Times (London), April 27, 2008.
	29.	An example of this is the pie chart “diversity wheel” of the community organi-
zation Olmec, in which six different inequalities are placed as contiguous slices 
(Olmec, “A Guide to Equality and Diversity in the Third Sector,” London, June 
2008, 15). For a more sophisticated framework, see Equality and Human Rights 
Commission, “Developing the Equality Measurement Framework” (London, 
2009), xiii: a three-­dimensional matrix involving (1) inequality (of outcomes, 
process, and autonomy), (2) across ten domains of social life and activity, and 
(3) involving eight social characteristics, including class.
	30.	For a very useful discussion of the relationship between touch and geometry, see 
Paterson (2007).
	31.	There are parallels here with Didi Herman’s (2011) discussion of judicial “way-­
finding.”
	32.	Equality and Human Rights Commission, “Our Strategic Plan: 2009–2012,” 20.
	33.	Equality and Human Rights Commission, “Developing the Equality Measure-
ment Framework” (London, 2009), 404.
	34.	See also Equality and Human Rights Commission, “What Our Plans Mean for 
You,” 20.
	35.	This discussion begs the question whether tentative knowing by state actors is 
always beneficial given the way state actors use not knowing as a deliberate and 
calculated political tool. Not knowing may relate to acts of state violence or col-
lusion, but it can also relate to minority sexual and religious identities, where 
knowing suggests not only responsibility but also contamination (Cooper 2006a; 
Herman 2011; Lamble 2009).
	36.	Sara Ahmed (2004a), among others, has usefully explored the circulation of feel-
ings and their effects. Her work challenges the assumption that emotions come 
from within and move out, arguing instead that emotions gather, impress upon, 
and shape subjects.
	37.	Department for Communities and Local Government, “Fairness and Freedom: 
The Final Report of the Equalities Review: A Summary” (London, February 
2007), 6.
	38.	For a contemporaneous example, see the British government’s expression of 
regret following the Report of the Bloody Sunday Inquiry on British soldiers 
firing and killing protestors in Londonderry in 1972. “Bloody Sunday Report 
Published,” BBC News Northern Ireland, June 15, 2010, http://www.bbc.co.uk 
/news/10320609 (accessed November 29, 2010).
	39.	See, for instance, Trevor Phillips, foreword to Equality and Human Rights Com-
mission, “Our Human Rights Strategy and Programme of Action: 2009–2012,” 1.
	40.	Equality and Human Rights Commission, “Cohesion and Equality: Guidance for 
Funders.”
	41.	Equality and Human Rights Commission, “Cohesion and Equality: Guidance for 
Funders,” 3–4, italics added.

Notes to Chapter 3    237
	42.	See R (on the application of Kaur and Shah) v. London Borough of Ealing [2008], 
ewhc 2062, judgment of Moses LJ that Ealing Council was in breach of their 
duty under the Race Relations Act 1976. The ehrc was an intervenor in this case, 
and their subsequent report (discussed here) can be interpreted as simply ex-
plaining the law given the decision in this case. At the same time, reports have a 
tone that conveys (or produces) particular feelings.
	43.	See, for instance, Equality and Human Rights Commission, “Cohesion and 
Equality: Guidance for Funders,” 7, where it instructs bodies to “assess . . . the 
equality impact of activities and functions from [disadvantaged groups’] perspec-
tive.”
	44.	Equality and Human Rights Commission, “What Our Plans Mean for You,” 19.
	45.	One interesting account to explore these themes is Thomas Dumm’s (1999: para. 
15) exploration of Bill Clinton as a touchable president. According to Dumm, 
“Clinton has been a touchable president, in a variety of ways. . . . The most famous 
phrase associated with him is ‘I feel your pain,’ even though as it turns out most 
of us have been forced to feel his.”
	46.	Casting equality, as an everyday utopia, may of course be criticized for aligning 
social justice with the augmenting of state power and dominant interests, work-
ing through social movements’ attachment to the state and equality state projects’ 
proximity to other state projects in ways that necessarily forgo any critical edge. 
As such, some might dismiss casting equality as nothing more than a means by 
which reactionary states can defuse or absorb the vitality of progressive politics. 
While this argument can be made, it assumes a high degree of coherence and in‑ 
tegration in what states are and can do; for a similar argument see Newman 
and Clarke (2009: 70–73). Given this book’s focus on the progressive tenden-
cies and potential of everyday utopias, it is not the approach I take; see also 
Cooper 2013.
	47.	A multi-­identity state framework not only provides a different understanding of 
what it means for the state to come in close; it also challenges the commonsense 
view of a clear boundary between state and society since it suggests that bodies, 
people, and forces are variously integrated, constituted, excluded, and at the bor-
ders of diverse state identities in complex, intersecting, and changing ways (see 
Mitchell 1991; Painter 2006). So the borders of the state as nation may not map 
neatly onto the borders of the state conceptualized as a network of governing 
apparatuses or as a regulatory web.
	48.	One premise of this discussion is that new forms of actualization, when it comes 
to state practice, can generate new ways of thinking about particular states as 
well as imaginings of what it is to be a state more generally.
	49.	This discussion builds on earlier work also driven by the challenge of state 
equality initiatives. See Cooper 1995, 2002, 2006a; Cooper and Monro 2003.
	50.	Department for Communities and Local Government, “Creating a Single Equality 
Scheme, 2010–2013 Consultation” (London, December 2009), 11.
	51.	Government Equalities Office, “Working towards Equality: Achieving Equality 
for Women and Men at Work,” 21; Government Equalities Office, “Turning Policy 

238    Notes to Chapter 4
into Action Business Plan 2010–2011,” 15; Government Equalities Office, “Work-
ing towards Equality: A Framework for Action” (London, February 2010), 11.
Chapter 4
	 1.	Translated as “A Little Tenderness for Crying Out Loud!” See Judith Mackrell, “I 
Didn’t Want Any Wobbling,” Guardian (London), May 31, 2011.
	 2.	Judith Mackrell, “In Your Face—but Lacking in Focus,” Guardian (London), 
June 4, 2011.
	 3.	World Naked Bike Ride U.K. website, http://www.worldnakedbikeride.org/uk/ 
(accessed July 5, 2011).
	 4.	“Brian Coldin, Nudist on Trial in Bracebridge, Gains Support,” Huffington Post, Sep-
tember 4, 2011, http://www.huffingtonpost.ca/2011/07/05/brian-­coldin-­nudist 
-­trial_n_890818.html (accessed March 3, 2012).
	 5.	See §174 of the Criminal Code of Canada.
	 6.	I include in my discussion both nudism and naturism. Historically and geographi-
cally the two terms have been used to designate differences of ethos, culture, po-
litical orientation, and body appearance (e.g., see Bell and Holliday 2000: 128). 
However, as use of the two terms is not consistent in the literature, nor specifi-
cally relevant for my discussion, I use nudism to embrace both terms as well as to 
include other forms of public nakedness.
	 7.	See “Naturists Lose Their Fight to Go Naked on the Beaches,” Independent (Lon-
don), April 28, 2009, http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/this-­britain/natur 
ists-­lose-­their-­fight-­to-­go-­naked-­on-­the-­beaches-­1675185.html (accessed March 
28, 2012).
	 8.	See Daniel Johnson, “Beyond Safe Havens: Oregon’s Terri Sue Webb,” Nude and 
Natural, Spring 2002.
	 9.	Nudism is not restricted to the global North. Alongside other histories of un-
dress and clothes, including the coerced wearing of clothes colonially imposed, 
associational nudism exists in many other parts of the world, including India, 
Argentina, and Brazil. See International Naturist Federation, http://www.inffni 
.org/ (accessed April 6, 2013).
	10.	My focus in this chapter is the norms and anxieties present within the realm of 
public nudist practice, but as a conceptual line equality is also affected by those 
norms and anxieties that condition its academic thinking also.
	11.	In using a wide array of media, my aim isn’t to substantiate my account through 
news stories. The stories cited come from media sources with a wide range of 
agendas and interests, including the production of sensational or entertaining 
accounts. However, the stories illustrate what nudism in public might entail.
	12.	Abbey House Gardens, venue website, http://www.abbeyhousegardens.co.uk 
/events.php (accessed May 27, 2011); Renee Chapple, “First All-­Nude Flight from  
Miami Makes History,” About.com Miami, http://miami.about.com/cs/nudists 
naturists/a/aa011603a.htm (accessed March 3, 2012); Maria Court, “Prepare for 
Take-­off,” Dorset Echo (U.K.), February 4, 2008, http://www.thisisdorset.net/news 
/2017891.0/ (accessed May 18, 2011).

Notes to Chapter 4    239
	13.	World Naked Bike Ride U.K. website, http://www.worldnakedbikeride.org/ (ac-
cessed March 28, 2012); Kristi Ceccarossi, “Nudists Seek Harmony—Town Asked 
to Solve Downtown Issue,” Brattleboro (Vt.) Reformer, August 22, 2006, http://
www.freerepublic.com/focus/f-­chat/1687615/posts (accessed March 28, 2012); 
Daniel Barlow, “Board Tackles Nudity,” Rutland (Vt.) Herald.com, Septem-
ber 3, 2006, http://www.rutlandherald.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/200609 
03/NEWS/609030355/1003/NEWS02 (accessed March 28, 2012); Body Freedom 
Collaborative website, http://bodyfreedom.org; Kathy George, “Exposed and Stark  
Naked—on Purpose,” Seattle Post-­Intelligencer Reporter, April 6, 2003, http:// 
www.seattlepi.com/local/116207_nude07.shtml (accessed March 28, 2012).
	14.	John Cloud, “Nude Family Values,” Time, June 25, 2003.
	15.	During this period nudism was also associated, to differing degrees, with lebens-
reform, or life reform movements; these linked nudism to vegetarianism, alter-
native medicine, and healthy living, according to a back-­to-­nature ethos. For dis-
cussion of the movement in Belgium, see Peeters (2006). For accounts of this 
history, including the tensions and rivalries between different cultural and politi-
cal strands of the movement, see Cleminson 2004; Jeffries 2006.
	16.	For further accounts of early- and mid-­twentieth-­century European nudism’s rela-
tionship to racism, anti-­Semitism, and eugenics, see Jeffries 2006; Kenway 1998; 
McLellan 2007; Ross 2005. For examples of racialized attitudes among earlier 
pro-­nudist writers, see also Hartman et al. 1970; Merrill and Merrill 1931: 162; 
Parmelee 1929: 173, 235–41; Warren 1933.
	17.	Nudism’s value in this respect may have proved more salient a hundred years 
ago than today. However, nudism’s historic emphasis on fit, able-­bodied women 
clashes with several progressive contemporary agendas, troubled by the pursuit 
of exposed, “complete,” “unblemished” bodies. Alongside the disability politics at 
stake, widespread contemporary attacks on Muslim women in the global North 
for veiling and the attacks on “covering up” to advance a European xenophobic 
politics make nudism’s continued celebration of the “naturally” revealed body 
troubling. At the same time, nudism raises the question of possible alliances be-
tween different kinds of stigmatized bodily appearance, or between people com-
mitted to a far more pluralist and open approach to bodily dress (and undress) 
that might also take in struggles against compulsory school and employee uni-
forms as well.
	18.	In relation to class, it is important to recognize the different economies at play 
in relation to organized nudist clubs and more radical initiatives oriented to free 
public spaces. See, for instance, Body Freedom Collaborative’s strategies and ap-
proaches, listed on their website.
	19.	Contemporary gay nudist environments certainly exist, including the sauna and 
beach (e.g., Hughes et al. 2010), but the ethos of mainstream nudism continues to 
emphasize heterosexual family culture (Holmes 2006). For an account of a white, 
mainly middle-­class, and heterosexual beach culture, see Obrador-­Pons 2007.
	20.	For reference to “nude-­phobic” violence, see British Naturism, Spring 2008, 46.
	21.	Severin Carrell, “Naked Rambler Faces Mental Health Checks after Breaking 

240    Notes to Chapter 4
Down in Court,” Guardian (London), August 23, 2012, http://www.guardian 
.co.uk/uk/2012/aug/23/naked-­rambler-­mental-­health-­checks (accessed August 
29, 2012).
	22.	See, for instance, “Nudist Not a Public Nuisance,” BBC News, January 10, 2011, 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/1110330.stm (accessed March 3, 2012); see also 
Terri Sue Webb, American activist prosecuted for nudity, supra note 8.
	23.	See, for instance, “The Naked Gun,” Mailonline, October 14, 2010, http://www 
.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-­1320369/Florida-­police-­Taser-­naked-­jogger-­Antho 
ny-­King-­wearing-­swim-­goggles-­super-­powers.html (accessed March 28, 2012);  
“Police Taser Naked Man in Streets of Kelso,” TDN.com, September 7, 2011,  
http://tdn.com/news/local/police-­taser-­naked-­man-­in-­streets-­of-­kelso/article 
_9a7c356e-­d9bb-­11e0–9849–001cc4c002e0.html (accessed March 28, 2012).
	24.	Samantha Epps Anderson, “Prayer Rally, Community to Focus on Naturists,” In 
dependentmail.com, October 19, 2006, http://andersonindependent.com/news 
/2006/oct/19/prayer-­rally-­community-­to-­focus-­on-­naturists/ (accessed March 
28, 2012); “Nudist Group Stripped of Service Claims PayPal Exposes Ignorance”  
[concerning the Federation of Canadian Naturists], Western Star (Canada), March 
25, 2008, http://www.thewesternstar.com/Business/Employment/2008–03–25 
/article-­1462601/Nudist-­group-­stripped-­of-­service-­claims-­PayPal-­exposes 
-­ignorance/1 (accessed March 3, 2012). Also see the ban on naked children under 
eighteen at the nude recreation site, Hippy Hollow (near Dallas, Texas); “A Brief 
History of Nudism and Naturism in America,” Southern California Naturist Asso-
ciation, 2006.
	25.	For an interesting historical account of the development of domestic American 
suburban nudism, see Schrank (2012).
	26.	See Body Freedom Collaborative website, bold type removed.
	27.	For one illustration of tensions, see George, “Exposed and Stark Naked—on Pur-
pose.”
	28.	The significance of showing nudist writers beside their articles is briefly discussed 
in British Naturism, Winter 2007, 7.
	29.	For a related instance, see the American town council hustings meeting held at 
a nudist community. Again, through the candidates’ political interactions with 
naked prospective voters, naked bodies got incorporated into the democratic pro-
cess in a far more vital way than if the candidates had simply deliberated on pro-­
nudist texts. See “Town Holds Clothing-­Optional Political Debate,” Democratic 
Underground.com, http://www.democraticunderground.com/discuss/duboard 
.php?az=view_all&address=389x337447 (accessed March 3, 2012).
	30.	“Tunick’s Naked Pictures of Me,” Manchester (U.K.) Confidential, July 19, 2010, 
http://www.manchesterconfidential.co.uk/Culture/Arts/Tunicks-­naked-­pictures 
-­of-­me (accessed March 3, 2012).
	31.	See, for instance, British Naturism’s legislative submission regarding “indecent 
photographs of children,” Select Committee on Culture, Media and Sport Written 
Evidence, January 2008, http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200708 
/cmselect/cmcumeds/353/353we08.htm (accessed April 6, 2013).

Notes to Chapter 4    241
	32.	For an extensive and rich discussion of orientation, see Ahmed (2006).
	33.	See Mike Lewis, “Under the Needle: Nudists Fight for Rights at City Pool,” 
Seattle Post-­Intelligencer, May 11, 2008, http://www.seattlepi.com/local/362641 
_needle12.html (accessed March 4, 2010).
	34.	A theater audience might briefly become a circulatory public by discussing the 
play afterward or by passing something on, whether an object, hand wave, whis-
per, song fragment, or something else—a gesture sometimes, although usually 
lightly, invoked at particular performance events.
	35.	For example, see “Naked Couple Go for a Stroll” [treating open-­air diners to a 
fifteen-­minute naked parade], Metro.co.uk, January 28, 2009, http://www.metro 
.co.uk/news/world/508052-­naked-­couple-­go-­for-­a-­stroll (accessed March 28, 
2012); “Naked Man Tasered ‘in the Ass’” [having stripped at a university con-
cert], Metro.co.uk, November 12, 2007, http://www.metro.co.uk/weird/75324 
-­naked-­man-­tasered-­in-­the-­ass (accessed March 28, 2012).
	36.	This parallels claims of several theorists that (public) stranger contact needs me-
diating objects or signifiers of distance; see Arendt 1958; Sennett 1992; Zerilli 
1995.
	37.	For an illuminating analysis of machinic and aesthetic perspectives on skin 
within early twentieth-­century German nudism, see Möhring 2005.
	38.	For an interesting account of different tactile cultures among contemporary Ger-
man and French nudists, which also sports some curious observational methods, 
see Smith (1980).
	39.	Dressing up pets when taking them outside also speaks to clothing’s power as a 
signifier of public appearance, alongside the desire to make animals into public 
subjects. Thanks to Didi Herman for raising this point.
	40.	Historically street nakedness, as in Australia, has been proscribed, in explic-
itly racialized ways, to suggest the “not yet civilized” of improper public perfor-
mance. See Watson 1998: 7.
	41.	Failure to appear properly in public may cause the public appearance of unhappy 
others to break down also. The town of Brattleboro, Vermont, illustrates this 
point. There, for a few summers, young people gathered naked downtown. Ac-
cording to reports, frustrated locals in response not only turned to law for remedy 
but exercised a form of resistance themselves, as public norms, such as “civil in-
attention,” “civility towards diversity,” and the pleasures of people watching, were 
abandoned. See, for instance, Ceccarossi, “Nudists Seek Harmony.” For a useful 
general discussion of contemporary American norms of public engagement, see 
Lofland (1998).
	42.	Especially in formal sites such as courts or government offices. See the Court of 
Appeals’ (Scotland) rejection of the “naked rambler’s” appeal over a contempt of 
court finding. Lord Gill commented that appearing in court naked was unques-
tionably contempt. “Judges Turn Down Appeal by Rambler,” news.scotsman.com, 
November 8, 2007, http://news.scotsman.com/nakedrambler/Judges-­turn-­down 
-­appeal-­by.3478376.jp (accessed March 3, 2012). See also Duncan Heenan, British 
Naturism, Autumn 2008, 23.

242    Notes to Chapter 5
	43.	“Bay City Police Used Taser to Kill Teenager, Previously Used Tasers against a 
Naked Man,” Mediamouse.org, April 9, 2009, http://www.mediamouse.org/news 
/2009/04/bay-­city-­police-­taser-­naked-­man.php (accessed March 3, 2012); 
“Prosecutor Charged with Parading Naked in Office Complex,” North Coun-
try Gazette (N.Y.), October 11, 2006, http://www.northcountrygazette.org/arti 
cles/101106NakedProsecutor.html (accessed March 3, 2012).
	44.	For example, see “Naked Tourist Shocks City” [regarding a man who osten-
sibly thought walking around naked in Germany was tolerated], Reuters U.K., 
May 22, 2007, http://uk.reuters.com/article/idUKL2245467620070522 (accessed 
March 3, 2012). One important exception to the rural/urban divide is the city 
beach where nudity may be permitted and legitimated (e.g., see Valverde and 
Cirak 2003); my discussion, however, focuses on non-­beach city spaces.
	45.	For work on urban and public space and the organization of sensation and touch, 
see Adams et al. 2007; Edensor 2007; Voskuil 2002. Juhani Pallasmaa (2000) has 
also written on the need for open-­ended, touch-­based, flexible, and experiential 
architecture. His account parallels several themes discussed here.
	46.	Thus, equality functions as both a presupposition of public nudism as well as a 
mode of expression underpinned by other presuppositions.
Chapter 5
	 1.	Interviewees included a mix of attendees, volunteers, and committee members, 
and ranged from one-­time attendees to regulars. In terms of demographics, those 
I spoke with varied in terms of gender, sexual and ethnic identity, and occupation 
but were largely in their late twenties to mid-­forties and predominantly Cana-
dian.
	 2.	Initially known as the Toronto Women’s Bathhouse (or Pussy Palace), the in-
creased drive to fully include transgendered participants led to the Pussy Palace 
becoming the Pleasure Palace in 2010. The name Toronto Women’s Bathhouse 
changed in various ways over time to emphasize transgendered people’s welcome 
participation. Since the majority of interviews were carried out before the change 
of names, and with women, I use the name Toronto Women’s and Trans Bath-
house to reflect the original primary focus as well as the growing inclusion of and 
attentiveness toward transgendered participants. On the history of Canadian les-
bian and gay community activism, particularly in relation to the state, see Adam 
et al. 1999; Grundy and Smith 2005; Herman 1994; Kinsman 1987; Ross 1995; 
Smith 1999; Tom Warner 2002.
	 3.	Cate Simpson, “Sugar Shack Stirs Desire,” Xtra: Canada’s Gay and Lesbian News, 
April 24, 2008, http://www.xtra.ca/public/Toronto/Sugar_Shack_stirs_desire-­46 
71.aspx (accessed February 23, 2012).
	 4.	Participants I spoke to described very different practices in relation to viral risk. 
Dams and condoms were described as widely available, but several participants 
indicated that use was limited.
	 5.	Some interviewees described being insufficiently attentive at the moment of 
parting and thus losing an opportunity to see someone they liked again.

Notes to Chapter 5    243
	 6.	For discussion of the socially contingent and contested character of need, see 
Fraser 1989; Waldron 1996; White and Tronto 2004.
	 7.	We might see the bathhouse as illustrating Nancy Fraser’s (1989: 300) notion of 
a “leaky” or “runaway need”, one that has escaped (or is being encouraged to es-
cape) its conventional institutional home, here domestic life, for more liberating 
pastures.
	 8.	Emphasis added.
	 9.	For critical engagements with care ethics more generally, see Bauman 1993; Beas­
ley and Bacchi 2005; Cloyes 2002; Cockburn 2005; Cooper 2007.
	10.	See, for instance, Engster’s (2007: 29) account of when a particular action—here 
baking or buying a cake—constitutes an act of caring.
	11.	Moralities can be inculcated in many ways, and rule-­based frameworks itemizing 
what can and can’t be done, in isolation from other techniques, may prove rela-
tively unsuccessful. Nevertheless, at the bathhouse, interviewees suggested rules 
were an important technique of governance as well as a means of clarifying the 
site’s moral (and evolving) foundations. For further discussion of the bathhouse 
as a self-­governed space, see Cooper (2009).
	12.	The “weighted” part highlights the fact that something matters or is at stake. It 
also identifies the emotional or expressive spectrum that mattering can denote; 
so things may matter to different degrees or according to different registers of 
pleasure, anxiety, rage, jealousy, calculation, and so on. Indeed one of the aspects 
of the bathhouse deemed by many participants to be most refreshing was the way 
it reframed (and so sometimes minimized) mattering when it came to body shape 
and size.
	13.	fce is also located within wider debates as to when attentiveness becomes over-
identification with the other (as immersion or engrossment) in ways that jeopar-
dize the individuality and needs of the caregiver, while also hindering the care-
giver’s capacity to recognize and the recipient’s capacity to express the latter’s 
distinct, not fully knowable needs. See generally Benhabib 1992: 168; Dahl 2000; 
Young 1997.
	14.	This equivocation resonates with Derrida’s (1995: 147) work on the undecidable: 
“It is when it is not possible to know what must be done, when it is not and can-
not be determining that a decision is possible as such . . . otherwise the decision 
is an application.”
	15.	This is to some extent an open question. If actors don’t treat rules or laws as de-
manding compliance toward which they have no choice but to defer, the dilemma 
that ethics invokes remains.
	16.	Organizers, of course, could not control and direct ethical conduct, as the term 
is understood here, since ethics depends on the possibility of choices, decisions, 
and practices going in different, undetermined directions. At the same time, 
organizers were conscious that their own collective ethical decisions affected 
participants’ moral obligations.

244    Notes to Chapter 6
Chapter 6
	 1.	Thanks to Eva Hartmann for highlighting this point. Members who tried to offer 
“less essential” goods, lessons in political theory, for example (as one ex-­colleague 
described doing), found themselves with little business and scrabbling around for 
more popular skills or goods to offer.
	 2.	Jill Jordan, speech at Findhorn Foundation, October 1991.
	 3.	See Michael Linton, email interview, August 21, 2000, quoted in Lee et al. (2004: 
603); also Michael Linton and Ernie Yacub, “Open Money,” Subsol, http://sub 
sol.c3.hu/subsol_2/contributors0/lintontext.html (accessed June 15, 2011). 
LETSystems saw lets as one money system interacting with others rather than 
as a substitute or replacement. See Lee et al. 2004: 604.
	 4.	Closure did not leave a lasting vacuum within the British world of alternative 
economics and local currency systems. Even as lets were winding up, other 
initiatives emerged, including Time Banking and freecycle. In Time Banking 
mostly nonprofessional neighboring activities were offered in exchange for 
bankable (spendable) time credits (Gregory 2009; Seyfang 2004; Seyfang and 
Smith 2002). Freecycle is an Internet-­based system coordinating the gifting of 
things no longer wanted. Freecycle networks operate in various countries (on 
U.S. freecycle, see Nelson et al. 2007) and have been particularly popular in Brit-
ain. See the website http://www.uk.freecycle.org/ (accessed June 7, 2011).
	 5.	Interviews were carried out by myself, Stacy Douglas, and Ryoko Matsuno, with 
additional introductory interviews by Jenny Smith. Interviews varied by age, gen-
der, ethnicity, and occupation and were chosen to elicit a range of perspectives 
including both urban and rural lets, as well as general lets and more special-
ized (or targeted) lets networks. For general British data on lets demographics, 
see Williams et al. (2001).
	 6.	Other studies examining the relationship between economic transactions and 
sociality include research on “mass gifting” by supermarkets, party selling, com-
mercial bribes, and the less than fully instrumental sociality of long-­term busi-
ness relationships (Bird-­David and Darr 2009; Macaulay 2003; McCaughey and 
French 2001; Smart 1993; Vincent 2003). Writing has also focused on the so-
cial dimension of more explicitly ethical economic activities—from fair trade 
commerce and farmers’ markets to new modes of gifting and exchange, such as 
freecycle and local currency-­based exchanges—the focus of this chapter (see for 
instance, Moore 2004; North 2007; Raddon 2003; for other writing on social ex-
changes in the marketplace, see chapter 8).
	 7.	In the light of contemporary work on postsocial relations, attentive to the inter-
active relationship between economies and objects (Cetina and Bruegger 2000, 
2002), I should stress my focus here is the reciprocal interaction between human 
communities and trading, even as the embedding of economies within local sus-
tainable environments also proved to be an important aspect of lets’ community 
commitment. For other recent work centering the agentic and analytical force of 
objects, see Bennett 2010; Coole and Frost 2010.

Notes to Chapter 6    245
	 8.	Some schemes found that people traded only at trading fairs. This also meant 
trades were more likely to involve things rather than services.
	 9.	See, for instance, “lets: An Introduction,” lets Forum (for southwest England),  
http://www.letsf.co.uk/index.php?module=htmlpages&func=display&pid=1 
(accessed August 1, 2011); “What Is lets?,” Coventry lets, http://coventry.let 
system.org/WhatIsLETS.htm (accessed August 1, 2011).
	10.	“LETSystem Dorchester and South Dorset,” Sustainable Dorset, http://www 
.sustainabledorset.org.uk/organisations/letsystem-­dorchester-­south-­dorset 
-­local-­exchange-­trading-­system (accessed August 1, 2011).
	11.	See also Michael Linton, “Open Money Manifesto,” Openmoney, http://www 
.openmoney.org/top/omanifesto.html (accessed June 7, 2011).
	12.	Although see May and Thrift (2001: 19), who argue that claims of a relatively uni-
form acceleration within modern capitalist societies are overstated.
	13.	The emphasis on community time as social time also created, in some lets 
schemes, a calendar of special days, involving annual or more frequent happen-
ings. These not only provided practical spaces for social contact to occur but 
functioned symbolically to develop and enhance individual schemes’ distinctive 
character and relations of attachment.
	14.	The complexity of combining sociality and trade was eloquently described by one 
interviewee: “If you ring someone out the yellow pages, and you get them to do a 
job and it’s not very good you can go back and complain. You won’t offend them 
because they’re complete strangers. . . . I had something fixed for me the other 
day [through lets] . . . a zip in my anorak. . . . I really appreciate the work . . . 
but she had left eight inches and I had to finish the eight inches off myself, but I 
wouldn’t tell her. . . . If it was a shop I’d have probably taken it back and said that’s 
not good enough. . . . [Member’s name] is lovely and I enjoy trading with her and 
she’s given me some good work. In fact sometimes she pays me half in sterling 
and half in credits, which is great ’cause I’m stint, and she’s doing a lot for the core 
group, so all these factors make it a complex picture . . . a web of interactions. . . . 
But that same web can make it awkward sometimes” (ex-­organizer and partici-
pant, North Midlands).
	15.	“The Benefits of lets,” letslink U.K., http://www.letslinkuk.net/practice/posi 
tives.htm (accessed July 20, 2011).
	16.	Thanks to Kate Bedford for clarifying this point.
	17.	In other contexts, particular agencies or bodies might play a mediating role. See 
Hope (2009) on the way capitalism’s conflicting temporalities were (temporarily) 
stabilized by the state.
	18.	For a summary of research on lets’ limited economic utility, see Evans (2009); 
also on trading levels, see Aldridge and Patterson (2002); Seyfang (2001b).
	19.	Arguably, establishing new lets trading norms happened in other areas, not di-
rectly to do with time. Reasons for this difference are worth considering but be-
yond the scope of this chapter.
	20.	This also suggests that community labor was expressed in more-­than-­linguistic 
ways through participants’ acts, expectations, disappointments, and departure, 

246    Notes to Chapter 7
which responded not simply to what was imagined but to the particular lines 
drawn between imagining and actualization.
Chapter 7
	 1.	Summerhill School’s fees for boarding and day pupils are generally low for a pri-
vate school. On the website the school states, “We try to keep our fees as low as 
possible so that more families can afford it. . . . The A. S. Neill Summerhill Trust 
aims to provide bursaries for the school so that a greater number of families with 
financial limitations may apply.” Factsheet on the school, updated January 2009, 
http://www.summerhillschool.co.uk/QAs-­2009.pdf (accessed April 3, 2012). For 
accounts of Summerhill School, see Appleton 2000; Croall 1983; Gribble 1998; 
Neill 1937, 1945, 1967, 1968; Stronach and Piper 2008.
	 2.	See school website, http://www.summerhill.co.uk/.
	 3.	Field research diaries recorded observations from seven two- to three-­day visits 
between 2002 and 2011, alongside interviews with twelve teachers, nineteen chil-
dren, and two with Zoe Readhead, the school head teacher. Interviews varied in 
formality, length, and style. Some were conducted with teachers between classes 
or when no one had shown up for a lesson. Discussions with children ranged 
from one-­on-­one conversations in a quiet space to group discussions that children 
joined and left as their interest waxed and waned or other needs or preferences 
arose. Because conversations with children were deliberately informal (and so not 
taped), this chapter quotes directly only from adult school members. With the ex-
ception of Readhead, all contributions, as in the rest of the book, are anonymized. 
This was not possible for Readhead given her distinctive position as the school’s 
principal, Neill’s daughter, and the owner of Summerhill as a family business.
	 4.	For discussion and critique of the “bundle of sticks” (sometimes referred to as 
“bundle of rights”) approach, see Arnold 2002; Freyfogle 1995; Penner 1996.
	 5.	For a good account and critical discussion of this approach to property, see Davies 
(1999).
	 6.	For work on whiteness as property, see the seminal article by Cheryl Harris 
(1993). This article has been taken up in many different ways; see for instance, 
Davies 2007: 43–44; Grabham 2009a; Keenan 2010; Roediger 1999.
	 7.	Being “brought up” is a commonly used Summerhill term for the process where 
one person brings a case against another.
	 8.	The resonance of this account with Locke’s labor-­based ([1821] 1988: 288–91) ap-
proach to property is striking.
	 9.	As told, this narrative did not, unfortunately, include details of what possession 
in this case meant.
	10.	The legal geographer Nicholas Blomley (2008b) usefully explores the labor that 
goes into simplification (and the difficulty in creating a single, coherent narra-
tive) in his study of a property boundaries dispute involving the movement of the 
Missouri River.
	11.	Although in other respects, no child’s bedroom is fully theirs; as one teacher said, 

Notes to Chapter 7    247
“They can be moved around if new kids come, and of course older kids have had 
that space before them.”
	12.	Seclusion is also not just a solitary activity. Groups of friends will find spaces on 
the grounds and in buildings to get away from others.
	13.	Other teachers interviewed were more skeptical about the ability of the school 
grounds to offer seclusion.
	14.	Using things to express differentiated intimacies is restricted by the “property 
limitation rules” different kinds of things receive. Some things cannot be used 
with some kinds of people to denote attachment or trust—giving younger kids 
cigarettes or pornography, for instance.
	15.	Italics added.
	16.	Zoe Readhead, in conversation with Jerry Mintz, Education Revolution 29, spring 
2000, p. 24, http://lib.store.yahoo.net/lib/educationrevolution/aer050.pdf (ac-
cessed April 8, 2013).
	17.	Summerhill General Policy Statement, June 11, 2002.
	18.	For an interesting discussion of Summerhill’s relationship to touch, see Stronach 
and Piper (2008).
	19.	Summerhill General Policy Statement, June 11, 2002.
	20.	Ofsted, Summerhill School: A report from the Office of Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector 
of Schools (1999), Reporting Inspector Mr N Grenyer, para 31.
	21.	The commentary to the policy declares that this may feel intrusive of relation-
ships with children, but advises that behaving otherwise would put the school 
and individual at risk if something perceived as inappropriate or harmful hap-
pened; Summerhill School Handbook, Child Protection Policy, June 13, 2000.
	22.	One area of conflict concerned the school toilet. The school argued that all chil-
dren and adults should share toilet facilities as they would in any home, disputing 
the notion that the toilet was a threatening space (see Summerhill General Policy 
Statement, June 11, 2002). Several institutional authorities criticized the school’s 
policy of having boys, girls, and adults share toilets. See Ofsted, Summerhill School 
(1999), paras. 12, 73.
	23.	Members can also ask a subsequent meeting for fines to be revisited and reduced.
	24.	See for instance Ofsted, Summerhill School (1999), para. 58.
	25.	This followed concerns raised by the 1999 Ofsted inspection. Removal from the 
register would have been drastic, making the school’s survival impossible.
	26.	See “School Attacks Ofsted ‘Vandals,’” Guardian, March 21, 2000.
	27.	These are elected school members who are responsible for making sure children 
go to bed and are quiet at the appropriate time (which varies with age) and also 
that they get up in the morning.
	28.	These laws relate to January 2003 and have been altered since.
	29.	See, for instance, the controversy following the screening of the Channel 4 docu-
mentary Summerhill at 70, broadcast in March 1992, and the account of it by the 
teacher Matthew Appleton, “Summerhill at 70—A Personal Perspective,” Friends 
of Summerhill Trust Journal 8 (Spring 1993).

248    Notes to Chapter 8
	30.	See also Neill (1948: 35), where he refers to a potential loss of income from stu-
dents swearing in front of prospective parents.
	31.	Recognition and definition, arguably, have the effect of extracting property rela-
tions as they get separated out from their wider context; for further discussion 
see Cooper and Herman 2013.
Chapter 8
	 1.	This chapter also draws from the weekly radio show Voice of the People and from 
other accounts of the Corner, such as Tony Allen’s (2004).
	 2.	Some speakers gather at the Corner on other days, but Sunday is the main day 
when people attend to hear speeches and to debate.
	 3.	Hyde Park was initially established as a fenced-­in space by Henry VIII to hunt 
deer. It was opened to the public in 1662. Over the subsequent centuries, it was 
used by diverse populations in diverse ways. See Leslie Jones, “Hyde Park and 
Free Speech,” SpeakersCorner, posted May 4, 2010, http://www.speakerscorner 
.net/articles/hydeparkandfreespeech (accessed March 16, 2012).
	 4.	Abrams v. United States, 250 U.S. 616, 630 (1919). For judicial use establishing the 
“market place of ideas,” see Justice Douglas, United States v. Rumely 345 U.S. 41, 
56 (1953); also Justice Brennan Lamont v. Postmaster General, 381 U.S. 301, 308 
(1965).
	 5.	There is an interesting contrast here with gift economies where the transaction is 
expected to be costly; indeed the exchange itself may entirely consume the use-­
value of the gift. See Hyde (1979: 10).
	 6.	See, for instance, Ahluwalia 2003; Anderson 2004; Besnier 2004; Buie 1996; 
Crewe and Gregson 1998; DeFilippis 1997; Sherry 1990; Stillerman 2006; Wat-
son 2009; Zukin 1995.
	 7.	Ibid.
	 8.	Italics removed.
	 9.	Markets also vary in the extent to which competition is central. Although com-
petition is conventionally associated with economic markets (including public 
sector ones), the many conceptual lines of the market drawn from Speakers’ Cor-
ner do not all foreground competition. To the extent that the Corner market is 
about discursive exchange relations, the capacity to have a plurality of exchanges 
augments any given exchange rather than detracting from (or competing with) 
it. Speakers do not necessarily lose out from attention paid to other speakers, 
and audience members do not have to compete with others listening or with the 
speakers that they engage with. Certainly, there is competition at the Corner as I 
discuss. But it isn’t structured by relations of scarcity, except for those imposed 
by limits of time.
	10.	For a useful discussion of the utopian dimensions of Bakhtin’s carnival, see 
Gardiner (1992).
	11.	Humphrey (2000) suggests contemporary scholars are inclined to rely too 
heavily on Bakhtin’s narrative in ways that neglect more recent scholarly work 
on the medieval period; that they overstate the socially oppositional character of 

Notes to Chapter 9    249
early festivals; and that, by omitting the intervening period between medieval 
and modern carnival practice, they neglect the social conditions out of which 
contemporary carnival activities have arisen.
	12.	The first was heard on Voice of the People, March 19, 2003; the second was heard 
on Voice of the People, April 9, 2003.
	13.	Speakers also commented that a degree of physical distance from the audience 
was important for play, even as a densely packed audience might contribute to 
reducing inhibition.
	14.	For instance, see the website for Terminator 24, a regular Corner speaker, http://
terminator24.blogspot.co.uk/ (accessed August 13, 2012).
	15.	It is less clear whether the development of such Corner expertise is translatable 
into other contexts. It certainly does not seem to produce any obvious social or 
cultural capital that can be deployed elsewhere.
	16.	The particular sensory character of the Corner, the density of bodies, and the im-
portance of being able to read intonation, expression, and emphasis within de-
bate were reasons one speaker gave for why the Corner could not adequately be 
replicated on the Internet. He commented, “You don’t get the satisfaction you get 
from standing up in a park and talking to people.”
	17.	There are similarities here with Elijah Anderson’s (2004: 28) discussion of the 
“cosmopolitan canopy” at Philadelphia’s Reading Terminal Market, in the oppor-
tunity provided “for diverse strangers to come together and be exposed to one 
another.”
	18.	In this sense, Speakers’ Corner provides an interesting counterpoint to lets, 
where exchange of goods and services was largely unsuccessful as a means of 
binding community.
	19.	Yet in coming close to the edge, a major difference with the edgework of extreme 
sports becomes evident. At Speakers’ Corner the edge can be crossed. The risk 
isn’t the single disastrous transgression but the failure to return from it. As one 
speaker told me, “I’m not really here in a serious way to offend people. . . . I want 
a humorous exchange, not a violent one. . . . You control the mood by moderating 
what you say and observing your audience so no one gets too angry. . . . It’s a bad 
speaker if someone gets too riled up.”
	20.	Newmahr (2011: 159–65), interestingly, seeks to extend edgework beyond what 
she sees as its male-­oriented focus in its concern with individual skill in just about 
safely navigating a hazardous environment and assumed risk, to focus instead 
on collaborative interactions where “edgeworkers depend on each other for suc-
cessful boundary negotiation,” recognizing the impact of social context on what 
is experienced as risky, and the importance of “emotional edges”—­developing 
“skills in order to voluntarily negotiate extreme emotional and psychological 
­boundaries.”
Chapter 9
	 1.	Sedgwick (2003: 141) also comments on the “paranoid trust in exposure” of what 
will come about through the revelation of what is wrong.

250    Notes to Chapter 9
	 2.	They may also be read as what is past, produced by a future that is coming into 
place. Deleuze and Guattari (2004: 476) use the notion of “reverse causalities” 
to characterize “an action of the future on the present . . . [where] what does not 
yet exist is already in action, in a different form.” See also Nail 2010.
	 3.	See Foreword, “Our Human Rights Strategy and Programme of Action: 2009–
2012” (EHRC, London, November 2009), 1.
	 4.	This followed an official inspection, the report from which commented, “There 
are major areas of unresolved difficulty where the school’s philosophy is in conflict 
with wider external expectations of pupils’ levels of achievement and progress. 
The most serious difficulty for the school is that it does not agree that identified 
weaknesses in its provision are weaknesses: such judgements are seen as external 
impositions at odds with the school’s beliefs and values.” Ofsted Inspection, con-
ducted March 1–5, 2009, para. 60; http://www.ofsted.gov.uk/inspection-­reports 
/find-­inspection-­report/provider/ELS/124870/%28type%29/16384%2C32768/%2
8typename%29/Independent%20education (accessed April 8, 2013).
	 5.	Although this clarity may also make particulate sites more vulnerable to criticism 
and attack, as Summerhill School encountered in their Ofsted inspection in 1999, 
and subsequent governmental action, see chapter 7.
	 6.	In this way, I go beyond those scholars who treat how the state is expressly imag-
ined in everyday life as an integral dimension of the imagined state but who ne-
glect to consider the contribution that everyday (or activist) imaginings make 
to the state’s actualization (or who see its actualization only as something imag-
ined).
	 7.	Of course, different conceptual lines can impact on each other, but whether or 
not they do, and what follows from it, will depend (at least in part) on their 
force—a force that may also seem quite different depending on the place and 
angle from which it is approached. There is a parallel here with legal pluralism. 
From the perspective of the state, community rules and norms may appear utterly 
dependent on the space that the state has carved out for them. While from the 
perspective of the community concerned, the authority of their norms and rules 
may come from within—as self-­authored and self-­authorizing.

References
Abensour, Miguel. 1973. “Les Formes De l’Utopie Socialistes-­Communistes.” PhD 
diss., University of Paris.
Adam, Barry D., Jan Willem Duyvendak, and André Krouwel, eds. 1999. The Global 
Emergence of Gay and Lesbian Politics: National Imprints of a Worldwide Movement. 
Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Adams, Mags, Gemma Moore, Trevor Cox, Ben Croxford, Mohamed Refaee, and 
Steve Sharples. 2007. “The 24-­Hour City: Residents’ Sensorial Experiences.” Senses 
and Society 2 (2): 201–16.
Agamben, Giorgio. 1998. Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life. Stanford: Stan-
ford University Press.
Agnew, Jean-­Christophe. 1986. Worlds Apart: The Market and the Theater in Anglo-­
American Thought, 1550–1750. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ahluwalia, Pal. 2003. “The Wonder of the African Market: Post-­colonial Inflections.” 
Pretexts: Literary and Cultural Studies 12 (2): 133–44.
Ahmed, Sara. 2004a. “Collective Feelings, Or, the Impressions Left by Others.” 
Theory, Culture and Society 21 (2): 25–42.
———. 2004b. “Declarations of Whiteness: The Non-­Performativity of Anti-­
Racism.” Borderlands 3 (2). Online.
———. 2006. Queer Phenomenology: Orientations, Objects, Others. Durham: Duke 
University Press.
Alaimo, Stacy. 2010. “The Naked Word: The Trans-­Corporeal Ethics of the Protesting 
Body.” Women and Performance: A Journal of Feminist Theory 20 (1): 15–36.
Alcoff, Linda, and Elizabeth Potter, eds. 1993. Feminist Epistemologies. New York: 
Routledge.
Aldridge, Theresa, and Alan Patterson. 2002. “lets Get Real: Constraints on the De-
velopment of Local Exchange Trading Schemes.” Area 34 (4): 370–81.
Aldridge, Theresa, Jane Tooke, Roger Lee, Andrew Leyshon, Nigel Thrift, and 
Colin Williams. 2001. “Recasting Work: The Example of Local Exchange Trading 
Schemes.” Work, Employment and Society 15 (3): 565–79.

252    references
Alexander, Gregory S. 1998. “Property as Propriety.” Nebraska Law Review 77: 667–
702.
Alexander, Jeffrey C. 2001. “Robust Utopias and Civil Repairs.” International Sociology 
16 (4): 579–91.
Allen, Tony. 2004. A Summer in the Park: A Journal of Speakers’ Corner. London: Free-
dom Press.
Anderson, Ben. 2006. “‘Transcending without Transcendence’: Utopianism and an 
Ethos of Hope.” Antipode 38 (4): 691–710.
Anderson, Elijah. 2004. “The Cosmopolitan Canopy.” Annals of the American Academy 
of Political and Social Science 595 (1): 14–31.
Anthias, Floya. 2006. “Belongings in a Globalising and Unequal World: Rethinking 
Translocations.” In The Situated Politics of Belonging, edited by Nira Yuval-­Davis, 
Kalpana Kannabiran, and Ulrike Vieten, 17–31. London: Sage.
Appadurai, Arjun. 1986. The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Appleton, Matthew. 2000. A Free Range Childhood: Self Regulation at Summerhill. 
Brandon, Vt.: Foundation for Educational Renewal.
Arendt, Hannah. 1958. The Human Condition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Arneil, Barbara. 2000. “The Politics of the Breast.” Canadian Journal of Women and 
the Law 12: 345–70.
Arnold, Craig Anthony. 2002. “The Reconstitution of Property: Property as a Web of 
Interests.” Harvard Environmental Law Review 26: 281.
Bain, Alison, and Catherine Nash. 2006. “Undressing the Researcher: Feminism, 
Embodiment and Sexuality at a Queer Bathhouse Event.” Area 38 (1): 99–106.
Bain, Alison, and Catherine Nash. 2007. “The Toronto Women’s Bathhouse Raid: 
Querying Queer Identities in the Courtroom.” Antipode 39 (1): 17–34.
Baker, John, Kathleen Lynch, Sara Cantillon, and Judy Walsh. 2004. Equality: From 
Theory to Action. Basingstoke, U.K.: Palgrave Macmillan.
Bakhtin, Mikhail. 1968. Rabelais and His World. Cambridge: mit Press.
Bal, Mieke. 2002. Travelling Concepts in the Humanities: A Rough Guide. Toronto: Uni-
versity of Toronto Press.
Barcan, Ruth. 2001. “‘The Moral Bath of Bodily Unconsciousness’: Female Nudism, 
Bodily Exposure and the Gaze.” Continuum 15 (3): 303–17.
———. 2004. Nudity: A Cultural Anatomy. Oxford: Berg.
Barker, Nicola. 2012. Not the Marrying Kind: Feminist Critiques of Marriage and the 
Legal Recognition of Same-­Sex Relationships. Basingstoke, U.K.: Palgrave Macmillan.
Barnes, Marian, and Tula Brannelly. 2008. “Achieving Care and Social Justice for 
People with Dementia.” Nursing Ethics 15 (3): 384–95.
Barry, John, and John Proops. 1999. “Seeking Sustainability Discourses with Q 
Methodology.” Ecological Economics 28 (3): 337–45.
Barta, Tony. 2008. “Sorry, and Not Sorry, in Australia: How the Apology to the Stolen 
Generations Buried a History of Genocide.” Journal of Genocide Research 10 (2): 
201–14.
Barthes, Roland. 1977. Sade, Fourier, Loyola. London: Cape.

references    253
Bauman, Zygmunt. 1993. Postmodern Ethics. Oxford: Blackwell.
———. 2003a. Liquid Love: On the Frailty of Human Bonds. Cambridge, U.K.: Polity 
Press.
———. 2003b. “Utopia with No Topos.” History of the Human Sciences 16 (1): 11–25.
Beasley, Chris, and Carol Bacchi. 2005. “The Political Limits of ‘Care’ in Re-­imagining 
Interconnection/Community and an Ethical Future.” Australian Feminist Studies 20 
(46): 49–64.
Bedford, Kate. 2009. Developing Partnerships: Gender, Sexuality, and the Reformed 
World Bank. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Bell, David. 2007. “The Hospitable City: Social Relations in Commercial Spaces.” 
Progress in Human Geography 31 (1): 7–22.
Bell, David, and Ruth Holliday. 2000. “Naked as Nature Intended.” Body and Society 
6 (3–4): 127–40.
Ben-­Galim, Dalia, Mary Campbell, and Jane Lewis. 2007. “Equality and Diversity: A 
New Approach to Gender Equality Policy in the U.K.” International Journal of Law 
in Context 3 (1): 19–33.
Benhabib, Seyla. 1992. Situating the Self: Gender, Community, and Postmodernism in 
Contemporary Ethics. London: Polity Press.
Bennett, Jane. 2010. Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things. Durham: Duke Uni-
versity Press.
Benzer, Matthias. 2011. “Social Critique in the Totally Socialized Society.” Philosophy 
and Social Criticism 37 (5): 575–603.
Berlant, Lauren, and Michael Warner. 2002. “Sex in Public.” In Publics and Counter-
publics, edited by Michael Warner, 187–208. New York: Zone Books.
Bernstein, J. M. 2001. Adorno: Disenchantment and Ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Berubé, Allan. 1996. “The History of Gay Bathhouses.” In Policing Public Sex: Queer 
Politics and the Future of aids Activism, edited by Dangerous Bedfellows, 187–220. 
Boston: South End Press.
Besnier, Niko. 2004. “Consumption and Cosmopolitanism: Practicing Modernity at 
the Second-­Hand Marketplace in Nuku’alofa, Tonga.” Anthropological Quarterly 77 
(1): 7–45.
Bey, Hakim. 2003. t.a.z.: The Temporary Autonomous Zone, Ontological Anarchy, Poetic 
Terrorism. New York: Autonomedia.
Bhatti, Mark, Andrew Church, Amanda Claremont, and Paul Stenner. 2009. “‘I Love 
Being in the Garden’: Enchanting Encounters in Everyday Life.” Social and Cultural 
Geography 10 (1): 61–76.
Bhavnani, Kum-­Kum, and John Foran. 2008. “Feminist Futures: From Dystopia to 
Eutopia?” Futures 40 (4): 319–28.
Binson, Diane, and William Woods. 2003. “A Theoretical Approach to Bathhouse En-
vironments.” Journal of Homosexuality 44 (3–4): 23–31.
Bird-­David, Nurit, and Asaf Darr. 2009. “Commodity, Gift and Mass-­Gift: On Gift-­
Commodity Hybrids in Advanced Mass Consumption Cultures.” Economy and So-
ciety 38 (2): 304–25.

254    references
Bloch, Ernst. 1971. On Karl Marx. New York: Herder and Herder.
———. 1986. The Principle of Hope. Oxford: Blackwell.
Blocher, Joseph. 2008. “Institutions in the Marketplace of Ideas.” Duke Law Journal 
57: 821–90.
Blomley, Nicholas. 2004a. “The Boundaries of Property: Lessons from Beatrix Pot-
ter.” Canadian Geographer / Le Géographe Canadien 48 (2): 91–100.
———. 2004b. Unsettling the City: Urban Land and the Politics of Property. London: 
Routledge.
———. 2008a. “Enclosure, Common Right and the Property of the Poor.” Social and 
Legal Studies 17 (3): 311–31.
———. 2008b. “Simplification Is Complicated: Property, Nature, and the Rivers of 
Law.” Environment and Planning A 40 (8): 1825–42.
Boellstorff, Tom. 2008. Coming of Age in Second Life. Princeton: Princeton Univer-
sity Press.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 2000. Pascalian Meditations. Translated by Richard Nice. Palo Alto, 
Calif.: Stanford University Press.
Bowden, Peta. 1997. Caring: Gender-­Sensitive Ethics. London: Routledge.
Boyd, Susan B. 1999. “Family, Law and Sexuality: Feminist Engagements.” Social and 
Legal Studies 8 (3): 369–90.
Boyne, Roy. 2001. “Cosmopolis and Risk.” Theory, Culture and Society 18 (4): 47–63.
Braidotti, Rosi. 2010. “On Putting the Active Back into Activism.” New Formations 68 
(1): 42–57.
Brannen, Julia. 2005. “Time and the Negotiation of Work-­Family Boundaries: Au-
tonomy or Illusion?” Time and Society 14 (1): 113–31.
Brietzke, Paul H. 1997. “How and Why the Marketplace of Ideas Fails.” Valparaiso Uni-
versity Law Review 31: 951–70.
Brown, Wendy. 1995. States of Injury: Power and Freedom in Late Modernity. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
Browne, Kath. 2009. “Naked and Dirty: Rethinking (Not) Attending Festivals.” Jour-
nal of Tourism and Cultural Change 7 (2): 115–32.
Buie, Sarah. 1996. “Market as Mandala: The Erotic Space of Commerce.” Organiza-
tion 3 (2): 225–32.
Butler, Judith, et al. 2011. Occupy! Scenes from Occupied America. London: Verso.
Caillois, Roger. 1961. Man, Play, and Games. Translated by Meyer Barash. New York: 
Free Press.
Callon, Michel, Cecile Méadel, and Vololona Rabeharisoa. 2002. “The Economy of 
Qualities.” Economy and Society 31 (2): 194–217.
Carpenter, Mick. 2009. “The Capabilities Approach and Critical Social Policy: Les-
sons from the Majority World?” Critical Social Policy 29 (3): 351–73.
Carr, Matt. 2010. “Slouching towards Dystopia: The New Military Futurism.” Race 
and Class 51 (3): 13–32.
Cetina, Karin Knorr, and Urs Bruegger. 2000. “The Market as an Object of Attach-
ment: Exploring Postsocial Relations in Financial Markets.” Canadian Journal of 
Sociology / Cahiers Canadiens de Sociologie 25 (2): 141–68.

references    255
———. 2002. “Traders’ Engagement with Markets: A Postsocial Relationship.” 
Theory, Culture and Society 19 (5–6): 161–85.
Chilton, Paul. 2004. Analysing Political Discourse: Theory and Practice. London: Rout-
ledge.
Clarke, John, and Janet Newman. 1997. The Managerial State. London: Sage.
Classen, Constance. 2005. The Book of Touch. Oxford: Berg.
Clement, Grace. 1996. Care, Autonomy, and Justice: Feminism and the Ethic of Care. 
Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
Cleminson, Richard. 2004. “Making Sense of the Body: Anarchism, Nudism and Sub-
jective Experience.” Bulletin of Spanish Studies 81 (6): 697–716.
Cloyes, Kristin. 2002. “Agonizing Care: Care Ethics, Agonistic Feminism and a Politi-
cal Theory of Care.” Nursing Inquiry 9 (3): 203–14.
Cockburn, Tom. 2005. “Children and the Feminist Ethic of Care.” Childhood 12 (1): 
71–89.
Cohen, Ed. 2009. A Body Worth Defending: Immunity, Biopolitics, and the Apotheosis of 
the Modern Body. Durham: Duke University Press.
Colebrook, Claire. 2002. Gilles Deleuze. London: Routledge.
Coleman, Stephen. 1997. Stilled Tongues: From Soapbox to Soundbite. London: Porcu-
pine Press.
Comaroff, John L., and Jean Comaroff. 1992. Ethnography and the Historical Imagina-
tion. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
Connolly, William E. 2011. A World of Becoming. Durham: Duke University Press.
Cook, Deborah. 2005. “From the Actual to the Possible: Nonidentity Thinking.” Con-
stellations 12 (1): 21–35.
Cook, Joanne, Peter Dwyer, and Louise Waite. 2010. “The Experiences of Acces-
sion 8 Migrants in England: Motivations, Work and Agency.” International Migra-
tion 49 (2): 54–79.
Coole, Diana, and Samantha Frost. 2010. New Materialisms: Ontology, Agency, and Poli-
tics. Durham: Duke University Press.
Cooper, Davina. 1995. Power in Struggle: Feminism, Sexuality and the State. New York: 
New York University Press.
———. 1996. “Institutional Illegality and Disobedience: Local Government Narra-
tives.” Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 16 (2): 255–74.
———. 1998. Governing Out of Order: Space, Law and the Politics of Belonging. Lon-
don: Rivers Oram Press.
———. 2002. “Imagining the Place of the State: Where Governance and Social 
Power Meet.” In Handbook of Lesbian and Gay Studies, edited by Diane Richardson 
and Steve Seidman, 231–52. London: Sage.
———. 2004. Challenging Diversity: Rethinking Equality and the Value of Difference. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2006a. “Active Citizenship and the Governmentality of Local Lesbian and 
Gay Politics.” Political Geography 25 (8): 921–43.
———. 2006b. “‘Sometimes a Community and Sometimes a Battlefield’: From the 

256    references
Comedic Public Sphere to the Commons of Speakers’ Corner.” Environment and 
Planning D: Society and Space 24: 753–75.
———. 2007. “‘Well, You Go There to Get Off’: Visiting Feminist Care Ethics 
through a Women’s Bathhouse.” Feminist Theory 8 (3): 243–62.
———. 2009. “Caring for Sex and the Power of Attentive Action: Governance, 
Drama, and Conflict in Building a Queer Feminist Bathhouse.” Signs 35 (1): 105–30.
———. 2013. “Public Bodies: Conceptualising Active Citizenship and the Embodied 
State.” In Beyond Citizenship? Feminism and the Transformation of Belonging, edited 
by Sasha Roseneil, 112–37. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Cooper, Davina, and Didi Herman. 2013. “Up Against the Property Logic of Equality 
Law: Conservative Christian Accommodation Claims and Gay Rights.” Feminist 
Legal Studies 21 (1): 61–80.
Cooper, Davina, and Surya Monro. 2003. “Governing from the Margins: Queering 
the State of Local Government.” Contemporary Politics 9 (3): 229–55.
Cooper, Robert, and John Law. 1995. “Organization: Distal and Proximal Views.” In 
Research in the Sociology of Organizations, edited by S. Bacharach, P. Gagliardi, and 
B. Mundell, 237–74. Greenwich, Conn.: jai Press.
Corbin, Alain. 1986. The Foul and the Fragrant: Odor and the French Social Imagination. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Crewe, Louise, and Nicky Gregson. 1998. “Tales of the Unexpected: Exploring Car 
Boot Sales as Marginal Spaces of Contemporary Consumption.” Transactions of the 
Institute of British Geographers 23 (1): 39–53.
Croall, Jonathan. 1983. Neill of Summerhill: The Permanent Rebel. London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul.
Crow, Graham, and Graham Allan. 1995. “Community Types, Community Typologies 
and Community Time.” Time and Society 4 (3): 147–66.
Curtis, Bruce. 2008. “‘I Can Tell by the Way You Smell’: Dietetics, Smell, Social 
Theory.” Senses and Society 3 (1): 5–22.
Cvetkovich, Ann. 2003. An Archive of Feelings: Trauma, Sexuality, and Lesbian Public 
Cultures. Durham: Duke University Press.
———. 2007. “Public Feelings.” South Atlantic Quarterly 106 (3): 459–68.
Dahl, Hanne Marlene. 2000. “A Perceptive and Reflective State?” European Journal of 
Women’s Studies 7 (4): 475–94.
Daley, Caroline. 2005. “From Bush to Beach: Nudism in Australasia.” Journal of His-
torical Geography 31 (1): 149–67.
Dauncey, George. 1988. After the Crash: The Emergence of the Rainbow Economy. Lon-
don: Green Print.
Davies, Margaret. 1999. “Queer Property, Queer Persons: Self-­Ownership and Be-
yond.” Social and Legal Studies 8 (3): 327–52.
———. 2007. Property: Meanings, Histories, Theories. London: Routledge Cavendish.
Dean, Mitchell. 2008. “Governing Society: The Story of Two Monsters.” Journal of 
Cultural Economy 1 (1): 25–38.
Deckha, Maneesha. 2011. “Pain as Culture: A Postcolonial Feminist Approach to s/m 
and Women’s Agency.” Sexualities 14 (2): 129–50.

references    257
DeFilippis, James. 1997. “From a Public Re-­creation to Private Recreation: The Trans-
formation of Public Space in South Street Seaport.” Journal of Urban Affairs 19 (4): 
405–17.
DeLanda, Manuel. 2006. A New Philosophy of Society: Assemblage Theory and Social 
Complexity. London: Continuum.
Deleuze, Gilles, and Félix Guattari. 1994. What Is Philosophy? Translated by Graham 
Burchell and Hugh Tomlinson. New York: Columbia University Press.
———. 2004. A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Translated by Brian 
Massumi. London: Continuum.
Derrida, Jacques. 1992a. “Force of Law: The Mystical Foundation of Authority.” In 
Deconstruction and the Possibility of Justice, edited by Drucilla Cornell and Michael 
Rosenfeld, 3–67. New York: Routledge.
———. 1992b. Given Time: I. Counterfeit Money. Translated by Peggy Kamuf. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1994. Specters of Marx: The State of the Debt, the Work of Mourning, and the 
New International. Translated by Peggy Kamuf. New York: Routledge.
———. 1995. Points . . . : Interviews, 1974–1994. Translated by Elisabeth Weber et al. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
———. 2005. On Touching—Jean Luc Nancy. Translated by Christine Irizarry. Stan-
ford: Stanford University Press.
Dickberry, F. 2006. The Storm of London: A Social Rhapsody. London: Adamant Media. 
Originally published 1904.
Dickens, Linda. 2007. “The Road Is Long: Thirty Years of Equality Legislation in Brit-
ain.” British Journal of Industrial Relations 45 (3): 463–94.
Dikeç, Mustafa. 2002. “Pera Peras Poros: Longings for Spaces of Hospitality.” Theory, 
Culture and Society 19 (1–2): 227–47.
DiMaggio, Paul, and Walter Powell, 1983. “The Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional Iso-
morphism and Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields.” American Sociologi-
cal Review 48 (2): 147–60.
Dobson, Ross. 1993. Bringing the Economy Home from the Market. Montreal: Black 
Rose Books.
Doherty, Brian. 2004. This Is Burning Man: The Rise of a New American Underground. 
Boston: Little, Brown.
Dolan, Jill. 2005. Utopia in Performance: Finding Hope at the Theater. Ann Arbor: Uni-
versity of Michigan Press.
Donovan, Josephine, and Carol J. Adams, eds. 2007. The Feminist Care Tradition in Ani-
mal Ethics: A Reader. New York: Columbia University Press.
Drakopoulou, Maria. 2000. “The Ethic of Care, Female Subjectivity and Feminist 
Legal Scholarship.” Feminist Legal Studies 8 (2): 199–226.
Dube, Saurabh. 2002. “Presence of Europe: An Interview with Dipesh Chakrabarty.” 
South Atlantic Quarterly 101 (4): 859–68.
Dumm, Thomas. 1999. “Leaky Sovereignty: Clinton’s Impeachment and the Crisis of 
Infantile Republicanism.” Theory and Event 2 (4): online.

258    references
Dworkin, Ronald. 2000. Sovereign Virtue: The Theory and Practice of Equality. Cam-
bridge: Harvard University Press.
Ebert, Teresa L. 1992–93. “Ludic Feminism, the Body, Performance, and Labor: Bring-
ing ‘Materialism’ Back into Feminist Cultural Studies.” Cultural Critique 23: 5–50.
Edensor, Tim. 2007. “Sensing the Ruin.” Senses and Society 2 (2): 217–32.
Engster, Daniel. 2007. The Heart of Justice: Care Ethics and Political Theory. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Escobar, Arturo. 1995. Encountering Development: The Making and Unmaking of the 
Third World. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Evans, Michael. S. 2009. “Zelizer’s Theory of Money and the Case of Local Curren-
cies.” Environment and Planning A 41 (5): 1026–41.
Featherstone, Mark. 2010. “Event Horizon: Utopia-­Dystopia in Bauman’s Thought.” 
In Bauman’s Challenge: Sociological Issues for the 21st Century, edited by Mark Davis 
and Keith Tester, 127–47. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Feldman, Allen. 1997. “Violence and Vision: The Prosthetics and Aesthetics of Ter-
ror.” Public Culture 10 (1): 24–60.
Felski, Rita. 1999. “The Invention of Everyday Life.” New Formations 39: 15–31.
Ferrell, Jeff. 2001. Tearing Down the Streets: Adventures in Urban Anarchy. New York: 
Palgrave.
———. 2005. “The Only Possible Adventure: Edgework and Anarchy.” In Edgework: 
The Sociology of Risk-­Taking, edited by Stephen Lyng, 75–88. New York: Routledge.
Fisher, Berenice, and Joan Tronto. 1990. “Toward a Feminist Theory of Caring.” In 
Circles of Care: Work and Identity in Women’s Lives, edited by Emily Abel and Mar-
garet Nelson, 35–62. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Fisher, William F., and Thomas Ponniah. 2003. Another World Is Possible: Popular Alter-
natives to Globalization at the World Social Forum. London: Zed.
Fitting, Peter. 1991. “Utopias beyond Our Ideals: The Dilemma of the Right-­Wing 
Utopia.” Utopian Studies 2 (1–2): 95–109.
Fligstein, Neil, and Luke Dauter. 2007. “The Sociology of Markets.” Annual Review of 
Sociology 33: 105–28.
Forrest, Ray, and Ade Kearns. 2001. “Social Cohesion, Social Capital and the Neigh-
bourhood.” Urban Studies 38 (12): 2125–43.
Foucault, Michel. 1984. “What Is Enlightenment?” In The Foucault Reader, edited by 
Paul Rabinow, 32–50. New York: Pantheon Books.
———. 1988. Politics, Philosophy, Culture: Interviews and Other Writings, 1977–1984, 
edited by Lawrence D. Kritzman. London: Routledge.
———. 1997. Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth. In The Essential Works of Michel Foucault, 
edited by Paul Rabinow. New York: New Press.
Fraser, Nancy. 1989. “Talking about Needs: Interpretive Contests as Political Con-
flicts in Welfare-­State Societies.” Ethics 99 (2): 291–313.
———. 1990. “Rethinking the Public Sphere: A Contribution to the Critique of 
Actually Existing Democracy.” Social Text 25/26: 56–80.
———. 1997. Justice Interruptus: Critical Reflections on the “Postsocialist” Condition. 
New York: Routledge.

references    259
Fredman, Sandra. 2011. Discrimination Law. 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Freeman, Richard, and Jo Maybin. 2011. “Documents, Practices and Policy.” Evidence 
and Policy: A Journal of Research, Debate and Practice 7 (2): 155–70.
Freyfogle, Eric T. 1995. “Owning and Taking of Sensitive Lands.” ucla Law Review 
43: 77–138.
Gallant, Chanelle, and Loralee Gillis. 2001. “Pussies Bite Back: The Story of the 
Women’s Bathhouse Raid.” Torquere: Journal of the Canadian Lesbian and Gay Studies 
Association 3: 152–67.
Gane, Nicholas. 2009. “Concepts and the New Empiricism.” European Journal of So-
cial Theory 12 (1): 83–97.
Gardiner, Michael. 1992. “Bakhtin’s Carnival: Utopia as Critique.” Utopian Studies 3 
(2): 21–49.
———. 2004. “Everyday Utopianism: Lefebvre and His Critics.” Cultural Studies 18 
(2–3): 228–54.
———. 2006. “Marxism and the Convergence of Utopia and the Everyday.” History 
of the Human Sciences 19 (3): 1–32.
Garforth, Lisa. 2009. “No Intentions? Utopian Theory after the Future.” Journal for 
Cultural Research 13 (1): 5–27.
Gatens, Moira. 1996. Imaginary Bodies: Ethics, Power and Corporeality. London: Rout-
ledge.
Geisler, Cheryl. 2001. “Textual Objects: Accounting for the Role of Texts in the Every-
day Life of Complex Organizations.” Written Communication 18 (3): 296–325.
Gell, Alfred. 1999. The Art of Anthropology: Essay and Diagrams. London: Athlone Press.
Geoghegan, Vincent. 1997. “Remembering the Future.” In Not Yet: Reconsidering Ernst 
Bloch, edited by Jamie Owen Daniel and Tom Moylan, 15–32. London: Verso.
———. 2003. “Hope Lost, Hope Regained.” History of the Human Sciences 16 (1): 
151–57.
Gibson-­Graham, J. K. 2006a. The End of Capitalism (As We Knew It): A Feminist Cri-
tique of Political Economy. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Originally 
published 1996.
———. 2006b. A Postcapitalist Politics. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Giesler, Markus. 2008. “Conflict and Compromise: Drama in Marketplace Evolu-
tion.” Journal of Consumer Research 34 (6): 739–53.
Gill, Nick. 2009. “Presentational State Power: Temporal and Spatial Influences over 
Asylum Sector Decisionmakers.” Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 
34 (2): 215–33.
———. 2010. “Tracing Imaginations of the State: The Spatial Consequences of Dif-
ference State Concepts among Asylum Activist Organizations.” Antipode 42 (5): 
1048–70.
Gilligan, Carol. 1982. In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and Women’s Develop-
ment. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Gilroy, Paul. 1993. The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness. Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press.

260    references
Giroux, Henry A. 2008. “Beyond the Biopolitics of Disposability: Rethinking Neolib-
eralism in the New Gilded Age.” Social Identities 14 (5): 587–620.
Goffman, Erving. 1963. Behavior in Public Places. New York: Free Press.
Goldberg-­Hiller, Jonathan. 2012. “Reconciliation and Plasticity in a Postcolonial 
Hawai’i.” Law, Culture and the Humanities 8 (3): 485–512.
Goldberg-­Hiller, Jonathan, and Noenoe K. Silva. 2011. “Sharks and Pigs: Animating 
Hawaiian Sovereignty against the Anthropological Machine.” South Atlantic Quar-
terly 110 (2): 429–46.
Goldman, Michael. 2006. Imperial Nature: The World Bank and Struggles for Social Jus-
tice in the Age of Globalization. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Goodin, Robert E. 1985. Protecting the Vulnerable: A Reanalysis of Our Social Responsi-
bilities. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gordon, Angus. 1999. “Turning Back: Adolescence, Narrative, and Queer Theory.” 
glq: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies 5 (1): 1–24.
Gordon, Avery. 1997. Ghostly Matters: Haunting and the Sociological Imagination. Min-
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Gotham, Kevin Fox. 2005. “Tourism from Above and Below: Globalization, Local-
ization and New Orleans’s Mardi Gras.” International Journal of Urban and Regional 
Research 29 (2): 309–26.
Grabham, Emily. 2009a. “‘Flagging’ the Skin: Corporeal Nationalism and the Prop-
erties of Belonging.” Body and Society 15 (1): 63–82.
———. 2009b. “Shaking Mr Jones: Law and Touch.” International Journal of Law in 
Context 5 (4): 343–53.
Grabham, Emily, Davina Cooper, Jane Krishnadas, and Didi Herman, eds. 2009. 
Intersectionality and Beyond: Law, Power and the Politics of Location. London: Rout-
ledge.
Graham, Nicole. 2010. Lawscape: Property, Environment, Law. New York: Routledge.
Granovetter, Mark. 1973. “The Strength of Weak Ties.” American Journal of Sociology 
78 (6): 1360–80.
Gray, Kevin. 1991. “Property in Thin Air.” Cambridge Law Journal 50 (2): 252–307.
Gray, Kevin, and Susan Francis Gray. 1998. “The Idea of Property in Land.” In Land 
Law: Themes and Perspectives, edited by Susan Bright and John Dewar, 15–51. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gregory, Lee. 2009. “Change Takes Time: Exploring Structural and Development 
Issues of Time Banking.” International Journal of Community Currency Research 13: 
19–32.
Gregson, Nicky, and Louise Crewe. 1997. “The Bargain, the Knowledge, and the Spec-
tacle: Making Sense of Consumption in the Space of the Car-­Boot Sale.” Environ-
ment and Planning D 15 (1): 87–112.
Gribble, David. 1998. Real Education: Varieties of Freedom. Bristol, U.K.: Libertarian 
Education.
Griffiths, John. 1986. “What Is Legal Pluralism?” Legal Pluralism and Unofficial Law 
24: 1–56.

references    261
Gross, David. 1985. “Temporality and the Modern State.” Theory and Society 14 (1): 
53–82.
Grossberg, Lawrence. 2010. Cultural Studies in the Future Tense. Durham: Duke Uni-
versity Press.
Grosz, Elizabeth. 1994. Volatile Bodies: Toward a Corporeal Feminism. Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press.
———. 2005. Time Travels: Feminism, Nature, Power. Durham: Duke University 
Press.
Grundy, John, and Miriam Smith. 2005. “The Politics of Multiscalar Citizenship: The 
Case of Lesbian and Gay Organizing in Canada.” Citizenship Studies 9 (4): 389–404.
Guiraudon, Virginie, and Gallya Lahav. 2000. “A Reappraisal of the State Sovereignty 
Debate: The Case of Migration Control.” Comparative Political Studies 33 (2): 163–
95.
Guthman, Julie. 2003. “Fast Food / Organic Food: Reflexive Tastes and the Making of 
‘Yuppie Chow.’” Social and Cultural Geography 4 (1): 45–58.
Hacking, Ian. 2002. “Inaugural Lecture: Chair of Philosophy and History of Scien-
tific Concepts at the Collège de France, 16 January 2001.” Economy and Society 31 
(1): 1–14.
Hall, C. Michael, Liz Sharples, Brock Cambourne, and Niki Macionis, eds. 2000. 
Wine Tourism around the World: Development, Management and Markets. Oxford: 
Butterworth Heinemann.
Hall, Stuart. 2003. “Marx’s Notes on Method: A ‘Reading’ of the 1857 Introduction.” 
Cultural Studies 17 (2): 113–49.
Halley, Janet. 2008. Split Decisions: How and Why to Take a Break from Feminism. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Hallward, Peter. 2006. Out of This World: Deleuze and the Philosophy of Creation. Lon-
don: Verso.
Hammers, Corie. 2008a. “Bodies That Speak and the Promise of Queer: Looking to 
Two Lesbian/Queer Bathhouses for a Third Way.” Journal of Gender Studies 17 (2): 
147–64.
———. 2008b. “Making Space for an Agentic Sexuality? The Examination of a Les-
bian/Queer Bathhouse.” Sexualities 11 (5): 547–72.
———. 2009a. “An Examination of Lesbian/Queer Bathhouse Culture and the So-
cial Organization of (Im)Personal Sex.” Journal of Contemporary Ethnography 38 (3): 
308–35.
———. 2009b. “Space, Agency, and the Transfiguring of Lesbian/Queer Desire.” 
Journal of Homosexuality 56 (6): 757–85.
Hansen, Thomas Blom, and Finn Stepputat. 2001. “Introduction: States of Imagina-
tion.” In Ethnographic Explorations of the Postcolonial State, edited by Thomas Blom 
Hansen and Finn Stepputat, 1–41. Durham: Duke University Press.
Harding, Rosie. 2011. Regulating Sexuality: Legal Consciousness in Lesbian and Gay 
Lives. London: Routledge.
Harding, Sandra, ed. 2004. The Feminist Standpoint Theory Reader: Intellectual and 
Political Controversies. New York: Routledge.

262    references
Harris, Cheryl I. 1993. “Whiteness as Property.” Harvard Law Review 106: 1707–91.
Harris, J. W. 1996. “Who Owns My Body.” Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 16 (1): 55–84.
Hartley, John, and Joshua Green. 2006. “The Public Sphere on the Beach.” European 
Journal of Cultural Studies 9 (3): 341–62.
Hartman, William, Marilyn Fithian, and Donald Johnson. 1970. Nudist Society: An Au-
thoritative, Complete Study of Nudism in America. New York: Crown.
Hartsock, Nancy. 1997. “Comment on Hekman’s ‘Truth and Method: Feminist Stand-
point Theory Revisited’: Truth or Justice?” Signs 22 (2): 367–74.
Held, Virginia. 2006. The Ethics of Care: Personal, Political, Global. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press. Online edition.
Hennessy, Rosemary. 2000. Profit and Pleasure: Sexual Identities in Late Capitalism. 
New York: Routledge.
Henricks, Thomas S. 2006. Play Reconsidered: Sociological Perspectives on Human Ex-
pression. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Hepple, Bob. 2010. “The New Single Equality Act in Britain.” Equalities Rights Review 
5: 11–24.
———. 2011. “Enforcing Equality Law: Two Steps Forward and Two Steps Back-
wards for Reflexive Regulation.” Industrial Law Journal 40 (4): 315–35.
Herman, Didi. 1994. Rights of Passage: Struggles for Lesbian and Gay Legal Equality. 
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
———. 1997. The Antigay Agenda: Orthodox Vision and the Christian Right. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
———. 2011. An Unfortunate Coincidence: Jews, Jewishness and English Law. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Hetherington, Kevin. 1997. The Badlands of Modernity: Heterotopia and Social Order-
ing. London: Routledge.
———. 2003. “Spatial Textures: Place, Touch, and Praesentia.” Environment and 
Planning A 35 (11): 1933–44.
Highmore, Ben. 2002. The Everyday Life Reader. London: Routledge.
Ho, Ming-­sho, and Jane Hindley. 2011. “The Humanist Challenge in Taiwan’s Edu-
cation: Liberation, Social Justice and Ecology.” Capitalism Nature Socialism 22 (1): 
76–94.
Holmes, Jacqueline Schoemaker. 2006. “Bare Bodies, Beaches, and Boundaries: Ab-
jected Outsiders and Rearticulation at the Nude Beach.” Sexuality and Culture 10 
(4): 29–53.
hooks, bell. 1991. Yearning: Race, Gender, and Cultural Politics. London: Turnaround.
Hope, Wayne. 2009. “Conflicting Temporalities: State, Nation, Economy and Democ-
racy under Global Capitalism.” Time and Society 18 (1): 62–85.
Howes, David, and Marc Lalonde. 1991. “The History of Sensibilities: Of the Standard 
of Taste in Mid-­Eighteenth Century England and the Circulation of Smells in Post-­
Revolutionary France.” Dialectical Anthropology 16 (2): 125–35.
Hughes, Bill, Linda McKie, Debra Hopkins, and Nick Watson. 2005. “Love’s Labours 
Lost? Feminism, the Disabled People’s Movement and an Ethic of Care.” Sociology 
39 (2): 259–75.

references    263
Hughes, Howard, Juan Carlos Monterrubio, and Amanda Miller. 2010. “‘Gay’ Tour-
ists and Host Community Attitudes.” International Journal of Tourism Research 12 
(6): 774–86.
Huizinga, Johan. 1970. Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play Element in Culture. London: 
Temple Smith.
———. 1993. “The Nature of Play.” Philosophic Inquiry in Sport 5–7.
Hume, David. 1965. Of the Standard of Taste, and Other Essays, edited by John W. Lenz. 
Indianapolis: Bobbs-­Merrill. Originally published 1757.
Humphrey, Chris. 2000. “Bakhtin and the Study of Popular Culture: Re-­thinking Car-
nival as a Historical and Analytical Concept.” In Materializing Bakhtin: The Bakh-
tin Circle and Social Theory, edited by Craig Brandist and Galin Tihanov, 164–72. 
Basingstoke, U.K.: Palgrave.
Hunter, Shona. 2008. “Living Documents: A Feminist Psychosocial Approach to the 
Relational Politics of Policy Documentation.” Critical Social Policy, 28 (4): 506–28.
Hyde, Lewis. 1979. The Gift: Imagination and the Erotic Life of Property. New York: Ran-
dom House.
Ingber, Stanley. 1984. “The Marketplace of Ideas: A Legitimizing Myth.” Duke Law 
Journal 1984 (1): 1–91.
Irigaray, Luce. 1985. This Sex Which Is Not One. Translated by Catherine Porter. Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press.
Jacobs, Jane. 1962. The Death and Life of Great American Cities. London: Jonathan Cape.
Jacoby, Russell. 2005. Picture Imperfect: Utopian Thought for an Anti-­Utopian Age. New 
York: Columbia University Press.
Jameson, Fredric. 1977. “Of Islands and Trenches: Naturalization and the Production 
of Utopian Discourse.” Diacritics 7 (2): 2–21.
———. 1991. Postmodernism, Or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. Durham: Duke 
University Press.
Jeffries, Matthew. 2006. “‘For a Genuine and Noble Nakedness’? German Naturism 
in the Third Reich.” German History 24 (1): 62–84.
Jessop, Bob. 1990. State Theory: Putting the Capitalist State in its Place. University Park: 
Pennsylvania State University Press.
Jessop, Sharon. 2009. “Children’s Participation: An Arendtian Criticism.” Educational 
Philosophy and Theory 1–18. Online.
Jones, Martin, and Bob Jessop. 2010. “Thinking State/Space Incompossibly.” Antipode 
42 (5): 1119–49.
Josipovici, Gabriel. 1996. Touch. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Kanter, Rosabeth Moss. 1972. Commitment and Community: Communes and Utopias in 
Sociological Perspective. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
———, ed. 1973a. Communes: Creating and Managing the Collective Life. New York: 
Harper and Row.
———. 1973b. “Getting It All Together: Group Issues in Contemporary Communes.” 
In Communes: Creating and Managing the Collective Life, edited by Rosabeth Moss 
Kanter, 400–407. New York: Harper and Row.

264    references
Keenan, Sarah. 2010. “Subversive Property: Reshaping Malleable Spaces of Belong-
ing.” Social and Legal Studies 19 (4): 423–39.
Kenway, Christopher. 1998. “Nudism, Health, and Modernity: The Natural Cure as 
Proposed by the German Physical Culture Movement 1900–1914.” Nineteenth Cen-
tury Prose 25 (1): 102–15.
King, Roger J. H. 1991. “Caring about Nature: Feminist Ethics and the Environment.” 
Hypatia 6 (1): 75–89.
Kinsman, Gary. 1987. The Regulation of Desire: Sexuality in Canada. Montreal: Black 
Rose Books.
Kittay, Eva F. 1999. Love’s Labor. London: Routledge.
Kleinhans, Martha-­Marie, and Roderick Macdonald. 1997. “What Is a Critical Legal 
Pluralism?” Canadian Journal of Law and Society 12 (2): 25–46.
Knox, Paul L. 2005. “Creating Ordinary Places: Slow Cities in a Fast World.” Journal 
of Urban Design 10 (1): 1–11.
Koehn, Daryl. 1998. Rethinking Feminist Ethics: Care, Trust and Empathy. London: 
Routledge.
Korn, Claire V. 1990. Alternative American Schools: Ideals in Action. Albany: State Uni-
versity of New York Press.
Kraftl, Peter. 2007. “Utopia, Performativity, and the Unhomely.” Environment and 
Planning D: Society and Space 25 (1): 120–43.
Kumar, Krishan. 1987. Utopia and Anti-­Utopia in Modern Times. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lamble, Sarah. 2009. “Unknowable Bodies, Unthinkable Sexualities: Lesbian and 
Transgender Legal Invisibility in the Toronto Women’s Bathhouse Raid.” Social and 
Legal Studies 18 (1): 111–30.
———. 2012. “Epistemologies of Possibility: Social Movements, Knowledge Produc-
tion and Political Transformation.” PhD diss., University of Kent.
Langman, Lauren. 2002. “Suppose They Gave a Culture War and No One Came.” 
American Behavioral Scientist 46 (4): 501–34.
Lansley, Stewart, Sue Goss, and Christian Wolmar. 1989. Councils in Conflict: The Rise 
and Fall of the Municipal Left. Basingstoke, U.K.: Macmillan.
Latour, Bruno. 2005. Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-­Network Theory. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lawrence, Charles, III. 1990. “If He Hollers Let Him Go: Regulating Racist Speech 
on Campus.” Duke Law Journal 431: 483.
Leccardi, Carmen. 1996. “Rethinking Social Time: Feminist Perspectives.” Time and 
Society 5 (2): 169–86.
Leckey, Robert. 2010. “Filiation and the Translation of Legal Concepts.” Legal Engi-
neering and Comparative Law 2: 123–41.
Lee, Roger, Andrew Leyshon, Theresa Aldridge, Jane Tooke, Colin Williams, and 
Nigel Thrift. 2004. “Making Geographies and Histories? Constructing Local Cir-
cuits of Value.” Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 22 (4): 595–617.
Leitch, Alison. 2003. “Slow Food and the Politics of Pork Fat: Italian Food and Euro-
pean Identity.” Ethnos 68 (4): 437–62.

references    265
Levitas, Ruth. 1990. The Concept of Utopia. London: Philip Allan.
———. 1993. “The Future of Thinking about the Future.” In Mapping the Futures: 
Local Cultures, Global Change, edited by Jon Bird, Barry Curtis, Tim Putnam, George 
Robertson, and Lisa Tickner, 256–65. London: Routledge.
———. 1997. “Educated Hope: Ernst Bloch on Abstract and Concrete Utopia.” In 
Not Yet: Reconsidering Ernst Bloch, edited by Jamie Owen Daniel and Tom Moylan, 
65–79. London: Verso.
———. 2005. “The Imaginary Reconstitution of Society, Or, Why Sociologists 
and Others Should Take Utopia More Seriously.” Inaugural lecture, University of 
Bristol, October.
———. 2007. “Looking for the Blue: The Necessity of Utopia.” Journal of Political 
Ideologies 12 (3): 289–306.
———. 2010. “Back to the Future: Wells, Sociology, Utopia and Method.” Sociologi-
cal Review 58 (4): 530–47.
———. 2013. Utopia as Method: The Imaginary Reconstitution of Society. London: Pal-
grave Macmillan.
Lewis, Gail. 2005. “Welcome to the Margins: Diversity, Tolerance, and Policies of Ex-
clusion.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 28 (3): 536–58.
Locke, John. 1988. Two Treatises of Government. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. Originally published 1821.
Lofland, Lyn. 1998. The Public Realm: Exploring the City’s Quintessential Social Territory. 
New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Lorimer, Hayden. 2005. “Cultural Geography: The Busyness of Being ‘More-­Than-­
Representational.’” Progress in Human Geography 29 (1): 83–94.
Lyng, Stephen. 2005a. “Edgework and the Risk-­Taking Experience.” In Edgework: The 
Sociology of Risk-­Taking, edited by Stephen Lyng, 3–16. New York: Routledge.
———. 2005b. “Sociology at the Edge: Social Theory and Voluntary Risk Taking.” In 
Edgework: The Sociology of Risk-­Taking, edited by Stephen Lyng, 17–50. New York: 
Routledge.
Mabbett, Deborah. 2008. “Aspirational Legalism and the Role of the Equality and 
Human Rights Commission in Equality Policy.” Political Quarterly 79 (1): 45–52.
Macaulay, Stewart. 2003. “The Real and the Paper Deal: Empirical Pictures of Re-
lationships, Complexity and the Urge for Transparent Simple Rules.” In Implicit 
Dimensions of Contract: Discrete, Relational and Network Contracts, edited by David 
Campbell, Hugh Colins, and John Wightman, 51–102. Oxford: Hart.
MacCormick, Neil. 1993. “Beyond the Sovereign State.” Modern Law Review 56 (1): 
1–18.
Macdonald, Roderick, and David Sandomierski. 2006. “Against Nomopolies.” North-
ern Ireland Legal Quarterly 57 (4): 610–33.
Maher, JaneMaree. 2009. “Accumulating Care: Mothers beyond the Conflicting Tem-
poralities of Caring and Work.” Time and Society 18 (2–3): 231–45.
Manley, Catherine, and Theresa Aldridge. 2000. “Can lets Make It Better? A Stirling 
Example.” A Life in the Day 4 (4): 3–10.

266    references
Manning, Erin. 2007. Politics of Touch: Sense, Movement, Sovereignty. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Martín Alcoff, Linda, and Alireza Shomali. 2010. “Adorno’s Dialectical Realism.” Sym-
posium: Canadian Journal of Continental Philosophy 14 (2): 45–65.
Marx, Karl. 2001. The Civil War in France. London: Electric Book Company. Origi-
nally published 1871.
Massey, Doreen. 2005. For Space. London: Sage.
Massumi, Brian. 2002. Parables for the Virtual: Movement, Affect, Sensation. Durham: 
Duke University Press.
Matsuda, Mari J., Charles Lawrence, Richard Delgado, and Kimberle Crenshaw. 1993. 
Words That Wound: Critical Race Theory, Assaultive Speech, and the First Amendment. 
Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
Maurer, Bill. 2003. “Comment: Got Language? Law, Property, and the Anthropologi-
cal Imagination.” American Anthropologist 105 (4): 775–81.
May, Jon, and Nigel J. Thrift. 2001. Timespace: Geographies of Temporality. London: 
Routledge.
May, Todd. 2010. Contemporary Political Movements and the Thought of Jacques Ran-
cière: Equality in Action. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Mbembe, Achille. 2003. “Necropolitics.” Public Culture 15 (1): 11–40.
McCaughey, Martha, and Christina French. 2001. “Women’s Sex-­Toy Parties: Tech-
nology, Orgasm, and Commodification.” Sexuality and Culture 5 (3): 77–96.
McIlvenny, Paul. 1996a. “Heckling in Hyde Park: Verbal Audience Participation in 
Popular Public Discourse.” Language in Society 25 (1): 27–60.
———. 1996b. “Popular Public Discourse at Speakers’ Corner: Negotiating Cultural 
Identities in Interaction.” Discourse and Society 7 (1): 7–37.
McLellan, Josie. 2007. “State Socialist Bodies: East German Nudism from Ban to 
Boom.” Journal of Modern History 79 (1): 48–79.
———. 2009. “Visual Dangers and Delights: Nude Photography in East Germany.” 
Past and Present 205 (1): 143–74.
McRuer, Robert. 2006. Crip Theory: Cultural Signs of Queerness and Disability. New 
York: New York University Press.
Meacham, Standish. 1999. Regaining Paradise: Englishness and the Early Garden City 
Movement. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Merrill, Frances, and Mason Merrill. 1931. Among the Nudists. London: Noel Douglas.
Merry, Sally Engle. 1988. “Legal Pluralism.” Law and Society Review 22 (5): 869–96.
Metcalf, Bill, ed. 1995. From Utopian Dreaming to Communal Reality: Cooperative Life-
styles in Australia. Sydney: University of New South Wales Press.
Miller, Tim C., and Dan N. Stone. 2009. “Public Speaking Apprehension (psa), Moti-
vation and Affect among Accounting Majors: A Proof-­of-­Concept Intervention.” 
Issues in Accounting Education 24 (2): 265–98.
Misri, Deepti. 2011. “‘Are You a Man?’ Performing Naked Protest in India.” Signs 36 
(3): 603–25.
Mitchell, Timothy. 1991. “The Limits of the State: Beyond Statist Approaches and 
Their Critics.” American Political Science Review 85 (1): 77–96.

references    267
Möhring, Maren. 2005. “Working Out the Body’s Boundaries: Physiological, Aes-
thetic, and Psychic Dimensions of the Skin in German Nudism, 1890–1930.” In 
Body Parts: Critical Explorations in Corporeality, edited by Christopher Forth and 
Ivan Crozier, 229–46. Lanham, Md.: Lexington Books.
Moore, Geoff. 2004. “The Fair Trade Movement: Parameters, Issues and Future Re-
search.” Journal of Business Ethics 53 (1): 73–86.
Morris, William. 2003. News from Nowhere, Or, an Epoch of Rest: Being Some Chapters 
from a Utopian Romance. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Originally published 
1890.
Moylan, Tom. 1986. Demand the Impossible: Science Fiction and the Utopian Imagina-
tion. New York: Methuen.
———. 2000. Scraps of the Untainted Sky: Science Fiction, Utopia, Dystopia. Boulder, 
Colo.: Westview Press.
Muñoz, José E. 2009. Cruising Utopia: The Then and There of Queer Futurity. New York: 
New York University Press.
Nail, Thomas. 2010. “Constructivism and the Future Anterior of Radical Politics.” An-
archist Developments in Cultural Studies 1: 73–94.
Nash, Catherine J. 2011. “Trans Experiences in Lesbian and Queer Space.” Canadian 
Geographer / Le Géographe Canadien 55 (2): 192–207.
Nash, Catherine J., and Alison Bain. 2007. “‘Reclaiming Raunch’: Spatializing Queer 
Identities at Toronto Women’s Bathhouse Events.” Journal of Social and Cultural 
Geography 8 (1): 47–62.
Neill, A. S. 1945. Hearts Not Heads in the School. London: H. Jenkins.
———. 1948. That Dreadful School. London: H. Jenkins.
———. 1967. Talking of Summerhill. London: Gollancz.
———. 1968. Summerhill. Harmondsworth, U.K.: Pelican.
Nelson, Michelle, Mark Rademacher, and Hye-­Jin Paek. 2007. “Downshifting Con-
sumer = Upshifting Citizen? An Examination of a Local Freecycle Community.” 
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 611 (1): 141–56.
Newmahr, Staci. 2011. Playing on the Edge: Sadomasochism, Risk, and Intimacy. Bloom-
ington: Indiana University Press.
Newman, Janet. 2001. Modernising Governance: New Labour, Policy and Society. Lon-
don: Sage.
———. 2007. “The ‘Double Dynamics’ of Activation: Institutions, Citizens and the 
Remaking of Welfare Governance.” International Journal of Sociology and Social 
Policy 27 (9–10): 364–75.
Newman, Janet, and John Clarke. 2009. Publics, Politics and Power: Remaking the Pub-
lic in Public Services. London: Sage.
Noddings, Nel. 1984. Caring: A Feminine Approach to Ethics and Moral Education. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
———. 2002. Starting at Home: Caring and Social Policy. Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press.
Nolan, James. 1998. The Therapeutic State: Justifying Government at Century’s End. New 
York: New York University Press.

268    references
North, Peter. 1999. “Explorations in Heterotopia: Local Exchange Trading Schemes 
(lets) and the Micropolitics of Money and Livelihood.” Environment and Plan-
ning D: Society and Space 17 (1): 69–86.
———. 2006. Alternative Currency Movements as a Challenge to Globalization? A Case-­
Study of Manchester’s Local Currency Networks. Aldershot, U.K.: Ashgate.
———. 2007. Money and Liberation: The Micropolitics of Alternative Currency Move-
ments. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Oakeshott, Michael. 1962. Rationalism in Politics and Other Essays. New York: 
Methuen.
———. 1990. On Human Conduct. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Obrador-­Pons, Pau. 2007. “A Haptic Geography of the Beach: Naked Bodies, Vision 
and Touch.” Social and Cultural Geography 8 (1): 123–41.
———. 2009. “Building Castles in the Sand: Repositioning Touch on the Beach.” 
Senses and Society 4 (2): 195–210.
O’Cinneide, Colm. 2007. “The Commission for Equality and Human Rights: A New 
Institution for New and Uncertain Times.” Industrial Law Journal 36 (2): 141–62.
Oldenburg, Ray. 1989. The Great Good Place: Cafes, Coffee Shops, Community Centers, 
Beauty Parlors, General Stores, Bars, Hangouts, and How They Get You through the Day. 
New York: Paragon House.
Pacione, Michael. 1997. “Local Exchange Trading Systems as a Response to the Glo-
balisation of Capitalism.” Urban Studies 34 (8): 1179–97.
Painter, Joe. 2006. “Prosaic Geographies of Stateness.” Political Geography 25 (7): 
752–74.
Pallasmaa, Juhani. 2000. “Hapticity and Time: Notes on Fragile Architecture.” Archi-
tectural Review 207 (1239): 78–84.
Parkins, Wendy. 2004. “Out of Time: Fast Subjects and Slow Living.” Time and Society 
13 (2–3): 363–82.
Parmelee, Maurice. 1929. Nudism in Modern Life. London: Noel Douglas.
Paterson, Mark. 2007. The Senses of Touch: Haptics, Affects and Technologies. Oxford: 
Berg.
Patton, Paul. 2010. Deleuzian Concepts: Philosophy, Colonization, Politics. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press.
Peacock, Mark. 2000. “Local Exchange Trading Systems: A Solution to the Employ-
ment Dilemma?” Annals of Public and Cooperative Economics 71 (1): 55–78.
Peeters, Evert. 2006. “Authenticity and Asceticism: Discourse and Performance in 
Nude Culture and Health Reform in Belgium, 1920–1940.” Journal of the History of 
Sexuality 15 (3): 432–61.
Peñalver, Eduardo M., and Sonia Katyal. 2010. Property Outlaws: How Squatters, 
Pirates, and Protesters Improve the Law of Ownership. New Haven: Yale University 
Press.
Penner, James. 1996. “The ‘Bundle of Rights’ Picture of Property.” ucla Law Review 
43: 711–820.
———. 1997. The Idea of Property Law. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

references    269
Peters, John D. 2005. Courting the Abyss: Free Speech and the Liberal Tradition. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Petrini, Carlo. 2001. Slow Food: The Case for Taste. New York: Columbia University 
Press.
Phillips, Anne. 1999. Which Equalities Matter? Cambridge, U.K.: Polity Press.
Piercy, Marge. 1976. A Woman on the Edge of Time. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Pietrykowski, Bruce. 2004. “You Are What You Eat: The Social Economy of the Slow 
Food Movement.” Review of Social Economy 62 (3): 307–21.
Pinder, David. 2002. “In Defence of Utopian Urbanism: Imagining Cities after the 
‘End of Utopia.’” Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography 84 (3–4): 229–41.
Popenoe, Joshua. 1970. Inside Summerhill. New York: Hart.
Pratt, Mary Louise. 1991. “Arts of the Contact Zone.” Profession 1991: 33–40.
———. 1992. Imperial Eyes: Travel Writing and Transculturation. New York: Rout-
ledge.
Purdue, Derrick, Jörge Dürrschmidt, Peter Jowers, and Richard O’Doherty. 1997. 
“diy Culture and Extended Milieux: lets, Veggie Boxes and Festivals.” Sociological 
Review 45 (4): 645–67.
Raddon, Mary-­Beth. 2003. Community and Money: Men and Women Making Change. 
Montreal: Black Rose Books.
Radin, Margaret Jane. 1993. Reinterpreting Property. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
———. 1994. “What, If Anything, Is Wrong with Baby Selling.” Pacific Law Journal 
26: 135–45.
Raghuram, Parvati, Clare Madge, and Pat Noxolo. 2009. “Rethinking Responsibility 
and Care for a Postcolonial World.” Geoforum 40 (1): 5–13.
Rai, Shirin. 1996. “Women and the State in the Third World.” In Women and Politics in 
the Third World, edited by Haleh Afshar, 26–40. London: Routledge.
Rancière, Jacques. 1995. On the Shores of Politics. London: Routledge.
Rau, Henrike. 2002. “Time Divided—Time United? Temporal Aspects of German 
Unification.” Time and Society 11 (2–3): 271–94.
Ravenscroft, Neil, and Paul Gilchrist. 2009. “Spaces of Transgression: Governance, 
Discipline and Reworking the Carnivalesque.” Leisure Studies 28 (1): 35–49.
Rawls, John. 1996. Political Liberalism. New York: Columbia University Press.
Reader, Soran, and Gillian Brock. 2004. “Needs, Moral Demands and Moral Theory.” 
Utilitas 16 (3): 251–66.
Rhodes, R. A. W. 1994. “The Hollowing Out of the State: The Changing Nature of the 
Public Service in Britain.” Political Quarterly 65 (2): 138–51.
Richardson, Diane, and Surya Monro. 2012. Sexuality, Equality and Diversity. Basing-
stoke, U.K.: Palgrave Macmillan.
Ricoeur, Paul. 1986. Lectures on Ideology and Utopia. New York: Columbia University 
Press.
Rifkin, Jeremy. 1987. Time Wars: The Primary Conflict in Human History. New York: 
Henry Holt.

270    references
Roberts, John. 2000. “The Enigma of Free Speech: Speakers’ Corner, the Geography 
of Governance and a Crisis of ‘Rationality.’” Social and Legal Studies 9 (2): 271–92.
———. 2001. “Spatial Governance and Working Class Public Spheres: The Case 
of a Chartist Demonstration at Hyde Park.” Journal of Historical Sociology 14 (3): 
308–36.
———. 2008. “Expressive Free Speech, the State and the Public Sphere: A 
Bakhtinian-­Deleuzian Analysis of ‘Public Address’ at Hyde Park.” Social Movement 
Studies 7 (2): 101–19.
Robertson, James. 2005. The New Economics of Sustainable Development—A Briefing 
for Policy Makers. Originally published for the European Commission, 1999. http://
www.jamesrobertson.com/book/neweconomicsofsustainabledevelopment.pdf
Robinson, Fiona. 1999. Globalizing Care: Ethics, Feminist Theory, and International Re-
lations. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
Robinson, Kim Stanley. 1993. Red Mars. New York: Spectra.
Roediger, David. 1999. “The Pursuit of Whiteness: Property, Terror, and Expansion, 
1790–1860.” Journal of the Early Republic 19 (4): 579–600.
Rose, Carol M. 1998. “The Several Futures of Property: Of Cyberspace and Folk Tales, 
Emission Trades and Ecosystems.” Minnesota Law Review 83: 129–82.
Rose, Nikolas. 1996. “Governing Advanced Liberal Democracies.” In Foucault and Po-
litical Reason, edited by Andrew Barry, Thomas Osborne, and Nikolas Rose, 37–64. 
London: ucl Press.
Roseneil, Sasha. 1995. Disarming Patriarchy: Feminism and Political Action at Greenham. 
Buckingham, U.K.: Open University Press.
Ross, Becki. 1995. The House That Jill Built: A Lesbian Nation in Formation. Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press.
Ross, Chad. 2005. Naked Germany: Health, Race and the Nation. Oxford: Berg.
Rossouw, Gedeon J., and Leon J. van Vuuren. 2003. “Modes of Managing Morality: 
A Descriptive Model of Strategies for Managing Ethics.” Journal of Business Ethics 
46 (4): 389–402.
Roy, Srirupa. 2006. “Seeing Like a State: National Commemorations and the Pub-
lic Sphere in India and Turkey.” Comparative Study of Society and History 48 (1): 
200–232.
Ruddick, Sara. 1989. Maternal Thinking: Toward a Politics of Peace. Boston: Beacon 
Press.
Saldanha, Arun. 2005. “Trance and Visibility at Dawn: Racial Dynamics in Goa’s Rave 
Scene.” Social and Cultural Geography 6 (5): 707–21.
Salzani, Carlo. 2012. “Quodlibet: Giorgio Agamben’s Anti-­Utopia.” Utopian Studies 23 
(1): 212–37.
Santos, Boaventura de Sousa. 2006. The Rise of the Global Left: The World Social Forum 
and Beyond. London: Zed.
Sargisson, Lucy. 2000. Utopian Bodies and the Politics of Transgression. London: Rout-
ledge.
———. 2007. “The Curious Relationship between Politics and Utopia.” In Utopia 

references    271
Method Vision: The Use Value of Social Dreaming, edited by Tom Moylan and Raf-
faella Baccolini, 25–46. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang.
———. 2010. “Friends Have All Things in Common: Utopian Property Relations.” 
British Journal of Politics and International Relations 12 (1): 22–36.
———. 2012. Fool’s Gold? Utopianism in the Twenty-­First Century. Basingstoke, U.K.: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Sargisson, Lucy, and Lyman Tower Sargent. 2004. Living in Utopia: New Zealand’s In-
tentional Communities. Aldershot, U.K.: Ashgate.
Schechner, Richard. 1985. Between Theatre and Anthropology. Philadelphia: University 
of Pennsylvania Press.
Schrank, Sarah. 2012. “Naked Houses: The Architecture of Nudism and the Rethink-
ing of the American Suburbs.” Journal of Urban History 38 (4): 635–61.
Schroeder, Jeanne Lorraine. 2004. The Triumph of Venus: The Erotics of the Market. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Scott, David. 2003. Behind the G-­String. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland.
Scott, James. 1998. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Con-
dition Have Failed. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. 2003. Touching Feeling: Affect, Pedagogy, Performativity. Dur-
ham: Duke University Press.
Segefjord, Bjarne. 1970. Summerhill Diary. London: Gollancz.
Sennett, Richard. 1992. The Fall of Public Man. New York: W. W. Norton.
Sevenhuijsen, Selma. 1998. Citizenship and the Ethics of Care. London: Routledge.
———. 2003. “The Place of Care: The Relevance of the Feminist Ethic of Care for 
Social Policy.” Feminist Theory 4 (2): 179–97.
Seyfang, Gill. 2001a. “Community Currencies: Small Change for a Green Economy.” 
Environment and Planning A 33 (6): 975–96.
———. 2001b. “Working for the Fenland Dollar: An Evaluation of Local Exchange 
Trading Schemes as an Informal Employment Strategy to Tackle Social Exclusion.” 
Work, Employment and Society 15 (3): 581–93.
———. 2004. “Time Banks: Rewarding Community Self-­Help in the Inner City?” 
Community Development Journal 39 (1): 62–71.
Seyfang, Gill, and Karen Smith. 2002. The Time of Our Lives: Using Time Banking for 
Neighbourhood Renewal and Community Capacity Building. London: New Economics 
Foundation.
Shephard, Liz, ed. 1997. lets Info Pack. 8th ed. London: LETSlink UK.
Sherry, John F., Jr. 1990. “A Sociocultural Analysis of a Midwestern American Flea 
Market.” Journal of Consumer Research 17 (1): 13–30.
Shildrick, Margrit. 2008. “Corporeal Cuts: Surgery and the Psycho-­Social.” Body and 
Society 14 (1): 31–46.
Shklar, Judith N. 1994. “What Is the Use of Utopia?” In Heterotopia: Postmodern 
Utopia and the Body Politic, edited by Tobin Siebers, 40–57. Ann Arbor: University 
of Michigan Press.
Shrum, Wesley, and John Kilburn. 1996. “Ritual Disrobement at Mardi Gras: Ceremo-
nial Exchange and Moral Order.” Social Forces 75 (2): 423–58.

272    references
Silk, John. 2004. “Caring at a Distance: Gift Theory, Aid Chains and Social Move-
ments.” Social and Cultural Geography 5 (2): 229–51.
Skinner, B. F. 1976. Walden Two. New York: Macmillan.
Śliwa, Martyna, and Kathleen Riach. 2012. “Making Scents of Transition: Smellscapes 
and the Everyday in ‘Old’ and ‘New’ Urban Poland.” Urban Studies 49 (1): 23–41.
Smart, Alan. 1993. “Gifts, Bribes, and Guanxi: A Reconsideration of Bourdieu’s Social 
Capital.” Cultural Anthropology 8 (3): 388–408.
Smets, Peer, and Saskia ten Kate. 2008. “Let’s Meet! Let’s Exchange! lets as an In-
strument for Linking Asylum Seekers and the Host Community in the Nether-
lands.” Journal of Refugee Studies 21 (3): 326–46.
Smith, H. W. 1980. “A Modest Test of Cross-­Cultural Differences in Sexual Modesty, 
Embarrassment and Self-­Disclosure.” Qualitative Sociology 3 (3): 223–41.
Smith, Miriam C. 1999. Lesbian and Gay Rights in Canada: Social Movements and 
Equality-­Seeking, 1971–1995. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Smith, Susan J. 1993. “Bounding the Borders: Claiming Space and Making Place in 
Rural Scotland.” Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 18 (3): 291–308.
Somerville, Margaret, and Tony Perkins. 2003. “Border Work in the Contact Zone: 
Thinking Indigenous–non-­Indigenous Collaboration Spatially.” Journal of Intercul-
tural Studies 24 (3): 253–66.
Spencer, Sarah. 2008. “Equality and Human Rights Commission: A Decade in the 
Making.” Political Quarterly 79 (1): 6–16.
Squires, Judith, and Mark Wickham-­Jones. 2002. “Mainstreaming in Westminster 
and Whitehall: From Labour’s Ministry for Women to the Women and Equality 
Unit.” Parliamentary Affairs 55 (1): 57–70.
Srivastava, Sarita. 2005. “You’re Calling Me a Racist? The Moral and Emotional Regu-
lation of Antiracism and Feminism.” Signs 31 (1): 29–62.
Staeheli, Lynn A., and Don Mitchell. 2008. The People’s Property? Power, Politics, and 
the Public. New York: Routledge.
Stevens, Quentin. 2007. The Ludic City: Exploring the Potential of Public Spaces. Lon-
don: Routledge.
Stillerman, Joel. 2006. “The Politics of Space and Culture in Santiago, Chile’s Street 
Markets.” Qualitative Sociology 29 (4): 507–30.
Strathern, Marilyn. 2004. “Losing (Out on) Intellectual Resources.” In Law, Anthro-
pology, and the Constitution of the Social, edited by Alain Pottage and Martha Mundy, 
201–33. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2010. “Sharing, Stealing and Borrowing Simultaneously.” In Ownership and 
Appropriation, edited by Veronica Strang and Mark Busse, 23–42. Oxford: Berg.
Stronach, Ian, and Heather Piper. 2008. “Can Liberal Education Make a Comeback? 
The Case of ‘Relational Touch’ at Summerhill School.” American Educational Re-
search Journal 45 (1): 6–37.
Styles, Joseph. 1979. “Outsider/Insider: Researching Gay Baths.” Urban Life 8 (2): 
139–52.
Sutton, Barbara. 2007. “Naked Protest: Memories of Bodies and Resistance at the 
World Social Forum.” Journal of International Women’s Studies 8 (3): 139–48.

references    273
Suvin, Darko. 1979. Metamorphoses of Science Fiction. New Haven: Yale University 
Press.
Tamanaha, Brian. 1993. “The Folly of the ‘Social Scientific’ Concept of Legal Plural-
ism.” Journal of Law and Society 20 (2): 192–217.
Tattelman, Ira. 1999. “Speaking to the Gay Bathhouse: Communicating in Sexually 
Charged Spaces.” In Public Sex/Gay Space, edited by William Leap, 71–94. New 
York: Columbia University Press.
———. 2000. “Presenting a Queer (Bath)House.” In Queer Frontiers: Millennial 
Geographies, Genders, and Generations, edited by Joseph Boone, Martin Dupuis, 
Martin Meeker, Karin Quimby, Cindy Sarver, Debra Silverman, and Rosemary 
Weatherston, 222–58. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Taylor, Antony. 1995. “‘Commons Stealers,’ ‘Land-­Grabbers’ and ‘Jerry Builders’: 
Space, Popular Radicalism and the Politics of Public Access in London, 1848–
1880.” International Review of Social History 40 (3): 383–408.
Tewksbury, Richard. 2002. “Bathhouse Intercourse: Structural and Behavioral As-
pects of an Erotic Oasis.” Deviant Behavior 23 (1): 75–112.
Thomas, Keith. 2005. “Magical Healing: The King’s Touch.” In The Book of Touch, 
edited by Constance Classen, 354–62. Oxford: Berg.
Thompson, E. P. 1977. William Morris: Romantic to Revolutionary. Rev. ed. London: 
Merlin Press.
Thompson, Hunter. 2005. Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas. London: Harper Perennial. 
Originally published 1972.
Thrift, Nigel J. 2008. Non-­Representational Theory: Space, Politics, Affect. London: 
Routledge.
Tiemann, Thomas K. 2008. “Grower-­Only Farmers’ Markets: Public Spaces and 
Third Places.” Journal of Popular Culture 41 (3): 467–87.
Tietze, Susanne, and Gillian Musson. 2002. “When ‘Work’ Meets ‘Home’: Temporal 
Flexibility as Lived Experience.” Time and Society 11 (2–3): 315–34.
Tronto, Joan. 1993. Moral Boundaries. New York: Routledge.
Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt. 2005. Friction: An Ethnography of Global Connection. Prince-
ton: Princeton University Press.
Twitchell, James B. 1992. Carnival Culture: The Trashing of Taste in America. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Underkuffler, Laura S. 2003. The Idea of Property: Its Meaning and Power. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Valverde, Mariana. 1999. “Derrida’s Justice and Foucault’s Freedom: Ethics, History, 
and Social Movements.” Law and Social Inquiry 24 (3): 655–76.
Valverde, Mariana, and Miomir Cirak. 2003. “Governing Bodies, Creating Gay 
Spaces: Policing and Security Issues in ‘Gay’ Downtown Toronto.” British Journal of 
Criminology 43 (1): 102–21.
Vincent, Susan. 2003. “Preserving Domesticity: Reading Tupperware in Women’s 
Changing Domestic, Social and Economic Roles.” Canadian Review of Sociology and 
Anthropology 40 (2): 171–96.

274    references
Voskuil, Lynn. 2002. “Feeling Public: Sensation Theater, Commodity Culture, and 
the Victorian Public Sphere.” Victorian Studies 44 (2): 245–74.
Waldron, Jeremy. 1996. “Rights and Needs: The Myth of Disjunction.” In Legal Rights: 
Historical and Philosophical Perspectives, edited by Austin Sarat and Thomas R. 
Kearns, 87–109. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Warner, Michael. 2002. Publics and Counterpublics. New York: Zone Books.
Warner, Tom. 2002. Never Going Back: A History of Queer Activism in Canada. Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press.
Warren, Howard. 1933. “Social Nudism and the Body Taboo.” Psychological Review 40 
(2): 160–83.
Watson, Irene. 1998. “Naked Peoples: Rules and Regulations.” Law Text Culture 4 (1): 
1–17.
Watson, Sophie. 2009. “The Magic of the Marketplace: Sociality in a Neglected Pub-
lic Space.” Urban Studies 46 (8): 1577–91.
Wegner, Phillip. 2002. Imaginary Communities: Utopia, the Nation, and the Spatial His-
tories of Modernity. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Weinberg, Martin. 1965. “Sexual Modesty, Social Meanings, and the Nudist Camp.” 
Social Problems 12 (3): 311–18.
Weinberg, Martin, and Colin J. Williams. 1979. “Gay Baths and the Social Organi-
zation of Impersonal Sex.” In Gay Men: The Sociology of Homosexuality, edited by 
Martin Levine, 164–81. New York: Harper and Row.
Wells, H. G. 2005. A Modern Utopia, edited by Gregory Claeys and Patrick Parrinder. 
London: Penguin Books. Originally published 1905.
White, Harrison C. 1981. “Where Do Markets Come From?” American Journal of Soci-
ology 87 (3): 517–47.
———. 2002. Markets from Networks: Socioeconomic Models of Production. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
White, Julie A., and Joan C. Tronto. 2004. “Political Practices of Care: Needs and 
Rights.” Ratio Juris 17 (4): 425–53.
Whyte, Jessica. 2010. “‘A New Use of the Self’: Giorgio Agamben on the Coming 
Community.” Theory & Event 13 (1). Project MUSE, available at http://muse.jhu 
.edu/.
Wigfield, Andrea, and Royce Turner. 2010. Good Relations Measurement Framework. 
London: Equality and Human Rights Commission.
Williams, Colin C. 1996a. “Informal Sector Responses to Unemployment: An Evalua-
tion of the Potential of Local Exchange Trading Systems (lets).” Work, Employment 
and Society 10 (2): 341–59.
———. 1996b. “Local Exchange and Trading Systems: A New Source of Work and 
Credit for the Poor and Unemployed?” Environment and Planning A 28 (8): 1395–
415.
Williams, Colin C., Theresa Aldridge, Roger Lee, Andrew Leyshon, Nigel Thrift, and 
Jane Tooke. 2001. “Bridges into Work? An Evaluation of Local Exchange and Trad-
ing Schemes (lets).” Policy Studies 22 (2): 119–32.
Williams, Colin C., Theresa Aldridge, and Jane Tooke. 2003. “Alternative Exchange 

references    275
Spaces.” In Alternative Economic Spaces, edited by Andrew Leyshon, Roger Lee, and 
Colin Williams, 151–67. London: Sage.
Williams, Colin C., and Jan Windebank. 2001a. “Beyond Social Inclusion through 
Employment: Harnessing Mutual Aid as a Complementary Social Inclusion 
Policy.” Policy and Politics 29 (1): 15–27.
Williams, Colin C., and Jan Windebank. 2001b. “Reconceptualising Paid Informal 
Exchange: Some Lessons from English Cities.” Environment and Planning A 33 (1): 
121–40.
Woodall, Ellen. 2002. “The American Nudist Movement: From Cooperative to Capi-
tal, the Song Remains the Same.” Journal of Popular Culture 36 (2): 264–84.
Worley, Claire. 2005. “‘It’s Not about Race. It’s about the Community’: New Labour 
and ‘Community Cohesion.’” Critical Social Policy 25 (4): 483–96.
Wright, Erik O. 2011. “Real Utopias.” Contexts 10 (2): 36–42.
Wyschogrod, Edith. 1981. “Empathy and Sympathy as Tactile Encounter.” Journal of 
Medicine and Philosophy 6 (1): 25–44.
Young, Iris M. 1990. Justice and the Politics of Difference. Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
———. 1997. “Asymmetrical Reciprocity: On Moral Respect, Wonder, and Enlarged 
Thought.” Constellations 3 (3): 340–63.
Yuval-­Davis, Nira. 2006. “Belonging and the Politics of Belonging.” Patterns of Preju-
dice 40 (3): 197–214.
Zerilli, Linda. 1995. “The Arendtian Body.” In Feminist Interpretations of Hannah 
Arendt, edited by Bonnie Honig, 167–93. University Park, Penn.: Pennsylvania 
State University Press.
———. 2005. “‘We Feel our Freedom’: Imagination and Judgment in the Thought of 
Hannah Arendt.” Political Theory 33 (2): 158–88.
Zukin, Sharon. 1995. The Cultures of Cities. Malden, Mass.: Blackwell.


index
Abstract utopias, 3. See also Utopia
Actualization, 35–36; imagining and, 38, 
153–54, 156, 224; limits on, 37. See 
also Concepts; Conceptual lines
Affect. See Deeling
Agamben, Giorgio, 30
Agnew, Jean-­Christophe, 204
Ahmed, Sara, 94, 236n36
Aldridge, Theresa, 134–35, 143
Alexander, Jeffrey, 9
Allen, Tony, 205, 212
Among the Nudists, 81, 83, 89
Anderson, Elijah, 249n17
Anthias, Floya, 163
Appleton, Matthew, 173, 176
Associational nudism, 78–79; rules of, 93. 
See also Nudism
Attentiveness: as engrossment, 243n13; in 
tasting, 206, 207; in understanding, 
63; as weighted, 243n12
Bakhtin, Mikhail, 202
Bal, Mieke, 102
Barthes, Roland, 230n14
Bathhouse: care, 105, 108; ethics, 125; 
hygiene, 119; men’s, 102–3; need for, 
117–18; post-­sex encounters, 108; 
rules, 104; volunteers, 106; vulnera-
bility, 107, 114–16. See also Toronto 
Women’s and Trans Bathhouse
Bauman, Zygmunt, 30–31
Beck, Ulrich, 30
Belonging, 184–85; as attachment, 182;  
of bodies, 171; inclusion and, 170; 
part-­whole, 162, 171; proper attach-
ment, 162, 169, 171; as proper place, 
163; property and, 161–63; recogni-
tion and, 163; as subject-­object, 162, 
168; of visitors, 180
Benzer, Matthias, 29
Bhatti, Mark, 230n11
Bird-­David, Nurit, 147
Bloch, Ernst, 3–4, 34, 217
Blomley, Nicholas, 246n10
Bodies, 171–72; beauty norms, 109; poli-
tics of, 82–84, 106
Body Freedom Collaborative, 86
Boundaries: of skin, 91–92; at Summer-
hill, 179–82
Boyne, Roy, 30
Braidotti, Rosi, 124
Brannen, Julia, 143–44
British equality governance, 47–48
British national identity, 62
Buie, Sarah, 211
Care: anonymous sex and, 113; as atten-
tiveness, 122–23; community com‑ 
mitment and, 114; dependency and,  
112–13; equality and, 102; ethics and, 

278    index
Care (continued) 
122; inequality and, 111; limits of, 127; 
at marketplace, 199; needs and, 112; 
as normative concept, 101; racism 
and, 111; responsibility and, 113; of 
self, 107, 116–17; time and, 114; vul-
nerability and, 114–15. See also Femi-
nist care ethics
Caring, 123–24
Carnival, 202–5
Casting equality, 51–53, 57–58, 67; as 
everyday utopia, 47–48; state power 
and, 237n46. See also Equality
Casual sex, 123, 125. See also Bathhouse; 
Toronto Women’s and Trans Bath-
house
Chakrabarty, Dipesh, 27
Children, 177, 181–82
Circulatory publics, 88–90, 241n34.  
See also Publics
City space, 96–97
Class: lets, 143–45; nudism, 83–84; 
Speakers’ Corner, 192–93
Cloud, John, 82
Cloyes, Kristin, 110–11, 115
Coldin, Brian, 74
Coleman, Stephen, 191, 192
Collective identity, 174
Community: through adjudication, 174; 
boundaries of, 179–80; life, 173; 
ownership by, 175; property, 159
Community labor: challenges facing, 
145–46; design of, 146–48, dimen-
sions of, 137–39; failure of, 153; as  
inspiring, 153; virtuous cycle, 140.  
See also lets
Community time, 135, 140–43, 148. See 
also Temporalities
Concepts: actualized, 35; approach 
toward, 11–15; as colonizing, 126–27; 
dominant social relations and, 27–30; 
as dynamic, 36–37; future oriented, 
219; histories of, 27; as idealized, 29, 
126–27; as ideas, 26–27; as imag-
ined, 35; legitimizing status quo, 
28; as lenses, 46, 48–49; material-
ist approach, 12, 25, 127; more-­than-­
linguistic, 41; as multiply articulated, 
187–88; nonmanifestation, 37, 153–54; 
potential and, 38, 77–78, 220; recog-
nition of, 41–44, 156; unuttered, 76. 
See also Normative concepts
Conceptual lines, 18, 37, 39, 187–88; cre-
ation of new ones, 14; destabilizing of, 
43; of equality, 78; force of, 226–27; of 
marketplace, 199, 207; through nud-
ism, 93; past and, 222–23; as plural, 
225; present and, 224–25; of property, 
182, 184; as queer, 13; recognition of, 
227; social practice and, 221; as stable, 
224–25; of state, 68
Concrete utopias, 3–4
Connolly, William, 36–37
Contact zones, 208–10
Contagion, 89–90
Crewe, Louise, 196
Critical distance, 9, 226
Critical proximity, 7, 9, 69, 151, 226
Currency. See lets
Cvetkovich, Ann, 63
Daley, Caroline, 96
Darr, Asaf, 147
Dean, Mitchell, 187
Defamiliarization, 5, 9
Deleuze, Gilles, 26, 249n2
Derrida, Jacques, 37, 197, 243n14
Desire: education of, 81, 103–4
Dickberry, F., 73
Disability, 55, 82–83, 109
Dominion, 167
Dumm, Thomas, 237n45
Dystopia, 30–31
Ealing Council, 63
Economy: equality and, 58; transactions, 
147. See also lets; Marketplace
Edgework, 210–13
Emotion. See Feeling
Engster, Daniel, 112–13, 117
Epistemology: from margins, 32; utopian 
32–34. See also Concepts; Conceptual 
lines; Utopian
Equality: comparison and, 93; concept 

index    279
of, 74–75; as expressed, 77, 91, 98; 
geometry of, 58–59, 64; law, 51–53; 
limits of, 98; as normative, 95; policy, 
52; policy absence and, 58; political 
objectives, 87; as potential, 77–78, 
98; as presupposition, 76–77, 97–98; 
publics and, 87; scholarship, 74–75; 
sensory potential of, 92–93. See also 
Casting equality; Inequality
Equality Act 2006, 56
Equality Act 2010, 52
Equality and Human Rights Commission 
(ehrc), 53, 62–63
Ethics: as deliberation, 120–21, 123–24; 
as dilemma, 121–22, 123–25, 126; 
limits of, 127; of organizations, 124
Everyday, 6–7, 9
Everyday utopias, 4–5; casting equality 
as, 46–48; conceptual life of, 11–15; 
conceptual lines, 224–27; critique of, 
18–20; as impossible, 82; lets and, 
130; as nearby, 8; nudism as, 81–82; 
past and, 222–23; politics of, 19; 
present and, 223; proximity of, 221; 
regularity, 9; Speakers’ Corner as, 
189–90; Summerhill as, 157; tempo-
rality, 81–82; Toronto Women’s and 
Trans Bathhouse as, 103–4. See also 
Utopia; Utopian
Exchange: as nonequivalence, 197; as 
pleasure, 213; as worthless, 205. See 
also Trading; Market; Marketplace
Feeling: ethical dilemmas and, 124–25; 
nakedness and, 94; one’s way, 60–61; 
unstately, 62. See also Liking; Sensa-
tion; Touch
Felski, Rita, 230n10
Feminism: anti-­oppression politics and, 
109; identity frameworks, 66; nudism 
and, 84; standpoint epistemology, 32; 
racism and, 110–11
Feminist care ethics, 100–102, 113, 126; 
inequality and, 111; limits of, 119; 
needs and, 116–18; vulnerability and, 
115. See also Care
Ferrell, Jeff, 211
Fisher, Berenice, 112
For Space, 26
Foucault, Michel, 34, 108, 123
Fraser, Nancy 243n7
Fredman, Sandra 75
Future: change and, 218–22; lets and, 
141; utopian 37. See also Potential; 
Temporalities
Gane, Nicholas, 26, 41
Gardiner, Michael, 229n4
Gender, 12, 58, 62–63; bathhouse and, 
102–3; casual sex and, 117–18; edge-
work and, 249n20; nudism and, 83– 
84; Speakers’ Corner and, 190–91.  
See also Feminism
Gibson-­Graham, J. K., 31
Gilchrist, Paul, 202–3
Gilligan, Carol, 100
Gilroy, Paul, 232n11
Giroux, Henry, 30
Goffman, Erving, 90
Good relations, 56–57
Goodin, Robert, 113–14
Gough, Stephen, 85
Governing: emotions and, 61–63; as 
queer feminist, 104; techniques of, 
67; through touch, 71; through vision, 
70–71; as a way of feeling, 60–61. See 
also State
Government Equalities Office (geo), 
47–48, 53
Graham, Nicole, 161
Gray, Kevin and Susan, 166
Greenham Common Women’s Peace 
Camp, 12
Gregson, Nicky, 196
Grossberg, Lawrence, 6
Grosz, Elizabeth, 153
Guattari, Félix, 26, 249n2
Guiraudon, Virginie, 68
Hacking, Ian, 39
Hall, Stuart, 30
Hallward, Peter, 26
Haptic equality, 93. See also Equality
Held, Virginia, 112–13, 116, 120

280    index
Henricks, Thomas, 200–201
Hepple, Bob, 56
Hetherington, Kevin, 40, 41, 51
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 193
hooks, bell, 32
Hope, Wayne, 245n17
Huizinga, Johan, 199, 211
Humphrey, Chris, 202
Hyde Park, 192, 210
Hygiene: at bathhouse, 106–7; nudism 
and, 89–90
Idealized concepts, 28–29, 126–27, 221. 
See also Concepts; Normative con-
cepts
Imagining, 12, 35; within actualization, 
38; movement from, 219; power of, 
39. See also Concepts
Ineffable, 40–41, 76, 124. See also  
Sensation
Inequality: care and, 111; knowledge of, 
60; plural, 64; state understanding of, 
63. See also Equality
Institute for Community Cohesion, 57
Intimate life, 167–68
Jacobs, Jane, 177
Jacoby, Russell, 229n5, 233n14
Jameson, Fredric, 33, 187, 229n8
Jordan, Jill, 130, 148
Josipovici, Gabriel, 50
Kanter, Rosabeth Moss, 179
Keenan, Sarah, 40, 162, 169
Labor market: norms, 147; time, 135, 143–
45. See also lets; Temporalities
Lahav, Gallya, 68
Langdon-­Davies, John, 81
Latour, Bruno, 39–40
Leccardi, Carmen, 151
Legal pluralism, 27–28, 136; property 
and, 164, 166. See also Norms; Rules
lets (Local Exchange Trading Schemes), 
1; challenges faced, 134–35, 145–46; 
community building, 139; contribu-
tion of, 134; currency, 130, 132; de-
cline, 133, 149; as everyday utopia, 
130; future and, 141; as gift, 140; labor 
market and, 143–45; legitimate ex-
pectations, 150; member reputations, 
150; norm-­making, 149; operation 
of, 131–32; organizational involve-
ment in, 132; origins of, 131; past and, 
141; pricing, 148; proximity to main-
stream, 143, 150–52; rhythms, 141, 
152; schemes, 132–33; services avail-
able, 143; sociability, 137–38, 153; soci-
ality, 141, 152; systems, 132–33; tem-
poralities, 140, 144–45, 147, 151; time 
problems, 135; trader autonomy, 148, 
150; virtuous cycle, 150, 153–54
Levitas, Ruth, 3, 33, 41, 60, 98, 218, 231n1
Liking: physical display of, 172; property 
and, 169–70. See also Feeling
Linton, Michael, 131, 132
Lyng, Stephen, 211
MacCormick, Neil, 68
Maher, JaneMaree, 143–44
Manning, Erin, 50
Market: competition and, 194, 248n9; 
as concept, 197–99; critique of, 187, 
194–95; gift and, 196–97; parody of, 
215; play and, 200, 204, 206, 213–15
Marketplace: carnival and, 202–5; di‑ 
versity and, 198; of ideas, 193–96; 
payment lacking, 196–98; selection 
and, 198; as sociable, 195–96; tast‑ 
ing and, 207–8; tension and, 199; 
worth and, 204–5
Marx, Karl, 219
Massey, Doreen, 26, 184–85
Massumi, Brian, 59
May, Todd, 77
Mbembe, Achille, 30, 234n6
Mediations, 39–40; of nudism, 91
Merrill, Frances and Mason, 81, 83, 89
Merry, Sally Engle, 136
Metcalf, Bill, 155
Morality, 121–22
More-­than-­linguistic concepts. See  
Ineffable
Morris, William, 42, 196

index    281
Moylan, Tom, 232n7
Municipal socialism, 69
Muñoz, José Esteban, 220
Musson, Gillian, 143–44
Nakedness: in public, 77, 80–81, 89, 93– 
95; sensation of, 89, 95–96. See also 
Nudism
Needs, 116–18; care and, 112; sex and, 
117–18
Neill, A. S., 158, 159, 167, 171, 174, 175
Newmahr, Staci, 212
News from Nowhere, 42, 196
Nolan, James, 65
Nonrecognition, 42
Norms, 149–50; creation of, 148–49; 
domestic, 167; nakedness and, 93–95; 
at Toronto Women’s and Trans Bath-
house, 108. See also Rules
Normative concepts, 28–30, 33, 37, 221; 
care, 101, 120; equality, 75–78, 92, 95,  
98; ethics, 126–28; as plural, 128; 
property, 184. See also Concepts;  
Conceptual lines
Normative temporalities. See  
Temporalities
North, Peter, 151
Nudism: circulatory publics and, 88– 
90; class and, 83; contamination by, 
89–90; contemporary politics and, 
76–77, 86–87; criminal offense, 74, 
85; as everyday utopia, 81–82; gen-
der and, 84; history of, 82–84; land 
and, 86; mediators of, 91; prohibition 
of, 85; racism and, 82–84; regulation 
of, 85; rules, 82, 93; rural and, 95–96; 
urban and, 96–97
Nudist equality, 76, 87, 92, 98; limits of, 
90; proprioception and, 94
Nudists. See Nudism
Oakeshott, Michael, 120–21, 124
Obrador-­Pons, Pau, 89, 92
Oldenburg, Ray, 208
Orientational publics, 90–93. See also 
Publics
Ownership, in belongings, 161; as doing, 
176; individual, 159–60; limits 
on, 167; private, 160; self and, 171; 
stewardship, 176. See also Property
Pallasmaa, Juhani, 242n45
Parmelee, Maurice, 83, 95
Past: lets and, 141; as produced, 222; re-
cuperated, 223. See also Temporalities
Paterson, Mark, 45, 49
Patterson, Alan, 134–35
Peeters, Evert, 89
Perkins, Tony, 209
Personal autonomy, 171
Personal nudism, 80. See also Nudism
Peu de Tendresse Bordel de Merde!, Un, 
73, 91
Phillips, Trevor, 58, 223
Piercy, Marge, 36, 42
Piper, Heather, 171
Play, 200–201; carnival and, 204; contact 
zone and, 209–10, 212; edgework and, 
210–13; markets and, 200, 204, 206, 
213–15; risk and, 211–12; spoilsports, 
207; through tasting, 206; touch and, 
210
Potential, 38, 220; of equality, 77–78, 98; 
needs, 118; of nudism, 98. See also 
Temporalities
Pratt, Mary Louise, 208, 209
Prefiguration, 5, 81–82, 223
Present: of everyday utopias, 223–25; 
of lets, 141; of nudism, 98. See also 
Future; Temporalities
Presupposition: of nudism, 76–77, 97–98
Privacy. See Seclusion
Privatization, 68
Proper attachment, 162–63. See also  
Belonging; Property
Proper place, 94–95
Property, 165–66; affect and, 169–70; as 
belonging, 160–63, 173, 183; breaches, 
174; as bundle of sticks, 161–62; codi-
fication and, 165–66; collective life 
and, 173; disputes, 165; individual, 
159; norms, 170; permission and, 170;  
power and, 166–67; as practice, 175– 
76; recognition and, 163–65; rights, 

282    index
Property (continued) 
164–65, 177; sharing and, 170; sim-
plification and, 165–66; stewardship, 
176–77; in vote, 164
Proprioception, 50, 94–95
Protected characteristics, 51–52, 56. See 
also Equality
Public appearance, 93–95. See also 
Publics
Public nakedness, 77, 80–81, 89, 93–95
Public norms. See Norms
Public nudism. See Nudism
Publics: appearing in, 93–95; circulatory, 
88–90, 241n34; orientational, 90–93; 
place, 95–97; sphere, 88
Pussy Palace, 1–2, 103. See also Toronto 
Women’s and Trans Bathhouse
Queer, 42–43; equality and, 87
Racism: care and, 111; feminism and, 110; 
nudism and, 82–84; Toronto Women’s 
and Trans Bathhouse and, 109–11
Radin, Margaret Jane, 162, 171, 183
Rancière, Jacques, 77
Ravenscroft, Neil, 202–3
Rawls, John, 28
Readhead, Zoe, 157, 164, 168, 171, 177; 
future and, 224; as guardian, 176; as 
owner, 174, 175; school reputation 
and, 181–82
Recognition, 41–44; as plural, 164; prop-
erty and, 163–65
Rees, Jonathan, 47–48
Relationship trading, 130
Risk: play and, 211–12; sex and, 115
Roberts, John, 191–92
Robinson, Kim Stanley, 36
Rose, Carol, 179
Roseneil, Sasha, 12
Rules: within associational nudism, 82, 
93; bathhouse, 104, 122; ethics and, 
122; at Speakers’ Corner, 195–96; at 
Summerhill, 180. See also Norms
Sargent, Lyman Tower, 7
Sargisson, Lucy, 7
Scott, David, 89
Seclusion, 168–69
Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky, 217
Selfhood, 171
Sennett, Richard, 203
Sensation, 41; of bathhouse emissions, 
119; of being naked, 89. See also Feel-
ing; Tasting; Touch
Senses of Touch, The, 49
Sevenhuijsen, Selma, 120
Sex: after-­care, 108; agreements, 115; 
anonymous, 107; as needs, 117–18; 
risk and, 115. See also Bathhouse; 
Toronto Women’s and Trans Bath-
house
Sexual agency, 103–4
Sexual education, 103
Shared space nudism, 79–80. See also 
Nudism
Shephard, Liz, 152
Slow food, 10
Social capital, 139
Social marginality, 190
Sociality: through trade, 152; in work, 
146–47. See also Community labor
Somerville, Margaret, 209
Southall Black Sisters, 63
Speakers’ Corner, 2; as carnival, 203; 
as contact zone, 208–10; edgework, 
210–13; as everyday utopia, 189–90; 
location, 188–89; as marketplace, 195; 
masculinity of, 190; origins, 191–92; 
risky play and, 211–12; tasting at, 
206–7; tension at, 199; as third  
place, 208, 209; users, 191
Srivastava, Sarita, 110, 124
State: apology, 61–62; as assemblage, 
66; boundaries of, 237n47; coercive 
touch, 46; as concept, 65–66; feeling, 
63–64, 69; identities, 66–70; imag-
ining of, 38, 67; senses and, 45–46, 
70–71; thinned out, 68–70; touch, 46, 
48, 71; as touched, 61–63; as utopia, 
47
Stevens, Quentin, 211
Stewardship, 176–77. See also Property
St-­Pierre, Dave, 73

index    283
Strangers: sex, 107–8; Speakers’ Corner, 
189, 209–10; trading and, 138. See also 
Visitors
Strathern, Marilyn, 181
Stronach, Ian, 171
Styles, Joseph, 128
Summerhill, 156–57; authentic self and, 
171; belonging, 173; democracy at, 
224; as everyday utopia, 157; as family, 
173; governance of, 177–78; as home, 
157; laws, 165, 181; legal dispute, 176; 
ownership, 165, 174–75; physical con-
tact at, 172; property, 159, 164–65, 
182–83; visitors, 179–80
Suvin, Darko, 24
Tamanaha, Brian, 27
Tasting, 205–8. See also Sensation;  
Touch
Tattelman, Ira, 113, 128
Taylor, Antony, 192
Temporalities: capitalist, 140–41; lets 
narratives, 141, 144–45; normative, 
94–95, 135–37, 146–48; plural, 151–52. 
See also Future; Past; Present
Thompson, Hunter, 211
Tiemann, Thomas, 196
Tietze, Susanne, 143–44
Time. See Temporalities
Toronto Women’s and Trans Bathhouse, 
7, 103–5; accounts of racism, 109–111; 
ethics, 120–25; name change, 242n2; 
politics, 109; stranger sex at, 107–8; 
vulnerability, 114–16. See also Bath-
house; Care; Feminist care ethics
Touch, 49–51; as affect, 50; of disadvan-
taged, 56; effects of, 71; equality and, 
92; as governmental technology, 54; 
idioms, 46, 53–54, 57; as knowledge, 
48, 51; lack of, 58; as lens, 48–49; as 
light, 55; play and, 210; proximity and, 
55; as reciprocating, 50; felt by state, 
61–63; at Summerhill, 172. See also 
Sensation
Touch-­chains, 55
Touching-­feeling state, 65
Trading: sociability norms, 137–38; soci-
ality and, 244n6, 245n14; strangers 
and, 138. See also lets; Market; 
Marketplace
Trans discrimination, 106, 109
Tronto, Joan, 112, 117
Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt, 199, 209
Tunick, Spencer, 84, 89
Unutterable. See Ineffable
Urban nudism, 96–97
Utopia: actualization of, 25; as blueprint, 
4; change and, 31, 34; concept of, 36; 
critique and, 5, 18–19, 32–33; as fail-
ure, 4; imperfection and, 7; as impos-
sible, 5–6; visitor to, 15–16; as world-­
building, 33
Utopian: as academic field, 3–7, 33–34, 
37, 44, 217–18; as attitude, 34, 220–21; 
conceptualizing 37, 156; epistemology, 
32–34; norms, 189–90; objects, 3; ori-
entation, 3, 5; property and, 183–84; 
work performed by, 24–25
Variegated social, 158
Visitors, at intentional communities, 
179; misrecognition, 42; for research, 
15–16, 19; at Summerhill, 179–80; in 
utopia, 15, 42
Warner, Michael, 88, 93
Webb, Terri Sue, 77
Weinberg, Martin, 113
Welch, Andrew, 77
Wells, H. G., 7
Williams, Colin C., 131, 139, 143
Williams, Colin J., 113
Windebank, Jan, 139
Woman on the Edge of Time, 42
Work/home boundaries, 143–44
World naked bike ride, 73, 80, 94
Wyschogrod, Edith, 50
Zerilli, Linda, 35

