Recommending Actionable Strategies: A Semantic
Approach to Integrating Analytical Frameworks with
Decision Heuristics
Renato Ghisellini1, Remo Pareschi2∗, Marco Pedroni1, Giovanni Battista Raggi1
1[Institute for Generative Strategy]
2[Stake Lab, University of Molise]
January 27, 2025
Abstract
We present a novel approach for recommending actionable strategies by in-
tegrating strategic frameworks with decision heuristics through semantic analysis.
While strategy frameworks provide systematic models for assessment and planning,
and decision heuristics encode experiential knowledge, these traditions have histori-
cally remained separate. Our methodology bridges this gap using advanced natural
language processing (NLP), demonstrated through integrating frameworks like the
6C model with the Thirty-Six Stratagems. The approach employs vector space rep-
resentations and semantic similarity calculations to map framework parameters
to heuristic patterns, supported by a computational architecture that combines deep se-
mantic processing with constrained use of Large Language Models. By processing both
primary content and secondary elements (diagrams, matrices) as complementary
linguistic representations, we demonstrate effectiveness through corporate strategy case
studies. The methodology generalizes to various analytical frameworks and heuristic
sets, culminating in a plug-and-play architecture for generating recommender
systems that enable cohesive integration of strategic frameworks and decision heuris-
tics into actionable guidance.
Keywords: recommender systems; semantic analysis; strategic frameworks; decision heuris-
tics; natural language processing; plug-and-play architecture
1
Introduction
Organizations today rely on two primary but historically separate textual traditions for
strategic management and decision-making: analytical frameworks and decision
∗Corresponding author: remo.pareschi@unimol.it. ORCID: 0000-0002-4912-582X
1
arXiv:2501.14634v1  [cs.AI]  24 Jan 2025

heuristics. Both traditions encode strategic knowledge in natural language—often comple-
mented by diagrams or structured representations—yet differ in scope and style. Analytical
frameworks such as Porter’s Five Forces, SWOT Analysis, and Value Chain Analysis offer
systematic lenses for situational assessment and long-term planning. Meanwhile, decision
heuristics—from early military wisdom (e.g., the Thirty-Six Stratagems) to modern “rules
of thumb”—provide concise, actionable insights forged through real-world experience.
In practice, combining these two traditions holds tangible advantages: a more bal-
anced approach to strategic planning, clearer avenues for evidence-based recommendations,
and reduced time spent on exhaustive analyses. However, frameworks and heuristics rarely
interact in a unified process. Frameworks excel at comprehensiveness and rigor but risk
analysis paralysis, whereas heuristics are more agile but can oversimplify complex scenarios.
Bridging this gap would enable decision-makers to reap the complementary strengths of
each method, yielding recommended strategies that are both thorough and swiftly imple-
mentable.
Recent advances in artificial intelligence (AI) and natural language processing
(NLP) offer a powerful way to integrate these traditions. By applying semantic analysis
to uncover linguistic patterns, rhetorical structures, and conceptual interdependencies within
strategic texts, we can construct automated mappings between the methodical constructs
of analytical frameworks and the concise action steps of heuristics. This paper proposes a
recommender-system architecture that leverages these mappings to generate action-
able strategic recommendations, ultimately expediting decision-making and enhancing
strategic insight.
To illustrate this semantic integration concretely, we focus on two representative mod-
els: the 6C framework and the Thirty-Six Stratagems.
The 6C framework synthesizes
recurring strategic themes (offensive/defensive strength, relational capacity, potential en-
ergy, temporal availability, and context-fit), drawn from military and business literature.
In contrast, the Thirty-Six Stratagems—rooted in Chinese political, military, and civil dis-
course—encapsulate centuries of heuristic insight in pithy expressions. Through advanced
NLP tools—such as vector-space embeddings, topic modeling, and pattern recognition—we
demonstrate how linguistic cues in each stratagem correlate with specific 6C parameters.
This systematic analysis then drives an automated pipeline that matches any given strategic
situation with suitable heuristics, producing evidence-based, context-aware recommen-
dations.
Two key innovations underscore our approach. First, we embed the system in an inter-
active simulation environment, prompting decision-makers to express scenarios in nat-
ural language. The environment analyzes these textual inputs, computes relevance scores,
and returns recommendations for how best to combine or select heuristics in light of the
chosen strategic framework. Second, we employ Large Language Models (LLMs) in
a controlled manner to produce coherent, narrative-style reports that clarify the rationale
behind each recommendation. By integrating LLMs as interpreters rather than autonomous
decision-makers, we preserve analytical rigor while providing accessible explanations.
In what follows, we detail our semantic methodology, discuss the computational
architecture that enables framework-heuristic integration, and illustrate its real-world rel-
evance through case studies in corporate strategy. We then show how this plug-and-
play architecture generalizes beyond 6C and the Thirty-Six Stratagems, adapting to other
2

widely known frameworks such as Porter’s Five Forces and SWOT. Ultimately, we aim
to demonstrate how organizations can deploy a recommender-system approach to
merge comprehensive strategic analysis with proven heuristic insights, delivering actionable
guidance that is both robust and readily applicable in complex environments.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows:
• Section 2 provides background knowledge
• Section 3 details our language analysis methodology for framework integration
• Section 4 presents the computational architecture supporting this integration
• Section 5 demonstrates the approach through two case studies
• Section 6 provides empirical validation
• Section 7 discusses related work
• Section 8 discusses implications and future directions
2
Background
Integrating analytical frameworks with decision heuristics through semantic analysis repre-
sents a highly interdisciplinary endeavor, drawing from multiple domains, including strategic
management, heuristics, computer science, and linguistics. This confluence of fields necessi-
tates thoroughly examining key concepts and prior work across several dimensions. Specifi-
cally, we must understand (1) how strategic frameworks systematize decision parameters, as
exemplified by the 6C model; (2) how decision heuristics encapsulate experiential knowledge,
illustrated through the Thirty-Six Stratagems; (3) how semantic analysis enables framework-
heuristic integration; (4) how mathematical formulations like Kullback-Leibler divergence
support validation; and (5) how gamification principles and Large Language Models facili-
tate practical implementation. The following subsections provide this essential foundation,
which underlies our novel recommender-system architecture for strategic decision support.
2.1
The 6C Framework as an Analytical Classification Tool
The 6C framework was conceived to provide a set of clear, well-defined parameters that would
enable straightforward experimentation with our semantic integration approach. While es-
tablished frameworks like SWOT Analysis and Porter’s Five Forces offer comprehensive
analytical tools, the 6C parameters were specifically designed to facilitate initial testing
and validation of our methodology, with the understanding that the same principles could
then be transferred to these well-known and widely adopted frameworks. The parameters
were distilled from an extensive study of strategic literature, offering a simplified yet robust
foundation for our initial framework-heuristic integration experiments.
The key parameters of the 6C model are as follows:
1. p1 = Offensive Strength: The ability to proactively shape and influence the strategic
landscape.
3

2. p2 = Defensive Strength: The resilience to respond effectively to adversarial actions
or challenges.
3. p3 = Relational Capacity: The ability to manage and leverage relationships with
external stakeholders.
4. p4 = Potential Energy: The availability and strategic deployment of resources.
5. p5 = Temporal Availability: The strategic use of time and timing in decision-
making.
6. p6 = Contextual Fit: The degree to which decisions align with the strategic context,
ensuring they are well-informed and relevant.
These classification processes emerged from a comparative study of prominent military
strategists—ranging from ancient figures such as Sun Tzu and Chanakya to modern thinkers
like Machiavelli and Clausewitz and more contemporary theorists such as Beaufre and Liddell
Hart. Over time, they have transcended their military origins to influence corporate strat-
egy, echoing broader perspectives that integrate historical wisdom with rigorous managerial
concepts [1].
The 6C framework functions as a classification system for organizing and analyzing data
obtained through competitive intelligence and data analytics, a capability especially valuable
in digitally transforming industries [2]. This classification provides a structured approach
to understanding competitive landscapes, where the six parameters can be assessed quanti-
tatively or qualitatively. While we do not delve into the specific mechanics of setting each
parameter—this is handled through the gamified environment described in Section 2.6—the
focus of this paper is on how these parameters (once established) can be integrated with
heuristic decision patterns via semantic analysis.
2.2
The Thirty-Six Stratagems: Crystallized Decision Patterns
The Thirty-Six Stratagems comprise a collection of ancient Chinese military decision heuris-
tics that have evolved into widely applicable strategic principles [3, 4]. These stratagems
are especially valuable for our study since they embody concise, experience-based rules, akin
to ”simple rules” in strategy-making [5], but encoded in metaphorical language with deep
historical roots. The highly metaphorical nature of these stratagems, while encoding deep
strategic wisdom, presents unique challenges for semantic analysis. Their idiosyncratic ex-
pressions require careful interpretation to bridge ancient military metaphors with modern
strategic concepts. This linguistic complexity makes them an especially rigorous test case for
our framework integration methodology—success here would suggest strong generalizability
to more straightforward decision-making frameworks.
Traditionally, the thirty-six stratagems are divided into six categories:
1. Stratagems for winning advantageous positions
2. Stratagems for confrontation
3. Stratagems for attack
4

4. Stratagems for creating confusion
5. Stratagems for gaining ground
6. Stratagems for desperate situations
Each stratagem defines a concrete pattern of strategic action—often encapsulated in
pithy maxims such as “Besiege Wei to rescue Zhao” (围魏救赵), which illustrates an in-
direct approach, or “Kill with a borrowed knife” (借刀杀人), which suggests leveraging
external resources. By codifying these patterns, the Thirty-Six Stratagems lend themselves
to computational extraction and matching when we embed them in modern NLP pipelines.
2.3
Additional Strategic Frameworks
While the 6C framework and the Thirty-Six Stratagems serve as primary examples in our
study, our approach generalizes to multiple analytical frameworks. Following the system-
atic nature of the 6C framework, other prominent analytical frameworks provide structured
parameters for strategic assessment:
SWOT Analysis
SWOT Analysis, developed by Albert Humphrey at Stanford Research
Institute, offers a systematic approach to evaluating internal and external factors [12]. Its
clear parameter structure makes it particularly suitable for semantic analysis:
• Strengths: Internal capabilities and resources that provide competitive advantages
• Weaknesses: Internal limitations that may hinder strategic objectives
• Opportunities: External factors or trends that could benefit the organization
• Threats: External challenges that could negatively impact performance
Porter’s Five Forces
This analytical framework, developed by Michael Porter, system-
atically dissects industry structure through five well-defined parameters [13]:
• Competitive Rivalry: Intensity of competition among existing players
• Supplier Power: Bargaining power of suppliers
• Buyer Power: Bargaining power of customers
• Threat of New Entrants: Ease with which new competitors can enter
• Threat of Substitution: Availability of alternative products or services
Like the 6C framework, SWOT and Five Forces provide clear analytical parameters that
can be vectorized and processed through semantic analysis for framework-heuristic integra-
tion. The effectiveness of our approach with these widely adopted frameworks demonstrates
its potential applicability to other strategic analysis tools, both contemporary and classical,
a direction we discuss in our future work.
5

2.4
Semantic Analysis in Strategic Text Processing
Our approach employs several key techniques from Natural Language Processing (NLP)
to analyze and connect strategic frameworks (like the 6C model) with decision heuristics
(such as the Thirty-Six Stratagems).
Recent advances in NLP, especially Transformer-
based architectures [6], have shown that vector-space language representations can capture
nuanced semantic meaning and contextual relationships.
• Vector Space Representations: We encode strategic concepts using word embed-
dings and sentence transformers, building on methods such as BERT [7], Sentence-
BERT [8], that excel in capturing contextual nuances. These techniques enable math-
ematical operations on semantic meaning and allow us to compare entire passages or
phrases in a high-dimensional embedding space.
• Topic Modeling (Optional): We can also apply Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
and related approaches [9] to identify high-level themes in strategic texts (e.g., ”al-
liances,” ”resource optimization”). Although not the core driver in our current imple-
mentation, such thematic analysis can support explainability by highlighting relevant
topics that link to each framework parameter or stratagem.
• Semantic Similarity Metrics: Using cosine similarity or similar measures, we quan-
tify relationships between vectors representing framework parameters and stratagem
patterns.
In our implementation with the Thirty-Six Stratagems, this objectively
measures how well each stratagem aligns with specific 6C parameters (e.g., Offensive
Strength, Relational Capacity).
The semantic analysis process involves the following steps:
1. Preprocessing (if needed) and Concept Extraction: In scenarios where texts are un-
structured, we may apply standard NLP techniques (tokenization, chunking, domain
ontology extraction). However, this step becomes straightforward if frameworks like
6C or Porter’s Five Forces are already delineated.
2. Creating vector representations of framework parameters and heuristic patterns;
3. Computing similarity matrices to link frameworks (e.g., 6C) with heuristics (e.g.,
Thirty-Six Stratagems);
4. Identifying significant semantic connections and ranking them for further interpreta-
tion.
Our work builds on emerging applications of BERT-like methods to nontraditional NLP
contexts [10], where domain-specific texts require fine-grained semantic understanding. Adapt-
ing these cutting-edge techniques preserves both the textual richness of each strategic ex-
pression and the interpretability needed for real-world strategic decision-making.
Having said that, it must be added that although these models have proven effective, they
inherit statistical biases from their training corpora, which may affect how parameters and
heuristics are aligned. Because we employ LLMs only for explanatory output, the overall
6

recommendation pipeline remains largely heuristic- and framework-driven.
Nevertheless,
mitigating potential embedding biases—by fine-tuning domain-specific corpora, employing
bias detection tools, or adopting interpretability frameworks—is an important direction for
future development.
While metrics like the symmetric Jensen–Shannon divergence could be considered, KL
divergence provides an efficient and intuitive tool for our semantic analysis workflow, where
we compare system-discovered parameter distributions to expert-annotated ones. This ap-
proach enables quantitative validation of our semantic mappings.
2.5
Kullback–Leibler Divergence
In information theory and statistics, the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence measures
how one probability distribution diverges from a second, reference distribution [11]. Given
two discrete probability distributions (P) and (Q) over the same outcome space (Ω), the KL
divergence is defined as:
DKL(P | Q) =
X
i∈Ω
P(i) log
P(i)
Q(i)

.
(1)
Intuitively, if (P) represents the “true” or expert-labeled distribution (e.g., the relative
importance of each parameter in a scenario), while (Q) is the model’s approximate distri-
bution, the KL divergence quantifies how inefficient it is to use (Q) in place of (P). A lower
DKL(P | Q) indicates a closer match between the two distributions, while higher values sig-
nify greater disparity. Unlike many distance metrics, KL divergence is not symmetric (i.e.,
DKL(P | Q) ̸= DKL(Q | P)) which means the direction of comparison matters. Because KL
divergence also fails to satisfy the triangle inequality, it is not a true metric in the formal
sense; however, it remains a widely used ’distance-like’ measure for comparing probability
distributions.
Why KL Divergence?
We selected KL divergence for three key reasons:
• Interpretability: It offers a straightforward interpretation of the “cost” of using an
approximate distribution, aligning well with our need to validate semantic analysis
against expert annotations.
• Directionality: Its asymmetric nature suits our context, where we specifically care
about how well our approximate distributions match expert distributions, rather than
vice versa.
• Established Usage: Its widespread adoption in machine learning and information
theory provides a well-tested foundation for measuring distributional differences.
While metrics like the symmetric Jensen–Shannon divergence could be considered, KL
divergence provides an efficient and intuitive tool for our semantic analysis workflow, where
we compare system-discovered parameter distributions to expert-annotated ones. A lower
7

divergence indicates our system captures expert priorities effectively, while higher values
highlight areas needing further calibration.
Usage in This Study
In our context, we leverage KL divergence to compare the discov-
ered parameter distributions (e.g., derived from the system’s semantic analysis) to expert-
annotated distributions. This comparison provides a quantitative measure of how closely our
system’s interpretations align with domain experts’ judgments, thereby helping to validate
and refine the robustness of our semantic mapping process. A lower divergence indicates
our system captures expert priorities effectively, while higher values highlight areas needing
further calibration.
2.6
Gamification of Strategic Decision-Making
To streamline the usage of these analytic results, we have developed a prototype interactive
simulation environment that enables:
• Exploration of different strategic scenarios;
• Testing of various decision combinations;
• Immediate feedback on potential outcomes;
• Gradual learning from simulated experiences.
Such gamification introduces a user-centric interface through which decision-makers set
or adjust the situation-specific scores of the chosen analytical framework.
For instance,
users can enter or modify the 6C parameters—Offensive Strength, Defensive Strength, and
so on—based on real competitive intelligence data or hypothetical ”what-if” explorations.
The system then applies its semantic mappings (Section 2.1) to generate immediate feedback
on how each parameter configuration impacts recommended strategies or outcomes.
Although this gamified environment is fully implemented and was used to produce the
case studies described in this paper, its detailed interface design and mechanics lie beyond
our current scope. Such a user-interface analysis merits its own dedicated treatment and can
be assumed here without loss of relevant information about the underlying framework. By
highlighting interactive experimentation and rapid feedback, our approach resonates with
broader digital transformation trends [2] and encourages deeper engagement and practical
experimentation among corporate decision-makers.
3
Language Analysis Methodology
Our methodology for integrating analytical frameworks with decision heuristics centers on
semantic analysis of strategic texts. This section details the technical approach to discovering
and quantifying relationships between framework parameters and heuristic patterns.
8

3.1
Vector Space Representation
The first step involves creating vector representations of both framework parameters and
heuristic descriptions:
v(t) =
X
w∈t
αw · e(w)
(2)
where v(t) is the vector representation of text t, w represents individual words or phrases,
e(w) is the embedding vector for word w, and αw is the weight assigned to word w. For
framework parameters (in our case, the 6Cs), we create vectors from their definitions and
associated descriptive text:
pi = v(di) + λ
X
j
v(cij)
(3)
where pi is the vector for parameter i, di is the base definition of parameter i, cij are associated
contextual descriptions, and λ is a weighting factor for contextual information. Detailed
calculations and examples of this vector space representation are provided in Appendix
A.1.1.
3.2
Semantic Similarity Computation
We compute semantic similarity between framework parameters and heuristics using the
cosine similarity measure. Specifically, for a given parameter vector pi and heuristic vector
hj, the similarity is:
sim(pi, hj) =
pi · hj
∥pi∥∥hj∥
(4)
where pi · hj denotes the dot (scalar) product of the two vectors,
pi · hj =
X
k
(pi)k(hj)k,
and ∥pi∥(likewise ∥hj∥) is the Euclidean norm,
∥pi∥=
sX
k
((pi)k)2.
A higher cosine similarity value sim(pi, hj) indicates a closer semantic relationship be-
tween parameter pi and heuristic hj.
Computing sim(pi, hj) for all parameters i ∈{1, . . . , m} and all heuristics j ∈{1, . . . , n}
produces a similarity matrix S, in which each element sij is defined by:
S =


s11
s12
· · ·
s1n
s21
s22
· · ·
s2n
...
...
...
...
sm1
sm2
· · ·
smn


with
sij = sim(pi, hj).
(5)
9

For example, when comparing parameter p3 (Relational Capacity) with Stratagem 24
(“Use Allies’ Resources”), our system computes a similarity score of 0.93, quantitatively
capturing their strong semantic alignment. Detailed calculations and further examples of
this process appear in Appendix A.2.1.
3.3
Distribution Discovery
For each heuristic hj, our system generates a discovered distribution across the framework
parameters (e.g., the 6C parameters).
Concretely, we first compute similarity scores sij
between parameter pi and heuristic hj (Section 3.2). We then normalize these scores to form
a probability-like distribution:
dij =
sij
P
k skj
,
(6)
where dij represents the weight (or relative importance) of parameter pi in heuristic hj. This
summation-based (L1) normalization treats each heuristic’s parameter weights as if they
were probabilities that sum to 1. It thus naturally encodes the idea that a given heuristic
distributes its “attention” across the available parameters.
Note on Alternative Normalization. An alternative would be to use the Euclidean (L2)
norm, where
dij =
sij
pP
k(skj)2,
thereby turning each heuristic’s parameter vector into a unit vector in ℓ2 space.
In our
approach, we opt for L1 normalization to mirror a ”probability-like” interpretation—each
heuristic can be seen as distributing its ”weight” over parameters in a manner analogous
to probabilities. L2 normalization could be equally valid in other contexts, especially if one
prefers strictly geometric interpretations of distance in the parameter space.
To validate these distributions, we compare them against expert-annotated distributions
using the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence measure. For Stratagem 24, this comparison
yielded a KL divergence of 0.0273, indicating strong alignment between system-discovered
and expert-provided distributions.
Detailed calculations and additional examples of this
validation process are provided in Appendix A.2.2.
By comparing discovered distributions against expert-annotated ones for each heuristic,
we obtain a numerical sense of alignment or mismatch. This process can be iterated: a large
KL divergence flags a heuristic whose vector representation needs either textual refinements
(e.g., additional synonyms or clarifications) or updates to the weighting scheme. Over time,
machine-based distribution discovery converges with expert insights, yielding robust
mappings that faithfully reflect how these strategic heuristics fit into analytical parameters.
As we already pointed out, the experts in this step are specialists in the methodologies
(e.g., the 6C model, the Thirty-Six Stratagems) rather than sector-specific domain experts.
This distinction ensures that the high-level semantic structure of each stratagem is validated
by those who understand it conceptually, independent of particular industries or case studies.
10

3.4
Stratagem Selection Algorithm
After the distribution discovery phase (Section 3.3), we obtain an invariant distribution
of analytical properties for each heuristic. This invariant distribution reflects how strongly
each heuristic (e.g., a particular stratagem) aligns with each framework parameter (e.g., the
6C model) based on the text analysis and expert validation.
Situation-Specific Parameter Vector.
In contrast, a variable (or current) situation
vector, denoted by x, describes how the analytical parameters apply to the present sce-
nario. For instance, if a certain strategic context demands high Offensive Strength (p1) and
moderate Relational Capacity (p3), x will capture these intensities accordingly.
Matching Heuristics to the Situation. By comparing x with each heuristic’s invariant
distribution, we produce a recommendation score that indicates how well that heuristic fits
the present conditions. This process is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Stratagem Selection
Require: Situation vector x, Similarity matrix S, Threshold θ
Ensure: Ranked list of relevant stratagems
1: scores ←∅
2: for each stratagem j do
3:
dj ←normalize(S[:, j]) {Invariant distribution of parameters for heuristic j}
4:
scorej ←similarity(x, dj) {Compare current situation vector to heuristic distribution}
5:
if scorej ≥θ then
6:
scores.append((j, scorej))
7:
end if
8: end for
9: return sort(scores, descending=True)
The algorithm produces a ranked list of relevant heuristics, from strongest to weaker
matches, filtered by a minimum threshold θ to ensure only sufficiently strong alignments are
proposed. When applied to strategic scenarios in our case studies, the algorithm successfully
identified relevant stratagems matching the strategic context. For instance, in the hydrogen
vs. electric vehicle competition case, it highlighted stratagems focused on indirect positioning
and resource leveraging. Detailed examples of the algorithm’s application, including specific
calculations and case study connections, are provided in Appendix A.3.
3.5
Semantic Validation
To ensure robustness and credibility in the discovered semantic mappings, we conduct a
three-pronged validation:
1. Cross-Validation: We compare parameter–heuristic distributions generated by mul-
tiple embedding approaches (e.g., different Transformer models, dimensionality set-
11

tings). If the mappings remain consistent across these variations, it indicates resilience
against model-specific biases or hyperparameter choices.
2. Perturbation Analysis: We introduce small textual modifications (e.g., synonyms,
minor paraphrasing) to heuristic descriptions or framework definitions and observe
whether the resulting distributions change drastically. A stable mapping under such
perturbations implies that the system captures deeper semantic relationships rather
than overfitting to exact word forms.
3. Expert Review: We invite experts knowledgeable about both the analytic framework
(e.g., 6C) and the heuristics (e.g., the Thirty-Six Stratagems) to label how strongly
each heuristic aligns with each parameter. By comparing these expert judgments to
algorithmic outputs, we can detect alignment or uncover conceptual mismatches (see
Section 3.3 for details on KL divergence).
The validation process produces a confidence score cij for each parameter–heuristic map-
ping:
cij = α · vij + β · sij + γ · eij,
(7)
where:
• vij is the cross-validation score, reflecting consistency across embedding variants,
• sij is the stability score, derived from perturbation analysis,
• eij is the expert agreement score, capturing how closely the system’s outputs align with
expert annotations,
• α, β, and γ are weighting parameters that can be tuned (e.g., through trials or domain
priorities).
A higher cij indicates that the mapping from parameter pi to heuristic hj is consis-
tently validated by multiple lines of evidence: model-invariant cross-validation, perturbation
resilience, and expert concordance. This systematic approach to verifying semantic relation-
ships underpins our goal of automating the integration of traditionally separate analytical
frameworks and decision heuristics with confidence.
3.5.1
Validation Example
To illustrate this validation process, let’s examine how we validate the mapping between
parameter p3 (Relational Capacity) and Stratagem 24 (“Use Allies’ Resources”):
Cross-Validation:
We compute the distribution using three different embedding models:
• BERT-base: [(p1 : 0.10), (p2 : 0.07), (p3 : 0.61), (p4 : 0.13), (p5 : 0.03), (p6 : 0.06)]
• RoBERTa: [(p1 : 0.11), (p2 : 0.08), (p3 : 0.58), (p4 : 0.14), (p5 : 0.03), (p6 : 0.06)]
• Sentence-BERT: [(p1 : 0.09), (p2 : 0.07), (p3 : 0.63), (p4 : 0.12), (p5 : 0.04), (p6 : 0.05)]
The consistent emphasis on parameter p3 (0.58–0.63) yields v3,24 = 0.92.
12

Perturbation Analysis:
We introduce variations in the stratagem description:
• Original: “Use Allies’ Resources”
• Variant 1: “Leverage Partnership Assets”
• Variant 2: “Utilize Collaborative Resources”
The stable distribution patterns across variants produce s3,24 = 0.88.
Expert Review:
Three expert ratings of parameter p3’s importance:
• Expert 1: 0.55
• Expert 2: 0.60
• Expert 3: 0.58
The close alignment with our computed distribution for parameter p3 (0.61) gives e3,24 = 0.94.
With weighting parameters α = 0.3, β = 0.3, and γ = 0.4 (emphasizing expert judgment
slightly), the final confidence score is:
c3,24 = 0.3 · 0.92 + 0.3 · 0.88 + 0.4 · 0.94
= 0.916
This high confidence score (¿ 0.9) suggests strong validation across all three approaches,
indicating reliable semantic mapping between parameter p3 (Relational Capacity) and Stratagem
24.
4
Computational Architecture
The computational architecture integrates user inputs, strategic analysis, semantic process-
ing, and decision-making support, leveraging both semantic analysis and Large Language
Models (LLMs) for insight generation and reporting. A key feature is that the architec-
ture manages a structured conversation flow to guide users through scenario parameter
collection, framework-heuristic mapping, and final report generation.
The system architecture consists of the following components (see Figure 1):
1. Strategic Data Input Layer: Users interact with a structured graphical environment
(the context editor) to input competitive intelligence data, market information, and
other relevant strategic details. This environment supports both quantitative data and
qualitative descriptions, with workflow states managing data validation and format
requirements. Detailed implementation specifications are provided in Appendix A.4.
2. Semantic Analysis Engine: This component processes input data using the method-
ology described in Section 3. Specifically, it:
• Creates vector representations of strategic situations
• Computes semantic similarities with framework parameters
13

• Maps situations to relevant heuristic patterns
• Generates initial parameter distributions
3. Framework Integration Layer: The system translates semantic analysis results
into the chosen analytical framework’s parameters. This layer ensures that framework-
agnostic analysis can be mapped to specific strategic tools while maintaining consistent
evaluation metrics across frameworks.
4. Strategic Processing Core: The main engine applies framework-specific weightings,
evaluates strategic options, matches situations with relevant heuristics, and generates
preliminary recommendations.
The processing core incorporates conversation state
information to produce context-appropriate guidance.
5. LLM Integration Layer: The system interfaces with LLMs through standardized
APIs to transform technical analysis into actionable insights. The architecture con-
strains LLM tasks via predefined templates to ensure structured, safe, and consistent
outputs. Key functions include:
• Translation of semantic similarities into natural language explanations
• Contextualization of framework-heuristic matches
• Generation of both executive summaries and detailed reports
• Template-based validation mechanisms for generated content
6. Report Generation and Visualization: The final layer produces comprehensive
strategic analysis reports, visual representations of strategic options, and detailed im-
plementation recommendations.
These outputs integrate data from all prior steps,
including scenario parameters, semantic analysis scores, and LLM-generated commen-
taries.
14

Figure 1: Computational Architecture Overview
The architecture’s modular design allows different frameworks and heuristic sets to be
integrated without modifying the core system.
Implementation details, including JSON
workflow definitions, state management specifications, and component interaction protocols,
are provided in Appendix A.4.
This architecture provides several key advantages:
• Flexibility: Supports multiple strategic frameworks and heuristic sets
• Scalability: Handles increasing complexity in strategic analysis
• Safety: Constrains LLM use to well-defined tasks
• Reproducibility: Ensures consistent analysis and recommendations
5
Case Studies
We demonstrate our semantic integration approach through two case studies:
1. A contemporary scenario of competing innovation pathways in the automotive industry
2. A historical competition in the personal computer market
These cases illustrate how our methodology connects strategic frameworks with decision
heuristics in different domains.
15

5.1
Semantic Analysis of the Hydrogen vs. Electric Competition
in the Automotive Industry
This first case study examines the strategic rivalry between hydrogen-based and electric-
based propulsion systems in the global automotive industry. Drawing on scenario inputs, the
system processes and compares two principal actors (HydrogenEngines and ElectricEngines)
with respect to their capacities for achieving MarketDominanceInSustainableAutomotive. By
applying the semantic analysis pipeline described in Section 3, we derive quantitative param-
eter values, match them to appropriate stratagems, and generate strategic recommendations.
5.1.1
Parameter Analysis
The parameter values shown below were derived by aggregating insights from structured in-
terviews with stakeholders in both the automotive and energy industries (e.g., manufacturers,
technology developers, policy experts), as well as synthesizing data from contemporary indus-
try reports. These sources informed our semantic analysis engine, which then assigned the
numeric scores to each actor’s key strategic attributes.
Parameter
HydrogenEngines
ElectricEngines
Defensive Strength
3.25
4.0
Offensive Strength
3.75
4.2
Relational Capacity
3.60
4.5
Potential Energy
4.00
4.8
Time Availability
3.20
4.3
Context Fit
3.80
4.6
Table 1: Semantic Analysis of Hydrogen vs. Electric Parameters
HydrogenEngines exhibits relatively strong Potential Energy (4.0), reflecting substantial in-
vestments and technological innovation, but shows lower Time Availability (3.2), indicating
urgency to secure market share. ElectricEngines, by contrast, attains higher overall param-
eter values, including robust Relational Capacity (4.5) and Context Fit (4.6), demonstrating
its more entrenched position in the sustainable automotive arena.
5.1.2
Stratagem Semantic Analysis
Following the methodology from Section 3, the system analyzes each of the Thirty-Six
Stratagems to derive parameter weights:
wij =
P
t∈Tj s(t, pi)
P
k
P
t∈Tj s(t, pk),
(8)
where
• wij is the weight of parameter i in stratagem j,
16

• Tj is the set of terms in the textual description of stratagem j,
• s(t, pi) is the semantic similarity between term t and parameter i.
For illustration, consider Stratagem 16 (“Leave the opponent illusory ways out”), ranked
highly for HydrogenEngines. A linguistic examination of key terms such as illusory, decep-
tion, and misdirection led to higher weights for Offensive Strength and Relational Capacity,
aligning with the actor’s moderate ability to engage in indirect actions.
5.1.3
Situation-Stratagem Matching
The system computes an alignment score between each actor’s parameter distribution and
each stratagem’s profile:
alignment(s, h) =
X
i
wi · pi · ci,
(9)
where wi is the parameter weight in the stratagem, pi is the parameter value for the actor,
and ci is a contextual relevance factor. Top matching stratagems for HydrogenEngines (with
effectiveness scores, EFF) are listed in Table 2.
Stratagem
Score (EFF)
Key Alignment
Implementation Focus
16: Illusory Ways Out
6.03
Offensive (3.75)
Misleading EV sector
15: Lure into Unfavorable Env.
5.72
Potential (4.0)
Exploit EV limitations
24: Use Allies’ Resources
5.68
Relational (3.6)
Infrastructure partnerships
3: Act Through an Ally
5.56
Offensive (3.75)
Indirect policy influence
1: Acting Unnoticed
5.41
Context Fit (3.8)
Quiet tech development
Table 2: Top Matching Stratagems for HydrogenEngines
5.1.4
Strategic Recommendations
Based on these matching results, the system generates actionable recommendations for Hy-
drogenEngines to achieve MarketDominanceInSustainableAutomotive:
1. Primary Strategy: Indirect Positioning
• Stratagem 16 (Illusory Ways Out): Create paths leading ElectricEngines into
complacency or unproductive markets, while HydrogenEngines solidifies niches
such as freight and heavy-duty applications.
• Alignment Score: 6.03
2. Supporting Strategy: Target Vulnerable Segments
• Stratagem 15 (Lure into Unfavorable Env.): Exploit EV weaknesses (e.g., lim-
ited mileage in heavy-duty use) by focusing hydrogen tech where EVs are less
dominant.
• Alignment Score: 5.72
17

3. Alliances and Borrowed Influence
• Stratagem 24 (Use Allies’ Resources) & Stratagem 3 (Act Through an Ally): Es-
tablish partnerships with governments, energy sectors, and logistics enterprises to
co-develop hydrogen infrastructure and coordinate policy support.
• Alignment Scores: 5.68, 5.56
4. Discreet Development Efforts
• Stratagem 1 (Acting Unnoticed): Invest quietly in R&D, infrastructure, and lob-
bying until hydrogen-based solutions are ready for large-scale deployment.
• Alignment Score: 5.41
5.1.5
Implementation Pathways
Figure 2 highlights concrete implementation steps: forging covert alliances, occupying un-
derdeveloped markets, and progressively rolling out hydrogen infrastructure.
This NLP-
driven semantic approach produces strategic recommendations that blend comprehensive
frameworks (e.g., 6C) with concise heuristic insights (e.g., the Thirty-Six Stratagems). By
leveraging alliances and focusing on niche strengths, HydrogenEngines can challenge Elec-
tricEngines’ market dominance in the evolving automotive landscape.
Figure 2: Strategic Implementation Pathways for HydrogenEngines, showing primary and
secondary strategies with tactical implementations.
Dashed lines indicate cross-strategy
synergies.
5.2
Semantic Analysis of the Commodore–Apple Market Compe-
tition
The second case study turns to historical business competition: in the late 1980s, Com-
modore, a pioneer in the personal computer market, faced fierce rivalry from Apple. Although
18

the Commodore 64 became one of the best-selling computers of all time, Commodore’s mar-
ket share eventually declined. Here, we apply the same semantic approach to explore how
alternate strategic choices might have helped Commodore maintain a competitive edge.
5.2.1
Parameter Analysis
These parameter values were derived by examining a range of historical documents and re-
ports detailing the so-called ”PC wars” of the 1980s (e.g., market analyses, shareholder
reports, and industry assessments). The semantic analysis engine then processed this docu-
mentary evidence to produce the numeric scores that reflect each actor’s strategic attributes
during that period.
Parameter
Commodore
Apple
Offensive Strength
3.5
4.0
Defensive Strength
3.0
3.5
Relational Capacity
2.8
3.8
Potential Energy
3.0
4.2
Time Availability
3.5
4.0
Context Fit
2.9
4.0
Table 3: Semantic Analysis of Commodore–Apple Parameters
Commodore shows moderate Offensive Strength (3.5) but lower Relational Capacity (2.8)
compared to Apple, indicating less success in forging strategic partnerships or consumer
alliances. Meanwhile, Apple consistently registers higher scores across multiple dimensions,
including Potential Energy (4.2).
5.2.2
Stratagem Semantic Analysis
Following the same weighting approach, each stratagem in the Thirty-Six Stratagems is
evaluated for relevance to Commodore’s parameters. For instance, Stratagem 18 (“Capture
Core Strengths”) is associated with keywords like attack, capture, dominate (aligned with
Offensive Strength) and resources, capabilities, power (aligned with Potential Energy), among
others.
5.2.3
Situation-Stratagem Matching
Using a similar alignment formula, the system identifies a handful of potentially optimal
strategies for Commodore, as shown in Table 4.
5.2.4
Strategic Recommendations
Based on these matches, the system suggests:
1. Primary Strategy: Core Capability Development¿
19

Stratagem
Score
Key Alignment
Implementation Focus
Capture Core (18)
0.85
Offensive (3.5)
Product innovation
Resource Focus (11)
0.82
Potential (3.0)
Strategic allocation
Alliance Building (23)
0.78
Time (3.5)
Partnership development
Table 4: Stratagem Matching Results for Commodore–Apple Competition
• Focus on product innovation and user-interface development
• Directly counter Apple’s market differentiators
• Alignment Score: 0.85
2. Supporting Strategy: Resource Optimization
• Reallocate development resources toward high-potential product lines
• Streamline less profitable divisions
• Alignment Score: 0.82
3. Tactical Implementation
• Launch targeted product-development campaigns
• Invest in market positioning
• Seek out strategic partnerships
5.2.5
Implementation Pathways
Figure 3 illustrates potential implementation paths. Using semantic analysis to spotlight
Commodore’s opportunities for core capability development and resource optimization, the
approach reveals how historical outcomes might have diverged if Commodore had adopted
structured strategic planning tied to concise, proven heuristics.
20

Figure 3: Strategic Implementation Pathways for Commodore vs. Apple, showing a primary
focus on core capability development and a secondary focus on resource optimization. Dashed
lines indicate cross-strategy synergies.
5.3
Cross-Case Analysis
Although the hydrogen–electric automotive and Commodore–Apple PC contexts are quite
different in scope and era, both case studies confirm the flexibility and effectiveness of our
semantic approach:
1. Domain Adaptation:
• In the automotive domain, the semantic analysis highlighted indirect positioning
and alliances as critical.
• In the PC domain, a focus on core capabilities and resource allocation emerged
as priorities.
2. Recurring Patterns:
• Even across distinct industries, resource optimization, partnership development,
and strategic positioning are repeatedly identified as success factors.
• Specific stratagems (e.g., alliance-building) have wide applicability, provided the
correct parameter alignment exists.
3. Implementation Pathways:
• Both studies exhibit primary and supporting strategies, tactical steps, and cross-
strategy synergies.
21

• Clear alignment scores lend transparency to why certain recommendations are
prioritized over others.
4. Framework-Heuristic Integration:
• In the automotive sector, the integrated approach effectively linked 6C parameters
(e.g., Potential Energy, Context Fit) with heuristics emphasizing deception and
alliance.
• In the PC sector, the same pipeline tied Offensive Strength and Potential Energy
to historically proven guidelines about capturing core strengths and leveraging
limited resources.
This comparative analysis demonstrates how a consistent semantic methodology can
bridge analytical frameworks and decision heuristics, regardless of domain differences.
5.4
Enhanced Understanding through LLM Reporting
In practice, the system’s semantic scores and recommendations can be further enriched by
Large Language Models (LLMs). Once the alignment scores and suggested strategies are
determined, an LLM can:
• Generate Summaries: Provide executive overviews for stakeholders, focusing on the
highest-scoring tactics.
• Explain Reasoning: Offer narrative justifications for why certain stratagems align
well with particular parameters.
• Highlight Potential Risks: Enumerate conditions or assumptions that might inval-
idate certain recommendations.
This capability empowers decision-makers to understand not just which strategies are
recommended but also the rationale behind them—ultimately improving trust and adoption
in corporate or organizational settings.
5.5
Implementation Insights
Across the two case studies, several insights emerge:
1. Text Processing Nuances:
• Industry-specific jargon can alter semantic similarity calculations.
• Historical data enriches pattern recognition but may require separate preprocess-
ing.
2. Pattern Matching Consistency:
• Similar strategic patterns recur, such as positioning, resource optimization, or
alliance-building.
• Modest parameter differences can push one stratagem over another in the ranking.
22

3. Validation and Context:
• Historical (Commodore–Apple) outcomes offer tangible lessons in how lacking a
suitable strategy might lead to missed market opportunities.
• Contemporary contexts (hydrogen vs. electric) show how real-time data can in-
form flexible, AI-assisted decisions.
Together, these insights underscore the value of a robust, domain-agnostic methodology
for integrating analytical frameworks and decision heuristics supported by semantic analysis
and enriched by LLM-driven reporting.
5.6
Extended Analysis Reports
The semantic analysis pipeline presented in this paper has been applied to numerous strate-
gic scenarios beyond the two detailed case studies above. Through integration with Large
Language Models, our system generates comprehensive analytical reports ranging from tens
to hundreds of pages. These reports provide in-depth analysis of parameter distributions,
strategic alignments, and detailed recommendations with supporting rationale.
The complete reports for both the hydrogen-electric automotive competition and the
Commodore-Apple market rivalry, along with analyses of many other strategic scenarios, are
available at https://www.linkedin.com/company/103262552/admin/dashboard/. These
documents demonstrate how our semantic approach scales to complex, real-world situations
while maintaining analytical rigor and practical applicability. Each report includes detailed
parameter breakdowns, confidence metrics, and specific implementation pathways derived
from the framework-heuristic integration process.
6
Empirical Validation
To validate our framework-stratagem integration approach, we conducted a focused empirical
study examining how effectively the Thirty-Six Stratagems can be integrated with different
analytical frameworks. Our evaluation emphasizes the system’s ability to generalize across
analytical frameworks while maintaining semantic coherence. While Section 3.5 established
the theoretical foundations for validating semantic mappings through cross-validation, per-
turbation analysis, and expert review—yielding confidence scores (cij)—this section extends
and operationalizes these concepts into measurable performance metrics.
6.1
Experimental Setup
We evaluated three key aspects of the system:
1. Framework Integration: Testing with three analytical frameworks:
• 6C Framework (primary test case)
• SWOT Analysis
23

• Porter’s Five Forces
2. Framework-Stratagem Integration: Testing the integration of the Thirty-Six Stratagems
with each analytical framework
3. Cross-Framework Consistency: Evaluating recommendation stability across frame-
works
6.2
Results
6.2.1
Framework Integration Performance
Table 5 shows the integration quality metrics across different frameworks:
Table 5: Framework Integration Results with the Thirty-Six Stratagems
Framework
Coverage
Consistency
Adaptability
6C Framework
0.89
0.92
0.87
SWOT
0.85
0.88
0.84
Porter’s Five Forces
0.82
0.85
0.81
Key findings include:
• High coverage (¿ 0.80) across all frameworks
• Strong consistency in parameter mapping
• Declining but still robust performance with more complex frameworks
6.2.2
Stratagem Integration Performance
Expert Agreement scores were calculated based on distributions generated by five experts
with deep knowledge of both the analytical frameworks and the Thirty-Six Stratagems. The
results show strong agreement with expert-derived mappings (¿0.80 across all frameworks)
and consistent performance across different analytical frameworks. Detailed calculations and
extended examples are provided in Appendix A.5.
6.3
Discussion
The empirical results validate three key aspects of our approach:
1. Integration Capability: The system successfully integrates the Thirty-Six Stratagems
with diverse analytical frameworks while maintaining high semantic accuracy.
2. Scalability: Performance remains robust when adapting to new frameworks, with
only modest degradation in accuracy.
3. Efficiency: Significant reduction in integration time compared to manual approaches
while maintaining expert-level accuracy.
24

Limitations and considerations:
• Performance slightly decreases with more complex frameworks
• Expert validation remains valuable for novel framework combinations
• System requires initial training data for optimal performance
These results demonstrate that our semantic approach provides a viable method for
automating framework-stratagem integration while maintaining accuracy and enabling sys-
tematic scaling to new domains.
6.4
Further Considerations on Scalability
Although our current validation demonstrates the system’s effectiveness across several an-
alytical frameworks and moderate-sized data sets, additional research is needed to assess
performance at large scales or in highly complex business scenarios. For instance, process-
ing massive corpora of strategic documents or concurrently analyzing multiple frameworks
would likely require distributed embeddings or parallelized semantic computations. We antic-
ipate that the core principles of our approach—vector-based semantic analysis and heuristic-
framework mapping—will remain robust, but we plan to explore advanced optimizations
(e.g., sharding, caching, or GPU acceleration) in future work.
7
Related Work
This section surveys prior research informing our approach to developing a recommender-
system architecture for strategic decision-making.
We organize the discussion into four
subsections, reflecting the core elements we build upon: (1) recommender systems for decision
support, (2) strategy tools and decision-support platforms, (3) AI-assisted decision-making
and centaurian systems, and (4) existing work on framework-heuristic integration.
7.1
Recommender Systems and Decision Support
Recommendation technologies have long been recognized as valuable tools for assisting users
in selecting products, content, or services that match their needs and preferences. Early
efforts in this field often relied on collaborative filtering, content-based filtering, or hybrid
approaches, as documented in seminal works on decision support [14]. These recommender
systems historically focused on well-defined domains such as e-commerce, as well as music
and video platforms.
More recently, there has been a surge of interest in context-aware
recommender systems, which factor in dynamic variables—such as user context, time, and
location—to enhance relevance [15]. Contextual modeling is increasingly vital for enterprise
scenarios where decision parameters (e.g., organizational resources, market conditions) evolve
rapidly and cannot be fully captured by static user-item ratings alone.
The ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys) showcases cutting-
edge developments in these areas. For instance, the 2024 edition in Bari https://recsys.
25

acm.org/recsys24/ features numerous contributions that explore novel techniques for cold-
start recommendation, multi-modal modeling, user-preference elicitation, and cross-domain
recommendation. Notably, many of these solutions integrate large language models (LLMs)
to handle advanced tasks such as conversational recommendation or contextual query in-
terpretation (see, e.g., Instructing and Prompting Large Language Models for Explainable
Cross-domain Recommendations [16] and Unleashing the Retrieval Potential of Large Lan-
guage Models [17]). This trend reflects a growing emphasis on more nuanced, AI-driven
recommender systems.
Despite this extensive literature on consumer-centric recommenders, relatively few imple-
mentations have explicitly adapted core analytical frameworks from corporate strategy (e.g.,
Porter’s Five Forces) to a recommendation context for organizational decision-making. Our
work addresses this gap by developing a context-aware, content-based recommender
that operates on strategic ”items” (i.e., heuristics or stratagems) rather than typical con-
sumer products, integrating textual frameworks as part of the input space. In doing so,
we position our research at the intersection of decision-support recommender systems [14]
and context-aware modeling [15], while offering a novel integration of established strate-
gic matrices with heuristic libraries. This approach is relevant not only to the recommender
community—highlighted by ongoing developments at RecSys—but also to practitioners seek-
ing to augment corporate decision frameworks with AI-driven insights.
7.2
Strategy Tools and Decision-Support Platforms
The formalization and systematization of organizational decision-making has evolved along
several parallel paths. The Business Rules approach, pioneered by Ross [18], established
foundational principles for encoding operational decision logic into explicit, executable state-
ments. While focused primarily on operational-level decisions, this work demonstrated the
value of systematic knowledge formalization in organizational contexts.
At the strategic level, the literature has long recognized the value of scenario planning
for coping with uncertain futures [19]. Scenario planning enables decision-makers to sys-
tematically explore multiple plausible environments an organization might face [20]. Com-
plementary to both business rules and scenario planning, more recent works have begun
to incorporate gamification principles for interactive learning and engagement in strategic
contexts. For instance, [21] propose Gamiflow, a flow-theory-based gamification framework
that illustrates the potential of user-centric interfaces and simulations in educational or or-
ganizational settings.
Despite these advances in rule-based systems and scenario-based platforms, many existing
approaches remain limited in integrating different forms of strategic knowledge. Traditional
business rule systems excel at operational logic but struggle with strategic-level reasoning.
Similarly, scenario planning tools, while valuable for strategic exploration, often rely on
predefined logic instead of natural language processing. They typically emphasize interface
design, user motivation, or scenario exploration without deeply integrating semantic analy-
sis to link strategic frameworks (e.g., Porter’s Five Forces, the 6C framework) with heuristic
26

libraries (e.g., the Thirty-Six Stratagems).
Our approach aims to bridge these gaps by automating the mapping between scenario-
specific parameters and context-appropriate heuristics. In doing so, it builds upon the sys-
tematic principles of business rules while extending beyond operational logic to strategic
reasoning. It benefits from the flexibility of scenario planning and gamification while lever-
aging advanced NLP to generate actionable guidance in a single integrated environment.
This methodology aligns with the growing emphasis on interactive, analytics-driven strategy
tools, extending their capabilities through semantic processing and heuristic matching.
7.3
AI-Assisted Decision Making and Centaurian Systems
Our recommender-system architecture for actionable strategies in the corporate world
also aligns with the notion of centaurian design [22], where human experts work in con-
cert with AI components to achieve superior outcomes. This paradigm, sometimes called
“human-in-the-loop” or “centaur systems,” underscores the synergy between natural and ar-
tificial intelligence [24]. In particular, our approach can be viewed as a monotonic centaur
system [22], because it augments existing human decision-making processes—enhancing ana-
lytical scope and consistency—without fundamentally altering the semantics of the previously
manual workflow.
By contrast, certain creative or open-ended domains (e.g., art and design) may experience
more “disruptive” centaurian processes, in which AI-driven innovation generates outcomes
far removed from traditional human routines [23]. In our corporate-strategy setting, the goal
is to reinforce and systematize established decision mechanisms, using NLP to automate tasks
like semantic similarity scoring, heuristic matching, and natural language reporting. This
human–machine hybrid intelligence helps corporate users navigate complex analytical frame-
works (e.g., 6C, Porter’s Five Forces) alongside heuristic sets (e.g., Thirty-Six Stratagems)
without displacing human strategists. Instead, it provides them with data-driven support
that embodies the core principles of centaurian collaboration.
LLMs for Explanation and Hypothesis Generation. Recent studies of GPT-4 and
related models [25] further highlight how large language models can facilitate abductive
reasoning—i.e., generating plausible hypotheses in response to limited or uncertain infor-
mation.
Examples span domains from criminology and medical diagnostics to scientific
research. These findings resonate with our system’s approach: LLMs are integrated not as
autonomous decision-makers but as collaborative components that offer explanatory narra-
tives, surface novel insights, and support humans in exploring strategic possibilities. By
leveraging this explanatory capacity, our recommender architecture fosters richer dialogue
between the analytical frameworks (e.g., 6C) and heuristic libraries (e.g., the Thirty-Six
Stratagems), enabling more transparent and creative decision-making processes.
27

8
Conclusion
This paper has presented a context-aware, content-based recommender system de-
signed to bridge the gap between analytical frameworks and decision heuristics through
semantic analysis. By treating strategic frameworks (e.g., 6C, Porter’s Five Forces) and
heuristic collections (e.g., the Thirty-Six Stratagems) as textual resources, our approach ad-
dresses a core challenge in strategic decision-making: how to systematically align the rigor
of structured analysis with the pragmatism and speed of heuristic-based action.
8.1
Key Contributions
The primary contributions of this work include:
1. Recommender-System Architecture: A novel design that reframes strategic knowl-
edge as “items” for recommendation, enabling context-aware and content-based match-
ing between analytical parameters and decision heuristics.
2. Semantic Integration Framework: A systematic methodology for connecting differ-
ent frameworks (e.g., 6C, SWOT) with heuristic sets (e.g., the Thirty-Six Stratagems,
OODA loops) via vector embeddings and semantic similarity scores.
3. Computational Implementation:
A flexible architecture combining deep NLP
pipelines, heuristic mapping, and AI-assisted reporting. This includes a gamified sim-
ulation layer that allows users to explore strategic scenarios in an interactive manner.
4. Generality Across Domains: Evidence from multiple case studies (e.g., hydrogen
vs. electric automotive competition, the Commodore–Apple rivalry) illustrating that
the approach can scale to diverse strategic contexts, from business to technology.
8.2
Practical Implications
Our system delivers several tangible benefits for organizations seeking an actionable decision-
support tool:
• Enriched Decision Support: Merges quantitative analysis (framework-based) with
qualitative insight (heuristics), fostering more balanced strategic decisions.
• Scalable Knowledge Transfer: Translates textual frameworks and heuristics into
easily comparable vector forms, reducing the reliance on domain-specific expertise.
• Efficient Recommendations: Automates the matching process between high-level
strategy parameters and heuristics, accelerating scenario analysis and cutting down on
manual mapping.
• Human-Centric AI Integration: Constrains large language models to explain and
synthesize, thereby strengthening, rather than replacing, human strategists—a mono-
tonic centaur approach.
28

8.3
Limitations and Future Work
Although the present study highlights promising results, several issues warrant further re-
search:
1. Semantic Processing:
• More advanced domain adaptation techniques for industry-specific terminology.
• Improved context modeling over longer textual inputs and time horizons.
• Inclusion of dynamic scenario elements (e.g., real-time data streams).
2. Framework Integration:
• Investigations into additional strategic tools (e.g., VRIO, PESTLE).
• Automated detection of framework-specific factors or sub-parameters.
• Potential integration of quantitative indicators (e.g., financial metrics).
3. Validation and User Studies:
• Systematic cross-domain evaluations in different organizational contexts.
• Longitudinal studies to assess real-world adoption and impact on decision out-
comes.
• Usability research on the simulation environment and LLM-based explanations.
8.4
Future Directions
The main line of future work will consist in identifying further heuristic contexts in which
the approach proposed here can be applied. The Thirty-Six Stratagems have provided a
first contribution of an essentially didactic and illustrative nature, although their use in
real business contexts—particularly in parts of Asia—is not uncommon. Two important
directions emerge:
1. Organizational-Specific Heuristics and Simple Rules: One promising avenue is
to extract decision-making rules that are specific, idiosyncratic, and intrinsic to orga-
nizations, in accordance with the idea of “simple rules” for strategic decision-making
[5]. Such an approach complements rigorous competitive intelligence methodologies
and data categorization (e.g., 6C, SWOT, Porter’s Five Forces).
2. Translating Other Classic Texts into Practical Heuristics: Another promis-
ing direction is to apply the same semantic-linguistic methodology to interpret classic
strategic works beyond the Thirty-Six Stratagems, such as Sun Tzu’s Art of War,
Machiavelli’s The Prince, and Chanakya’s Arthashastra.
29

8.5
Concluding Remarks
Integrating analytical frameworks with decision heuristics through NLP-driven recommenders
represents a compelling advance in strategic decision-making. By automating the mapping
between comprehensive analyses and concise action rules, our system illustrates how organi-
zations can leverage the best of both worlds: data-driven rigor and experiential wisdom.
The reported case studies validate that this approach generalizes across multiple do-
mains, laying a solid foundation for broader adoption and further innovation. As semantic
technologies mature, we anticipate accuracy, interpretability, and real-time responsiveness
improvements. Ultimately, this research contributes to the growing conversation on how
human-centered AI can seamlessly amplify existing strategic processes, offering a blueprint
for interactive, context-aware, and heuristic-informed decision-support solutions.
Funding
Remo Pareschi has been funded by the European Union—NextGenerationEU under the
Italian Ministry of University and Research (MUR) National Innovation Ecosystem grant
ECS00000041- VITALITY—CUP E13C22001060006.
Acknowledgments
We thank Herv´e Gallaire, whose comments helped improve various versions of this article.
References
[1] Mintzberg, H., “Strategy Safari: A Guided Tour Through the Wilds of Strategic Man-
agement,” Simon and Schuster, New York, NY, 2005.
[2] Hirt, M., Willmott, P., “Strategic principles for competing in the digital age,” McKinsey
& Company article, 2014.
[3] Taylor, P., “The Thirty-Six Stratagems: A modern interpretation of a strategy classic,”
Infinite Ideas, 2013.
[4] von Senger, H., Gubitz, M., “The Book of Stratagems: Tactics for Triumph and Sur-
vival,” Viking, 1991.
[5] Eisenhardt, K.M., Sull, D.N., “Strategy as Simple Rules,” Harvard Business Review,
Vol. 79, pp. 106–116, 2001.
[6] Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, L.,
Polosukhin, I., “Attention is All you Need,” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 5998–
6008, 2017.
30

[7] Devlin, J., Chang, M., Lee, K., Toutanova, K., “BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirec-
tional Transformers for Language Understanding,” Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2019,
pp. 4171–4186, 2019.
[8] Reimers, N., Gurevych, I., “Sentence-BERT: Sentence Embeddings using Siamese
BERT-Networks,” EMNLP-IJCNLP 2019, pp. 3980–3990, 2019.
[9] Blei, D.M., “Probabilistic topic models,” Communications of the ACM, Vol. 55, No. 4,
pp. 77–84, 2012.
[10] Di Pilla, P., Pareschi, R., Salzano, F., Zappone, F., “Listening to what the system tells
us: Innovative auditing for distributed systems,” Frontiers in Computer Science, Vol. 4,
2023.
[11] Cover, T.M., Thomas, J.A., “Elements of Information Theory,” John Wiley & Sons,
Hoboken, NJ, 2006.
[12] Helms, M., Nixon, J., “Exploring SWOT analysis – where are we now? A review of
academic research from the last decade,” Journal of Strategy and Management, Vol. 3,
pp. 215–251, 2010.
[13] Porter, M.E., “The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy,” Harvard Business
Review, Vol. 86, No. 1, pp. 78–93, 2008.
[14] Liang, T.P., “Recommendation systems for decision support: An editorial introduction,”
Decision Support Systems, Vol. 45, No. 3, pp. 385–386, 2008.
[15] Kulkarni, S., Rodd, S.F., “Context Aware Recommendation Systems: A review of the
state of the art techniques,” Computer Science Review, Vol. 37, 100255, 2020.
[16] Petruzzelli, A., Musto, C., Laraspata, L., Rinaldi, I., de Gemmis, M., Lops, P., Se-
meraro, G., “Instructing and Prompting Large Language Models for Explainable Cross-
domain Recommendations,” Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Recommender
Systems, pp. 298–308, 2024.
[17] Yang, T., Chen, L., “Unleashing the Retrieval Potential of Large Language Models in
Conversational Recommender Systems,” Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on
Recommender Systems, pp. 43–52, 2024.
[18] Ross, R.G., “Principles of the Business Rule Approach,” Addison-Wesley Professional,
Boston, MA, 2003.
[19] Schoemaker, P., “Scenario Planning,” pp. 1–9, 2016.
[20] Dean, M., “Scenario Planning: A Literature Review,” ResearchGate Preprint, 2019.
[21] Challco, G., Bittencourt, I., Reis, M., Santos, J., Isotani, S., “Gamiflow: Towards a Flow
Theory-Based Gamification Framework for Learning Scenarios,” pp. 415–421, 2023.
31

[22] Pareschi, R., “Beyond Human and Machine: An Architecture and Methodology Guide-
line for Centaurian Design,” Sci, Vol. 6, No. 4, 71, 2024.
[23] Pareschi, R., “Centaur Art: The Future of Art in the Age of Generative AI,” Springer,
Cham, 2024.
[24] Saghafian, S., Idan, L., “Effective generative AI: The human-algorithm centaur,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2406.10942, 2024.
[25] Pareschi, R., “Abductive reasoning with the GPT-4 language model: Case studies from
criminal investigation, medical practice, scientific research,” Sistemi intelligenti, pp.
435–444, 2023.
[26] Sull, D., Eisenhardt, K.M., “Simple Rules: How to Thrive in a Complex World,”
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015.
32

A
Technical Details and Supplementary Information
A.1
Mathematical Foundations
A.1.1
Vector Space Calculations
For framework parameters and heuristic descriptions, we create vector representations using:
v(t) =
X
w∈t
αw · e(w)
(10)
where:
• v(t) is the vector representation of text t
• w represents individual words or phrases
• e(w) is the embedding vector for word w
• αw is the weight assigned to word w
For example, considering parameter p3 (Relational Capacity), we compute:
Base definition vector components:
e(manage) = [(d1 : 0.2), (d2 : 0.5), (d3 : 0.3)]
e(relationships) = [(d1 : 0.6), (d2 : 0.4), (d3 : 0.5)]
(11)
e(stakeholders) = [(d1 : 0.4), (d2 : 0.6), (d3 : 0.3)]
Combined with weights αw = 1.0:
v(d3) = [(d1 : 1.2), (d2 : 1.5), (d3 : 1.1)]
(12)
Adding contextual information with λ = 0.5:
p3 = [(d1 : 1.2), (d2 : 1.5), (d3 : 1.1)]
+ 0.5 · [(d1 : 0.9), (d2 : 1.1), (d3 : 0.8)]
(13)
= [(d1 : 1.65), (d2 : 2.05), (d3 : 1.5)]
This detailed computation demonstrates how we combine base definitions with contextual
information to create rich vector representations of strategic parameters.
33

A.2
Semantic Analysis
A.2.1
Similarity Calculations
To demonstrate how similarity calculations reflect semantic alignment between parameters
and stratagems, we present detailed computations for parameter p3 (Relational Capacity)
and Stratagem 24 (“Use Allies’ Resources”).
Given the vector representation for parameter p3:
h24 = [(d1 : 1.8), (d2 : 1.9), (d3 : 1.4)]
Applying equation (4):
sim(p3, h24) =
(1.65 × 1.8) + (2.05 × 1.9) + (1.5 × 1.4)
√
1.652 + 2.052 + 1.52 ×
√
1.82 + 1.92 + 1.42
=
8.91
√
9.85 ×
√
9.21
= 0.93
This high similarity score quantitatively captures the semantic alignment between parameter
p3’s focus on relationship management and Stratagem 24’s emphasis on leveraging allies.
A.2.2
Kullback-Leibler Divergence Calculations
To validate our semantic mappings, we compute the KL divergence between system-generated
distributions (Q) and expert-provided distributions (P). For Stratagem 24, we compare:
System distribution Q:
[(p1: 0.10), (p2: 0.15), (p3: 0.40), (p4: 0.20), (p5: 0.05), (p6: 0.10)]
Expert distribution P:
[(p1: 0.15), (p2: 0.10), (p3: 0.45), (p4: 0.15), (p5: 0.05), (p6: 0.10)]
Computing term by term:
Offensive:
0.10 · log(0.10/0.15) = −0.0176
Defensive:
0.15 · log(0.15/0.10) = +0.0347
Relational:
0.40 · log(0.40/0.45) = −0.0186
(14)
Potential:
0.20 · log(0.20/0.15) = +0.0288
Time:
0.05 · log(0.05/0.05) = 0
Context:
0.10 · log(0.10/0.10) = 0
The resulting KL divergence of 0.0273 indicates strong alignment between system-generated
and expert distributions.
34

A.3
Algorithm Implementation
A.3.1
Selection Process Details
To illustrate how the stratagem selection algorithm works in practice, consider a strategic
scenario where a company needs to expand its market presence while maintaining existing
partnerships. The situation vector x might be:
x = [(p1: 0.15), (p2: 0.10), (p3: 0.45), (p4: 0.20), (p5: 0.05), (p6: 0.05)]
From our analysis, we have several heuristic distributions including Stratagem 24 (“Use
Allies’ Resources”):
d24 = [(p1: 0.10), (p2: 0.07), (p3: 0.61), (p4: 0.13), (p5: 0.03), (p6: 0.06)]
Applying cosine similarity:
score24 =
(0.15 × 0.10) + (0.10 × 0.07) + · · · + (0.05 × 0.06)
√
0.152 + 0.102 + · · · + 0.052 ×
√
0.102 + 0.072 + · · · + 0.062
= 0.89
Similarly, for two other relevant stratagems:
Stratagem 15 (“Lure Into Unfavorable Position”):
d15 = [(p1: 0.40), (p2: 0.15), (p3: 0.20), (p4: 0.15), (p5: 0.05), (p6: 0.05)]
score15 = 0.76
Stratagem 3 (“Kill With Borrowed Knife”):
d3 = [(p1: 0.30), (p2: 0.10), (p3: 0.35), (p4: 0.15), (p5: 0.05), (p6: 0.05)]
score3 = 0.82
With threshold θ = 0.75, the algorithm returns:
[(24, 0.89), (3, 0.82), (15, 0.76)]
35

A.4
System Architecture Details
A.4.1
Workflow Definitions
The system uses JSON state definitions to manage conversation flow and data validation.
Below, we provide some illustrative excerpts from those definitions:
{
"state": "parameter_collection",
"transitions": {
"complete": "framework_selection",
"incomplete": "parameter_prompt"
},
"validation": {
"required_fields": ["offensive_strength",
"defensive_strength"],
"value_bounds": {
"min": 0,
"max": 5
}
}
}
A.4.2
Conversation Management
The conversation manager implements a state machine that governs user interactions:
{
"states": {
"initial": {
"type": "input_collection",
"required_params": ["scenario_type", "actor_count"],
"next": "actor_details"
},
"actor_details": {
"type": "parameter_collection",
"validation": "validate_actor_params",
"next": "framework_selection"
},
"framework_selection": {
"type": "single_choice",
"options": ["6C", "SWOT", "Porter"],
"next": "analysis"
}
36

}
}
A.4.3
Component Interactions
Inter-component communication follows standardized protocols:
{
"request": {
"type": "semantic_analysis",
"content": {
"text": "strategic situation description",
"framework": "6C",
"parameters": {
"offensive_strength": 4.2,
"defensive_strength": 3.8
}
}
},
"response": {
"vectors": {
"situation": [0.8, 0.6, 0.7],
"params": {
"p1": [0.9, 0.5, 0.4]
}
},
"similarities": {
"stratagem_24": 0.85
}
}
}
A.4.4
LLM Integration
Template examples for LLM-generated content:
{
"template_type": "strategy_explanation",
"components": {
"context": {
"framework": "{{framework_name}}",
"key_parameters": "{{param_list}}",
37

"scores": "{{similarity_scores}}"
},
"structure": {
"introduction": "Based on {{framework_name}} analysis...",
"rationale": "The recommended strategy aligns with...",
"implementation": "Key steps include..."
},
"constraints": {
"max_length": 500,
"required_sections": ["context", "rationale", "steps"],
"style": "professional"
}
}
}
A.5
Validation Analysis
The examples in this appendix are intended primarily for illustrative purposes, showing how
our validation procedures work in practice. In the real system:
• The vectors representing parameters and heuristics generally have much higher dimen-
sionality (e.g., hundreds of embedding components) rather than the 3D vectors shown
here.
• Expert reviews may involve more participants (e.g., five or more) to ensure broader
consensus, whereas we show a three-expert sample below for didactic clarity.
Despite these simplifications, the overall process remains the same at larger scales.
A.5.1
Perturbation Analysis
Our perturbation analysis evaluated system robustness by introducing controlled variations
in input text. For example, considering Stratagem 24 (“Use Allies’ Resources”), we tested
these variations:
Original text:
"Use Allies’ Resources"
Variations tested:
1. "Leverage Partnership Assets"
2. "Utilize Collaborative Resources"
3. "Deploy Allied Capabilities"
38

Results for parameter p3 (Relational Capacity):
Original:
0.61
Variation 1:
0.58
Variation 2:
0.63
Variation 3:
0.59
The stable distribution patterns across variants (standard deviation ¡ 0.03) demonstrate
robust semantic mapping.
A.5.2
Cross-Validation Results
To ensure stability across multiple embedding models, we compare the system-generated
distributions of parameter importance using BERT-base, RoBERTa, and Sentence-BERT.
Although these examples focus on Stratagem 24 in a simplified format, the same approach
extends to higher-dimensional embeddings and additional heuristics or frameworks.
Model Comparison
Below are sample distributions for Stratagem 24 from each embed-
ding model:
BERT-base:
[(p1: 0.10), (p2: 0.07), (p3: 0.61), (p4: 0.13), (p5: 0.03), (p6: 0.06)]
RoBERTa:
[(p1: 0.11), (p2: 0.08), (p3: 0.58), (p4: 0.14), (p5: 0.03), (p6: 0.06)]
Sentence-BERT:
[(p1: 0.09), (p2: 0.07), (p3: 0.63), (p4: 0.12), (p5: 0.04), (p6: 0.05)]
Expert Ratings
For demonstration, we show three expert ratings of parameter p3’s im-
portance in Stratagem 24:
• Expert 1: 0.55
• Expert 2: 0.60
• Expert 3: 0.58
Although our main study employs five experts for deeper validation, these three ratings
illustrate the calculation process. With weighting parameters α = 0.3, β = 0.3, and γ = 0.4,
the final confidence score calculation is:
c3,24 = 0.3 · 0.92 + 0.3 · 0.88 + 0.4 · 0.94
= 0.916
indicating strong agreement between the system’s discovered distribution and the experts’
judgments.
39

A.5.3
Framework-Specific Implementation
Below is a short example illustrating how we parse a stratagem’s text into vectors and then
apply framework-specific adjustments. In real usage, these vectors are higher-dimensional,
and additional domain refinements may be employed.
Step 1: Text Preprocessing
Input: "Use Allies’ Resources"
Tokens: ["use", "allies", "resources"]
Step 2: Vector Representation
vuse = [0.2, 0.3, 0.1],
vallies = [0.4, 0.6, 0.5],
vresources = [0.3, 0.4, 0.2]
vtotal = [0.9, 1.3, 0.8]
(combined)
Step 3: Framework-Specific Adjustments
• 6C Framework. Increase weights for relational/offensive terms.
• SWOT Analysis. Distinguish internal vs. external factors.
• Porter’s Five Forces. Emphasize industry-structure terminology.
These illustrative factors ensure framework-specific nuances are captured. Despite the
minimal 3D example here, the actual system incorporates substantially larger embedding
vectors and more advanced weighting logic to handle more complex strategic texts.
40

