Soft Policy Optimization:
Online Off-Policy RL for Sequence Models
Taco Cohen * 1 David W. Zhang * 1 Kunhao Zheng 1 Yunhao Tang 1 Remi Munos 1 Gabriel Synnaeve 1
Abstract
RL-based post-training of language models is al-
most exclusively done using on-policy methods
such as PPO. These methods cannot learn from
arbitrary sequences such as those produced ear-
lier in training, in earlier runs, by human experts
or other policies, or by decoding and exploration
methods. This results in severe sample ineffi-
ciency and exploration difficulties, as well as a
potential loss of diversity in the policy responses.
Moreover, asynchronous PPO implementations
require frequent and costly model transfers, and
typically use value models which require a large
amount of memory. In this paper we introduce
Soft Policy Optimization (SPO), a simple, scal-
able and principled Soft RL method for sequence
model policies that can learn from arbitrary on-
line and offline trajectories and does not require
a separate value model. In experiments on code
contests, we shows that SPO outperforms PPO on
pass@10, is significantly faster and more memory
efficient, is able to benefit from off-policy data,
enjoys improved stability, and learns more diverse
(i.e. soft) policies.
1. Introduction
One of the key traits that distinguishes humans from other
animals is our capacity for social learning and open-ended
cultural evolution. Through the invention of writing and
the internet, AI is now able to leverage the product of our
cultural evolution by pretraining, yielding near human-level
understanding of many subjects. Yet, the reinforcement
learning stage, which holds the unique potential to surpass
human-level performance, still requires repeating the ex-
ploration process with each new training run – much like a
species whose members are unable to learn from the discov-
eries and mistakes of others.
*Equal contribution
1Meta Platforms, Inc..
Correspon-
dence to: Taco Cohen <tscohen@meta.com>, David W. Zhang
<dwz@meta.com>.
Copyright 2025 by the author(s).
Indeed, although online on-policy RL methods such as PPO
consistently outperform pure offline methods like DPO, they
must re-discover good behaviour in each training run (Xu
et al.; Rafailov et al., 2023; Schulman et al., 2017b). For
hard prompts (e.g. a coding challenge), it can easily take
thousands of rollouts to find a correct response (Wu et al.,
2024; Brown et al., 2024). The resulting trajectory is then
used to do a small clipped gradient update (lest the policy
collapse), after which it is discarded. In order to get un-
biased gradients and guarantee convergence, the rollouts
must be performed using standard sampling because alter-
native decoding or exploration methods result in off-policy
trajectories. Clearly, then, it would be highly desirable to
have RL methods that can learn from arbitrary previous
experiences, as it would allow us to leverage exploration
methods during training, and re-use hard-to-discover solu-
tions from previous training runs. In this way, AI models
become participants in the knowledge evolution process.
In this paper we introduce Soft Policy Optimization (SPO),
a principled and effective asynchronous online off-policy
soft RL method. SPO leverages both online and offline data,
and excels at learning policies with high entropy and high
return. A key idea behind our method is what we call the
Cumulative Q-Parameterization, which parameterizes the
token-level soft action-value function in terms of policy and
reference model log-probabilities.
This unification of policy and value function saves a signifi-
cant amount of memory. More importantly, we prove that a
cumulatively parameterized Q-function satisfies both soft
Bellman-consistency and path-consistency (Nachum et al.,
2017) by construction, except at tokens where a reward is
observed (in our case, only the last one). Hence, neither
Q-learning nor path-consistency losses are needed for non-
terminal tokens. We therefore explore a family of simple
off-policy losses that we derive from first principles and
which can be thought of equivalently as terminal Q-value
regression or full-sequence path-consistency learning.
We further prove that if either the policy or the value func-
tion is optimal, then so is the other one. This allows us to
flexibly combine policy-based and value-based losses (on
both online and offline trajectories), with the understanding
that all of them share the same optimum.
1
arXiv:2503.05453v1  [cs.LG]  7 Mar 2025

Soft Policy Optimization
We implement both PPO and a number of SPO variants
in an asynchronous distributed RL framework (Gehring
et al., 2024; Noukhovitch et al., 2024) and evaluate their
performance on the CodeContests and TACO competitive
programming benchmarks (Li et al., 2022; 2023). Our ex-
periments demonstrate that SPO consistently outperforms
PPO in terms of pass@10 scores, indicating that SPO learns
more diverse policies in accordance with the soft RL theory
on which our method is based. We also demonstrate that
SPO can effectively leverage offline data in practice to speed
up learning and yield improved results.
Furthermore, we perform a number of ablations to study the
effect of different SPO loss variants. To demonstrate the
utility of combining different loss functions, we show that
results can be improved by regressing the Q-values towards
Monte-Carlo targets for a subset of tokens obtained via
Pivotal Token Search (Abdin et al., 2024). Finally, because
off-policy learning does not require frequent model transfer
between compute nodes, we observe speedups of about 85%
compared to PPO.
2. Theoretical Results
2.1. Setup & Basic Results
We consider a simple setup, where the policy π(a|x) sees
a prompt x (e.g. a programming problem), responds with
a sequence of tokens (actions) a = a1, . . . , aT , and then
receives a deterministic reward r(x, a) ∈{0, −1}, e.g.
based on whether a solution passes all tests (r = 0) or
not (r = −1). There is no observation beyond the prompt,
no intermediate reward, no environment stochasticity, and
no discounting. The ideas and methods in this paper can
be generalized, but this setup simplifies the exposition and
matches our current experimental setup.
Following much recent work (Jaques et al., 2016; Ziegler
et al., 2019; Rafailov et al., 2023), we consider the KL-
regularized reward maximization problem (“Soft RL”),
L(π) = Eπ[r] −β KL[π, π0],
(1)
where π0 is a reference policy, typically an instruction-tuned
LLM that is also used to initialize π. It is well known that
the optimum of L is given by
π∗(a | x) = exp(r(x, a)/β) π0(a | x)/Z.
(2)
This can be shown by maximizing L(π) subject to a normal-
ization constraint, or by recognizing L(π) as a variational
bound on KL[π, π∗] (explained shortly).
When β is small, the reward factor exp(r/β) will be close
to 0 for failure (r = −1) and equal 1 for success (r = 0),
thus acting as a (soft) constraint. Moreover, the target π∗
will be approximately proportional to π0 on the set of suc-
cessful a, thus (theoretically) preserving the full diversity of
correct responses in π0 instead of hard-maxing the reward,
which should benefit exploration. Clearly, learning all good
responses to a query is a harder problem than learning only
one good response, but should lead to a deeper understand-
ing of the domain and a reduction in reliance on spurious
correlations and memorization. Soft RL, which learns a
high-entropy policy, is also more aligned with generative
modelling objectives than classical hard RL that converges
to a deterministic policy.
Indeed, we can interpret π∗as a success-conditioned poste-
rior (Levine, 2018). In this interpretation we view π0(a|x)
as a prior over actions, and define the likelihood of an auxil-
iary binary variable p(o = 1|x, a) = exp(r(x, a)/β) (well
defined for r ≤0). We can think of o = 1 as “success” or
“optimality”. By Bayes rule, the posterior is proportional to
likelihood times prior, so p(a|x, o = 1) = π∗(a|x).
The normalizing constant Z = Eπ0[exp(r/β)] can be ex-
pressed in log-space as β log Z = Sβ
π0[r] using the general-
ized softmax operator:
Sβ
π0(a|x)[r] = β log
X
a
π0(a|x) exp(r(x, a)/β)
(3)
Taking limits, we see that Sβ
π[r] interpolates between the
classical value function V π = Eπ[r] = S∞
π [r] and the
optimal value function V ∗= maxa[r] = S0
π[r]. Hence, we
can think of Sβ
π0[r] as a generalized “soft” value function:
V = Sβ
π0(a|x)[r] = β log Z = β log p(o = 1|x).
By expanding β KL[π, π∗] and rearanging terms, we find
L(π) = V π −β KL[π, π0] = V −β KL[π, π∗],
(4)
This remarkable equation, which we have not found in the
Soft RL literature, can be understood as the fundamental
equation of variational inference expressed in RL notation.
Because V is the (soft) value of π0, it is a constant with
respect to optimization, so that maximizing L(π) is equiva-
lent to minimizing KL[π, π∗], making it evident that π∗is
indeed the optimum of L(π) as claimed before.
2.2. Token-level Policy & Value Functions
Since we wish to train a sequence model, we consider the
token-level policy and value functions. Given a partial re-
sponse a≤t = a1, . . . , at, we define the soft Q-value:
Qt = Sβ
π0(a>t|a≤t,x)[r] = β log p(o = 1|a≤t, x).
Note that Q0 = V. Furthermore, we define the advantage
At = Qt −Qt−1
(5)
The advantage of at can be interpreted as the change in
log-likelihood of o = 1 (when following π0) that results
from appending at to the sequence a<t.
2

Soft Policy Optimization
By applying the sum and product rules of probability to
Eq. 2, we find that the token-level optimal policy can be
expressed as:
π∗(at|a<t, x) = exp(At/β) π0(at|a<t, x)
(6)
Thus, the posterior π∗is an easily computable function of
the Q or A-value of the prior π0.
2.3. Path- & Bellman Consistency
Taking logarithms of Eq. 6 we find that
At = β log π∗(at|a<t, x) −β log π0(at|a<t, x)
(7)
Thus At tells us how much more likely at is under π∗
compared to π0, and (by Eq. 5), how much more likely
o = 1 is after adding at to the sequence a<t.
Using the definition At = Qt −Qt−1 we find that for any
interval t = t1, . . . , tk:
tk
X
t=t1
At = Qtk −Qt1−1,
(8)
That is, analogous to the fundamental theorem of calculus,
integrating (summing) the change (in log-prob) at each time
step yields the total change (see also Jenner et al. (2022)).
This kind of equation, which relates the value function Q
and the difference of policy log-probs A, has been called
path consistency (Nachum et al., 2017).
Consider now Eq. 8 for the whole sequence (i.e. t1 =
1, tk = T). Rearanging terms and using QT = r we obtain
a forward and backward expression for Qt:
Qt = Q0 +
t
X
t′=1
At′ = r −
T
X
t′=t
At′
(9)
The forward equations says that the sequence of Qt values
can be obtained by a cumulative sum of the advantages.
By definition of At (eq. 5) we have Qt+1 = Qt + At+1.
Using this fact one can show that Q satisfies the following
Bellman-like consistency equation:
Sβ
π0[Qt+1] = Sβ
π0[At+1] + Qt = Qt
(10)
where the subscript π0 refers to the next-token distribution
π0(at+1|a≤t, x). Like the Bellman equations in classical
(hard) RL, this equation relates the values at the next time
step (weighted by π0) to the value at the current time step.
(note that there is no instantaneous reward because we only
consider terminal rewards in our setup). Since Sβ interpo-
lates between E and max, the soft Bellman equation gener-
alizes both the Bellman evaluation and optimality equations.
Path-consistency is a property that holds for every trajec-
tory or contiguous sub-trajectory, regardless of how it was
produced. It relates the Q values and policy log-probs, eval-
uated at specific token values at. By contrast, Bellman
consistency relates the Qt-value of a≤t to the Qt+1 value
for all possible next tokens at+1, using a policy (in our case
π0) to weigh the different possibilities.
2.4. The Cumulative Q-Parameterization
So far, we have discussed relations between the log-probs
and value functions associated with the optimal and refer-
ence policy. Now, let us consider an arbitrary sequence
policy πθ(a | x) = Q
t πθ(at | a<t, x) parameterized by θ.
Based on the expression of At as a difference of policy
log-probs (Eq. 7), we propose to estimate the advantage as
Aθ
t ≡β (log πθ(at | a<t, x) −log π0(at | a<t, x)) . (11)
Notice that when initializing πθ ←π0, the advantage esti-
mates start off at 0. Now, based on the expression of At as a
difference of Q-values (Eq. 5), and using the result of Eq. 9,
we define the cumulative Q-parameterization as:
Qθ
t ≡bQ0 +
t
X
t′=1
Aθ
t′ = Qθ
t−1 + Aθ
t ,
(12)
That is, we compute all Qθ
t as a cumulative sum of log-prob
differences (advantages), plus an initial value estimate. The
initial value of the prompt Vθ = Qθ
0 = bQ0 is estimated
once before training using Monte-Carlo sampling from π0
(see Sec. 3.1.3). One could also estimate Q0 online using a
running average or using πθ (e.g. as a log-prob or difference
at the last prompt token or summed over the prompt), but
learning accurate generalizing value functions is hard.
As argued by Tang et al. (2023), parameterizing the value
Qθ
t in terms of previous value plus advantage is statistically
advantageous, since Qt−1 can share statistical power from
all visits to a<t whereas Aθ
t only needs to learn whether at
was a relative improvement (thus sidestepping the hard task
of estimating the magnitude of Qt).
Theorem 2.1. Qθ = Q iff πθ = π∗and bQ0 = Q0.
Proof. The cumulative Q-parameterization defines an invert-
ible map from bQ0 and policy log-probabilities to Qθ
t -values,
so either one determines the other. Moreover, by Eq. 7 and
Eq. 9, the true / optimal value Q and π∗are related by the
same mapping. Hence, if Qθ = Q then the policy is optimal
(and trivially bQ0 = Q0), and vice versa.
It follows from Theorem 2.1 that we can freely combine
policy-based and value-based RL methods for improving
πθ and Qθ, as they will converge on the same optimal θ∗.
A natural idea would be to use temporal difference (TD)
or path-consistency (PC) losses. However, the following
3

Soft Policy Optimization
theorems show that Bellman consistency and path consis-
tency are already satisfied by construction, making a loss
unnecessary.
Theorem 2.2. For any θ and any sequence of tokens
a1, . . . , aT , the cumulative Q-function Qθ
t satisfies Bellman
consistency for all 0 ≤t ≤T. That is,
Qθ
t = Sβ
π0(at+1|a≤t,x)[Qθ
t+1]
Proof. By definition, we have Qθ
t+1 = Qθ
t + Aθ
t+1. Fur-
thermore, as with the expectation and max operators, we
can take out additive constants from the softmax, so
Sβ
π0[Qθ
t + Aθ
t+1] = Sβ
π0[Aθ
t+1] + Qθ
t
It remains to show that Sβ
π0[Aθ
t+1] = 0:
Sβ
π0[Aθ
t+1] = β log
X
at+1
π0(at+1|a≤t)πθ(at+1|a≤t)
π0(at+1|a≤t)
= β log
X
at+1
πθ(at+1|a≤t) = 0.
(we left out conditioning on the prompt x for brevity)
Note that the theorem only speaks about internal consis-
tency between the Q-values produced by the model. At
time t = T we obtain an external reward and since there
is no guarantee that Qθ
T = Qt = r we will in general
get an error at that time. However, the intermediate TD
errors Qθ
t −Sβ
π0[Qθ
t+1] are always 0. So although standard
Q-learning and even methods such as Q-Transformer (Cheb-
otar et al., 2023) that are used with transformers need to
learn Bellman-consistency even for intermediate steps, our
Q-parameterization is internally consistent by construction.
We have a similar result for path consistency:
Theorem 2.3. For any θ and any sequence of tokens
a1, . . . , aT , the cumulative Q-function Qθ
t satisfies path
consistency on any interval t1, . . . , tk with t1 ≤tk ≤T.
That is,
tk
X
t=t1
Aθ
t = Qθ
tk −Qθ
t1−1,
Proof. Substitute the definition of Qθ
t (Eq. 12) and cancel
shared terms bQθ
0 +Pt1−1
t′=1 Aθ
t′, leaving only Ptk
t=t1 Aθ
t .
In path consistency learning (Nachum et al., 2017), one
learns a separate policy and value function, and attempts to
enforce path consistency on random intervals by learning.
When using the cumulative Q-parameterization, there is no
point to this because path consistency is guaranteed.
Theorem 2.4. If Qθ
T = QT for all a, then Qθ = Q.
Proof. By induction, assume Qθ
t+1 = Qt+1 for all at+1.
Then by Theorem 2.2,
Qθ
t = Sβ
π0[Qθ
t+1] = Sβ
π0[Qt+1] = Qt.
Hence Qθ = Q.
Together with Theorem 2.1, this demonstrates that if we can
learn the terminal Qθ
T for all sequences, we have learned
the true value function and optimal policy.
3. Soft Policy Optimization
SPO is a hybrid online off-policy method, which means we
can learn from on-policy trajectories as well arbitrary offline
data. A key feature of SPO is the use of the cumulative Q-
Parameterization (Sec. 2.4), which means we compute Qθ
t
as the value of the prompt bQ0 (estimated by sampling from
π0 before trainig) plus the cumulative sum of log-prob dif-
ferences Aθ
t = β(πθ(at|a<t, x)−log π0(at|a>t, x)). Thus,
quite intuitively, when the policy log prob for at exceeds
the reference model log prob (i.e. it is considered a good
action by πθ), we have a positive advantage for at and an
increase in value Qθ
t .
3.1. Learning Objectives
The results of the previous section show that a cumulative
Q function (Eq. 11 and Eq. 12) is always self-consistent
in both the Bellman- and path-consistency sense. What
remains to be learned is consistency with observed rewards.
The terminal QT is equal to the terminal reward r(x, a).
Hence, we wish to make Qθ
T satisfy (for all x, a):
Qθ
T ≡bQ0 +
T
X
t=1
Aθ
t ≈r,
(13)
where Qθ
T is defined by the cumulative Q-parameterization,
meaning bQ0 is a Monte-Carlo estimate of the soft value
of the prompt x (computed prior to training), and Aθ
t =
β(log πθ −log π0)t (Eq. 11).
By rearranging terms, we can derive from Eq. 13 various
equations, each of which can be turned into an off-policy
learning objective by choosing a loss function. Below we
first discuss the choice of loss function (Sec. 3.1.1), and
then consider the various off-policy learning objectives
(Sec. 3.1.2). Finally, we also discuss the use of Monte-
Carlo regression targets (Sec. 3.1.3) and policy gradients
(Sec. 3.1.4). Here we will simply present all options; in
Sec. 5 we will systematically compare them.
3.1.1. LOSS FUNCTIONS
Below we discuss different regression problems, each of
which is defined by a prediction ˆy that we want to bring
4

Soft Policy Optimization
close to a target y (for instance, regressing Qθ
T towards r).
To measure the discrepancy, we can employ a squared loss
L(ˆy, y) = (ˆy −y)2. Where ˆy and y are log-probabilities,
we can also use a binary cross-entropy loss: L(ˆy, y) =
−xˆy −(1 −x) log(1 −exp(ˆy)), with targets x = exp y.
Clipping: In some cases, the prediction ˆy (and target y) may
be larger than 0 even though a log-probability can never be.
This results in infinities in the cross-entropy, so we use clip-
ping on both y and ˆy. We clip the prediction ˆy close to
zero, and propagate gradient straight-through, ignoring clip-
ping on the backward pass. We further modify the positive
term of the cross-entropy from −xˆy to x relu(−ˆy) so as to
remove any incentive to increase ˆy above 0.
Warping: For any injective (difference-preserving) map σ,
σ(u) = σ(v) ⇒u = v. Hence, for any equation implied
by Eq. 13, we can apply σ to both sides and aim to make
the resulting equation hold. In our experiments, we consider
specifically the case where σ is the sigmoid function.
3.1.2. OFF-POLICY OBJECTIVES
Terminal Q-Regression: Most obviously, we can regress
Qθ
T towards the observed reward using some loss function
L(Qθ
T , r). In Q-learning and other TD-methods, one typ-
ically regresses the Q-function towards TD targets using
a squared loss. Since Qt has an interpretation as a log-
probability Qt = log p(o = 1 | a≤t, x), we can also use a
binary cross-entropy loss. Since Qθ
t may exceed 0, we use
clipping as described in the previous section.
Non-Terminal Q-Regression: Rearranging terms in Eq. 13,
we can also attempt to make Qθ
t = bQ0 + Pt
t′=1 Aθ
t ≈
r −PT
t′=t+1 Aθ
t′ hold. That is, we regress Qθ
t towards
targets Rt defined as Rt = detach(r −PT
t′=t+1 Aθ
t′). We
refer to this as reverse-Q targets because Rt is just a time-
reversed estimate of Qt. Intuitively, the target for Qθ
t is the
reward, adjusted for the quality (advantage) of later actions.
If we obtained a low reward but this can be explained by
later actions, perhaps Qθ
t should still take a relatively high
value.
When using squared loss L = PT
t=1(Qθ
t −Rt)2, the error
at each term is equal to the terminal one: Qθ
t −Rt = Qθ
T −r.
However, because we detach the gradients of the targets Rt,
the gradients for the t-th term only flow into Qθ
t, leading
to larger gradients for earlier terms. Moreover, when using
cross-entropy loss, the error itself is different for each term
because the target Rt and predictor Qt enter into the cross-
entropy formula in exponentiated and non-exponentiated
form, respectively.
Advantage Regression: Finally, we can subtract bQ0 from
Eq. 13 to obtain PT
t=1 Aθ
t = r −bQ0. Again the error is
equivalent to terminal Q-regression, and in this case the
gradients are also equivalent. Hence, we only consider
advantage regression in combination with sigmoid-warping
and a binary cross-entropy loss.
3.1.3. MONTE-CARLO TARGETS
As mentioned, we use Monte-Carlo sampling to estimate
bQ0. Additionally, we experiment with directly regressing
Qθ
t towards a Monte-Carlo estimate of Qt. Recall that
Qt = Sβ
π0[r] = β log Eπ0[exp (r/β)], i.e. it is the loga-
rithm of the expectation of the exponentiated reward. Ap-
proximating the expectation using samples from π0 leads
to a consistent but biased estimation of Qt, due to the loga-
rithm. However, when using the cross-entropy loss, we get
an unbiased estimate of the loss as long as the exponentiated
value targets are unbiased, which they are.
In order to estimate bQ0, we take 800 samples from π0 for
each prompt, before training. Since we assume our reward
to be binary with r ∈{0, −1}, we can estimate the success
probability bS0 ≈p(r = 0|x) and compute exp (Q0/β) =
Eπ0[exp(r/β)] ≈bS0 exp(0/β) + (1 −bS0) exp(−1/β).
In order to test the utility of regressing Qθ
t directly towards
Monte-Carlo estimates, we annotate some of our offline
data (described in Sec. 5) with estimates of the success
probability St (from which a Qt-estimate can be derived as
above). Since samples are taken from the reference model,
early tokens in successful but improbable trajectories may
produce failed rollouts with overwhelming probability, thus
providing little learning signal. Hence, we wish to focus
the computational effort on “interesting” tokens, where the
success probability changes significantly.
For this purpose, we use Pivotal Token Search as described
in Abdin et al. (2024). This algorithm searches for pivotal
tokens (where the success probability changes significantly)
by recursively bisecting the trajectory, performing K roll-
outs to estimate St at the bisection point, and recursing if the
endpoints of the current interval have sufficiently different
St. In this way, a number of pivotal tokens are produced,
and more importantly for our purposes, a sparse set of St-
estimates that can be used as targets for Qθ
t .
3.1.4. PROXIMAL POLICY OPTIMIZATION
Our primary baseline is PPO (Schulman et al., 2017b), im-
plemented following the approach in (Gehring et al., 2024).
PPO uses GAE (Schulman et al., 2016) to estimate the ad-
vantage based on a learned value model, and uses a clipped
loss function to avoid excessive gradient updates.
Importance Weighting: Because we use asynchronous
RL (Sec. 3.2) with worker nodes performing rollouts and
trainer nodes operating simultaneously, rollouts may be
generated using a slightly out of date policy parameter
θold, making them somewhat off-policy. For limited de-
5

Soft Policy Optimization
grees of staleness, a simple importance weighting correc-
tion suffices to make the gradients unbaised without in-
troducing too much variance. This is done by evaluating
the policy probabilities πθold on the workers, and sending
them to the trainers, which compute an importance weight
wi = πθ(at|a<t, x)/πθold(at|a<t, x) and multiplies the loss
by this weight.
3.2. Asynchronous On- & Off-policy RL Framework
We perform asynchronous RL training in a distributed
system consisting of trainer and worker nodes (each con-
taining 8 H100 GPUs), similar to Gehring et al. (2024);
Noukhovitch et al. (2024).
The workers continuously perform rollouts using a batched
and throughput-optimized inference implementation and
parallelized sandboxed code execution for reward evaluation.
The resulting trajectories (token sequences and rewards) are
sent to the trainers.
The trainers collect a batch of trajectories (from workers and
optionally from offline sources), and do a training update us-
ing one of the available loss functions. In general this will re-
quire a forward pass on the latest policy and reference model,
as well as the value model for PPO, followed by a backward
pass on the latest policy and value model (if applicable).
After a certain number of steps (model update interval), we
send new model weights from the trainers to the workers, in
order to enable approximately on-policy rollouts. Compared
to a synchrounous approach – where the same nodes alter-
nate between collecting rollouts and doing training updates
– the asynchronous approach yields much higher throughput
and continuously high GPU utilization.
The workers are configurable so that they can do on-policy
rollouts (temperature 1, using the latest policy), or use al-
ternative decoding methods such as temperature and top-p
sampling using the latest or reference policy. Likewise, the
trainers can be configured to use a mix of offline trajec-
tories loaded from disk and online data produced by the
workers. Trainers can also be configured to use different
loss functions (optionally depending on the source of data)
including the ones discussed in Sec. 3.1. When using on-
policy losses, we set a low value for model update interval,
and although there is no strict guarantee that training trajec-
tories are strictly on-policy, we have found that low values
such as 1 – 4 lead to stable training.
4. Related Work
Our work is based on the Soft RL framework, also known as
RL-as-inference, maximum-entropy RL and KL-divergence
control (Todorov, 2008; Ziebart et al., 2008; Kappen et al.,
2009; Schulman et al., 2017a; Levine, 2018; L´azaro-Gredilla
et al., 2024). It is the basis of several popular methods, such
as Soft Q-Learning and Soft Actor-Critic (Haarnoja et al.,
2018; 2017). Most recent works on RL for LLMs, including
RLHF (Ziegler et al., 2019; Ouyang et al., 2022), use the
KL-regularized reward maximization soft RL objective.
The off-policy objectives we use can be understood either as
Q-regression towards (future-corrected) empirical targets,
or as path-consistency losses applied to the entire trajectory
(since they relate the values bQ0 and QT = r at the begin-
ning and end of the trajectory to the policy log-probs along
the trajectory). There is however a fundamental difference
to path-consistency learning as explored by Nachum et al.
(2017), because in their case the policy and value function
are learned separately, and path-consistency must be en-
forced by a loss on every sub-trajectory t1, . . . , tk. In our
case, path-consistency is satisfied on all sub-trajectories,
and learning only happens on the entire trajectory (with the
terminal QT -value replaced by the observed reward r).
Similarly, although we learn a soft Q function, SPO is dif-
ferent from Soft Q-Learning (Haarnoja et al., 2017), be-
cause we do not use Bellman backups (since according to
Theorem 2.2, all TD errors are zero). Other works have ex-
plored Q-Learning with transformers (Chebotar et al., 2023),
but again these methods need to learn internal Bellman-
consistency whereas for SPO it is guaranteed.
Expressions involving a sum of log-probability differences
log πθ −log π0 have appeared in a number of recent
works, most notably DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023) and DRO
(Richemond et al., 2024). However these methods differ in
that DPO is a preference-optimization method (requiring
preference pairs rather than rewards for training), and DRO
is a purely offline training method. Such sums have also
been used in concurrent work to parameterize “process re-
ward models” (a new name for advantage (Schulman et al.,
2016)), which can be used to speed up learning in policy
gradient methods (Yuan et al., 2024; Cui et al.). However,
these works use the resulting PRM only to accelerate learn-
ing with policy gradients, rather than using it directly as
a policy and value function as we do. Indeed, the authors
found that their PRMs perform poorly as policies, which
is likely due to the fact that they omitted the critical bQ0
estimate, and use a different loss function.
Other recent works have noted that removing the value
model from PPO can have benefits, both for reasons of
memory and bias, in the context of LLM training. Group
Relative Policy Optimization (Shao et al., 2024) samples
multiple independent trajectories and computes an advan-
tage for each, which is then used in the clipped PPO loss as a
replacement for the GAE estimate. Similarly, VinePPO uses
Monte-Carlo rollouts for advantage estimation at each rea-
soning step in a rollout (Kazemnejad et al., 2024). Although
these works share the benefit of not requiring a separate
value model, neither can leverage off-policy data.
6

Soft Policy Optimization
5. Experiments & Results
Our experiments are centered around two main questions:
first, is incorporating previous experiences during the train-
ing of SPO possible and beneficial, and secondly, can SPO
learn a better and more diverse policy compared to PPO?
For the first point, it is important that SPO can not only train
stably on arbitrary offline data, but actually benefits from
adding more offline data from diverse sources.
Experiment setting: We run all our experiments on the
challenging CodeContests benchmark introduced by Li et al.
(2022). In this task the LLM is presented with a code con-
test problem description, followed by a description of the
input and outputs, and some example input and outputs. The
LLM needs to generate a Python solution that solves the
coding challenge correctly within the given memory and
time constraints. A solution is deemed correct if it produces
the correct output for all the test inputs, including inputs that
are not shown in the prompt. We evaluate the models based
on the average over the evaluation sets in CodeContests,
and in TACO (Li et al., 2023). In our experience adding
the TACO tests has proven to be a more reliable way of
tracking progress. We deduplicate the CodeContests train-
ing data against the TACO test data. We evaluate the models
with the pass@10 score, which measures whether out of
10 solutions, at least one solution passes all the tests. This
metric favors models with diverse outputs compared to the
more commonly seen pass@1. To compute the pass@10 we
sample 20 responses with a temperature of 0.4 and top-p of
0.95, and use the estimator from (Li et al., 2022).
We initialize all policies using Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
(Llama Team, AI Meta, 2024). The model is then trained for
100,000 steps with a batch size of 128. We use 64 GPUs to
update the policy and 32-64 GPUs to generate new samples.
We use the AdamW optimizer with a warm-up period of
200 steps, followed by a constant learning rate of 6 × 10−8.
We test two settings for SPO that differ only in their train-
ing data: pure online vs a combination of online and of-
fline data in equal proportions.
Both SPO runs use a
β = 1/ log(100000) ≈1/11.5, and use the Q-regression
with cross-entropy loss. For each training problem we es-
timate Q0 with Monte Carlo simulation by sampling 800
completions and evaluating their correctness. In order to
demonstrate SPO’s ability to handle diverse data sources, we
gather offline data from the reference model (sampled from
π0 with random temperature and top-p 0.95), from an online
SPO run and PPO run, samples generated by Llama-70B
with a chain-of-though (CoT) prompt, and human solutions
from the CodeContests dataset. We remove duplicates from
the offline dataset and filter for correct solutions. The on-
line samples for SPO are generated from its current policy
with a random temperature sampled from U(0.1, 0.8) and a
top-p value of 0.95. This steers the training process towards
0
20k
40k
60k
80k
100k
steps
10
11
12
13
pass@10
SPO half-online
SPO online
PPO
Figure 1. Code generation performance measured in pass@10 vs
training step. SPO trained on mixed online and offline data outper-
forms both the pure online SPO and PPO.
sequences for which the model assigns higher probability.
Our primary baseline is a well-tuned PPO implementation
with a KL-regularized reward using the same β as SPO.
PPO is the most commonly used policy gradient method
and it has also found popular application in training LLMs
(Ouyang et al., 2022; Gehring et al., 2024). It can train on
slightly off-policy trajectories by applying importance sam-
pling, but generally benefits from on-policy samples using
the latest model. Hence we update the behavior policy after
each batch of samples. This requires the trainer nodes to
frequently send model updates to the worker nodes, which
incurs a heavy slowdown in overall training speed (even
though the transfer is done asynchronously). In contrast,
in preliminary experiments with SPO we observed no sig-
nificant benefits from on-policy samples or frequent model
updates. Hence, we decrease the update frequency of the
behavior policy to every 10 batches of samples. This has a
significant effect on the training time, resulting in an 85%
speedup in terms of wall clock time.
Results: In Figure 1, the results show that the pass@10
performance of SPO steadily improves over training, while
it declines somewhat for PPO. Additionally, we observe
that the half-online SPO run, which incorporates offline
data, not only remains stable but also shows better results.
Importantly, both PPO and SPO-online require the same
number of GPUs for training and collecting rollouts. In
contrast, SPO half-online trains on 50% offline samples,
effectively reducing the sampling cost by half.
On pass@1, PPO performs better, yielding 8.4 vs 6.3 for
SPO half-online and 6.0 for online SPO.
PPO discussion: Our PPO baseline matches the pass@1
performance reported in (Gehring et al., 2024) for the single-
turn setup, but its improvement in pass@1 performance co-
occurs with a modest decline in the pass@10 performance.
7

Soft Policy Optimization
0
10k
20k
30k
40k
50k
60k
steps
12
13
pass@10
Squared Loss
Cross Entropy
Advantage Regression
(a)
0
10k
20k
30k
40k
50k
60k
steps
11
12
13
pass@10
Squared Loss
Cross Entropy
Non-Terminal
Terminal
(b)
0
5k
10k
15k
20k
25k
30k
35k
40k
steps
12
13
pass@10
MCQ
Rollouts
SPO
(c)
Figure 2. Ablation of different SPO settings and extensions: (a) Terminal Q-regression with different losses. (b) Terminal vs. non-terminal
Q-regression with reverse-Q targets, combined with either squared or cross-entropy loss. (c) Non-terminal Q-regression with Monte Carlo
Q-estimations at pivotal tokens, ablated against terminal Q-regression on the rollouts gathered during the pivotal token search.
This happens because the PPO policy quickly learns to sam-
ple a single solution per problem, so the original difference
between pass@1 and pass@10 performance diminishes over
the duration of training. In contrast, SPO improves both
while preserving the difference.
5.1. Ablations and Extensions
In our previous experiment we focused on a specific imple-
mentation of SPO: terminal Q-regression with cross-entropy
loss. This allowed us to assess the practical feasibility of
SPO by examining its training dynamics over long training
runs. In this section we will ablate these choices in shorter
training runs and explore additional directions to improve
the performance of SPO. We consider terminal Q-regression
with cross-entropy loss as the primary baseline, which we
refer to simply as SPO. Unless otherwise specified, the ab-
lation runs use the half-online setting.
Loss function: We begin by investigating the impact of
different loss functions on performance. We compare termi-
nal Q-regression with squared loss and cross-entropy loss,
and advantage regression with sigmoid warping and cross-
entropy loss. The results in Figure 2(a) show that the choice
of loss function significantly affects the speed of improve-
ment, with the squared loss outperforming the other two.
Interestingly, our findings differ from those of Yuan et al.
(2024), who reported policy performance degradation when
using a similar cross-entropy loss. This discrepancy can be
attributed to the difference in target labels: their model was
trained on response-level correctness labels, whereas our
advantage regression loss correctly captures the mathemati-
cal relationship between the policy and the value function,
leading to improved policy performance.
Terminal vs. Non-Terminal: Next, we investigate whether
a non-terminal loss using reverse-Q targets can enhance the
performance. We conduct experiments with non-terminal
Q-regression using both squared loss and cross-entropy loss.
The results in Figure 2(b) indicate that combining the non-
terminal targets with cross-entropy loss significantly de-
grades the performance, while for the squared loss we ob-
serve no substantial effect.
Monte Carlo Targets: Finally, we examine the effective-
ness of using Monte Carlo estimation for non-terminal Qt
in place of reverse-Q targets. We specifically target time
steps t that show the greatest increase in successive Qt val-
ues, identified through a Pivotal Token Search on multiple
correct samples from our offline dataset (Sec. 3.1.3). This
process produces 50,000 trajectories, annotated with the
success probability estimated via 10 rollouts at each token
visited by PTS. We replace half of the offline data with
these samples, resulting in a data distribution of 50% online,
25% standard offline, and 25% samples with Monte Carlo
targets. We also introduce a baseline that replaces half of
the offline data with rollouts obtained during the pivotal
token search. This baseline checks whether integrating the
additional information from rollouts with the terminal loss
is sufficient, or if condensing these rollouts into Qt targets
for non-terminal targets is essential. The results in Fig-
ure 2(c) show that the non-terminal Q-regression towards
Monte Carlo targets significantly improves the performance.
This happens despite only adding 50,000 trajectories, which
corresponds to less than 1,600 steps per epoch. In contrast,
applying the terminal loss solely on the rollouts performs
the same as the baseline.
6. Discussion
The goal of Soft RL is to learn a policy that not only knows
a good response to every query, but ideally knows all good
responses to every query. Although any KL-regularized
reward maximization method shares this objective in theory,
in practice policy gradient methods fail to preserve diversity
in the policy. They rapidly learn to increase the probability
of responses that already have a reasonably high probability
under the reference policy. As a result they achieve good
pass@1 performance early on, but it becomes increasingly
8

Soft Policy Optimization
hard to discover good responses that were not known al-
ready. By contrast, even pure online SPO is able to steadily
improve on both pass@1 and pass@10, with the gap remain-
ing consistent or growing. This effect is further enhanced
by the inclusion of offline data containing solutions with
relatively low probability under the reference model.
The cumulative Q parameterization provides a unified policy
and value function that are guaranteed to be consistent. This
feature of our method enables many interesting possibilities
for combined policy and value-based learning. For instance,
although still limited in scale, our experiments with Monte-
Carlo Qt estimates show that combining terminal Q loss
with MC targets results in faster learning and improved final
performance. Other options, such as combining SPO with a
policy gradient loss, remain to be explored as well.
One limitation of our current implementation is that we do
not update the reference model. Doing so would require on-
line estimation of Q0, but is likely to improve both pass@1
and pass@10 performance (preliminary experiments using
fixed bQ0 support this notion).
In our experiments we have demonstrated the benefit of
including offline data, but the full extent of the benefit of
our approach will become evident only when we contin-
uously grow the offline dataset as we run more and more
experiments and ablations. Although such a cumulative
procedure becomes hard to reproduce, it drastically reduces
the inference cost of RL training runs by amortizing it.
7. Conclusion
In this paper we have presented Soft Policy Optimiza-
tion, a hybrid online off-policy RL method for language
model improvement. SPO is based on the cumulative Q-
parameterization, which has a number of appealing theoret-
ical properties first revealed in this work. Our large-scale
experiments on code contests demonstrate that SPO is able
to leverage diverse and highly off-policy data, and unlike
PPO is able to preserve diversity in the policy throughout
training, resulting in improved pass@10 scores. Moreover,
SPO is significantly more scalable and faster to train, due
to a reduced need for model transfers, significantly reduced
memory consumption, and reduced need for inference com-
pute due to the use of offline data. Although here we have
experimented with a fixed set of offline data, the benefits
of offline data are poised to grow as we accumulate diverse
solutions to hard problems across the many training runs
that are required for frontier model development.
References
Abdin, M., Aneja, J., Behl, H., Bubeck, S., Eldan, R., Gu-
nasekar, S., Harrison, M., Hewett, R. J., Javaheripi, M.,
Kauffmann, P., Lee, J. R., Lee, Y. T., Li, Y., Liu, W.,
Mendes, C. C. T., Nguyen, A., Price, E., de Rosa, G.,
Saarikivi, O., Salim, A., Shah, S., Wang, X., Ward, R.,
Wu, Y., Yu, D., Zhang, C., and Zhang, Y. Phi-4 Techni-
cal Report. 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2412.08905.
Brown, B., Juravsky, J., Ehrlich, R., Clark, R., Le, Q. V., R´e,
C., and Mirhoseini, A. Large language monkeys: Scaling
inference compute with repeated sampling. 2024. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21787.
Chebotar, Y., Vuong, Q., Irpan, A., Hausman, K., Xia,
F., Lu, Y., Kumar, A., Yu, T., Herzog, A., Pertsch,
K., Gopalakrishnan, K., Ibarz, J., Nachum, O., Son-
takke, S., Salazar, G., Tran, H., Peralta, J., Tan, C.,
Manjunath, D., Singht, J., Zitkovich, B., Jackson, T.,
Rao, K., Finn, C., and Levine, S.
Q-transformer:
Scalable offline reinforcement learning via autoregres-
sive Q-functions.
CoRL, 229:3909–3928, September
2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
v229/chebotar23a/chebotar23a.pdf.
Cui, G., Yuan, L., Wang, Z., Wang, H., Li, W., He, B.,
Fan, Y., Yu, T., Xu, Q., Chen, W., Yuan, J., Chen, H.,
Zhang, K., Lv, X., Wang, S., Yao, Y., Han, X., Peng,
H., Cheng, Y., Liu, Z., Sun, M., Zhou, B., and Ding, N.
Process Reinforcement through IMplicit rEwards. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/2502.01456.
Gehring, J., Zheng, K., Copet, J., Mella, V., Cohen, T., and
Synnaeve, G. Rlef: Grounding code llms in execution
feedback with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.02089, 2024.
Haarnoja, T., Tang, H., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Reinforce-
ment learning with deep energy-based policies. 2017.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1702.08165.
Haarnoja, T., Zhou, A., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Soft
actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforce-
ment learning with a stochastic actor. arXiv [cs.LG], Jan-
uary 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1801.
01290.
Jaques, N., Gu, S., Bahdanau, D., Hern´andez-Lobato, J. M.,
Turner, R. E., and Eck, D.
Sequence tutor: Conser-
vative fine-tuning of sequence generation models with
KL-control. 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
1611.02796.
Jenner, E., van Hoof, H., and Gleave, A. Calculus on MDPs:
Potential Shaping as a Gradient. 2022. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2208.09570.
Kappen, B., Gomez, V., and Opper, M.
Optimal con-
trol as a graphical model inference problem.
2009.
9

Soft Policy Optimization
URL
https://cdn.aaai.org/ojs/13573/
13573-40-17091-1-2-20201228.pdf.
Kazemnejad, A., Aghajohari, M., Portelance, E., Sordoni,
A., Reddy, S., Courville, A., and Roux, N. L. VinePPO:
Unlocking RL potential for LLM reasoning through re-
fined credit assignment. 2024. URL http://arxiv.
org/abs/2410.01679.
Levine, S. Reinforcement learning and control as proba-
bilistic inference: Tutorial and review. arXiv [cs.LG],
May 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.
00909.
Li, R., Fu, J., Zhang, B.-W., Huang, T., Sun, Z., Lyu, C., Liu,
G., Jin, Z., and Li, G. Taco: Topics in algorithmic code
generation dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14852,
2023.
Li, Y., Choi, D., Chung, J., Kushman, N., Schrittwieser, J.,
Leblond, R., Eccles, T., Keeling, J., Gimeno, F., Dal Lago,
A., et al. Competition-level code generation with alpha-
code. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022.
Llama Team, AI Meta. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.
L´azaro-Gredilla, M., Ku, L. Y., Murphy, K. P., and George,
D. What type of inference is planning?
2024. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/2406.17863.
Nachum, O., Norouzi, M., Xu, K., and Schuurmans, D.
Bridging the gap between value and policy based re-
inforcement learning.
February 2017.
URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1702.08892.
Noukhovitch, M., Huang, S., Xhonneux, S., Hosseini, A.,
Agarwal, R., and Courville, A. Asynchronous RLHF:
Faster and more efficient off-policy RL for language mod-
els. 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2410.
18252.
Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright,
C. L., Mishkin, P., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S., Slama,
K., Ray, A., Schulman, J., Hilton, J., Kelton, F.,
Miller, L. E., Simens, M., Askell, A., Welinder, P.,
Christiano, P., Leike, J., and Lowe, R. J.
Training
language models to follow instructions with human
feedback.
abs/2203.02155:27730–27744,
2022.
URL
https://cdn.openai.com/papers/
Training_language_models_to_follow_
instructions_with_human_feedback.pdf.
Rafailov, R., Sharma, A., Mitchell, E., Ermon, S., Manning,
C. D., and Finn, C. Direct preference optimization: Your
language model is secretly a reward model. arXiv [cs.LG],
May 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.
18290.
Richemond, P. H., Tang, Y., Guo, D., Calandriello, D.,
Azar, M. G., Rafailov, R., Pires, B. A., Tarassov, E.,
Spangher, L., Ellsworth, W., Severyn, A., Mallinson, J.,
Shani, L., Shamir, G., Joshi, R., Liu, T., Munos, R.,
and Piot, B.
Offline regularised reinforcement learn-
ing for large language models alignment. 2024. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.19107.
Schulman, J., Moritz, P., Levine, S., Jordan, M., and Abbeel,
P. High-Dimensional Continuous Control Using Gen-
eralized Advantage Estimation. pp. 1–9, 2016. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.02438v1.
Schulman, J., Chen, X., and Abbeel, P. Equivalence be-
tween policy gradients and soft Q-learning. arXiv [cs.LG],
April 2017a. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1704.
06440.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A.,
and Klimov, O.
Proximal Policy Optimization Algo-
rithms.
2017b.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
1707.06347.
Shao, Z., Wang, P., Zhu, Q., Xu, R., Song, J., Zhang, M.,
Li, Y. K., Wu, Y., and Guo, D. DeepSeekMath: Push-
ing the Limits of Mathematical Reasoning in Open Lan-
guage Models. 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/2402.03300.
Tang, Y., Munos, R., Rowland, M., and Valko, M.
VA-learning as a more efficient alternative to Q-
learning.
2023.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2305.18161.
Todorov, E.
General duality between optimal con-
trol and estimation.
9:4286–4292, 2008.
URL
https://homes.cs.washington.edu/
˜todorov/papers/TodorovCDC08.pdf.
Wu, Y., Sun, Z., Li, S., Welleck, S., and Yang, Y. Infer-
ence scaling laws: An empirical analysis of compute-
optimal inference for problem-solving with language
models. 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2408.00724.
Xu, S., Fu, W., Gao, J., Ye, W., Liu, W., Mei, Z., Wang,
G., Yu, C., and Wu, Y. Is DPO superior to PPO for
LLM alignment? A comprehensive study. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2404.10719.
Yuan, L., Li, W., Chen, H., Cui, G., Ding, N., Zhang, K.,
Zhou, B., Liu, Z., and Peng, H. Free process rewards
without process labels. 2024. URL http://arxiv.
org/abs/2412.01981.
Ziebart, B. D., Maas, A. L., Bagnell, J. A., Dey, A. K.,
et al. Maximum entropy inverse reinforcement learning.
8:1433–1438, 2008.
10

Soft Policy Optimization
Ziegler, D. M., Stiennon, N., Wu, J., Brown, T. B., Radford,
A., Amodei, D., Christiano, P., and Irving, G. Fine-tuning
language models from human preferences. 2019. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.08593.
11

