
Contents
Half Title page
Title page
Copyright page
Dedication
Preface
Chapter 1: Dimensional Analysis and One-
Dimensional Dynamics
1.1 Dimensional Analysis
1.2 Scaling
1.3 Differential Equations
References and Notes
Chapter 2: Two-Dimensional Dynamical Systems
2.1 Phase Plane Phenomena
2.2 Linear Systems
2.3 Nonlinear Systems
2.4 Bifurcations
2.5 Reaction Kinetics
2.6 Pathogens
References and Notes
Chapter 3: Perturbation Methods and Asymptotic
Expansions

3.1 Regular Perturbation
3.2 Singular Perturbation
3.3 Boundary Layer Analysis
3.4 Initial Layers
3.5 The WKB Approximation
3.6 Asymptotic Expansion of Integrals
References and Notes
Chapter 4: Calculus of Variations
4.1 Variational Problems
4.2 Necessary Conditions for Extrema
4.3 The Simplest Problem
4.4 Generalizations
4.5 Hamilton’s Principle
4.6 Isoperimetric Problems
References and Notes
Chapter 5: Boundary Value Problems and Integral
Equations
5.1 Boundary-Value Problems
5.2 Sturm–Liouville Problems
5.3 Classical Fourier Series
5.4 Integral Equations
5.5 Green’s Functions
5.6 Distributions
References and Notes
Chapter 6: Partial Differential Equations
6.1 Basic Concepts
6.2 Conservation Laws

6.3 Equilibrium Equations
6.4 Eigenfunction Expansions
6.5 Integral Transforms
6.6 Stability of Solutions
6.7 Distributions
References and Notes
Chapter 7: Wave Phenomena
7.1 Waves
7.2 Nonlinear Waves
7.3 Quasi-linear Equations
7.4 The Wave Equation
References and Notes
Chapter 8: Mathematical Models of Continua
8.1 Kinematics and Mass Conservation
8.2 Momentum and Energy
8.3 Gas Dynamics
8.4 Fluid Motions in R3
References and Notes
Chapter 9: Discrete Models
9.1 One-Dimensional Models
9.2 Systems of Difference Equations
9.3 Stochastic Models
9.4 Probability-Based Models
References and Notes
Index

Applied Mathematics


Copyright © 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108
of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written
permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate
per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive,
Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 750-4470, or on the web at
www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River
Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at
http://www.wiley.com/go/permission.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have
used their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representation or
warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this
book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or
fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained
herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a
professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable
for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited
to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside
the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content
that appears in print, however, may not be available in electronic formats. For
more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Logan, J. David (John David)
Applied mathematics / J. David Logan. — 4th ed.
    pages cm

 Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-118-47580-5 (hardback) — ISBN 978-1-118-51492-4 — ISBN
978-1-118-51493-1 — ISBN 978-1-118-51490-0 1. Mathematics—Textbooks. I.
Title.
 QA37.3.L64 2013
 510—dc23
 2013001305

To my parents
George Edd Logan (1919–1996)
Dorothy Elizabeth Wyatt Logan (1923–2009)

Preface
The fourth edition of Applied Mathematics shares the same goals, philosophy,
and style as its predecessors—to introduce key ideas about mathematical
methods and modeling, along with the important tools, to mature seniors and
graduate students in mathematics, science, and engineering. The emphasis is on
how mathematics interrelates with the applied and natural sciences. Prerequisites
include a good command of concepts and techniques of calculus, and
sophomore-level courses in differential equations and matrices; a genuine
interest in applications in some area of science or engineering is a must.
Readers should understand the limited scope of this text. Being a broad
introduction to the methods of applied mathematics, it cannot cover every topic
in depth. Indeed, each chapter could be expanded into a one, or even several,
full-length books. In fact, readers can find elementary books on all of the topics;
some of these are cited in the references at the end of the chapters. Secondly,
readers should understand the mathematical level of the text. Some books on
applied mathematics take a highly practical approach and ignore technical
mathematical issues completely, while others take a purely theoretical approach;
both of these approaches are valuable and part of the overall body of applied
mathematics. Here, we seek a middle ground by providing the physical basis and
motivation for the ideas and methods, and we also give a glimpse of deeper
mathematical ideas.
There are major changes in the fourth edition. The material has been
rearranged and basically divided into two parts. Chapters 1 through 5 involve
models leading to ordinary differential equations and integral equations, while
Chapters 6 through 8 focus on partial differential equations and their
applications. Motivated by problems in the biological sciences where
quantitative methods are becoming central, Chapter 9 deals with discrete-time
models, which include some material on random processes. Sections reviewing
elementary methods for solving systems of ordinary differential equations have
been added in Chapters 1 and 2. Many additional examples and figures are
included in this edition, and several new exercises appear throughout. Some
exercises from the last edition have been revised for better clarity, and many new
exercises are included. The length of the text has expanded over 160 pages. The
Table of Contents details the specific topics covered.

Note that equations are numbered within sections. Thus, equation label (3.2)
refers to the second numbered equation in Section 3 of the current chapter.
My colleagues in Lincoln, who have often used the text in our core sequence
in applied mathematics, deserve special thanks. Glenn Ledder, Richard Rebarber,
and Tom Shores have provided me with an extensive errata, and they supplied
several exercises from graduate qualifying examinations, homework, and course
exams. Former students Bill Wolesensky and Kevin TeBeest read parts of the
earlier manuscripts and both were often a sounding board for suggestions. I am
extremely humbled and grateful to those who used earlier editions of the book
and helped establish it as one of the basic textbooks in the area; many have
generously given me corrections and suggestions, and many of the typographical
errors from the third edition have been resolved. Because of the extensive
revision, some new ones, but hopefully not many, have no doubt appeared. I
welcome suggestions, comments, and corrections, and contact information is on
the 
book’s 
website: 
http://www.unl.edu/~jlogan1/applied-math.htm.
Solutions to some of the exercises and an errata will appear when they become
available.
My editor at Wiley, Susanne Steitz-Filler, along with Jackie Palmieri, deserves
praise for her continued enthusiasm about this new revision and her skill in
making it an efficient, painless process. Finally, my wife, Tess, has been a
constant source of support for my research, teaching, and writing, and I again
take this opportunity to publicly express my appreciation for her encouragement
and affection.
Suggestions for use of the text. The full text cannot be covered in a two-
semester, 3-credit course, but there is a lot of flexibility built into the text. There
is significant independence among chapters, enabling instructors to design
special one- or two-semester courses in applied mathematics that meet their
specific needs.
Portions of Chapters 1 through 5 can form the basis of a one-semester course
involving differential and integral equations and the basic core of applied
mathematics. Chapter 4 on the calculus of variations is essentially independent
from the others, so it need not be covered. If students have a strong background
in differential equations, then only small portions of Chapters 1 and 2 need to be
covered.
A second semester, focused around partial differential equations, could cover
Chapters 6,7, and 8. Students have the flexibility to take the second semester, as
is often done at the University of Nebraska, without having the first, provided

small portions of Chapter 5 on Fourier-type expansions is covered.
Chapter 9, like Chapter 3, is independent from the rest of the book and can be
covered at any time.
The text, and its translations, have been used in several types of courses:
applied 
mathematics, 
mathematical 
modeling, 
differential 
equations,
mathematical biology, mathematical physics, and mathematical methods in
chemical or mechanical engineering.
J. David Logan, Lincoln, Nebraska
April 2013

Chapter 1
Dimensional Analysis and One-
Dimensional Dynamics
The techniques of dimensional analysis and scaling are basic in the theory and
practice of mathematical modeling. In every physical setting a good grasp of the
possible relationships and comparative magnitudes among the various
dimensioned parameters nearly always leads to a better understanding of the
problem and sometimes points the way toward approximations and solutions. In
this chapter we introduce some of the basic concepts from these two topics. A
statement and proof of the fundamental result in dimensional analysis, the Pi
theorem, is presented, and scaling is discussed in the context of reducing
problems to dimensionless form. The notion of scaling points the way toward a
proper treatment of perturbation methods, especially boundary layer phenomena
in singular perturbation theory as well as algebraic equations with small
parameters.
The first part of Section 1.3 is a review of ordinary differential equations. This
material may be perused or used as a reference by readers familiar with the basic
concepts and elementary solution methods. The last part includes a discussion of
stability and bifurcation; it may be less familiar.

1.1 Dimensional Analysis
1.1.1 The Program of Applied
Mathematics
Applied mathematics is a broad subject area in the mathematical sciences
dealing with those topics, problems, and techniques that have been useful in
analyzing real-world phenomena. In a very limited sense it is a set of methods
that are used to solve the equations that come out of science, engineering, and
other areas. Traditionally, these methods were techniques used to examine and
solve ordinary and partial differential equations, and integral equations. At the
other end of the spectrum, applied mathematics is applied analysis, or the theory
that underlies the methods. But, in a broader sense, applied mathematics is about
mathematical modeling and an entire process that intertwines with the physical
reality that underpins its origins.
By a mathematical model we mean an equation, or set of equations, that
describes some physical problem or phenomenon having its origin in science,
engineering, economics, or some other area. By mathematical modeling we
mean the process by which we formulate and analyze the model. This process
includes introducing the important and relevant quantities or variables involved
in the model, making model-specific assumptions about those quantities, solving
the model equations by some analytic or numerical method, and then comparing
the solutions to real data and interpreting the results. This latter process,
confronting the model with data, is often the most difficult part of the modeling
process. It involves determining parameter values from the experimental data.
This book does not address these important issues, and we refer to texts on data-
fitting techniques. This confrontation may lead to revision and refinement until
we are satisfied that the model accurately describes the physical situation and is
predictive of other similar observations. This process is depicted schematically
in Fig. 1.1. Thus, the subject of mathematical modeling involves physical
intuition, formulation of equations, solution methods, analysis, and data fitting.
A good mathematical model is simple, applies to many situations, and is
predictive.

Figure 1.1 Schematic of the modeling process.
In summary, in mathematical modeling the overarching objective is to make
quantitative sense of the world as we observe it, often by inventing caricatures of
reality. Scientific exactness is sometimes sacrificed for mathematical tractability.
Model predictions depend strongly on the assumptions, and changing the
assumptions changes the model. If some assumptions are less critical than
others, we say the model is robust to those assumptions. They help us clarify
verbal descriptions of nature and the mechanisms that make up natural law, and
they help us determine which parameters and processes are important, and which
are unimportant.
Another issue is the level of complexity of a model. With modern computer
technology it is tempting to build complicated models that include every
possible effect we can think of, with large numbers of parameters and variables.
Simulation models like these have their place, but computer runs do not always
allow us to discern which are the important processes and which are not. Of
course, the complexity of the model depends upon the data and the purpose, but
it is usually a good idea to err on the side of simplicity and then build in
complexity as it is needed or desired.
Finally, authors have tried to classify models in several ways—stochastic vs.
deterministic, continuous vs. discrete, static vs. dynamic, quantitative vs.
qualitative, descriptive vs. explanatory, and so on. In this book we are interested
in modeling the underlying reasons for the phenomena we observe (explanatory)
rather than fitting the data with formulas (descriptive) as is often done in
statistics. For example, fitting measurements of the size of an animal over its
lifetime by a regression curve is descriptive, and it gives some information. But
describing the dynamics of growth by a differential equation relating growth
rates, food assimilation rates, and energy maintenance requirements tells more
about the underlying processes involved.
Models are a blend of physical laws, such as conservation of mass, energy,
etc., experimental results that lead to constitutive relations, or equations based on
experiment, and even ad hoc assumptions when more specific evidence is

lacking. The reader is already familiar with many models. In an elementary
science or calculus course we learn that Newton’s second law, force equals mass
times acceleration, governs mechanical systems like falling bodies; Newton’s
inverse-square law of gravitation describes the motion of the planets; Ohm’s law
in circuit theory dictates the voltage drop across a resistor in terms of the current;
the law of mass action in chemistry describes how fast chemical reactions occur;
or the logistic equation, an intuitive ad hoc model of growth and competition in a
population.
The first step in modeling is to select the relevant variables (independent and
dependent) and parameters that we need to describe the problem. Usually these
are based on available experimental data and natural laws. Physical quantities
have dimensions like time, distance, degrees, and so on, or corresponding units
like seconds, meters, and degrees Celsius. The equations we write down as
models must be dimensionally correct. Apples cannot equal oranges. Verifying
that each term in our model has the same dimensions is the first task in obtaining
a correct equation. Also, checking dimensions can often give us insight into what
a term in the model might be. We always should be aware of the dimensions of
the quantities, both variables and parameters, in a model, and we should always
try to identify the physical meaning of the terms in the equations we obtain. A
general rule is to always let the physical problem and the data available drive the
mathematics, and not vice-versa.
It would be a limited view to believe that applied mathematics consists only of
developing techniques and algorithms to solve problems that arise in a physical
or applied context. Applied mathematics deals with all the stages of the
modeling process, not merely the formal solution. It is true that an important
aspect of applied mathematics is studying, investigating, and developing
procedures that are useful in solving mathematical problems: these include
analytic and approximation techniques, numerical analysis, and methods for
solving differential and integral equations. It is more the case, however, that
applied mathematics deals with all phases of the problem. Formulating the
model and understanding its origin in empirics are crucial steps. Because there is
a constant interplay between the various stages, the scientist, engineer, or
mathematician must understand each phase. For example, the solution stage
sometimes involves making approximations that lead to a simplification; the
approximations often come from a careful examination of the physical reality,
which in turn suggests what terms may be neglected, what quantities (if any) are
small, and so on. The origins and analysis are equally important. Indeed,

physical insight forces us toward the right questions and at times leads us to the
theorems and their proofs. In fact, mathematical modeling has been, and
remains, one of the main driving forces for mathematics itself.
In the first part of this chapter our aim is to focus on the first phase of the
modeling process. Our strategy is to formulate models for various physical
systems while emphasizing the interdependence of mathematics and the physical
world. Through study of the modeling process we gain insight into the equations
themselves. In addition to presenting some concrete examples of modeling, we
also discuss two techniques that are useful in developing and interpreting the
model equations. One technique is dimensional analysis, and the other is scaling.
The former permits us to understand the dimensional (meaning length, time,
mass, etc.) relationships of the quantities in the equations and the resulting
implications of dimensional homogeneity. Scaling is a technique that helps us
understand the magnitude of the terms that appear in the model equations by
comparing the quantities to intrinsic reference quantities that appear naturally in
the physical situation. A side benefit in scaling differential equations, for
example, is in the great economy it affords; more often than not, the number of
independent parameters can be significantly reduced.

1.1.2 Dimensional Methods
One of the basic techniques that is useful in the initial, modeling stage of a
problem is the analysis of the relevant quantities and how they must relate to
each other in a dimensional way. Simply put, apples cannot equal oranges plus
bananas; equations must have a consistency to them that precludes every
possible relationship among the variables. Stated differently, equations must be
dimensionally homogeneous. These simple observations form the basis of the
subject known as dimensional analysis. The methods of dimensional analysis
have led to important results in determining the nature of physical phenomena,
even when the governing equations were not known. This has been especially
true in continuum mechanics, out of which the general methods of dimensional
analysis evolved.
The cornerstone result in dimensional analysis is known as the Pi theorem.
The Pi theorem states that if there is a physical law that gives a relation among a
certain number of dimensioned physical quantities, then there is an equivalent
law that can be expressed as a relation among certain dimensionless quantities
(often noted by π1, π2,…, and hence the name). In the early 1900s, E.
Buckingham formalized the original method used by Lord Rayleigh and gave a
proof of the Pi theorem for special cases; now the theorem often carries his
name. Birkhoff (1950) can be consulted for a bibliography and history.
Example 1.1
(Atomic explosion) To communicate the flavor and power of this classic result,
we consider a calculation made by the British applied mathematician G. I. Taylor
in the late 1940s to compute the yield of the first atomic explosion after viewing
photographs of the spread of the fireball. In such an explosion a large amount of
energy E is released in a short time (essentially instantaneously) in a region
small enough to be considered a point. From the center of the explosion a strong
shock wave spreads outward; the pressure behind it is on the order of hundreds
of thousands of atmospheres, far greater than the ambient air pressure whose
magnitude can be accordingly neglected in the early stages of the explosion. It is
plausible that there is a relation between the radius of the blast wave front r, time
t, the initial air density ρ, and the energy released E. Hence, we assume there is a
physical law

(1.1) 
which postulates a functional relationship among these four dimensioned
quantities. The Pi theorem states that there is an equivalent physical law between
the independent dimensionless quantities that can be formed from t, r, E, and ρ.
We note that t has dimensions of time, r has dimensions of length, E has
dimensions of mass · length2 · time−2, and ρ has dimensions of mass · length−3.
Hence, the quantity r5ρ/t2E is dimensionless, because all of the dimensions
cancel out of this quantity (this is easy to check). It is not difficult to observe,
and we shall show it later, that no other independent dimensionless quantities
can be formed from t, r, E, and ρ. The Pi theorem then guarantees that the
physical law (1.1) is equivalent to a physical law involving only the
dimensionless quantities; in this case
(1.2) 
because there is only one such quantity, where f is some function of a single
variable. From (1.2) it follows that the physical law must take the form (a root of
(1.2))
or
(1.3) 
where C is a constant. Therefore, just from dimensional reasoning it has been
shown that the radius of the wave front depends on the two-fifths power of time.
Experiments and photographs of explosions confirm this dependence. The
constant C depends on the dimensionless ratio of the specific heat at constant
pressure to the specific heat at constant volume. By fitting the curve (1.3) to
experimental data of r versus t, the initial energy yield E can be computed, since
C and ρ are known quantities. (See Exercise 3.) Although this calculation is only
a simple version of the original argument given by Taylor, we infer that
dimensional reasoning can give crucial insights into the nature of a physical
process and is an invaluable tool for the applied mathematician, scientist, or
engineer.
Example 1.2

(Height of a projectile) Let us imagine going outside and asking how high we
can throw a baseball vertically upward. What would the maximum height h
depend on? We may conjecture that it depends on the mass m of the ball, the
acceleration of gravity g, and the velocity v with which we propel it. For now
let’s ignore the air resistance, which could be another issue. We can learn a lot by
dimensional methods. Assume a physical law of the form
relating the four quantities we selected. All of them can be written in terms of
fundamental dimensions M (mass), L (length), and T (time). If Π is a
dimensionless quantity that can be formed from m, g, v, and h, then
for some powers a, b, c, and d. This means
Because Π is dimensionless, the dimensions must cancel and all the exponents
must be zero; we obtain the homogeneous system of equations
Clearly, a = 0, and the last two equations have one degree of freedom (three
unknowns and only two equations). So, pick c = −2, which gives b = d = 1.
(Note that any multiple of this solution is also a solution.) We have shown that a
dimensionless quantity Π has the form
There is only one such independent dimensionless variable (modulo the
exponents being multiplied by some constant). We conclude that the physical
law can be written in terms of this single dimensionless variable, or
where C is some constant. This means
so the maximum height depends on the square of the velocity and the inverse of
gravity. Based on minimal assumptions and dimensional reasoning we have
learned a lot. For example, if we double the velocity, the height is quadrupled.
How would we determine the constant C? A single experiment that measures h
and v suffices (g is known).
As an aside, there is another aspect of dimensional analysis that is important in
engineering, namely the design of small laboratory-scale models (say of an

airplane or ship) that behave like their real counterparts. A discussion of this
important topic is not treated here, but can be found in many engineering texts,
especially books on fluid mechanics.
Example 1.3
(Air resistance) Those who bike have certainly noticed that the force F (mass
times length, per time-squared) of air resistance appears to be positively related
to their speed v (length per time) and cross-sectional area A (length-squared).
But force involves mass, so it cannot depend only upon v and A. Therefore, let us
add fluid, or air, density ρ (mass per length-cubed), and assume a relation of the
form
for some function f to be determined. What are the possible forms of f? To be
dimensionally correct, the right side must be a force. What powers of ρ, A, and v
would combine to give a force, that is,
where k is some constant without any units (i.e., dimensionless). If we denote
mass by M, length by L, and time by T, then the last equation requires
Equating exponents of M, L, and T gives
Therefore x = 1, y = 1, and z = 2. So the only relation must be
Consequently, the force must depend upon the square of the velocity, a fact often
used in problems involving fluid resistance, and it must be proportional to
density of air and area of the object. Again, substantial information can be
obtained from dimensional arguments alone.
EXERCISES
1. A pendulum executing small vibrations has period P and length l, and m is
the mass of the bob. Can P depend only on l and m? If we assume P depends
on l and the acceleration g due to gravity, then show that P = constant 
2. A detonation wave, or shock front, moves through a high explosive with
velocity D, thereby initiating an explosion that releases a specific energy
(energy per unit mass) E. If there is a relationship between e and D, what can

be concluded?
3. In the blast wave problem take C = 1 (a value used by Taylor) in (1.3),
and use ρ = 1.25 kg/m3. Some of the radius (m) vs. time (milliseconds) data
for the Trinity explosion is given in the following table:
Using these data, estimate the yield of the Trinity explosion in kilotons (1
kiloton equals 4.186(10)12 joules). Compare your answer to the actual yield
of approximately 21 kilotons.
Least Squares: Least squares is a popular method of choosing parameters in
a function, or curve, in order to give the best fit to a set of data points. The
philosophy is that the curve of best fit is the one that minimizes the sums of
squares of the vertical distances between the curve and the data points. Let
(xi, yi), i = 1, 2,…, n be n data points, and, for example, let y = F(x, a, b) be a
fitting function with two unknown parameters a and b. Then the least
squares method is to determine a and b such that
From calculus, a necessary condition for D to be minimum is that
which can be solved for a and b. With certain caveats, the least squares
method can be extended to any number of parameters. Texts on data fitting
can be consulted for additional information.
4. In the blast wave problem in Example 1.1, assume, instead of (1.1), a
physical law of the form
where P is the ambient air pressure. By inspection, find two independent
dimensionless parameters formed from t, r, ρ, e, and P. Naming the two
dimensionless parameters π1 and π2 and assuming the law is equivalent to
does it still follow that r varies like the two-fifths power of t?
5. The law governing the distance x an object falls in time t in a field of
constant gravitational acceleration g with no air resistance is x = gt2. How
many independent dimensionless quantities can be formed from t, x, and g?

Rewrite the physical law in terms of dimensionless quantities. Can the
distance a body falls depend on the mass m as well? That is, can there be a
physical law of the form f(t, x, g, m) = 0?
6. A ball tossed upward with initial velocity v reaches a height at time t
given by x = −gt2+vt, where g is the acceleration due to gravity. Show this
law is dimensionally consistent. Find two independent dimensionless
variables (call them y and s) and rewrite the law only in terms of the
dimensionless quantities. Plot the dimensionless law in the sy plane, and
make an argument that the single, dimensionless plot contains all the
information in the graphs of all the plots of x = −gt2 + vt (x vs. t), for all
possible parameter values g and v.

1.1.3 The Pi Theorem
The Pi theorem states that it is generally true that a physical law
(1.4) 
relating m dimensional quantities q1, q2,…, qm is equivalent to a physical law
that relates the k dimensionless quantities π1, π2,…, πk that can be formed from
q1, q2,…, qm. There are tremendous values in a dimensionless formulation of a
problem. One, the formula is independent of the set of units used; two, there are
fewer dimensionless quantities than the dimensioned ones, and thus there is
economy in the formulation; finally, important relations can be discovered
among the quantities. Before making a formal statement, we introduce some
basic terminology.
First, the m dimensional quantities q1, q2,…, qm, which are like the quantities t,
r, ρ, and e in the blast wave example, Example 1.1, are dimensioned quantities.
This means that they can be expressed in a natural way in terms of a minimal set
of fundamental dimensions L1, L2,…, Ln (n < m), appropriate to the problem
being studied. In the blast wave problem, time T, length L, and mass M can be
taken to be the fundamental dimensions, since each quantity t, r, ρ, and e can be
expressed in terms of T, L, and M. For example, the dimensions of the energy e
are ML2T−2. In general, the dimensions of qi, denoted by the square brackets
notation [qi], can be written in terms of the fundamental dimensions as
(1.5) 
for some choice of exponents a1i,…, ani. If [qi] = 1, then the quantity qi is said to
be dimensionless.
We proceed as follows. If π is a quantity of the form
a monomial in the dimensioned quantities, we want to find all exponents p1,…,
pm for which π is dimensionless, or [π] = 1. Then,

The powers of the Li must sum to zero, and thus we obtain a homogeneous
system of n equations in m unknowns p1,…, pm, given in matrix form by
where p = [p1,…, pm]T is a column vector of the unknown exponents, and A is
the n × m matrix
called the dimension matrix. The elements in the ith column give the exponents
for qi in terms of the powers of L1,…, Ln. It follows from a key result in linear
algebra that the number of independent solutions is m − r, where r is the rank of
A. We recall that the rank of a matrix is the number of linearly independent rows,
which, when the matrix is reduced to row echelon form, is the number of
nonzero rows. So, the number of independent dimensionless variables that can
be formed from q1,…, qm is m − r.
What assumptions are needed to show equivalence of the dimensionless form
of the physical law? The fundamental assumption regarding the physical law
(1.4) goes back to the simple statement that apples cannot equal oranges. We
assume that (1.4) is unit free in the sense that it is independent of the particular
set of units chosen to express the quantities q1, q2,…, qm. We are distinguishing
the word unit from the word dimension. By units we mean specific physical
units like seconds, hours, days, and years; all of these units have dimensions of
time. Similarly, grams, kilograms, slugs, and so on are units of the dimension
mass. Any fundamental dimension Li has the property that its units can be
changed upon multiplication by the appropriate conversion factor λi > 0 to obtain
i in a new system of units. We write
The units of derived quantities q can be changed in a similar fashion. If
then
gives q in the new system of units. The physical law (1.4) is said to be
independent of the units chosen to express the dimensional quantities q1, q2,…,

qm, or unit-free, if f(q1,…, qm) = 0 and f( 1,…, m) = 0 are equivalent physical
laws. More formally:
Definition 1.4
The physical law (1.4) is unit-free if for all choices of real positive numbers λ1,
…, λn we have f( 1,…, m) = 0, if, and only if, f(q1,…, qm) = 0,.
Example 1.5
The physical law
(1.6) 
relates the distance x a body falls in a constant gravitational field g to the time t.
In the cgs system of units, x is given in centimeters (cm), t in seconds, and g in
cm/sec2. If we change units for the fundamental quantities x and t to inches and
minutes, then in the new system of units
where 
 (in/cm) and 
 (min/sec). Because [g] = LT−2, we have
Then
Therefore (1.6) is unit-free.
We can now give a formal statement of the Pi theorem.
Theorem 1.6
(Pi theorem) Let
(1.7) 
be a unit-free physical law that relates the dimensional quantities q1, q2,…, qm.
Let L1,…, Ln(n < m) be fundamental dimensions with
and let r = rank A, where A is the dimension matrix (1.5). Then there exists m–r
independent dimensionless quantities π1, π2,…, πm–r that can be formed from q1,
…, qm, and the physical law (1.7) is equivalent to an equation
(1.8) 

expressed only in terms of the dimensionless quantities.
The existence of a physical law (1.7) is an assumption. In practice one must
conjecture which are the relevant variables in a problem and then apply the
machinery of the theorem. The resulting dimensionless physical law (1.8) must
be checked by experiment, or whatever, in an effort to establish the validity of
the original assumptions.
We prove the Pi theorem after more examples.
Example 1.7
(Heat transfer) At time t = 0 an amount of heat energy e, concentrated at a point
in space, is allowed to diffuse outward into a region with temperature zero. If r
denotes the radial distance from the source and t is time, the problem is to
determine the temperature u as a function of r and t. This problem can be
formulated as a boundary value problem for a partial differential equation (the
heat equation, as in Chapter 6), but here we see what can be learned from a
careful dimensional analysis of the problem. The first step is to make an
assumption regarding which quantities affect the temperature u. Clearly t, r, and
e are relevant quantities. It also is reasonable that the heat capacity c, with
dimensions of energy per degree per volume, of the region plays a role, as will
the rate at which heat diffuses outward. The latter is characterized by the thermal
diffusivity k of dimensions length-squared per time. Therefore, we conjecture a
physical law of the form
which relates the six quantities, t, r, u, e, k, c. The next step is to determine a
minimal set of fundamental dimensions L1,…, Ln by which the six-dimensional
quantities can be expressed. A suitable selection would be the four quantities T
(time), L (length), Θ (temperature), and E (energy1). Then
and the dimension matrix A is given by

Here m = 6, n = 4, and the rank of the dimension matrix is r = 4. Consequently,
there are m − r = 2 dimensionless quantities that can be formed from t, r, u, e, k,
and c. To find them we proceed as follows: If π is dimensionless, then for some
choice of α1,…, α6
Therefore, the exponents must vanish and we obtain four homogeneous linear
equations for α1,…, α6, namely
The coefficient matrix of this homogeneous linear system is just the dimension
matrix A. From elementary matrix theory the number of independent solutions
equals the number of unknowns minus the rank of A. Each independent solution
will give rise to a dimensionless variable. Now the method unfolds and we can
see the origin of the rank condition in the statement of the Pi theorem. By
standard methods for solving linear systems we find two linearly independent
solutions
and
These give two dimensionless quantities
and
Therefore, the Pi theorem guarantees that the original physical law f(t, r, u, e, k,
c) = 0 is equivalent to a physical law of the form
Solving for π2 gives

for some function g, or
(1.9) 
Again, without solving an equation governing the diffusion process, we are able
via dimensional analysis to argue that the temperature of the region varies
according to (1.9). For example, we can conclude that the temperature near the
source r = 0 falls off like t−3/2.
Example 1.8
(Blood flow in arteries) Used in conjunction with experiments, dimensional
analysis can be a powerful tool in obtaining theoretical results in all areas of
science and engineering. In this example we study how blood flows in veins and
arteries, depending on the radius of the artery r, the length of the artery l, the
density and viscosity of blood, ρ and μ, and the pressure change ΔP over that
length segment. Our interest is the volumetric flow rate Q (volume of blood per
second) and how those quantities affect it. Of course, what we say applies to any
context of viscous flow in a pipe.
There are six quantities. It is fairly clear that the dimensions of five of them are
but the viscosity may be less uncertain for many. Therefore we give a brief,
heuristic explanation of viscosity that reveals its dimensions. We all have an
intuitive idea about viscosity. Honey is very viscous, oil perhaps a little less, and
alcohol less yet. Let us imagine a viscous fluid between two infinite plates made
of metal, for example. See Fig. 1.2. The lower plane is fixed, and we pull on the
upper plate in a direction tangent to it, giving a shear force per unit area. The
basic property of a viscous fluid is its ‘stickiness’ at a boundary; it adheres to a
boundary, stationary or moving, with the same velocity as the boundary. So, the
movement of the upper plate drags along the fluid at some velocity; at the lower
boundary the velocity of the fluid is zero. Therefore, as we drag along the plate,
the shear force imparts momentum to the fluid. As shown in the figure, the
velocity profile decreases from the top plate to zero at the lower plate.
Intuitively, it appears that the shear force should therefore be related to the
vertical change of the velocity. As a constitutive assumption, we take a linear
relationship with proportionality constant μ. That is,
Figure 1.2 A viscous fluid between a fixed lower plate and an upper plate. A

shear force on the upper plate transfers momentum downward into the fluid.
force per area = μ. change in velocity per unit length.
Dimensionally,
or
Now we can perform a dimensional analysis with L, T, and M as fundamental
dimensions.
We make the assumption there is a relationship among these six quantities, i.e.,
To find the dimensionless variables we set
Therefore,
and so the exponents for the six quantities must satisfy the homogeneous system
The dimension matrix is
and it is already in reduced echelon form. Clearly, all three rows are linearly
independent and therefore the matrix has rank 3. Thus, 6 − 3 = 3 dimensionless
variables can be found. Also, from the properties of the matrix, a, c, and d are

basic variables (the pivot positions) and b, e, and f are free; so we can solve for
the three basic variables in terms of the free ones. Using backward substitution,
the solution of the system can be written
The solution can be written in vector form as
These three linearly independent vectors define the three sets of six exponents of
the independent pi variables, and we have
Note that various combinations (products and powers) of pi variables are also
dimensionless, and we need to make the appropriate choice to obtain what we
want, namely a formula for Q. There are two quantities that depend on Q, and
two that depend on ΔP. We can eliminate Q by forming the new variable
Then, the Pi theorem guarantees that the physical law is equivalent to
or
where g is an arbitrary function. We can solve for the first second argument in
terms of the other two to get
where G is again arbitrary. This gives
At this point it appears we are at an impasse. However, we can perform
experiments to get additional information; this is not uncommon. If we hold all

of the quantities fixed except Q and ΔP, we find that the volumetric flow rate Q
depends linearly on the pressure gradient ΔP. Then the arbitrary function G
cannot depend on its last argument and we obtain
where H is arbitrary. Next, by performing another experiment, we can find how
H depends on the ratio r/l. Holding all the quantities fixed but r and l, we can
plot Qμ/r3ΔP vs. R/l, and we find that H is linear. Hence,
where C is a constant. In conclusion, we have deduced from dimensional
reasoning and experiment that the volumetric flow rate of blood depends linearly
on the pressure change and the fourth power of the radius of the artery.
It is interesting to note that the theoretical equations of viscous fluid dynamics,
which we examine in the last chapter, imply that the volumetric flow rate is
Of course, we used a lot of foresight in making our dimensional calculations, but
it is fairly impressive that we reached almost the same result!
One of the fundamental techniques for finding solutions to differential
equations has it basis in dimensional analysis. Among the different variables and
parameters in the problem it is sometimes possible to identify new variables that
reduce the equation to a much simpler one. For example, it may be possible to
reduce a partial differential equation to an ordinary differential equation, or
transform a second-order differential equation into a first-order equation. This
method works because of natural symmetries in the problem itself, for example,
invariance under a stretching transformation. A detailed treatment of symmetries
and the discovery of variables that simplify a problem can be found in Logan
(2008), as well as in a chapter in the first edition of the present text. Here we
give a simple example of how dimensionless variables can be used in this type of
reduction.
Example 1.9
(Diffusion of a pollutant) Imagine a long canal occupying the region 0 ≤ x < ∞
and filled with pollutant-free water. At its boundary, x = 0, suppose there is a

constant, continual concentration u0 of a toxicant that diffuses into the canal over
time. The problem is to determine the concentration u = u(x, t) of the toxicant at
any x > 0 for all time t > 0. It can be shown (see Chapter 6) that u(x, t) satisfies
the partial differential equation
and the boundary conditions
along with an initial condition
This partial differential equation is called the diffusion equation. As we observe
later, it also appears in the context of heat conduction and random walks. The
constant D is called the diffusion constant and has dimensions length-squared
per time; it is a measure of how fast the toxicant diffuses through the water
medium.
If the preceding problem has a solution, then it is plausible that there is a
physical law, or relationship, among the five quantities involved, or f(x, t, D, u,
u0) = 0. Let us perform the dimensional analysis. If π is dimensionless, then
Therefore,
The dimension matrix is
The matrix is already in row echelon form and has three linearly independent
rows; so the rank is 3. Thus, there are 5 − 3 = 2 independent dimensionless
variables. Clearly, basic variables are a, b and e, and the free variables are c and
e. Thus, a, b and e can be determined in terms of c and e. Easily, by back
substitution,
In vector form, the solution to the homogeneous system is

where c and e are arbitrary real numbers. Therefore, two dimensionless
quantities are
Of course, dimensionless quantities may be chosen in many ways; we can take
powers, products, and quotients and still maintain independent quantities. Here,
for convenience in subsequent calculations, we take
From the Pi theorem we then have the equivalent law g(π1, π2) = 0, or solving
for π2,
where F is an unknown function. This is the dependence given by the Pi
theorem.
However, we do not stop here. We have a partial differential equation, the
diffusion equation, that can be used to determine F, and thus u = u(x, t). To this
end, we write
We are thinking now that the dimensionless quantity s is an independent
variable. We can substitute this expression into the diffusion equation as follows.
By the chain rule,
and
When these expressions are substituted into the diffusion equation, we obtain
or

Amazingly enough, the diffusion equation reduced to a ordinary differential
equation for F(s)! This cancellation of the original variables x and t signals the
success of the method. The variable s is called a similarity variable and the
solutions we obtain subsequently are called similarity solutions.
This differential equation can be solved easily by letting G(s) = F’(s). Then
G’(s) = −(s/2)G(s), immediately giving G(s) = C1 exp [−s2/4]. Then
To determine the constants of integration we apply the auxiliary conditions. We
have u(0, t) = u0F(0) = u0 and so F(0) = 1. Also u(x, 0) = u0F(∞) = 0, or F(∞) =
0. Therefore C2 = 1 and
Using the well known integral formula
we get
Finally we can write the solution as
In terms of the original variables,

1.1.4 Proof of the Pi Theorem
To prove the Pi theorem we demonstrate two propositions.
(i) Among the quantities q1,…,qm there are m − r independent dimensionless
variables that can be formed, where r is the rank of the dimension matrix A.
(ii) If π1,…, πm–r are the m − r dimensionless variables, then (1.7) is
equivalent to a physical law of the form F(π1,…, πm–r) = 0.
The proof of (i) has been outlined earlier—the general argument proceeds
exactly like the construction of the dimensionless variables in the last several
examples. It makes use of the familiar result in linear algebra that the number of
linearly independent solutions of a set of n homogeneous equations in m
unknowns is m − r, where r is the rank of the coefficient matrix. For, let π be a
dimensionless quantity. Then
(1.10) 
for some p1, p2,…,pm. In terms of the fundamental dimensions L1,…, Ln,
Because [π] = 1, the exponents vanish, or
(1.11) 
By the aforementioned theorem in linear algebra, the homogeneous system
(1.11) has exactly m − r independent (vector) solutions [p1,…,pm]. (These
solutions form a basis for the nullspace, or kernel, of A.) Each solution gives rise
to a dimensionless variable via (1.10), and this completes the proof of (i). The
independence of the dimensionless variables is in the sense of linear algebraic
independence. Note that we can always, for example, multiply a vector by a
constant, say 1/2, and get an equivalent dimensionless variable, the square root
of the dimensionless quantity.
The proof of (ii) makes strong use of the hypothesis that the law is unit-free.
The argument is subtle, but it can be made almost transparent if we examine a
particular example.

Example 1.10
Consider the unit-free law
(1.12) 
for the distance a particle falls in a gravitational field. If length and time are
chosen as fundamental dimensions, a straightforward calculation shows there is
a single dimensionless variable given by
The remaining variable g can be expressed as g = xπ1/t2, and we can define a
function G by
Clearly the law G(x, t, π1) = 0, or
(1.13) 
is equivalent to (1.12) and is unit-free because f is. Then F is defined by
which is equivalent to (1.13) and (1.12).
We present the proof of (ii) in the special case when m = 4, n = 2, and r = 2.
The notation will be easier, and the general argument for arbitrary m, n, and r
proceeds in exactly the same manner. Therefore we consider a unit-free physical
law
(1.14) 
with
where L1 and L2 are fundamental dimensions. The dimension matrix
is assumed to have rank r = 2. If π is a dimensionless quantity, then
where the exponents p1, p2, p3, p4 satisfy the homogeneous system (1.11), which
in this case is
(1.15) 

We wish to determine p1, p2, p3, p4, and the form of the two dimensionless
variables. Without loss of any generality, we can assume the first two columns of
A are linearly independent. This is because we can rearrange the indices on the qj
so that the two independent columns appear as the first two. Then columns three
and four can be written as linear combinations of the first two, or
(1.16) 
(1.17) 
for some constants c31, c32, c41, and c42. Substituting into (1.15) gives
The left side is a combination of linearly independent vectors, and therefore the
coefficients must vanish,
Therefore, we can solve for p1 and p2 in terms of p3 and p4 and write
The two vectors on the right represent two linearly independent solutions of
(1.15); hence, the two dimensionless quantities are
Next define a function G by
The physical law
(1.18) 
holds if, and only if, (1.14) holds, and therefore (1.18) is an equivalent physical
law. Since f = 0 is unit-free, it easily follows that (1.18) is unit-free (note that 
 under any change of units; that is, dimensionless variables
have the same value in all systems of units). For the final stage of the argument
we show that (1.18) is equivalent to the physical law

(1.19) 
which will give the result, for (1.19) implies F(π1, π2) = 0, where F(π1, π2) 
G(1, 1, π1, π2). Because (1.18) is a unit-free, we must have
(1.20) 
where
for every choice of the conversion factors λ1, λ2 > 0. We select λ1 and λ2 so that 
1 = 2 = 1. We are able to make this choice because
(1.21) 
implies
(1.22) 
And, because the coefficient matrix
in (1.22) is nonsingular (recall the assumption that the first two columns of the
dimension matrix A are linearly independent), the system (1.22) has a unique
solution (ln λ1, ln λ2), from which λ1 and λ2 can be determined to satisfy (1.21).
Thus (1.19) is an equivalent physical law and the argument is complete.
The general argument for arbitrary m, n, and r can be found in Birkhoff (1950),
from which the preceding proof was adapted. This classic book also provides
additional examples and historical comments.2
In performing a dimensional analysis on a problem, two judgments are
required at the beginning.
1. The selection of the pertinent variables.
2. The choice of the fundamental dimensions.
The first is a matter of experience and may be based on intuition or
experiments. There is, of course, no guarantee that the selection will lead to a
useful formula after the procedure is applied. Second, the choice of fundamental
dimensions may involve tacit assumptions that may not be valid in a given
problem. For example, including mass, length, and time but not force in a given
problem assumes there is some relation (Newton’s second law) that plays an
important role and causes force not to be an independent dimension. As a
specific example, a small sphere falling under gravity in a viscous fluid is

observed to fall, after a short time, at constant velocity. Since the motion is un-
accelerated we need not make use of the proportionality of force to acceleration,
and so force can be treated as a separate, independent fundamental dimension. In
summary, intuition and experience are important ingredients in applying the
dimensional analysis formalism to a specific physical problem.
Table 1.1 gives dimensions for common quantities, including key relations that
remind us of their origins. The reader should review the mks units for each of
these quantities (e.g., energy is given in Joules), some of which are listed.
Table 1.1 Dimensions of common quantities in mechanics and thermodynamics.
Symbols M, L, T, and Θ (temperature) are fundamental dimensions.
Quantity (symbol)
Dimensions Relation
velocity (v)
LT−1
length per time (m/s)
acceleration (a)
LT−2
velocity per time-squared (m/s2)
momentum (p)
MLT−1
mass · velocity
mass density (ρ)
ML−3
mass per volume
force (F)
MLT−2
mass · acceleration (N)
energy (E), work (W)
ML2T−2
force · distance (Joules)
power (P)
ML2T−3
energy per time (Watts)
pressure (P), stress (σ)
ML−1T−2
force per area (Pascals)
frequency (ω)
T−1
per time (Hertz)
internal energy (U)
ML2T−2
energy
specific heat (c)
L2T−2Θ−1
energy per mass per degree
heat flux (ϕ)
MT−3
energy per time per area
thermal conductivity (K) MLT−3Θ−1
flux per length per degree
diffusivity (k)
L2T−1
K/ρc
viscosity (μ)
ML−1T−1
mass per length per time
heat loss coefficient (h)
MT3Θ−1
energy per volume · deg · time
EXERCISES
1. (Waves) The speed v of a wave in deep water is determined by its
wavelength λ and the acceleration g due to gravity. What does dimensional
analysis imply regarding the relationship between v, λ, and g?
2. (Allometry)An ecologist postulated that there is a relationship among the
mass m, density ρ, volume V, and surface area S of certain animals. Discuss

this conjecture in terms of dimensionless analysis.
3. (Mechanics) A small sphere of radius r and density ρ is falling at constant
velocity v under the influence of gravity g in a liquid of density ρl and
viscosity μ (given in mass per length per time). It is observed experimentally
that
Show that this law is unit-free.
4. A physical phenomenon is described by the quantities P, l, m, t, and ρ,
representing pressure, length, mass, time, and density, respectively. If there
is a physical law
relating these quantities, show that there is an equivalent physical law of the
form G(l3ρ/m, t6 P3/m2ρ) = 0. Find P in terms of an arbitrary function.
5. A physical system is described by a law f(E, P, A) = 0, where E, P, and A
are energy, pressure, and area, respectively. Show that PA3/2 / E = const.
6. (Allometry) The length L of an organism depends upon time t, its density
ρ, its resource assimilation rate a (mass per area per time), and its resource
use rate b (mass per volume per time). Show that there is a physical law
involving two dimensionless quantities.
7. (Mechanics) A piece of shrapnel of density ρ is driven off an explosive
device at velocity v. The density of the explosive is ρe, and E is its Gurney
energy (joules/kilogram), or the specific energy available in the explosive to
do work. Determine how the velocity of the shrapnel depends upon E.
8. (Mechanics) In an indentation experiment, a slab of metal of thickness h is
subjected to a constant pressure P on its upper surface by a cylinder of
radius a. The technician then measures the vertical displacement of U of the
indentation. The displacement also depends upon two material properties,
Poisson’s ratio v, which is dimensionless, and the Lamé constant μ, which
has dimensions M/L3T2, where M is mass, L is length, and T is time.
Determine a set of dimensionless variables and show that the functional
form of U is
9. (Digestion) In modeling the digestion process in insects, it is believed that

digestion yield rate Y, in mass per time, is related to the concentration C of
the limiting nutrient, the residence time T in the gut, the gut volume V, and
the rate of nutrient nutrient breakdown r, given in mass per time per volume.
Show that for fixed T, r, C, the yield is positively related to the gut volume.
10. (Reactors) A chemical C flows continuously into a reactor with
concentration Ci and volumetric flow rate q (volume/time). While in the
reactor, which has volume V, the substances are continuously stirred and a
chemical reaction C→ products, with rate constant k (1/time), consumes the
chemical. The mixture exits the reactor at the same flow rate q. The
concentration of C in the reactor at any time t is C = C(t), and C(0) = C0.
Use dimensional analysis to deduce that
where a = C0/Ci and b = Vk/q are dimensionless constants and F is some
function.
11. (Mechanics) The problem is to determine the power P that must be
applied to keep a ship of length l moving at a constant speed V. If it is the
case, as seems reasonable, that P depends on the density of water ρ, the
acceleration due to gravity g, and the viscosity of water v (in length-squared
per time), as well as l and V, then show that
where Fr is the Froude number and Re is the Reynolds number defined by
12. A spherical gas bubble with ratio of specific heats γ is surrounded by an
infinite sea of liquid of density ρl. The bubble oscillates with growth and
contraction periodically with small amplitude at a well-defined frequency ω.
Assuming a physical law
where P is the mean pressure inside the bubble and R is the mean radius,
show that the frequency must vary inversely with the mean radius R. The
constant γ is dimensionless.
13. (Mechanics) Did you ever wonder how fast a long line of dominos
topple over? Let us imagine an experiment where we set up a line of
dominos with spacing d between them. Further, we assume a typical domino

has height h and thickness τ. We seek a formula that relates these quantities,
the gravitational constant g, and the velocity v.
a) Use dimensional analysis to show that
Assume τ/h is very small and can be neglected. What does the law
become?
b) Experiments have been performed that show the graph of v/
 vs.
d/h is approximately constant, 1.5, for d/h varying over the range 0 to 0.8.
Using h = 0.05 meters, what is the velocity of the toppling dominos?
14. A perfect gas in equilibrium has specific energy E (energy per mass),
temperature T, and Boltzmann constant k (specific energy per degree).
Derive a functional relationship of the form E = f(k, T).
15. (Environment) In tests for fuel economy, cars are driven at constant
speed V on a level highway. With no acceleration, the force of propulsion F
must be in equilibrium with other forces, such as the air resistance, and so
on. Assume that the variables affecting F are the velocity V, the rate C that
fuel is burned, in volume per time, and the amount of energy K in a gallon of
fuel, in mass per length per time-squared. Determine F as a function of V, C,
and K.
16. (Biology) Across a cell membrane of thickness w the mass concentration
of a biochemical molecule is Ci on the inside of the cell, and Co on the
outside. The diffusion constant in the membrane is d, measured in length-
squared per time. Use dimensional analysis (not guessing) to obtain the most
general relationship for the flux ϕ of the molecules (mass/(area·time)
through the membrane in terms of the other quantities.

1.2 Scaling
1.2.1 Characteristic Scales
Another procedure useful in formulating a mathematical model is scaling.
Roughly, scaling means selecting new, usually dimensionless variables and
reformulating the problem in terms of those variables. Not only is the procedure
useful, but it often is a necessity, especially when comparisons of the magnitudes
of various terms in an equation must be made in order to neglect small terms.
This idea is particularly crucial in the application of perturbation methods to
identify small and large parameters. Further, scaling usually reduces the number
of parameters in a problem, thereby leading to great simplification, and it
identifies what combinations of parameters are important.
For motivation let us suppose that time t is a variable in a given problem,
measured in units of seconds. If the problem involved the motion of a glacier,
clearly the unit of seconds is too fast because significant changes in the glacier
could not be observed on the order of seconds. On the other hand, if the problem
involved a nuclear reaction, then the unit of seconds is too slow; all of the
important action would be over before the first second ticked. Evidently, every
problem has an intrinsic time scale, or characteristic time tc, which is
appropriate to the given problem. This is the shortest time for discernible
changes to be observed in the physical quantities. For example, the characteristic
time for glacier motion would be of the order of years, whereas the characteristic
time for a nuclear reaction would be of the order of microseconds. Some
problems have multiple time scales. A chemical reaction, for example, may
begin slowly and the concentration changes little over a long time; then, the
reaction may suddenly go to completion with a large change in concentration
over a short time. There are two time scales involved in such a process. Other
examples are in the life sciences, where multi-scale processes are the norm.
Spatial scales vary over as much as 1015 orders of magnitude as we progress
from processes involving genes, proteins, cells, organs, organisms, communities,
and ecosystems; time scales vary from times that it takes for protein to fold to
times for evolution to occur. Several scales can occur in the same problem. Yet
another example occurs in fluid flow, where the processes of heat diffusion,

advection, and possible chemical reaction all have different scales.
Once a characteristic time has been identified, at least for a part of a process,
then a new dimensionless variable  can be defined by
If tc is chosen correctly, then the dimensionless time  is neither too large nor too
small, but rather of order unity. The question remains to determine the time scale
tc for a particular problem, and the same question applies to other variables in
the problem (e.g., length, concentration, and so on). The general rule is that the
characteristic quantities are formed by taking combinations of the various
dimensional constants in the problem and should be roughly the same order of
magnitude of the quantity itself.
After characteristic scales, which are built up from the parameters in the
model, are chosen for the independent and dependent variables, the model can
then be reformulated in terms of the new dimensionless variables. The result will
be a model in dimensionless form, where all the variables and parameters in the
problem are dimensionless. This process is called non-dimensionalization, or
scaling a problem. By the Pi theorem, it is guaranteed that we can always non-
dimensionalize a consistent, unit-free problem. The payoff is a simpler model
that is independent of units and dimensions and that has fewer parameters, which
is often a worthwhile economy of complication.
Example 1.11
(Population growth) Let p = p(t) denote the population of an animal species
located in a fixed region at time t. The simplest model of population growth is
the classic Malthus model,3 which states that the per capita growth rate 
 is
constant. This means that the growth rate 
 is proportional to the population p,
or 
 = rp, where r is the per capita growth rate, given in dimensions of inverse-
time. Easily, the Malthus model predicts that the population will grow
exponentially for all time, that is, p = p0ert, where p0 is the initial population.
Many books on an impending world population explosion have been written
with the Malthusian model as a premise. Clearly, however, as a population
grows, intraspecific competition for food, living space, and natural resources
limits the growth. We can modify the Malthus model to include a competition
term. The simplest approach is to notice that if there are p individuals in the

system, then the number of encounters, which is a measure of competition, is
approximately p2; therefore, we subtract a term proportional to p2 from the
growth rate to obtain the model
(2.1) 
This is saying that the per capita growth rate is not constant, but decreases
linearly with population. The parameter K is the carrying capacity, which is the
number of individuals that the ecosystem can sustain. When p = K the growth
rate is zero. The model (2.1) is called the logistic model4; as the population
grows, the negative p2 term will kick in and limit the growth. To reduce (2.1) to
dimensionless form we select new dimensionless independent and dependent
variables. The time scale and population scale are formed from the constants in
the problem, r, K, and p0. Of these, only r contains the dimensions of time, and
therefore we scale time by 1/r giving a new, dimensionless time τ defined by
There are two choices for the population scale, K or p0. Either will work, and so
we select K to obtain a dimensionless population P given by
Thus, we measure population in the problem relative to the carrying capacity.
Using these dimensionless variables, it is straightforward to obtain
(2.2) 
where α  p0/K is a dimensionless constant. The scaled model (2.2) has only one
constant (α), a significant simplification over (2.1) where there are three
constants (r, K, p0). The constant α represents a scaled, initial population. There
is a single combination of the parameters in the original that is relevant to the
dynamics. The initial value problem (2.2) can be solved by separating variables
to obtain
(2.3) 
Clearly
It follows that, confirming our earlier statement, the limiting population p is
equal to the carrying capacity K. We observe that there are two equilibrium

populations, or constant solutions of (2.1), p = K and p = 0. The population p =
K is an attractor; that is, regardless of the initial population, the population p(t)
tends to the value K as time gets large.

1.2.2 A Chemical Reactor Problem
A basic problem in chemical engineering is to understand how concentrations of
chemical species vary when undergoing a reaction in a chemical reactor. To
illustrate the concept of non-dimensionalization and scaling we analyze a simple
model of an isothermal, continuously stirred, tank reactor (see Fig. 1.3). The
reactor has a fixed volume V, and a chemical C of fixed concentration ci, given
in mass per volume, enters the reactor through the feed at a constant flow rate q,
given in volume per time; initially the concentration of the chemical in the
reactor is c0. When the chemical enters the reactor, the mixture is perfectly
stirred while undergoing a chemical reaction, and then the mixture exits the
reactor at the same flow rate q. At any time t, we denote the concentration of the
chemical C in the reactor by c = c(t). The reactant chemical is assumed to
disappear, that is, it is consumed by reaction, with a rate R, given in mass per
unit volume, per unit time. We are thinking of a simple reaction of the form C →
products. Usually reaction rates depend on temperature, but here we assume that
r depends linearly only on the concentration c; this is what makes our problem
isothermal. The perfectly stirred assumption is an idealization and implies that
there are no concentration gradients in the reactor; otherwise, c would also
depend on a spatial variable.
Figure 1.3 Continuously stirred tank reactor.
To obtain a mathematical model of this problem we look for a physical law. A
common principle that is fundamental to all flow problems is mass balance. That
is, the time rate of change of the mass of the chemical inside the reactor must
equal the rate mass flows in (qci), minus the rate that mass flows out (qc), plus
the rate that mass is consumed by the reaction (VR). At any given time the mass
of the chemical in the reactor is Vc. In symbols, the mass balance equation is

Observe that the factor V is required on the reaction term to obtain consistent
dimensions. To fix the idea, let us take the reaction rate R to be proportional to c,
that is R = kc, where k is the rate constant having dimensions of inverse time.
Recall that this is the law of mass action in elementary chemistry, which states
that the rate of a reaction is proportional to the product of the concentrations of
the reactants. Then, the mathematical model is given by the initial value problem
(2.4) 
(2.5) 
To non-dimensionalize the problem we choose dimensionless independent and
dependent variables. This means we must select a characteristic time and a
characteristic concentration by which to measure the real time and concentration.
These characteristic values are formed from the constants in the problem: ci, c0,
V, q, k. Generally, we measure the dependent variable relative to some maximum
value in the problem, or any other value that represents the order of magnitude
of that quantity. There are two constant concentrations, ci and c0, and either one
of them is a suitable concentration scale. Therefore, we define a dimensionless
concentration C by
Therefore, all concentrations in the problem are measured relative to ci, the
concentration of the feed. To select a time scale we observe that there are two
quantities with dimensions of time that can be formed from the constants in the
problem, V/q and k−1. The former is based on the flow rate, and the latter is
based on the reaction rate. So the choice of a time scale is not unique. Either
choice leads to a correct dimensionless problem. Let us hold up on making a
selection and define a dimensionless time τ by
where T is either V/q or k−1. We recast the model in dimensionless form. By the
chain rule
and therefore the model becomes

where γ is a dimensionless constant given by the ratio
If we choose T = V/q, then we obtain the dimensionless model
(2.6) 
(2.7) 
where
is a dimensionless constant representing a ratio of the two time scales. Therefore,
the problem has been reduced to dimensionless form, and any results that are
obtained are free of any specific set of units that we select. Moreover, the
number of parameters has been decreased from five to two, and the problem is
simpler. If we choose the other time scale, T = k−1, then the problem reduces to
the dimensionless form
(2.8) 
(2.9) 
Is there any advantage of one over the other? Yes. In some problems, where
the terms differ in order of magnitude, it is important to choose the correct scale,
so that each term reflects the correct magnitude. For example, suppose reaction
occurs on a slow time scale compared to the flow through the reactor. Then k is
small compared to the flow rate q/V. We write k << q/V. Therefore the
dimensionless parameter β is small, or β 
 1. Of the two dimensionless models
(2.6)–(2.7) or (2.8)–(2.9), which best reflects this assumption? We expect the
reaction term to be small compared to the flow rate term, so the best choice is
(2.6)–(2.7), which means we should scale time on the more dominant flow rate.
If reaction is fast compared to the flow rate, then β is large (β 
 1), and we
should choose a reaction time scale, giving (2.8)–(2.9); this choice puts the small
term 1/β correctly on the flow rate term.
Making the correct choice when terms have different orders of magnitude is
especially essential when we want to make an approximation by deleting small

terms in the equation. This is a very common strategy in equations that we
cannot solve, for example, most nonlinear equations. For example, if β 
 1 and
we scale by the flow rate, the model is (2.6)–(2.7). Ignoring the small term gives
the approximation
which gives approximation C(τ) = 1 + (γ − 1)e−τ. This approximation is
believable; the reaction is slow and the concentration approaches the
concentration of the feed. On the other hand, the model (2.8)–(2.9) gives 
, which, upon neglecting the small terms, provides the
approximation C = 1. This approximation does not even satisfy the initial
condition.
Remark 1.12
In summary, if approximations are to be made by deleting small terms, it is
important how we non-dimensionalize the problem. The common scaling
strategy is to non-dimensionalize the problem using a generic time scale T that is
chosen later to make the coefficients of the terms in the equation reflect their
size or reflect what terms balance in the process. Ultimately, proper scaling is
learned through experience and careful analysis.

1.2.3 The Projectile Problem
The projectile problem, as first pointed out by Lin and Segel (1974), is a good
illustration of the importance of choosing correct scales, particularly when it is
desired to make a simplification by neglecting small quantities. Terms in an
equation that appear small are not always as they seem, and proper scaling is
essential in determining the orders of magnitude of the terms.
We analyze the motion of a projectile thrust vertically upward from the surface
of the earth. At time t = 0 on the surface of the earth, with radius R and mass M,
an object of mass m is given a vertical upward velocity of magnitude V. To be
determined is the height h above the earth’s surface that the mass reaches at time
t (see Fig. 1.4). Generally, forces on the object are the gravitational force and the
force due to air resistance. But we assume the force due to air resistance is
negligible in the particular problem we are considering. In general, as a first
approximation it is common to neglect what are believed to be small effects,
since in that case the equations are more tractable for analysis. Should the
analytic results compare unfavorably with experiment or should a more detailed
description be required, then additional effects can be included.
Figure 1.4 The projectile problem.
The governing equation, or mathematical model, comes from a physical law.
Newton’s universal gravitational law, which states that the force between the two
objects is proportional to the product of the masses and inversely proportional to
the square of the distance between them, where the mass of each object can be
regarded as concentrated at its center. By Newton’s second law the force equals
the mass times acceleration, or

where G is the proportionality constant in the universal gravitational law.
When h = 0, that is, at the earth’s surface, the gravitational force equals −mg, and
therefore
Thus
(2.10) 
with initial conditions
(2.11) 
The initial value problem (2.10) and (2.11) is the mathematical model for the
problem.
At this point we undertake a dimensional analysis of the problem and gain
considerable insight without actually attempting a solution. Prom our model the
relevant dimensional quantities are t, h, R, V, and g having dimensions
(2.12) 
(2.13) 
(2.14) 
We can use T (time) and L (length) as fundamental dimensions. Following the
procedure described earlier, if π is a dimensionless combination of t, h, R, V, and
g, then
Therefore,
(2.15) 
This system has rank two and so there are three independent dimensionless
variables. Either by inspection or solving (2.15), we find dimensionless
quantities
(2.16) 
By the Pi theorem, if there is a physical law relating t, h, R, V, and g (and we

assume there must be, since in theory we could solve (2.10) and (2.11) to obtain
that law), then there is an equivalent law that can be expressed as
(2.17) 
for some function f(π2, π3).
Actually there is considerable information in (2.17). For example, suppose we
are interested in finding the time tmax that is required for the object to reach its
maximum height for a given velocity V. Then differentiating (2.17) with respect
to t and setting h’(t) equal to zero gives
or
(2.18) 
for some function F. Remarkably, with little analysis beyond dimensional
reasoning, we have found that the time to maximum height depends on the
dimensionless combination 
 The value in knowing this kind of
information lies in the efficiency of (2.18); a single graph of tmax/(R/V) vs. 
 contains all of the data of the graphs of tmax versus V for all choices of g
and R. For example, an experimenter making measurements on different planets
of tmax versus V would not need a separate plot of data for each planet. An entire
atlas can be replaced by a single map when we plot dimensionless quantities.
Now we select characteristic time and length scales and recast the problem
represented by (2.10) and (2.11) into dimensionless form. The problem is more
subtle than it originally appears. The general method requires us to choose a new
dimensionless dependent variable  and independent variable  by
(2.19) 
where tc is an intrinsic time scale and hc is an intrinsic length scale; the values of
tc and hc should be chosen by taking combinations of the constants in the
problem, which in this case are R, V, and g. This problem presents several
choices. For a length scale hc we could take either R or V2/g. Possible time scales
are R/V, 
, and V/g. Which choice is the most appropriate? Actually,
equations (2.19) represent a legitimate transformation of variables for any choice

of tc and hc; after the change of variables an equivalent problem results. Prom a
scaling viewpoint, however, one particular choice is advantageous. The three
choices
(2.20) 
(2.21) 
and
(2.22) 
lead to the following three dimensionless problems, which are equivalent to
(2.10) and (2.11):
(2.23) 
(2.24) 
and
(2.25) 
respectively, where ε is a dimensionless parameter defined by
To illustrate how difficulties arise in selecting an incorrect scaling, let us modify
our original problem by examining the situation when ε is known to be a small
quantity; that is, V2 is much smaller than gR. Then one may be tempted, in order
to make an approximation, to delete the terms involving ε in the scaled problem.
Problem (2.23) then becomes
which has no solution, and problem (2.24) becomes
which has no physically valid solution (the graph of 
( ) passes though the

origin with zero slope and is concave downward, thereby making  negative).
Therefore it appears that terms involving small parameters cannot be neglected.
This is indeed unfortunate because this kind of technique is common practice in
making approximations in applied problems. What went wrong was that (2.20)
and (2.21) represent incorrect scalings; in these cases, terms that appear small
may not in fact be small. For example, in the term εd2 /d 2, the parameter ε is
small but d2 /d 2 may be large, and hence the term may not be negligible
compared to other terms in the equation.
If, on the other hand, the term ε  is neglected in (2.25), then d2 /d 2 = −1, or 
=  − 2/2, after applying the initial conditions. Therefore
and we have obtained an approximate solution that is consistent with our
experience with falling bodies close to the earth. In this case we are able to
neglect the small term and obtain a valid approximation because the scaling is
correct. That (2.22) gives the correct time and length scales can be argued
physically. If V is small, then the body will be acted on by a constant
gravitational field; hence, launched with speed V, it will uniformly decelerate
and reach its maximum height in V/g units of time, which is the characteristic
time. It will travel a distance of about (V/g) times its average velocity 1/2(V + 0),
or V2/2g. Hence V2/g is a good selection for the length scale. Measuring the
height relative to the radius of the earth is not a good choice for small initial
velocities.
In general, if a correct scaling is chosen, then terms in the equations that
appear small are indeed small and may be safely neglected. Formally:
Principle of Scaling. The goal of scaling is to select intrinsic, characteristic
reference quantities so that each term in the dimensional equation transforms
into a term in such a manner that the dimensionless coefficient in the
transformed term represents the order of magnitude or approximate size of that
term. Schematically,
By order of unity we mean a term that is neither extremely large nor small.

EXERCISES
1. Let u = u(t), 0 ≤ t ≤ b, be a given smooth function. If M = max|u(t)|, then u
can be scaled by M to obtain the dimensionless dependent variable U = u/M.
A time scale can be taken as tc = M/max |u’(t)|, the ratio of the maximum
value of the function to the maximum slope. Find M and tc for the following
functions:
a) u(t) = A sinωt, t > 0.
b) u(t) = Ae−λt, t > 0.
c) u(t) = Ate−λt, 0 ≤ t ≤ 2/λ.
2. Consider a process described by the function u(t) = 1+e−t/ε on the interval
0 ≤ t ≤ 1, where ε is a small number. Use Exercise 1 to determine a time
scale. Is this time scale appropriate for the entire interval [0, 1]? (Sketch a
graph of u(t) when ε = 0.05.) Explain why two time scales might be required
for a process described by u(t).
3. The growth rate of an organism is often measured using carbon biomass
as the “currency.” The von Bertalanffy growth model is
where m is its biomass, x is some characteristic length of the organism, a is
its biomass assimilation rate, and b is its biomass use rate. Thus, it
assimilates nutrients proportional to its area, and it uses nutrients
proportional to its volume. Assume m = ρx3 and rewrite the model in terms
of the length x. Determine the dimensions of the constants a, b, and ρ. Select
time and length scales ρ/b and a/b, respectively, and reduce the problem to
dimensionless form. If x(0) = 0, find the length x at time t. Does this seem
like a reasonable model?
4. A mass hanging on a spring is given a positive initial velocity V from
equilibrium. The ensuing displacement x = x(t) from equilibrium (x = 0) is
governed by
where −ax|x’| is a nonlinear damping force and −kx is a linear restoring force
of the spring. First make a table of the quantities and their dimensions. What
are possible time scales, and on what physical processes are they based.
What are possible length scales? If the restoring force is small compared to

the damping force, choose appropriate time and length scales and non-
dimensionalize the model so that the small term appears in the damping
force.
5. The dynamics of a nonlinear spring-mass system are described by
where x is the displacement, −ax’ is a linear damping term, and −kx3 is a
nonlinear restoring force. Initially, the displacement is zero and the mass m
is given an impulse I that starts the motion.
a) Determine the dimensions of the constants I, a, and k.
b) Recast the problem into dimensionless form by selecting
dimensionless variables τ = t/T, u = ax/I, where the time scale T is yet to
be determined.
c) In the special case that the mass is very small, choose an appropriate
time scale T and find the correct dimensionless model. (A small
dimensionless parameter should occur on the terms involving the mass in
the original model.)
6. In a classic work modeling the outbreak of the spruce bud worm in
Canada’s balsam fir forests, researchers proposed that the bud worm
population n = n(t) was governed by the law
where r and K are the growth rate and carrying capacity, respectively, and
p(n) is a bird predation term given by
where a and b are positive constants.
a) Determine the dimensions of the parameters in the problem.
b) Select time and population scales T and N0 so that the model equation
becomes, in dimensionless form,
where q  K/a and s  ar/b.
c) Researchers are often interested in equilibrium populations, or constant
solutions of the differential equation. Working with the dimensionless

model, show graphically that there is always at least one nonzero
equilibrium population, and that there may be two or three, depending on
the values of the parameters. (Hint: Plot the per capita growth rate
G(N)/N and the per capita predation rate P(N)/N on the same set of N, 1/N
axes.)
d) Find the equilibrium populations when q = 12 and s = 0.25 and when q
= 35 and s = 0.4.
e) In the case q = 35 and s = 0.4, use a numerical differential equations
solver (e.g., in MATLAB) to plot population curves N = N(τ) when initial
populations are given by N(0) = 40, 25, 2, and 0.05, respectively.
7. A rocket blasts off from the earth’s surface. During the initial phase of
flight, fuel is burned at the maximum possible rate α, and the exhaust gas is
expelled downward with velocity β relative to the velocity of the rocket. The
motion is governed by the following set of equations:
where m(t) is the mass of the rocket, v(t) is the upward velocity, x(t) is the
height above the earth’s surface, M is the initial mass, g is the gravitational
constant, and R is the radius of the earth. Reformulate the problem in terms
of dimensionless variables using appropriate scales for m, x, v, t. (Hint: Scale
m and x by obvious choices; then choose the time scale and velocity scale to
ensure that the terms in the v equation and x equation are of the same order.
Assume that the acceleration is due primarily to fuel burning and that the
gravitational force is relatively small.)
8. In the chemical reactor problem assume that the reaction is C + C →
products, and the chemical reaction rate is r = kc2, where c = c(t) is the
concentration and k is the rate constant. What is the dimension of k? Define
dimensionless variables and reformulate the problem in dimensionless form.
Solve the dimensionless problem to determine the concentration.
9. The temperature T = T(t) of a chemical sample in a furnace at time t is
governed by the initial value problem

where T0 is the initial temperature of the sample, Tf is the temperature in the
furnace, and q, k, and A are positive constants. The first term on the right
side is the heat generation term, and the second is the heat loss term given by
Newton’s law of cooling.
a) What are the dimensions of the constants q, k, A?
b) Reduce the problem to dimensionless form using Tf as the temperature
scale and choosing a time scale to be one appropriate to the case when the
heat loss term is large compared to the heat generated by the reaction.
10. A ball of mass m is tossed upward with initial velocity V. Assuming the
force caused by air resistance is proportional to the square of the velocity of
the ball and the gravitational field is constant, formulate an initial value
problem for the height of the ball at any time t. Choose characteristic length
and time scales and recast the problem in dimensionless form.
11. A particle of mass m moves in one dimension on the x-axis under the
influence of a force
where k and a are positive constants. Initially the particle is located at x =
L and has zero velocity.
a) Set up an initial value problem for the location x = x(t) of the particle
at time t.
b) Identify the length and time scales in the problem, and introduce
dimensionless variables in two different ways, reformulating the problem
in dimensionless form in both cases.
12. An aging spring is sometimes modeled by a force F(x, t) = −kxe−t/a,
where k is the stiffness of the spring and a is constant. Set up and non-
dimensionalize a model for oscillation of a mass m on an aging spring if x(0)
= L and x’(0) = V.
13. (Fishery management) A fishing industry on the East Coast has fished an
area to near depletion and has stopped its activity (assume this occurs at time
zero with fish population x0). The management assumes that the fish will
recover and grow logistically with growth rate r and carrying capacity K.
The question is: when should fishing resume? Let x(t) be the fish population,
b(t) the number of fishing boats, and q be the catchability, given in units of
per boat per time, so that the harvesting rate is h(t) = qb(t)x(t).

a) If tf is the time fishing is resumed, find differential equations that
govern the fish population for t > tf and t < tf.
b) Assume that the fleet is constant, b(t) = B, and non-dimensionalize the
model in Part (a), choosing the growth rate as the time scale and the
carrying capacity as the population scale.
c) Determine the (dimensionless) time τ that fishing begins as a function
of the dimensionless fleet size β = qB/r, subject to the condition that the
fish population should remain at constant for times greater than τ.
Translate this relation into dimensioned form to find tf = tf(B).
d) Under the conditions of Part (c), what is the optimum number of boats
and the maximum sustainable catch, i.e., the maximum harvesting rate?
e) Suppose p is the selling price per fish, cb is the cost of maintenance per
boat per time, w is a fisherman’s wage per time, and n is the number of
fishermen per boat. Argue that the rate money is earned from the fishing
is ph(t) − b(t)(cb + nw). If the value of money is discounted at rate R over
time, conclude that the net profit can be written as a function of the fleet
size as
f) Under the condition of a constant fleet size, b(t) = B, at what time tf
should the fleet resume fishing to maximize the profit J(B)? What is the
optimal fleet size?
g) Use parameter values R = 0.7, p = 2, q = 0.5, K = 50, r = 0.55, x0 = 2,
cb + nw = 2, to plot J(B) in Part (f), and find the maximum starting time,
the optimal fleet size, and the maximum profit.
14. A pendulum of length l with a bob of mass m executes a (dimensionless)
angular displacement θ = θ(t) from its attachment point, with θ = 0 when the
pendulum is vertically downward. See Fig. 1.5. Use Newton’s law to derive
the equation of motion for the pendulum by noting that the acceleration is
d2s/dt2, where s = lθ is the length of the circular arc traveled by the bob; the
force is −mg vertically downward, and only the component tangential to the
arc of oscillation affects the motion. The model is
Figure 1.5 Pendulum.

If the bob is released from a small angle θ0 at time t = 0, formulate a
dimensionless initial value problem describing the motion. (Observe that
the radian measurement θ is dimensionless, but one can still scale θ by
θ0.)
15. The initial value problem for the damped pendulum equation is
a) Find three time scales and comment upon what process each involves.
b) Non-dimensionalize the model with a time scale appropriate to
expecting damping to have a small contribution.
c) Non-dimensionalize the model with a time scale based on the fact that
damping has an effect.
16. In a simple model of predation a fraction of the prey take refuge and are
not subject to predation. If H = H(t) is the number of prey, and P = P(t) is the
number of predators, the model takes the form
where r is the prey growth rate, k is the predator mortality rate, Hr is the
number of prey in refuge (constant), and a and b are predation rates. Find
dimensionless variables so that the model reduces to the dimensionless form

for appropriate choices of α and β.

1.3 Differential Equations
The first subsection below contains a very brief review of elementary solution
techniques for first- and second-order differential equations. This review may be
safely omitted for those who have fresh knowledge of elementary methods. The
Exercises review standard applications with which the reader should be familiar;
working through some of these may introduce the reader to new applications and
scaling methods. [Differential equations can be reviewed in Logan (2010), for
example, or numerous other elementary textbooks.]

1.3.1 Review of Elementary Methods
In calculus, one focus is on finding derivatives of given functions. In differential
equations the focus is on the reverse problem, namely, given a relationship
between an unknown function u = u(t) and some of its derivatives, find the
function itself. The given relationship is called a differential equation. The
simplest differential equation is the pure time equation
(3.1) 
where g is a given continuous function. We recognize, by definition, that a
solution u = u(t) must be an antiderivative of g. By the fundamental theorem of
calculus, all antiderivatives are given by
(3.2) 
where C is an arbitrary constant of integration and a is any lower limit of
integration. Thus (3.2) gives all solutions of the pure time equation (3.1).
Antiderivatives are sometimes denoted by the usual indefinite integral sign
but this representation is only symbolic and useless if we cannot find an
expression for ƒ g(t) dt.
Example 1.13
If g(t) = exp(−t2), then there is no simple formula for the antiderivative, and thus
we cannot find, for example, the antiderivative evaluated at a specific value of t.
Therefore we write the antiderivative as
A multiple of this function is the common special function
which is the error or “erf” function.
In general, a first-order differential equation has the form
(3.3) 

where t ranges over some specified interval I of time. A solution is a
differentiable function u = u(t) that, when substituted into (3.3), satisfies it
identically for all t in the interval I. Often the differential equation is
accompanied by an initial condition of the form
(3.4) 
which specifies that the solution curve pass through the point (t0, u0), or that the
system is in state u0 at time t0. The problem of solving (3.3) subject to (3.4) is
called the initial value problem associated with the differential equation. If f(t,
u) is a continuous function in some open region of the tu-plane containing the
point (t0, u0), then one can show that there is a solution to the initial value
problem in some interval containing t0. If, in addition, the partial derivative fut, u
is continuous in the domain, then the solution is unique. See, for example,
Kelley & Peterson (2010).
Separable Equations. Some differential equations of first order can be solved,
at least in principle. A differential equation is separable if it has the form
In this case we can divide both sides by h(u) and integrate over t to obtain
Here we have written explicit dependence on t. Also, as noted above, sometimes
the antiderivatives must be written as definite integrals with a variable upper
limit of integration. Next we can change variables in the integral on the left: u =
u(t), du = u’(t) dt. Then
which, when the integrals are resolved, gives the solution u implicitly as a
function of t. One may, or may not, be able to solve for u and find an explicit
form for the solutions. An autonomous equation, where the right side of the
differential equation does not depend on time t,
has implicit solution
An example of a simple, separable equation is the growth-decay equation, u’ =
λu, from which one easily obtains the general solution u = Ceλt. The solution

models exponential growth if λ > 0 and exponential decay if λ < 0.
Linear Equations. A first-order linear equation has the form
(3.5) 
Multiplying this equation by an integrating factor eƒp(t)dt turns the left side into a
total derivative and (3.5) becomes
Now, both sides can be integrated to determine u. We illustrate this procedure
with an example.
Example 1.14
Find an expression for the solution to the initial value problem
The integrating factor is exp(  2t dt) = exp(t2). Multiplying both sides of the
equation by the integrating factor makes the left side a total derivative, or
Integrating from 0 to t (while changing the dummy variable of integration to s)
gives
Solving for u gives
As is often the case, the integrals in this example cannot be performed easily, if
at all, and we must write the solution in terms of integrals with variable limits.
Example 1.15
Some first-order equations can be solved by substitution. For example,
Bernoulli equations are differential equations having the form
The transformation of dependent variables w = u1−n turns a Bernoulli equation
into a linear equation for w = w(t).
Second-Order Linear Equations. The linear equation with constant
coefficients,

(3.6) 
where a, b, and c are constants, occurs frequently in modeling RCL circuits and
spring-mass-damping systems. We recall that if u1(t) and u2(t) are two
independent solutions to a second-order, linear, homogeneous equation, then the
general solution is u = c1u1(t) + c2u2(t), where c1 and c2 are arbitrary constants.
Equation (3.6) has solutions of the form u = emt, where m is to be determined.
Substitution of this exponential form into the equation leads to the
characteristic equation
This quadratic will have two roots, m1 and m2. Three possibilities can occur:
unequal real roots, equal real roots, and complex roots (which must be complex
conjugates).
(a) m1, m2 real and unequal. Two independent solutions of (3.6) are em1t and
em2t.
(b) m1, m2 real and equal, i.e., m1 = m2  m. Two independent solutions of
(3.6) are emt and temt.
(c) m = α ± iβ are complex conjugate roots. Two real, independent solutions
of (3.6) are eαt sin βt and eαt cos βt. This follows from an application of
Euler’s formula,
and the fact that the real and imaginary parts of a complex solution are
both real solutions
Example 1.16
Of particular importance are the two equations, u″ + a2u = 0, which has
oscillatory solutions u = c1 cos at + c2 sin at, and u″ − a2u = 0, which has
exponential solutions u = c1e−at+c2eat; we can also write this latter solution in
terms of hyperbolic functions as u = c1 cosh at+c2 sinh at. These two equations
occur so frequently that it is best to memorize them.
It is difficult to find analytic solution formulas for second order linear
equations with variable coefficients,
Often power series methods are applied, and they lead to solution representations

as power series that define special functions like Bessel functions, Airy
functions, Legendre and Hermite polynomials, and so on.
Example 1.17
There is a special variable coefficient equation that can be solved with simple
formulas, namely the Cauchy–Euler equation:
(3.7) 
This equation admits power functions as solutions of the form u = tm, where m is
to be determined. Upon substitution, we obtain the characteristic equation
This quadratic equation has two roots, m1 and m2, and there are three cases:
(a) m1, m2 are real and unequal. Two independent solutions of (3.7) are tm1
and tm2.
(b) m1, m2 are real and equal, i.e., m1 = m2  m. Two independent solutions
of (3.7) are tm and tm ln t.
(c) m = α ± iβ are complex conjugate roots. Two real, independent solutions,
determined from the real and imaginary parts of the complex solution tα+iβ
(3.7) are tα sin (β ln t) and tα cos(β ln t).
Nonhomogeneous 
Equations. 
The 
general 
solution 
of 
the 
linear
nonhomogeneous equation
(3.8) 
is
where u1 and u2 are independent solutions of the homogeneous equation (i.e.,
when f(t)  0), and uP is any particular solution to (3.8). This structure result is
valid for all linear equations of any order: The general solution is the sum of the
general solution to the homogeneous equation and a particular solution to the
nonhomogeneous equation. For constant coefficient equations a particular
solution can sometimes be inferred, or judiciously guessed, from the form of the
forcing term f(t) when it is a polynomial, sine or cosine function, exponential
function, or sums and products of these functions. This is the method of
undetermined coefficients. In any case, however, there is a general formula,
called the variation of parameters formula, that gives a particular solution in
terms of the linear independent solution of the homogeneous equation. In the

case of the second-order equation (3.8) with linearly independent solutions u1
and u2, the formula is
where W(s) = u1(s)u’2(s) − u2(s)u’1(s) is the Wronskian. Any elementary
differential equation book has a detailed discussion of these methods (e.g.,
Logan, 2010).
Nonlinear Equations. Some second-order, nonlinear equations can be
immediately reduced to a first-order equation. For example, we consider
Newton’s second law of motion, a dynamical equation of the form
where the dependent variable is x = x(t), representing position; m is the mass and
F is the force. If the force does not depend on position x, then the substitution y
= x’ immediately reduces the equation to the first-order equation in the velocity
y:
Once y is obtained, integration gives the solution x. If the force does not depend
explicitly on the time t, that is, it has the form
then 
we 
again 
define 
y 
= 
x’. 
Then, 
using 
the 
chain 
rule, 
, and the equation becomes
which is a first-order equation for the velocity in terms of position, y = y(x).
Then we can obtain x = x(t) by solving
There is one additional important case when the force depends only on
position and is conservative, that is, when there is a potential function V = V(x)
for which
Then the equation of motion becomes

or, upon separating variables,
Integrating both sides gives
where the constant of integration in denoted by E. This last equation expresses
the fact that the total energy in the system (kinetic energy plus potential energy)
is constant. Therefore, if the force F(x) is conservative, then total energy is
conserved. The energy constant E can be computed from the initial position and
velocity, x(0) and y(0). Later, these models are discussed in detail.
EXERCISES
1. Find the general solution of the following differential equations:
2. A differential equation of the form u’ = f(u/t) is called a homogeneous
equation. (The word homogeneous in this case is used differently from that
of an equation whose right side is zero.) Show that the change of variables y
= u/t transforms the equation into a separable equation for y.
3. (Mechanics) From the conservation of energy law for a conservative
force, show that the position x = x(t) satisfies the equation
where C is a constant of integration.
4. (Reactor dynamics) Consider a chemical reactor of constant volume V
where a chemical C is pumped into the reactor at constant concentration and
constant flow rate q. While in the reactor it reacts according to C + C →
products. The law of mass action dictates that the rate of the reaction is r =
kC2, where k is the rate constant. If the concentration of C in the reactor is
given by C(t), then mass balance leads to the governing equation

Non-dimensionalize the model by selecting the concentration scale to be cin,
the input concentration, and a time scale based on the flow-through rate.
Determine the equilibria, or constant solutions, and find a formula for the
concentration as a function of time.
5. (Heat transfer) The goal of this exercise is to derive a differential equation
for the changing temperature T = T(t) of a small, uniform object of initial
temperature T0 placed in an environment of temperature Te. (Think of an
object placed in an oven.) The result is Newton’s law of cooling, and the
reader is asked to follow through the steps. To this end, let U be the internal
energy of the object. Then
where ρ is the density (mass per volume) and cv is the specific heat at
constant volume (energy per mass, per degree). We assume, based on
empirical data, that the rate of change of energy in the object is proportional
to the difference between the temperature of the object and its environmental
temperature, or
where h is the heat loss coefficient. Show that [h] = energy per volume, per
degree per time. Why is there a minus sign on the right side of the equation?
Finally,
where k = h/ρcv. Note that this argument depends on uniform conditions in
the object, no temperature gradients, and so on.
a) Determine the temperature T = T(t) of the object and sketch a generic
plot of temperature vs. time if T0 < Te.
b) Find an analytic formula for the temperature if the environmental
temperature varies according to Te = θ(t).
c) Next, think of a small exothermic animal (a lizard, or snake) emerging
from a cool nest at midday. In addition to exchanging heat with its
environment, it also heated by solar radiation S (power per area) falling
on its effective body area. Then, its temperature is governed by

What are the dimensions of the constant a?
6. (Advertising) This exercise develops a simple model to assess the
effectiveness of an advertising campaign. Let S = S(t) be the monthly sales
of an item. In the absence of advertising it is observed from sales history
data that sales decrease at a constant per capita rate a. If there is advertising,
then sales rebound and tend to saturate at some maximum value S = M,
because there are only finitely many consumers. The rate of increase in sales
due to advertising is jointly proportional to the advertising rate A(t) and to
the degree the market is not saturated, that is,
The constant r measures the effectiveness of the advertising campaign, and 
 is a measure of the market share that has still not purchased the
product. Combining natural sales decay and advertising gives the model
If S(0) = S0 and the advertising is constant over a fixed time period T and is
then removed, that is,
find a formula for the sales S(t).
7. (Biogeography) The MacArthur–Wilson model of the dynamics of
species (e.g., bird species) that inhabit an island located near a mainland was
developed in the 1960s. Let N be the number of species in the source pool on
the mainland, and let S = S(t) be the number of species on the island.
Assume that the rate of change of the number of species is
where χ is colonization rate and μ is the extinction rate. In the MacArthur–
Wilson model,
where I and E are the maximum colonization and extinction rates,
respectively.
a) Over a long time, what is the expected equilibrium for the number of

species inhabiting the island?
b) Given S(0) = S0, find an analytic formula for S(t).
c) Suppose there are two islands, one large and one small, with the larger
island having the smaller maximum extinction rate. Both have the same
colonization rate. Show that the smaller island will eventually have fewer
species.
8. (Chemical reactors) A large industrial retention pond of volume V,
initially free of pollutants, was subject to the inflow of a contaminant
produced in the factory’s processing plant. Over a period of b days the EPA
found that the inflow concentration of the contaminant decreased linearly (in
time) to zero from its initial initial value of a (grams per volume), its flow
rate q (volume per day) being constant. During the b days the spillage rate to
the local stream was also q. What is the concentration in the pond after b
days? Take V = 6000 cubic meters, b = 20 days, a = 0.03 grams per cubic
meter, and q = 50 cubic meters per day. With these data, how long would it
take for the concentration in the pond to get below a required EPA level of
0.00001 grams per cubic meter if fresh water is pumped into the pond at the
same flow rate, with the same spill over? [Use software to perform the
calculations.]
9. (Circuits) An electrical (RCL) circuit (Fig. 1.6) has an inductor, resistor,
and capacitor connected in series, along with an electromotive force that
supplies energy. The governing equation, obtained by Kirchhoff’s law, is
Figure 1.6 An RCL circuit containing an inductor, capacitor, and resistor in
series with electromotive force E(t).
where q = q(t) is the charge on the capacitor, L is the inductance, R is the
resistance, C is the capacitance, I0 is the initial current, and E(t) is the

electromotive force (voltage) supplied by a battery or generator. Each term
in Kirchhoff’s is the work required to move a unit charge across the
corresponding circuit element Table 1.2 shows the dimensional relations for
the various parameters.
Table 1.2 Fundamental dimensions of various quantities occurring in electrical circuits. Charge Q is a
fundamental dimension. Note that the quantities can be written in terms current I instead of Q; also,
mass may be replaced by appropriate expressions involving force F and/or energy E.
Quantity (symbol) Dimensions Relation
charge (q)
Q
current (I)
QT−1
charge per time
voltage (V)
ML2T−2Q−1
energy (work) per charge
capacitance (C)
Q2T2M−1L−2 charge per voltage
resistance (R)
ML2T−2Q−1
voltage per current
inductance (L)
ML2Q−1
voltage per current per time
a) (Units) In rhe mks system of units time is measured in seconds, length
in meters, and mass in kilograms. Then force is measured in newtons,
energy in joules, and charge in coulombs. Using the dimensional relations
in Table 1.2, find the mks units of current, voltage, resistance,
capacitance, and inductance (these are called amperes, volts, ohms,
farads, and henrys, respectively). Verify that each term in Kirchhoff’s law
has dimensions of work per charge.
b) If E(t) = V0 (volts) is constant, what is the behavior, or dynamics, of
the circuit in the three cases: R2 > 4L/C, R2 = 4L/C, and R2 < 4L/C.
Answer this question using terms like decay, oscillatory, frequency, and
amplitude.
10. In an RC circuit the charge q = q(t) on a capacitor is governed by the
first-order equation
If q(0) = q0, find the charge as a function of time. If the electromotive force
is constant, E(t) = V, what is the long-time charge on the capacitor?
11. (Electricity) The basic law of electricity is Coulomb’s law, an
experimental result that states, in a vacuum, the force F on two charged
particles q1 and q2 separated by a distance r is

where ε0 is an experimental constant, depending on the units, called the
(electric) permittivity of free space. In mks units, ε0 = 8.85 · 10−12 farads per
meter. (a) Find the dimensions of ε0 in terms of mass, length, time, and
current. (b) Calculate the force required to maintain a separation distance of
1 meter between two positive, 1 coulomb charges. Is this a large force? What
does this result say about the magnitude of 1 coulomb?
12. (Thermistors) A thermistor is a resistor that depends on temperature; as it
gets hotter, resistance increases. They are used in fuses and and in electrical
appliances to prevent devices from overheating. A typical thermistor may be
a dime-shaped ceramic having metal contacts on the flat surfaces. Let us
assume that a constant voltage V is applied across the thermistor, and the
temperature in the thermistor is uniform and depends only on time, or T =
T(t). On one hand, ohmic heating causes the thermistor to heat up, and on the
other hand heat is lost to the constant temperature environment Te (Newton’s
law of cooling). Show that energy balance in the thermistor leads to the
model
where m and c are the mass and specific heat of the thermistor, h is the heat
loss coefficient, and R(T) is the resistance. Assuming that R(T) is a linearly
increasing function of temperature, show that there is equilibrium, or
constant, solution to the model.
13. (Ecology) A population N = N(t) is governed by the logistic law
where the carrying capacity varies according to K = K(t). Find an integral
form of the solution N = N(t).

1.3.2 Stability and Bifurcation
First-order autonomous equations arise frequently in applications; they have the
form
(3.9) 
where there is no explicit dependence on time. Because (3.9) is separable, we
can immediately obtain an implicit, general solution of the form
In only the simplest equations can the integral be resolved, and so we almost
always resort to a geometric, or qualitative, analysis of (3.9), which gives the
essential behavior of the solutions. If the qualitative behavior is important, then
we can perform numerical methods (e.g., a Runge–Kutta method).
Example 1.18
This example (see Strogatz, 1994) well illustrates that the analytic solution to a
differential equation is not often transparent, and actually sometimes useless in
understanding its qualitative features. Consider the simple initial value problem
Separating variables and integrating immediately leads to the implicit form
What are the qualitative features of the solution for different values of the initial
condition a? This question would draw a collective groan from a class. There is
a better way to address this question.
Key to the qualitative analysis is to determine the equilibria of an equation and
the dynamics near the equilibria. An equilibrium solution of (3.9) is a constant
solution, which is clearly a root of the algebraic equation f(u) = 0. Thus, u(t) =
u* is an equilibrium solution if, and only if, f(u*) = 0. Geometrically, the values
u* are the points where the graph of f(u) versus u intersects the u axis. We
always assume the equilibria are isolated, i.e., if u* is an equilibrium, then there
is an open interval containing u* that contains no other equilibria. Fig. 1.7 shows
a generic plot of f(u), where the equilibria are, say, u* = a, b, c. In between the
equilibria we observe the values of u for which u is increasing (f(u) > 0) or
decreasing (f(u) < 0). We may place arrows on the u axis, or phase line, in

between the equilibria showing direction of the flow of u = u(t) (increasing or
decreasing) as time increases. If desired, the information from the phase line can
be translated into time series plots of u(t) versus t (Fig. 1.8).
Figure 1.7 Generic phase line plot. The u axis is interpreted as a one-
dimensional state, or phase, space on which the solution u = u(t) moves in time.
The arrows indicate the direction of movement.
Figure 1.8 Time series plots for various initial conditions of the equation whose
phase line plot is shown in the phase line diagram.
On the phase line, if arrows on both sides of an equilibrium point toward that
equilibrium point, then we say the equilibrium point is an attractor, or a locally
asymptotically stable equilibrium. If both of the arrows point away, the
equilibrium is a repeller and is unstable. The terms sink and source are also
used. If one arrow points toward the equilibrium and one points away, the
equilibrium is hyperbolic; some authors call these equilibria semi-stable.
Repellers and hyperbolic equilibria are unstable equilibria. Suppose an

equilibrium is an attractor and the system is in that constant equilibrium state; if
it is given a small perturbation (i.e., a change or “bump”) to a nearby state, then
it returns to that state as t → +∞. In one-dimensional systems we often us the
word stable in place of the wordy expression ‘locally asymptotic stable’; in
higher-dimensional systems we must distinguish between these two terms. It
seems plausible that meaningful physical and biological systems will seek out
stable states. Repellers and hyperbolic points are unstable because a small
perturbation can cause the system to go to a different equilibrium, or even blow
up.
One point of clarification: if the domain for the dependent variable is, for
example, u ≥ 0, as in a population model, and u = 0 is an equilibrium
representing extinction, then we use the words stable and unstable in a one-sided
sense, ignoring the phase line for u < 0.
When we state that an equilibrium u* is locally asymptotically stable, the
understanding is that it is with respect to small perturbations. To fix the idea,
consider a population of fish in a lake that is in a locally asymptotically stable
equilibrium u*. A small death event, say caused by some toxic chemical that is
dumped into the lake, will cause the population to drop. Local asymptotic
stability means that the system will return the original state u* over time. If
many fish are killed by the pollution event, then the perturbation is not small and
there is no guarantee that the fish population will return to the original state u*;
for example, it may go to some other equilibrium state or become extinct. If the
population returns to the state u* for all perturbations, no matter how large, then
the state u* is called globally asymptotically stable. A precise definition of
local asymptotic stability can be given as follows.
Definition 1.19
An isolated equilibrium state u* of (3.9) is locally asymptotically stable if there
is an open interval I containing u* with limt→+∞ u(t) = u* for any solution u =
u(t) of (3.9) with u(0) in I. That is, each solution starting in I converges to u*.
Graphically, stability can be determined from the slope of the tangent line
f’(u*) to the graph of f(u) vs. u at the equilibrium state. If f’(u*) < 0, the graph of
f(u) through the equilibrium falls from positive to negative values, giving an
arrow pattern of an attractor. Similarly, if f’(u*) > 0, we obtain the arrow pattern
of a repeller. If f’(u*) = 0, then u* may be an attractor, repeller, or hyperbolic.
Using linearization, we can confirm these graphical criteria analytically. If

(3.9) is in an equilibrium state u* and U = U(t) represents a small perturbation
from that state, then u(t) = u* + U(t) and, using Taylor’s theorem,
where the dots denote higher-order terms in U. Ignoring all but the linear terms,
we get
which is called the linearization, or the perturbation equation, about the
equilibrium u*. This is a linear growth-decay equation and its solution is simply
U(t) = Ceλt, where λ = f’(u*), a constant. If λ < 0, the perturbation decays, and if
λ > 0, the perturbation grows, implying local asymptotic stability and instability,
respectively.
If λ = 0, then we must analyze higher-order terms in the Taylor expansion to
determine stability. For example, the term f“(u*) relates to concavity. Or, we can
just plot the function f(u) and observe its behavior.
Remark 1.20
As an exercise, the reader should now consider answering the question posed in
Example 1.18.
Example 1.21
(Logistic model) The logistic model of population growth is
where r is the growth rate and K is the carrying capacity. The equilibria are p* =
0, K, found by setting the right side f(p) = rp (1 − p/K) = 0. The equilibrium p* =
K is asymptotically stable because f’(K) = −r < 0, and the zero population is
unstable because f’(0) = r > 0.
Example 1.22
(Uniqueness) The simple initial value problem
reveals another important issue, namely uniqueness. There are clearly two
solutions to this problem, u = 0 and u = (2/3 t)3/2, both valid for all t ≥ 0. The
phase line diagram gives incomplete and even confusing information. The plot

of f(u) = u1/3 has an infinite derivative at u = 0 and is not defined. What would a
particle do if it started at u = 0? Remain at u = 0 or follow the nonzero solution?
This issue is avoided when there exist unique solutions to an initial value
problem. It is proved in more advanced texts that unique solutions exist for the
initial value problem u’ = f(u), u(0) = u0 when f and f’ are continuous in some
open interval containing u0; the unique solution u = u(t) is guaranteed to exist in
some interval –τ < t < τ.
Remark 1.23
(Oscillatory solutions) Notice that uniqueness implies that a solution u = u(t)
plotted on the phase line cannot enter an equilibrium at finite time. It also
ensures that oscillatory solutions cannot exist; they cannot ever turn around
because of the monotonicity of the of direction arrows.
The qualitative behavior of the one-dimensional dynamical equation u’ = f(u)
seems straightforward. But what is interesting, and not always straightforward, is
how the behavior of solutions can change as one or more parameters in the
model equation changes. A simple example illustrates the point.
Example 1.24
(Harvesting) More often than not, differential equations contain parameters. Let
us modify the logistic model by adding a harvesting term. That is, consider a
population p(t) (e.g., fish) that is governed by logistic growth, while at the same
time it is harvested (fishing) at a constant rate H > 0. Then the dynamics is
(3.10) 
There are three parameters in this problem, r, K, and H, and we want to examine
how the solutions change as the harvesting rate H varies, with r and K held
fixed. To simplify the analysis we non-dimensionalize the problem by
introducing a scaled population u and a scaled time τ defined by
Therefore, we measure population relative to the carrying capacity and time
relative to the reciprocal of the growth rate. Then equation (3.10) becomes
(3.11) 

where h 
 H/rK is the dimensionless harvesting parameter. Treating h as a
control parameter, we inquire if equilibrium populations exist. These are easily
found by setting du/dt = 0, or
Solving for u gives equilibria
(3.12) 
Therefore, if the harvesting parameter exceeds 1/4, then no equilibrium
populations exist. If 0 < h < 1/4, then there are two positive equilibrium states.
We can sketch the locus (3.12) on a hu*-coordinate system (with h the
independent variable) to graphically indicate the dependence of the equilibrium
solutions on the parameter h. Such a graph is shown in Fig. 1.9 and is called a
bifurcation diagram; in this context, the harvesting parameter h is called a
bifurcation parameter. We observe that if h is too large (i.e., there is too much
harvesting of the population), then no equilibrium populations exist and (3.11)
shows that du/dτ < 0, so that the population dies out. As harvesting is decreased,
there is a critical value of h (h = 1/4) below which two equilibrium populations
can exist; in these two populations, there is a balance between growth and
harvesting. The point B on the graph where the two solutions appear is called a
bifurcation point. Next we ask if nature prefers one of these equilibria over the
other. The resolution of this question lies in the stability properties of those
states. We would expect nature to select out a stable state over an unstable one;
for, if a small change is made in an unstable state (and small deviations are
always present), then the system would leave that state permanently; if the state
were stable, then small perturbations will decay away. We could perform a
linearized stability analysis as in the preceding subsection to determine which, if
any, of the two equilibrium populations given by (3.12) is unstable. But let us
proceed a different way and plot the phase line of the differential equation (3.11)
when 0 < h < 1/4. Let u+ and u− denote the two equilibrium populations in (3.12)
with the plus and minus signs, respectively. A plot of the right side of (3.11) for a
fixed 0 < h < 1/4 is shown in Fig. 1.10. The phase line clearly indicates that the
larger equilibrium u+ is stable, and the smaller u− is unstable. Consequently,
nature would select out the larger equilibrium population for a given harvesting
rate 0 < h < 1/4. In terms of the bifurcation diagram in Fig. 1.8, the upper branch
is stable and the lower branch is unstable. A bifurcation is said to occur at the
point B. Note that we can also use the analytic derivative criterion, the sign of

f’(u*), to determine stability.
Figure 1.9 Bifurcation diagram showing equilibrium solutions u* vs. the
parameter h. There are two branches, the upper branch, which is stable, and the
lower branch, which is unstable.
Figure 1.10 Plot of f(u) vs. u and the phase line corresponding to Fig. 1.9 for a
fixed h < 1/4. As h increases, the parabola moves down until eventually no
equilibria exist.
Example 1.25
(Ecology) In this example we set up a simple model of a plant–herbivore system
and study its bifurcation properties. Bifurcations are highly important in all
physical and biological phenomena, and theoretical ecology offers easily
accessible examples without the details of complicated physical and chemical
concepts. Let P = P(t) be the plant biomass and assume the plant grows
logistically with growth rate r and carrying capacity K. Thus, without herbivores,
In this ecological system we assume there are H herbivores and they consume

plant biomass at the rate
per herbivore. Notice that this consumption rate saturates at the value a/b,
reflecting satiation on the part of herbivores. The constant a is measured in
dimensions of ‘per time per herbivore,’ and b is ‘per plant biomass.’ The
governing model for the plant biomass is therefore
Because of the number of parameters (5), it is wise to scale the equation. We
introduce dimensionless quantities
It is easily checked that the dimensionless model becomes
(3.13) 
with introduction of the dimensionless parameters
Generally, the carrying capacity is large and so we assume for the analysis that c
> 1, and c is fixed. Our interest is in examining the model when the herbivore
population varies; so, h is the bifurcation parameter.
The equilibria N* are determined by setting dN/dτ = 0, and we obtain
Thus N* = 0 (for all values of h) and
Here, it is difficult to plot equilibria as a function of h, but it is easy to plot h vs.
N*. Solving for h,
which is a concave down parabola with positive root N* = 1. By simple calculus
we find the maximum value occurs at
We can turn this parabola on its side to obtain a plot of the bifurcation diagram

with N* vs. h; this is shown in Fig. 1.11 along with the zero equilibrium.
Figure 1.11 Bifurcation diagram for the model equation (3.13). As h increases
from a small value, the two equilibria bifurcate at h = 1 into three; then, at h =
(c+1)2/2c the two nonzero equilibria coalesce and only the zero equilibrium
remains.
We can determine the stability of the various branches in Fig. 1.11 using a
phase line. Figure 1.12 shows the three plots for the three possible cases. We
graph the fixed growth rate N (1 − N) and the consumption rate hN/(1 + cN) in
each. They show that the upper branch of the parabola is stable, and the lower
branch is unstable.
Figure 1.12 Phase line diagram for the equilibria in model equation (3.13).
Remark 1.26
(Functional responses) Ecology provides a rich source of problems in nonlinear
dynamics involving predation, cooperation, and disease transmission. Many
models relating to resource dynamics (plants–herbivores, predator–prey) involve

a consumption, or predation, rate. To fix the context, let x be the number of prey
and y be the number of predators.5 The number of total possible encounters is xy,
and a fraction of those, axy, are effective; that is, they result in predation. This
effective contact rate is also called mass action, and later we observe it is the
reaction rate of two reacting chemical species. So, the rate of predation (prey per
time, per predator) is proportional to the number of prey, i.e., ax. Thinking
carefully about this leads to concerns. Increasing the prey density indefinitely
leads to an extremely high per predator consumption rate, which is clearly
impossible for any consumer. It seems more reasonable that the rate of predation
would have a limiting value as prey density gets large. In the late 1950s, C.
Holling developed a functional form that has this limiting property by
partitioning the time budget of the predator. He reasoned that the number N of
prey captured by a single predator is proportional to the number x of prey and
the time Ts allotted for searching. Thus N = aTsx, where the proportionality
constant a is the effective encounter rate. But the total time T available to the
predator must be partitioned into search time and total handling time Th, or T =
Ts + Th. The total handling time is proportional to the number captured, Th = hN,
where h is the time for a predator to handle a single prey. Hence N = a(T − hN)x.
Solving for N/T, which is the predation rate (prey per time, per predator), gives
This function for the predation rate is called a Holling type II response, or the
Holling disk equation. Note that limx→∞ ax/(1 + ahx) = 1/h, so the rate of
predation approaches a constant value. This quantity, N/T, is measured in prey
per time, per predator, so multiplying by the number of predators y gives the
predation rate for y predators.
If the encounter rate a is a function of the prey density (e.g., a linear function a
= bx), the the predation, or feeding, rate is
which is called a Holling type III response. Figure 1.13 compares different types
of predation rates used by ecologists. For a type III response the predation is
turned on once the prey density is high enough; this models, for example,
predators that must form a “prey image” before they become aware of the prey,
or predators that eat different types of prey. At low densities prey go nearly
unnoticed; but once the density reaches an upper threshold the predation rises

quickly to its maximum rate. In ecology literature one often encounters these
types of consumption rates.
Figure 1.13 Three types of functional responses, or consumption rates, studied
in ecology. The consumption rate is measured in prey per time, per predator.
Example 1.27
(Non-isothermal tank reactor) In this section we set up a model for
determining the temperature 
 and concentration 
 of a heat-releasing,
chemically reacting substance in a continuously stirred tank reactor. (We are
using over-bars in the variables in anticipation of using unbarred dimensionless
variables later.) The reaction takes place in a tank of volume V (see Fig. 1.2) that
is stirred continuously in order to maintain uniform temperature and
concentration. It is fed by a stream of constant flow velocity q, constant reactant
concentration ci, and constant temperature θi. After mixing and reacting, the
products are removed at the same volume rate q. We assume that the exothermic
reaction C → products is first-order and irreversible, and the reactant disappears
at the rate
where A and k are positive constants. The temperature-dependent factor 
 in
the rate is the Arrhenius factor, where A is proportional to the activation energy
(A is the activation energy divided by the gas constant R), or the amount of
kinetic energy needed for the reaction to occur. The amount of heat released is
assumed to be given by
where h is a positive constant, the specific heat of reaction, measured in energy
per mass.

We are able to write a system of two differential equations that govern the
concentration ( ) and the temperature 
 of the reactant in the tank. One
equation comes from balancing the mass of the reactant, and the other arises
from conservation of (heat) energy. First, mass balances gives (see Section 1.2.2)
(3.14) 
This equation states that the rate of change of mass of reactant in the tank equals
the mass in, less the mass out, plus the rate at which the mass of the reactant
disappears in the chemical reaction. Next, heat balance gives
(3.15) 
where C is the heat capacity of the mixture, measured in energy per volume per
degree. These equations can be reduced to dimensionless form by introducing
dimensionless variables
and dimensionless constants
In this case the mass and energy balance equations (3.14) and (3.15) become
(3.16) 
(3.17) 
This pair of equations can be reduced to a single equation using the following
argument. If we multiply (3.16) by b and add it to (3.17), we get
which integrates to
where D is a constant. Assuming θ + bc at t = 0 is 1 + b gives D = 0; then θ + bc
= 1 + b. Consequently the heat balance equation becomes
which is a single differential equation for θ. Introducing u = θ − 1, this equation

becomes
(3.18) 
which is the final form that we shall study.
By definition, the parameter μ in (3.18) can be identified as the ratio of the
flow rate to the reaction rate, and it acts as the bifurcation parameter in our
analysis because we wish to study equilibrium solutions as a function of flow
rate. The equilibrium solutions are given by solutions to the equation
(3.19) 
Because (3.19) cannot be solved in analytic form, we resort to graphical
techniques. We can plot μ vs. u* easily and then reflect the plot through u* = μ
to obtain a bifurcation diagram with abscissa μ. Figure 1.14 shows one case (b =
5, γ = 8, not drawn to scale). For a small value μ = μ1 there is one large
temperature equilibrium. As μ increases slowly, to maintain equilibrium, there is
a bifurcation at point C to two, then three, equilibria. As μ increases still further,
say up to μ = μ3, there is a bifurcation at point B back to a single, lower,
equilibrium temperature. To determine the stability of the branches AB, CB, and
CD let us write u’ =  (−μu + g(u)), where g(u) = (b − u) e−γ/(u+1). The equilibria
occur when the graphs of g(u) and μu intersect. Figure 1.15 shows three cases: μ
= μ1, μ = μ2, μ = μ3. For μ values where g(u) > μu we have u’ > 0, and μ values
where g(u) < μu we have u’ > 0. This means the upper temperature branch AB
must be asymptotically stable, the middle branch BC must be unstable, and the
lower temperature branch must be asymptotically stable.
Figure 1.14 Bifurcation diagram. The top branch from A to B and the bottom
branch from C to D are stable; the middle branch B to C is unstable.

Figure 1.15 Plot of the left and right sides of equation (3.19). Intersections show
the equilibria and how they change as μ changes.
Physically, if the flow rate μ is fast, say μ = μ3, the reactor is operating at a low
temperature. If it is slowly decreased, the temperature changes along the lower,
stable branch CD until it reaches the point C. At that time a bifurcation must
occur, and further decrease in μ will cause the temperature to jump suddenly
(and dynamically) to the upper, hotter branch. We say ignition has occurred.
Conversely, if the flow rate is increased from μ1, on reaching state B there is a
sudden jump to the lower temperature state along the stable branch CD. This
bifurcation is called quenching the reaction. In summary, the flow rate through
the reactor controls its performance; when the flow rate is large it operates at a

higher temperature, and at a low rate it operates at a low temperature. It is not
difficult to understand why bifurcation phenomena are important in the operation
of nuclear reactors.
EXERCISES
1. (Ecology) In the usual Malthus growth law p’ = rp for a population of size
p, assume the growth rate is a linear function of food availability F; that is, r
= bF, where b is the conversion factor of food into newborns. Assume that
FT is the total, constant food in the system with FT = F + cp, where cp is
amount of food already consumed. Write down a differential equation for the
population p. What is the population as t gets large? Find the population as a
function of time if p(0) = p0.
2. (Biology) A model of tumor growth is the Gompertz equation
where R = R(t) is the tumor radius, and a and k are positive constants. Find
the equilibria and analyze their stability. Find the solution R = R(t) and plot
several solution curves.
3. (Ecology) When a population gets small, the members may find it
difficult to locate mates, causing the growth rate to be negative. This
phenomenon is called the Allee effect. Explain how the model explains this
effect.
4. (Harvesting) A fish population in a lake is harvested at a constant rate H,
and it grows logistically. The growth rate is 0.2 per month, the carrying
capacity is 40 (thousand), and the harvesting rate is 1.5 (thousand per
month). Write down the model equation, find the equilibria, and classify
them. Will the fish population ever become extinct? What is the most likely
long-term fish population?
5. (Harvesting) A deer population grows logistically, but it is harvested at a
rate proportional to its population size. Conclude that the dynamics of
population growth is given by

where H is the per capita harvesting rate. Non-dimensionalize the model and
use a bifurcation diagram to explain the effects on the equilibrium deer
population when H is slowly increased from a small value.
6. Draw a bifurcation diagram for the model u’ = u3 − u + h, where h is the
bifurcation parameter, using h as the abscissa. Label branches of the curves
as stable or unstable. (Hint: first plot h vs. u.)
7. For the following equations, find the equilibria and sketch the phase line.
Determine the type and stability of all the equilibria.
a) u’ = u2(3 − u).
b) u’ = 2u(1 − u) − 1/2u.
c) u’ = (4 − u)(2 − u)3.
d) u’ = u − cos u. (Hint: plot u and cos u separately.)
e) u’ = eu − cos u.
8. The following models contain a parameter h. Find the equilibria in terms
of h and determine their stability. Construct a bifurcation diagram showing
how equilibria depend upon h, and label the branches of the curves as
unstable or stable.
a) u’ = hu − u2.
b) u’ = hu − u3.
c) u’ = (1 − u) (u2 − h).
d) u’ = h − u − e−u.
e) u’ = −u + h tanh u.
9. Consider the model u’ = (λ − b)u − au3, where a and b are fixed positive
constants and λ is a parameter that varies.
a) If λ < b show that there is a single equilibrium and that it is
asymptotically stable.
b) If λ > b find all equilibria and determine their stability.
c) Sketch the bifurcation diagram showing how equilibria vary with λ.
Label each branch of the curves shown in the bifurcation diagram as
stable or unstable.
10. (Ecology) An animal species of population u grows exponentially with
growth rate r. At the same time it is subjected to predation at a rate au/1+bu,
which depends upon its population. The constants a and b are positive, and
the dynamics are

a) Non-dimensionalize the model so that there is a single dimensionless
parameter h.
b) Sketch a bifurcation diagram, and determine the stability of the
equilibria as a function of h; indicate the results on the diagram.
11. Repeat the last problem for the model
12. (Ecology) The biomass P of a plant grows logistically with intrinsic
growth rate r and carrying capacity K. At the same time it is consumed at a
rate
per herbivore, where a and b are positive constants. The model is therefore
with r, K, a, and b fixed parameters.
a) Non-dimensionalize the model to obtain
for appropriate dimensionless parameters R and k.
b) On the same set of axes, plot the per capita growth and consumption
rate as functions of N, indicating the possible equilibria that can occur
depending on the values of R and k.
c) For fixed R < 0.5, sketch a bifurcation diagram of the equilibria vs. the
bifurcation parameter k. Label each branch as stable or unstable.
d) Explain in words what happens in the model when k is slowly
increased from a small value to a large value.
13. A one-dimensional system is governed by the dynamical equation
where a and h are positive constants. Holding ft, constant, draw a bifurcation
diagram with respect to the parameter a. Indicate the stable and unstable
branches. Hint: Plot both terms on the same set of axes.
14. Consider the two-parameter model

where h and r are real numbers. Carry out each step to understand
completely the dynamics of this model.
a) For r < 0, sketch the bifurcation diagram of x* vs. h. (Hint: plot y = h
and y = x3 − rx on the same set of axes to find equilibria.)
b) For r > 0, sketch the bifurcation diagram of x* vs. h. (Hint: plot y = h
and y = x3 − rx on the same set of axes, and let ft vary to find equilibria.)
c) From part (b), calculate the critical values of h = hc(r) (depending on r)
where bifurcations occur. Answer:
d) In the rh plane, sketch the regions where 1, 2, or 3 equilibria exist, and
find the equation(s) for the boundaries of these regions.

REFERENCES AND NOTES
Birkhoff, G. 1950. Hydrodynamics: A Study in Logic, Fact, and Similitude,
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Fowler, A. C. 1997. Mathematical Models in the Applied Sciences, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Hirsch, M. W., Smale, S. & Devaney. R. L. 2004. Differential Equations,
Dynamical Systems, and an Introduction to Chaos, 2nd ed., Academic Press, San
Diego.
Holmes, M. H. 2009. An Introduction to the Foundations of Applied
Mathematics, Springer, NY.
Illner, R., Bohun, C. S., McCollum, S. & van Roode, T. 2005. Mathematical
Modelling: A Case Studies Approach, American Mathematical Society,
Providence.
Kelley, W. G. & Peterson, A. C. 2010. The Theory of Differential Equations, 2nd
ed., Springer, NY.
Lin, C. C. & Segel, L. A. 1974. Mathematics Applied to Deterministic Problems
in the Natural Sciences, Macmillan, New York [reprinted by SIAM (Soc.
Industr. & Appl. Math.), Philadelphia, 1988].
Logan, J. D. 2006. Applied Mathematics, 3rd ed., Wiley Interscience, New York.
Logan, J. D. 2010. A First Course in Differential Equations, 2nd ed., Springer,
NY.
Strogatz, S. H. 1994. Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos, Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA.
1Alternately, because energy E involves mass M, the fundamental dimensions
T, L, Θl, and E can be replaced by T, L, Θ, and M.
2 A simple proof of the Pi theorem in a linear algebraic setting is contained in
J. D. Logan, et al., 1982. Dimensional analysis and the Pi theorem, Linear
Algebra and Its Applications 47, 117-126.
3 Thomas Malthus (1766–1834) was an English essayist who was one of the
first individuals to address demographics and food supply.

4 The logistic model was introduced by P. Verhulst (1804–1849) as a model
for the population of France.
5We are thinking of x and y as population numbers, but we can also regard
them as population densities, or animals per area. There is always an
underlying fixed area where the dynamics are occurring.

Chapter 2
Two-Dimensional Dynamical Systems
It is easily imagined that most models in science and engineering require more
than one state variable to describe them. In this chapter we study two-
dimensional, or planar, systems of linear and nonlinear differential equations.
The last two sections introduce dynamics of chemical reactions and the
propagation of pathogens, or viruses and other infections, in disease dynamics.

2.1 Phase Plane Phenomena
We extend the analysis of differential equations to a system of two coupled,
simultaneous equations
(1.1) 
in two unknowns x = x(t) and y = y(t). The functions P and Q are assumed to
have continuous partial derivatives of all orders in a domain D of the xy plane. A
system of the type (1.1) in which the independent variable t does not appear in P
and Q is said to be autonomous. Under these assumptions on P and Q, it can be
shown that there is a unique solution x = x(t), y = y(t) to the initial value
problem
(1.2) 
where t0 is an instant of time and (ξ0, η0)  D. The solution is defined in some
interval α < t < β containing t0. (See Kelley and Peterson, 2010.)
There are two ways to graphically represent solutions. They can be plotted as
time series in state space (x and y vs. t). Or, if x(t) and y(t) are not both constant
functions, then x = x(t) and y = y(t) define parametric equations of a curve that
can be plotted in the xy plane, called the phase plane. Such a curve is called an
orbit, path, or trajectory, of the system (1.1). Examples of both the time series
and a corresponding orbit are shown in Fig. 2.1. The orbit is directed in the sense
that it is traced out in a certain direction as t increases; this direction is indicated
by the direction of the tangent vector (x′, y′) along the curve. Because the
solution to the initial value problem is unique, it follows that at most one orbit
passes through each point of the phase plane, and all of the orbits cover the
entire phase plane without intersecting each other.
Figure 2.1 Time series representation of a solution curve and and its
corresponding orbit in the phase plane.

A constant solution x(t) = x0, y(t) = y0 of (1.1) is called an equilibrium, a
steady-state solution, or a critical point. Such a solution does not define a
curve in the phase plane but plots as a single point. Clearly, critical points occur
where both P and Q vanish, that is,
It is evident that no orbit can pass through a critical point; otherwise, uniqueness
would be violated. The totality of all the orbits, their directions, and critical
points graphed in the phase plane is called the phase plane diagram of the
system (1.1). Indeed, the qualitative behavior of all the orbits in the phase plane
is determined to a large extent by the location of the critical points and the local
behavior of orbits near those points. One can prove the following results, which
essentially form the basis of the Poincaré–Bendixson theorem:1
(i) An orbit cannot approach a critical point in finite time; that is, if an orbit
approaches a critical point, then necessarily t → ±∞.
(ii) An orbit is either a critical point, or, as t → ±∞, it moves along a closed
orbit, it approaches a closed orbit, or it leaves every bounded set.
A closed orbit corresponds to a periodic solution of (1.1). These facts severely
limit the behavior of solutions in the phase plane. We discuss these matters
further in the sequel.
Example 2.1
Consider the system
(1.3) 
Here P(x, y) = y and Q(x, y) = −x and (0,0) is the only critical point
corresponding to the equilibrium solution x(t) = 0, y(t) = 0. One way find the
orbits is to turn the system into a single linear equation

Then
give the solution, where c1 and c2 are constants. We can eliminate the time
parameter t by squaring and adding to obtain
Therefore the orbits are circles centered at the origin; the phase diagram is
shown in Fig. 2.2. The critical point surrounded by periodic orbits is called a
center. Alternatively, we may divide the two equations in the system (1.3) to
obtain2
Figure 2.2 Circular orbits of (1.3) surrounding the critical point (0, 0), which is
called a center. The orbits are counterclockwise because x′ > 0 when y > 0, and x′
< 0 when y < 0.
This can be solved directly to obtain the orbits
In this example all the paths are closed and each corresponds to a periodic
solution of period 2π because x(t + 2π) = x(t), y(t + 2π) = y(t). Initial conditions
fix a value of C and therefore a single orbit.

Example 2.2
The autonomous system
is uncoupled and each equation can be solved separately to obtain the solution
The origin (0,0) is the only critical point. The orbits can be found either by
eliminating t from the parametric equations, or by integrating the equation
In any case we obtain y2 = cx3, where c is a constant, and the orbits are plotted in
Fig. 2.3. A critical point having this local structure, where orbits emanate from
the origin as t → −∞ and tend to infinity as t → ∞, is called a node. Because the
orbits are leaving the origin (the tangent vector field (2x, 3y) points away from
the origin), the origin is an unstable critical point, repeller, or source. (All of
these terms are used.)
Figure 2.3 Phase diagram showing an unstable node at (0,0).
Remark 2.3
It is a fact that any linear system, x’ = ax + by, y = cx + dy, can be transformed
into a second-order linear equation with constant coefficients. (The reader should
be able to easily figure out how to do this.) The converse is also true.

Example 2.4
(Mechanics) Consider a particle of mass m moving in one dimension x subject
to a force f(x, x′). By Newton’s second law the governing equation of motion is
(1.4) 
Equation (1.4) may be recast as a system of two first-order equations by
introducing velocity y as a new variable: y = x’. Then
(1.5) 
Critical points occur at (x*, 0), where f(x*, 0) = 0; these correspond to points
where the velocity and the acceleration vanish. Thus the particle is in
equilibrium and no forces are acting on it.
Example 2.5
(Conservative forces) If f depends only on position, f = f(x), then the force is
conservative and there is a potential function V = V(x) defined by 
. In this special case the total
energy (kinetic plus potential energy) is conserved, or
(1.6) 
where E is the energy constant. This follows from
For conservative systems we can draw the phase diagram by solving (1.6) for y
(velocity) as a function of x (position) to get
(1.7) 
Each total energy level E, determined by the particle’s initial position and
velocity, defines an orbit, or orbits, in intervals where E > V(x). The orbit can be
obtained quickly by plotting both the (generic) potential V(x) and the constant
energy level E on the same graph (the top plot in Fig. 2.4); then the positive right
side of (1.7) can be plotted by subtracting and taking the square root graphically.
Reflecting the positive plots through the x axis gives the lower plot. Figure 2.4

shows a generic potential energy function and one such orbit. We can get an
entire phase diagram by carrying out this graphical procedure for several
different energy levels E. Note that in spatial intervals where E < V(x) there are
no orbits; values of x for which E = V(x) are called turning points.
Figure 2.4 In a conservative mechanical system with generic potential energy
V(x), orbits showing constant energy curves (lower plot). Many such orbits can
be drawn for several values of the energy to obtain the phase diagram. Equilibria
occur at points where the potential energy has a maximum, minimum, or zero
derivative.
We can also interpret the system (1.1) in the context of a fluid flow in the
plane. Physically, the functions P and Q on the right side can be regarded as the
components of a vector field v(x, y) = P(x, y), Q (x, y)  representing the velocity
of a two-dimensional fluid motion, or flow. The orbits x = x(t), y = y(t) of the
fluid particles are tangent to v and therefore satisfy (1.1). The critical points are
points where v = 0, or where the fluid particles are at rest. In fluid mechanics
these points are called stagnation points.
In practice, to plot the orbital structure of the phase diagram, we often plot

separately the locus P(x, y) = 0 (where the vector field is vertical) and the locus
Q(x, y) = 0 (where the vector field is horizontal); these loci are called the x and y
nullclines, respectively (also isoclines). The x and y nullclines intersect at the
critical points. Sketching nullclines and critical points, and plotting the directions
of the vector field facilitate drawing the phase plane diagram. Typically, we
usually indicate some key orbits that characterize the flow. Software can be
useful to plot the vector field as well as the orbits.
In principle the critical points of (1.1) can be found by solving the
simultaneous equations P(x, y) = 0 and Q(x, y) = 0. As observed in the examples,
the orbits in the phase plane can sometimes be found by integrating the
differential relationship,
particularly when P and Q are fairly simple expressions.
A critical point of (1.1) is said to be isolated if there is an open neighborhood
of the critical point that contains no other critical points. There are four types of
isolated critical points that occur in linear system, where both P and Q are linear
functions of x and y; these critical points are called centers, nodes, saddles, and
spirals. In Fig. 2.5 these critical points are drawn schematically with the local
orbital structure.
Figure 2.5 The four types of isolated critical points for a linear system. Centers
are surrounded by closed, periodic orbits, either clockwise or counterclockwise;
at a node or spiral point, all orbits either approach the origin as t → ±∞, or all
orbits approach the origin as t → −∞. Near a saddle point, all orbits veer away
from the origin except for special straight line orbits where one opposing pair
enters the origin as t → ±∞, and the other opposing pair approaches the origin t
→ −∞. The details of these constructions are discussed in the next section.

In nonlinear systems different types of critical points can occur. For example, a
critical point could have a nodal structure on one side and a saddle structure on
the other, as shown in Fig. 2.6
Figure 2.6 A possible orbital structure near an critical point in a nonlinear
system.
Critical points represent equilibrium, or constant, solutions of (1.1). Another
important issue is their stability. That is, does the equilibrium solution have some
degree of permanence to it when it is subjected to small changes or
perturbations? For example, we might expect a predator–prey system to have a
state where the two species coexist. Roughly speaking, a critical point is stable if

all paths that start nearby the critical point remain near the point for all time t >
0. All meaningful physical systems must have this property. We now formulate
this concept in mathematical terms.
Definition 2.6
Suppose the origin (0,0) is an isolated critical point of (1.1).
(i) The critical point (0, 0) is stable if for each  > 0 there exists a positive
number δ  such that every path that starts inside the circle of radius δ  at
some time t0 (e.g., t0 = 0) remains inside the circle of radius  for all t > t0
(see Fig. 2.7). This type of stability is sometimes called Lyapunov stability.
Figure 2.7 The definition of stability. Orbits that start at t = 0 close to a
stable critical point remain close for all time t > 0.
(ii) The critical point is locally asymptotically stable if it is stable and there
exists a circle of radius δ  such that every path that is inside this circle at t =
t0 approaches (0, 0) as t → ∞.
(iii) If (0, 0) is not stable, then it is unstable.
For a linear system, from Fig. 2.5, we note that a center is stable, but not
asymptotically stable; a saddle is unstable. A spiral is either asymptotically
stable or unstable, depending on the direction of the paths, and similarly for
nodes.
To determine analytic criteria for stability we can proceed as we did for a
single differential equation, namely to linearize near the critical point. Suppose
(x0, y0) is an isolated critical point of (1.1). This means x(t) = x0, y(t) = y0, is an
equilibrium, or constant, solution. Let

where u(t) and v(t) represent small perturbations from the equilibrium state.
Substituting into (1.1) gives the perturbation equations (or, equations for the
perturbations)
By Taylor’s theorem,
where a = Px(x0, y0) and b = Py(x0, y0), and the dots represent higher order terms
in u and v. Similarly,
where c = Qx(x0, y0) and d = Qy(x0, y0). Neglecting the higher-order terms, we
obtain the linearized perturbation equations, or the linearization near the critical
point:
(1.8) 
To emphasize the idea, the preceding equations express how the perturbations
behave. The matrix associated with this linearization,
is called the Jacobian matrix of the system at the equilibrium (x0, y0). It seems
reasonable that the stability of the equilibrium (x0, y0) of the nonlinear system
(1.1) is indicated by the stability of (0,0) of the associated linearized system
(1.8). Under suitable conditions, discussed in subsequent sections, this is true. In
the next section we analyze linear systems.
In ecological contexts, where these ideas are central, the Jacobian is often
called the community matrix.
EXERCISES

1. In the xy phase plane sketch several orbits of a conservative mechanical
system governed by mx″ = F(x) if the potential energy function is V(x) = x3(1
− x)2. Take m = 1. For which values of the total energy E does the system
oscillate?
2. Work Exercise 1 if the force is F(x) = 3x2 − 1.
3. For the system
find the critical points, nullclines, and the direction of the orbits in the
regions separated by the nullclines. Next, find the equations of the orbits and
plot the phase plane diagram. Is the origin stable or unstable?
4. Repeat the questions in the last exercise for the system
5. Find the linearization of the system
about the equilibrium point (1,1). Draw the nullclines and indicate the
direction of the orbits in each region separated by the nullclines. Can you
conclude anything about the stability of the critical point?

2.2 Linear Systems
In the preceding section we noted the role of the linear approximation near a
critical point. Linear systems are also interesting in themselves and occur often
in physics, engineering, and other contexts. Consider a two-dimensional linear
system
(2.1) 
where a, b, c, and d are constants. We assume that the coefficient matrix is
nonsingular, or
(2.2) 
This guarantees that the algebraic system
has only the trivial solution and the linear system has only an isolated critical
point at the origin. Otherwise, if ad − bc = 0, there is an entire line of nonisolated
critical points.
It is easier to examine (2.1) using matrix notation. This is advantageous
because the notation generalizes immediately to higher dimensions. Letting
(2.1) can be written
(2.3) 
Condition (2.2) is then
Following our experience with single linear equations with constant coefficients,
we try a solution of (2.3) of the form
(2.4) 
where v and λ are to be determined. Substituting (2.4) into (2.3) gives, after
simplification,
(2.5) 
which is the algebraic eigenvalue problem. The number λ is an eigenvalue of

A and the nonzero vector v is an associated eigenvector. (Observe that any
multiple of an eigenvector is also an eigenvector belonging to the same
eigenvalue.) The eigenvalues of A are found as roots of the characteristic
equation
(2.6) 
and the corresponding eigenvector(s) are then determined by solving the
homogeneous system
(2.7) 
In terms of the elements of the matrix A, equation (2.6) is
where tr A = a + d is the trace of A. This quadratic equation is called the
characteristic equation associated with A. It will have two roots: both real and
unequal, both real and equal, or complex conjugate roots. Note that the
assumption det A ≠ 0, so λ = 0 is not an eigenvalue in this case. In other contexts,
zero can be an eigenvalue.
In summary, each eigenpair λ and v gives a solution x = veλt to the linear
system. We summarize the solution structure in all of the cases.
Case I. If the eigenvalues λ1, λ2 are not equal, then the corresponding
eigenvectors v1, v2 are linearly independent and the linear combination
(2.8) 
is a solution to the linear system for all constants c1 and c2. This expression
is the general solution to (2.3) because it contains all solutions. The initial
value problem consisting of (2.3) and the initial condition x(0) = x0
determine the two constants c1 and c2 uniquely.
Case II. When there is a single eigenvalue λ  λ1 = λ2 of multiplicity two, the
general solution depends on whether there are one or two linearly independent
eigenvectors.
(a) If v1 and v2 are linearly independent eigenvectors corresponding to λ,
then the general solution of (2.3) is
(b) If v is the only eigenvector corresponding to λ, then veλt is a solution of

(2.3). It is easily checked that a second linearly independent solution has the
form (w + vt)eλt for a vector w satisfying
Therefore the general solution is
Case III. If the eigenvalues are complex, that is,
then the corresponding eigenvectors are complex,
Then a complex solution of (2.3) is
Using Euler’s formula, exp(iθ) = cos θ + i sin θ, we can expand this to
The real and imaginary parts of a complex solution are independent real
solutions, and therefore the general solution (2.3) is
The other eigenvalue gives the same two independent solutions. Notice that
the two functions w cos βt − v sin βt and w sin βt + v cos βt are periodic
functions with period 2π/β, and the factor eαt is an amplitude factor. If α = 0,
then the solution is periodic with period 2π/β. Therefore the orbits are closed
curves and (0, 0) is a center. If α < 0, the amplitude of x decreases and the
orbits form spirals that wind into the origin; these are decaying oscillations
and the origin is an asymptotically stable spiral point. If α > 0, the
amplitude of x increases and the orbits are unstable spirals, representing
growing oscillations, and the origin is an unstable spiral point.
The preceding discussion completely characterizes the solution structure near
an isolated critical point (0,0) of the linear system (2.3). We summarize the key
stability result in the following theorem, whose proof easily follows from the
form of the various solutions.
Theorem 2.7
The critical point (0, 0) of the linear system

is asymptotically stable if, and only if, the eigenvalues of A are negative or have
negative real parts.
Remark 2.8
In the two-dimensional case the characteristic equation can be written simply as
where tr A = a + d is the trace of the matrix A. Therefore, by the quadratic
equation, the eigenvalues are given by
where p = tr A and q = det A. It follows that the eigenvalues have negative real
parts if, and only if,
or,
These conditions on the trace and determinant are necessary and sufficient for
asymptotic stability.
In Case (III) above, when the eigenvalues are complex (p2 − 4q < 0), we
completely characterize the phase diagram as centers when p = 0 or spirals (p ≠
0). Now we examine the geometrical structure of the phase plane in Cases (I)
and (II), when the eigenvalues are real.
If λ, v is an eigenpair, the solution x(t) = veλt is a straight line, or linear orbit.
Note that x(0) = v, which is a nonzero point in the plane. Then for each time t,
veλt is a multiple of v, and so it lies on the ray emanating from the origin and
passing through v. If λ > 0 then |x(t)| → ∞ as t → +∞, and x(t) → 0 as t → −∞. It
is exactly opposite if λ < 0.
Further, when v is an eigenvector so is −v. Therefore −veλt is a straight line
solution opposite to veλt. These two opposing linear orbits, shown in Fig. 2.8,
either both point in (λ < 0), or both point out (λ > 0). The two opposing rays
pointing inward are called the stable manifolds of (0, 0), and two pointing
outward are called unstable manifolds of (0,0).
Figure 2.8 Opposing linear orbits corresponding to an eigenpair λ < 0, v. These
two linear orbits that approach the origin are the stable manifolds of (0, 0).

In the case of a stable node with two negative unequal eigenvalues, there are
two pairs of stable manifolds, and all other orbits approach the origin in the
direction of the pair corresponding to the largest negative eigenvalue. For
example, if λ = −4, −1, the general solution is
as t → +∞. Similarly, as t → −∞, backward in time, the orbits approach the
direction corresponding to the most negative eigenvalue.
For an unstable node, when the eigenvalues are both positive, and unequal, the
phase plane diagram is just opposite.
For saddle points, the eigenvalues are real and have opposite signs. There is a
pair of stable manifolds corresponding to the negative eigenvalue and a pair of
unstable manifolds corresponding to the positive eigenvalue. All other orbits
veer away from the origin and approach the unstable manifolds: in backward
time they approach the stable manifolds.
Example 2.9
This example is a prototype of two real eigenvalues of opposite sign, which
gives a saddle structure. Consider the linear system
The coefficient matrix
has characteristic equation

and therefore the eigenvalues are λ = −1, 2. Therefore the origin is an unstable
critical point. The eigenvectors are found by solving the linear homogeneous
system
When λ = −1,
and an eigenvector corresponding to λ = −1 is [v1, v2]T = [1, 2]T. When λ = 2,
which gives [v1, v2]T = [2, 1]T. The general solution to the system is
The two eigenvectors above define the directions of the linear orbits, or the pair
of stable manifolds corresponding to negative eigenvalue and the pair of
unstable manifolds corresponding to the positive eigenvalue. The remaining
orbits, given as a linear combination of the two linear orbits, veer away from the
origin and approach the unstable manifolds as t → +∞. To get a more accurate
plot it is helpful to plot the nullclines, or loci of points where x′ = 0 and where y′
= 0. A phase diagram, computed in MATLAB, is shown in Fig. 2.9.
Figure 2.9 Saddle point structure.

EXERCISES
1. Find the general solution and sketch phase diagrams for the following
systems; characterize the equilibria as to type (node, etc.) and stability.
a) x′ = x − 3y, y’ = −3x + y.
b) x′ = −x + y, y’ = y.
c) x′ = 4y, y’ = −9x.
d) x′ = x + y, y’ = 4x − 2y.
e) x′ = 3x − 4y, y’ = x − y.
f) x′ = −2x − 3y, y’ = 3x − 2y.
2. Determine the behavior of solutions near the origin for the system
for different values of b.
3. Fill in the details of Remark 2.8.
4. For the linear system (2.3), letting p = tr A and q = det A, shade regions in
the pq plane representing values where the origin is a saddle point, a stable
node, a stable spiral, an unstable node, an unstable spiral, or a center. What

is the structure of the phase plane along the line q = 0.
5. (Environment) At time t = 0 a chemical herbicide is sprayed on a soil in a
field of crops. Let x be the amount of herbicide in the crop, and let y be the
amount of herbicide in the soil. Suppose herbicide is transferred from the
soil to the crop at rate βy and transferred from the crop to the soil at rate αx;
further, assume the chemical degrades in the soil at rate γy. Set up a model
for the amounts of herbicide in the crop and in soil. Sketch a phase plane
diagram indicating how the system evolves in time.
6. Consider the system
What are the possible behaviors of solutions to this system, depending upon
the parameter a.
7. The equation for a damped spring-mass oscillator is
Write the equation as a system by introducing y =  and show that (0,0) is a
critical point. Describe the nature and stability of the critical point in the
following cases: a = 0; a2 − 4mk = 0; a2 − 4km < 0; a2 − 4km > 0. Interpret
the results physically.

2.3 Nonlinear Systems
We now examine nonlinear systems by first revisiting the question of whether
the linearization
(3.1) 
of a nonlinear system
(3.2) 
at a critical point (x0, y0) Predicts its type (node, saddle, center, spiral point) and
stability. The following result of Poincaré gives a partial answer to this question.
The proof can be found in the references.
Theorem 2.10
Let (x0, y0) be an isolated critical point for the nonlinear system (3.2) and let A =
A(x0, y0) be the Jacobian matrix for the linearization (3.1), with det A ≠ 0. Then
(x0, y0) is a critical point of the same type and stability as the origin (0, 0) for the
linearization in the following cases:
(i) The eigenvalues of A are real, either equal or distinct, and have the same
sign (node).
(ii) The eigenvalues of A are real and have opposite signs (saddle).
(iii) The eigenvalues of A are complex but not purely imaginary (spiral).
The exceptional case is when the linearization has a center. In this case there
are several interesting possibilities that can occur in the nonlinear system, and
we will investigate some of them. The orbital structure for the nonlinear system
near critical points mirrors that of the linearization in the nonexceptional cases
indicated in the theorem, with a slight distortion in the phase plane diagram
caused by the nonlinearity.
The question of stability is cataloged in the following theorem, which is an
immediate corollary of the Poincaré theorem.
Theorem 2.11
If (0, 0) is asymptotically stable for (3.1), then (x0, y0) is asymptotically stable

for (3.2).
Example 2.12
Consider the nonlinear system
which has an isolated critical point at (0,0). The Jacobian matrix A at the origin
is
and it has eigenvalues 
. Thus the linearization has an
asymptotically stable spiral at (0, 0), and thus the nonlinear system has an
asymptotically stable spiral at (0,0).
Example 2.13
The nonlinear system
has a stable spiral at the origin. The linearization has Jacobian
has purely imaginary eigenvalues ±i, and hence (0,0) is a center for the
linearization. This is the exceptional case in the theorem and we are not
guaranteed that (0, 0) is a center for the nonlinear system. In fact, we show later
that there are no periodic solutions to the nonlinear system.
Example 2.14
(Mechanics) A particle of mass m = 1 moves on the x axis under the influence of
a conservative force f(x) = 3x2 − 1. The equations of motion in the phase plane
are
where the position x and the velocity y are functions of time t. The potential
energy is V(x) = −x3 + x, where the zero potential energy level is located at x = 0.

The orbits are given by the conservation of energy law
or
They are plotted in Fig. 2.10. There are two equilibria, 
and 
, where the velocity is zero and the force is zero. The
Figure 2.10 Orbits for the conservative system.
equilibrium solution 
 has the structure of a center, and for
small initial values the system will oscillate. The other equilibrium 
, has the structure of an unstable saddle point. Because x’ = y,
for y > 0 we have x′ > 0, and the orbits are directed to the right in the upper half-
plane. For y < 0 we have x′ < 0, and the orbits are directed to the left in the lower
half plane. The x nullcline is the y axis, where the vector field is vertical; the y
nullclines are the lines 
, where the vector field is
horizontal. For large initial energies the system does not oscillate but rather goes
to x = +∞, y = +∞; that is, the mass moves farther and farther to the right with
faster speed. The Jacobian matrix is

Then
The eigenvalues of the first matrix are purely imaginary, so the linearization has
a center at 
. This is the exceptional case and the theorem gives no
information about the nonlinear system. However, for this problem we were able
to find equations for the orbits, and we found that the nonlinear system does
have a center at 
. The second matrix has real eigenvalues of opposite
sign, and therefore 
 is a saddle point, confirming the analysis.
Example 2.15
(Lotka–Volterra model) Nonlinear equations play a central role in modeling
population dynamics in ecology. Let x = x(t) be the prey population and y = y(t)
be the predator population. We can think of lynx and hares, food fish and sharks,
or any consumer-resource interaction, including herbivores and plants. If there is
no predator we assume the prey dynamics is x′ = rx, or exponential growth,
where r is the per capita growth rate. In the absence of prey, we assume that the
predator dies via y′ = −my, where m is the per capita mortality rate. When there
are interactions, we must include terms that decrease the prey population and
increase the predator population. To determine the form of the predation term, let
us assume that the rate of predation, or the number of prey consumed per unit
time, per predator, is proportional to the number of prey. That is the rate of
predation is ax. Thus, if there are y predators then the rate that prey is decreased
is axy. This is mass–action kinetics. Note that the interaction term is
proportional to xy, the product of the number of predators and the number of
prey. For example, if there were 20 prey and 10 predators, there would be 200
possible interactions. Only a fraction of them, a, is assumed to result in a kill.
The parameter a depends upon the fraction of encounters and the success of the
encounters. The prey consumed cause a rate of increase in predators of εaxy,
where ε is the conversion efficiency of the predator population. (There is not a
one-to-one trade off of prey consumed to predators produced; it takes many

small fish to create a shark.). Therefore, we obtain the simplest model of
predator-prey interaction, called the Lotka–Volterra model:
where b = εa. A. Lotka and V. Volterra developed this model in the 1920s to
study fish populations in the Mediterranean Sea after the First World War. It was
one of the first models of its kind developed in theoretical ecology, and it has a
high historical interest despite some of its deficiencies.
To analyze the Lotka–Volterra model we factor the right sides of the equations
to obtain
(3.3) 
Setting the right sides equal to zero gives two equilibria, (0,0) and (m/b, r/a).
The origin represents extinction of both species, and the nonzero equilibrium
represents a possible coexistent state. The x nullclines for (3.3), where x′ = 0, are
x − 0 and y = r/a. Orbits cross these two lines vertically. Orbits cross the y
nullclines, where y′ = 0, horizontally. The equilibria are the intersections of the x
and y nullclines. See Fig. 2.11. Along each nullcline we can find the direction of
the vector field. For example, on the ray to the right of the equilibrium we have x
> m/b, y = r/a. We know the vector field is vertical so we need only check the
sign of y′. We have y′ = y(−m + bx) = (r/a)(−m + bx) > 0, so the vector field
points upward. Similarly we can determine the directions along the other three
rays. These are shown in the accompanying figure. Further, we can determine
the direction of the vector field in regions between the nullclines either by
selecting an arbitrary point in that region and calculating x′ and y′, or by just
noting the sign of x′ and y′ in that region from information obtained from the
system. For example, in the quadrant above and to the right of the nonzero
equilibrium, it is easy to see that x′ < 0 and y′ > 0; so the vector field points
upward and to the left. This task can be performed for each region to obtain the
directions shown in the figure. Having the direction of the vector field along the
nullclines and in the regions bounded by the nullclines tells us the directions of
the orbits. Near (0, 0) the orbits appear to veer away and the equilibrium seems
to have a saddle structure. The Jacobian matrix is
Figure 2.11 Nullclines and vector field for the Lotka–Volterra system.

Clearly,
has eigenvalues r and −m, confirming that (0, 0) is indeed a saddle. It appears
that orbits circle around the nonzero equilibrium in a counterclockwise fashion.
The linearized matrix is
which has purely imaginary eigenvalues. So the linearization is inconclusive and
additional work is required.
To obtain the equation of the orbits we divide the two equations in (3.3) to get
Rearranging and integrating gives
which is the algebraic equation for the orbits. It remains obscure what these
curves are because it is not possible to solve for either of the variables. But we
can proceed as follows. If we exponentiate we get
Now consider the y nullcline where x is fixed at a value m/b, and fix a C value
(i.e., an orbit). The right side of the last equation is a positive number γ, and so yr
= γeay. If we plot both sides of this equation (a power function and a growing

exponential) we observe that there can be at most two crossings; therefore, this
equation can have at most two solutions for y. Hence, along the y nullcline there
can be at most two crossings; an orbit cannot spiral into or out from the
equilibrium point because that would mean many values of y would be possible.
We conclude that the nonzero equilibrium is a center with closed, periodic orbits
encircling it. A phase diagram is shown in Fig. 2.12. When the prey population is
high the predators have a high food source and their numbers start to increase,
thereby eventually driving down the prey population. Then the prey population
gets low, ultimately reducing the number of predators because of lack of food.
Then the process repeats, giving cycles. The Lotka–Volterra model is the
simplest model in ecology showing how populations can cycle, and it was one of
the first strategic models to explain qualitative observations in natural systems.
Note that the nonzero equilibrium is stable. A small perturbation from
equilibrium puts the populations on a periodic orbit that stays near the
equilibrium. But the system does not return to equilibrium.
Figure 2.12 Counterclockwise periodic orbits of the Lotka-Volterra system.
Remark 2.16
From a historical point of view, there are many issues with the suitability of the

Lotka–Volterra model as a predator-prey model. A classic data set obtained in
Canada during the period 1881–1940 on lynx–hare populations does not
conform with the model. One problem, of many, is that the data indicate the
cycles should go clockwise, not counterclockwise! And, the model lacks a
certain structural stability in that if other terms are included, even if the effects
are small, the behavior of the solution changes dramatically. Other problems
exist in the data itself, e.g., its incompleteness, how it was collected, its omission
of the role of the trappers, and so on. Many have written on this topic. A brief
discussion with other references is in Brauer and Castillo-Chavez (2001), pp.
180–188.
A central problem in the theory of nonlinear systems is to determine whether
the system admits any cycles, or closed orbits. These orbits represent periodic
solutions of the system, or oscillations. In general, for nonlinear systems the
existence of closed orbits may be difficult to decide. The following negative
result, however, due to Bendixson and Dulac is easy to prove.
Theorem 2.17
For the system (3.2), if Px + Qy is of one sign in a region of the phase plane, then
system (3.2) cannot have a closed orbit in that region.
Proof
By way of contradiction assume the region contains a closed orbit Γ given by
and denote the interior of Γ by R. By Green’s theorem in the plane,
On the other hand,
which is a contradiction.
Another negative criterion is due to Poincaré.
Theorem 2.18
A closed orbit of the system (3.2) surrounds at least one critical point of the

system. Thus, if no critical points exist in a region, then there can be no periodic
orbits in that region.
Positive criteria that ensure the existence of closed orbits are not abundant,
particularly criteria that are practical and easy to apply. For certain special types
of equations such criteria do exist. The following fundamental theorem, called
the Poincaré–Bendixson theorem, is a general theoretical result.
Theorem 2.19
Let R be a closed bounded region in the plane containing no critical points of
(3.2). If Γ is an orbit of (3.2) that lies in R for some t0 and remains in R for all t >
t0, then Γ is either a closed orbit or it spirals toward a closed orbit as t → ∞.
The Poincaré-Bendixson theorem guarantees that, in the plane, either an orbit
leaves every bounded set as t → ±∞, it is a closed curve, it approaches a critical
point or a closed curve as t → ±∞, or it is a critical point. An orbit cannot just
wander around chaotically forever. Thus, in the plane, the only attractors are
closed orbits or critical points. Interestingly enough, the Poincaré-Bendixson
theorem does not generalize directly to higher dimensions. In three dimensions,
for example, there exist strange attractors that have neither the character of a
point, a curve, or a surface, which act as attractors to all paths.

2.4 Bifurcations
Next we examine systems of equations of the form
(4.1) 
depending upon a real parameter μ. As μ varies, the nature of the solution often
changes at special values of μ, giving fundamentally different critical point
structures. For example, what was once a stable equilibrium can bifurcate into an
unstable one. This type of phenomenon is ubiquitous in all physical problems
involving differential equations. All systems contain parameters (often several),
and it is essential to understand how the behavior of solutions changes as the
parameters change. A simple example illustrates the idea.
Example 2.20
Consider the linear system
where μ is a parameter. The eigenvalues λ are determined from
or
Hence
If μ > −1, then the eigenvalues are real and have opposite signs, and therefore
the origin is a saddle point. If μ = −1, then the system becomes
and there is a line of equilibrium solutions along y = x. If μ < −1, then the
eigenvalues are purely imaginary and the origin is a center. Consequently, as μ
decreases, the nature of the solution changes at μ = −1; the equilibrium state (0,
0) evolves from an unstable saddle to a stable center as μ passes through the
critical value. We say a bifurcation occurs at μ = −1.
As noted above, these types of phenomena occur frequently in physical
systems. For example, in a predator-prey interaction in ecology we may ask how
coexistent states, or equilibrium populations, depend upon the carrying capacity

K of the prey species. The parameter K then acts as a bifurcation parameter. For
a given system, we may find a coexistent, asymptotically stable state for small
carrying capacities. But, as the carrying capacity increases, the coexistent state
can suddenly bifurcate to an unstable equilibrium and the dynamics could
change dramatically. This type of behavior, if present, is an important
characteristic of differential equations in physics, engineering, and the natural
sciences.
Example 2.21
Consider the system
(4.2) 
The origin is an isolated equilibrium, and the linearization is
It is easy to see that the eigenvalues λ of the Jacobian matrix are given by
If μ, < 0, then Re λ < 0, and (0, 0) is a stable spiral; if μ = 0, then λ = ±i, and (0,
0) is a center; if μ > 0, then Re λ > 0, and (0, 0) is an unstable spiral. From
results in the preceding sections regarding the relationship between a nonlinear
system and its linearization, we know (0, 0) is a stable spiral for the nonlinear
system when μ < 0 and an unstable spiral when μ > 0. Therefore, there is a
bifurcation at μ = 0 where the equilibrium exchanges stability.
The system in the last example deserves a more careful look. It is possible to
solve the nonlinear problem (4.2) directly if we transform to polar coordinates x
= r cos θ, y = r sin θ. First, it is straightforward to show
If we multiply the first equation by x and the second by y and then add, we
obtain
(4.3) 
If we multiply the first equation by −y and the second by x and then add, we
obtain
(4.4) 
The equivalent system (4.3)–(4.4) in polar coordinates may be integrated
directly. Clearly

(4.5) 
where t0 is a constant. Therefore, the polar angle θ winds around
counterclockwise as time increases.
Next we examine the r-equation when μ > 0. By separating variables and using
the partial fraction decomposition
we obtain
(4.6) 
where c is a constant of integration. When c = 0 we obtain the solution
which represents a periodic solution whose orbit is the circle r = 
 in the phase
plane. If c < 0, then (4.6) represents an orbit that spirals counterclockwise toward
the circle r = 
 from the outside, and if c > 0 the solution represents an orbit
that spirals counterclockwise toward the circle from the inside. This means that
the origin is an unstable spiral as indicated by the linear analysis, and the
periodic solution r = 
 is approached by all other solutions. When a periodic
orbit, or cycle, is approached by orbits from both the inside and outside, we say
that the orbit is a stable limit cycle. See Fig. 2.13.
Figure 2.13 Limit cycle occurring in the case μ > 0.

In the case μ, = 0 the r-equation becomes
and direct integration gives the solution
This implies that the origin is a stable spiral. Thus, as μ changed from positive to
zero, the limit cycle disappeared and the origin changed stability.
Finally, in the case μ < 0, let k2 = −μ > 0. Then the radial r-equation is
(4.7) 
The partial fraction decomposition is
and (4.7) integrates to
It is easy to verify that this solution represents spirals that approach the origin at
t → +∞.
Now let us review the results. As μ passes through the critical value μ = 0 from

negative to positive, the origin changes from a stable spiral to an unstable spiral
and there is born a new time periodic solution, a limit cycle. This type of
bifurcation is common and it is an example of a Hopf bifurcation. A graph in
the complex plane of the eigenvalues λ = μ + i and λ = μ − i of the linearized
system, as functions of μ, shows that the complex conjugate pair crosses the
imaginary axis at μ = 0. Generally this can signal a bifurcation to a time periodic
solution, or limit cycle. In the general case (Fig. 2.14), the eigenvalues are λ(μ) =
Reλ(μ) ± iImλ(μ) with λ(μ*) = ±iImλ(μ*) purely imaginary, and Reλ’(μ) > 0.
Two cases can occur. There is an unstable limit cycle for μ < μ* with the critical
point asymptotically stable, or there is a stable limit cycle for μ > μ* with the
critical point unstable. This is essentially the Hopf bifurcation theorem. (The
theorem was first mentioned by Poincaré; later, in the 1920s, A. Andronov
proved the planar version, and E. Hopf generalized it to higher dimensional
system in the early 1940s.)
Figure 2.14 Schematic of a Hopf bifurcation in the complex λ plane showing
how the eigenvalues at a critical point cross the imaginary axis from one side of
the plane to the other, depending on the value of a parameter μ. Purely imaginary
eigenvalues occur at μ = μ*.
There are several other theorems for special systems that guarantee the
conditions for a Hopf bifurcation. One of these, due to A. Kolmogorov, is a
result for systems of the form
where f and g satisfy specialized conditions. Such systems are common in
predator-prey models. We refer to Edelstein-Keshet (1988), p. 351, for a precise
statement.
We mention one other important consequence of the Poincaré–Bendixson

theorem that predicts the existence of limit cycles. Suppose there is a closed
bounded region R in the plane where at each point (x, y) on the boundary of R
the vector field (P(x, y), Q(x, y)) for the system points inward into R. We call R a
basin of attraction. If R contains no critical points, then there must be a periodic
orbit in R. This result applies equally well for an annular (donut-type) region R
when the vector field points inward on both the interior and exterior boundaries.
For example, if a rectangular region is attracting and contains a repeller in its
interior, then we can form an annular region by deleting a small disc encircling
the critical point; then we can apply the Poincaré–Bendixson theorem to show
the annular region must contain a limit cycle.
EXERCISES
1. Determine the nature and stability properties of the critical points of the
systems, and sketch the phase diagram:
a) x′ = x + y − 2x2, y′ − −2x + y + 3y2.
b) x′ = −x − y − 3x2y, y′ = −2x − 4y + y sin x.
c) x′ = y2, y′ = −2/3 x.
d) x′ = x2 − y2, y′ = x − y.
e) x′ = x2 + y2 − 4, y′ = y − 2x.
2. Consider the system
a) Show there is a closed orbit in the region 1 ≤ r ≤ 3, where r2 = x2+y2.
b) Find the general solution.
3. Determine if the following systems admit periodic solutions.
a) x′ = y, y′ = (x2 + 1)y − x5.
b) x′ = x + x3 − 2y, y′ = −3x + y5.
c) x′ = y, y′ = y2 + x2 + 1.
d) x′ = y, y′ = 3x2 − y − y5.
e) x′ = 1 + x2 + y2, y′ = (x − 1)2 + 4.
4. Find the values of μ where solutions bifurcate and examine the stability of
the origin in each case.
a) x′ = x + μy, y′ = μx + y.

b) x′ = y, y′ = −2x + μy.
c) x′ = x + y, y′ = μx + y.
d) x′ = 2y, y′ = 2x − μy.
e) x′ = y, y′ = μx + x2.
f) x′ = y, y′ = x2 − x + μy.
g) x′ = μy + xy, y′ = -μx + μy + x2 + y2.
h) x′ = y, y′ = −y − μ + x2.
i) x′ = μx − x2 − 2xy, y′ = (μ − 5/3)y + xy + y2.
5. Discuss the dependence on the sign of μ of the critical point at the origin
of the system
6. Consider the predator-prey model
where x and y are two species.
a) Sketch the nullclines and indicate the direction field.
b) Find the critical points and classify them.
c) Sketch a phase plane diagram in the case a > 1.
d) Explain what happens if a = 1/2.
e) Sketch the possible types of phase diagrams that can occur for 0 < a <
1.
7. Prove a generalization of the Bendixson-Dulac theorem: For the system
(3.2), if there is a smooth function h(x, y) for which (hP)x + (hQ)y is of one
sign in a region R of the phase plane, then system (3.2) cannot have a closed
orbit in R. Use this result to show that the system
has no periodic orbits. (Hint: Take h(x, y) = 1/xy).
8. If p(0, 0) and h(0) are positive, prove that the origin is an asymptotically
stable critical point for the dynamical equation
9. Examine the stability of the equilibrium solutions of the system
where γ and v are positive constants.

10. (Ecology) Let P denote the carbon biomass of plants in an ecosystem, H
be the carbon biomass of herbivores, and ϕ the rate of primary carbon
production in plants due to photosynthesis. A model of plant-herbivore
dynamics is given by
where a, b, c, and ε are positive parameters.
a) Explain the various terms and parameters in the model and determine
the dimensions of each parameter.
b) Non-dimensionalize the model and find the equilibrium solutions.
c) Analyze the dynamics in the cases of high primary production (ϕ > ac/
εb) and low primary production (ϕ < ac/εb). Explain what happens in the
system if primary production is slowly increased from a low value to a
high value.
11. A system
is called a Hamiltonian system if there is a function H(x, y) for which f =
Hy and g = −Hx. The function H is called the Hamiltonian. Prove the
following facts about Hamiltonian systems:
a) If fx + gy = 0, then the system is Hamiltonian. (Recall that fx + gy is the
divergence of the vector field (f, g).)
b) Prove that along any orbit, H(x, y) = constant, and therefore all the
orbits are given by H(x, y) = constant.
c) Show that if a Hamiltonian system has an equilibrium, then it is not a
source or sink (node or spiral).
d) Show that any conservative dynamical equation x″ = f(x) leads to a
Hamiltonian system, and show that the Hamiltonian coincides with the
total energy.
e) Find the Hamiltonian for the system x′ = y, y′ = x − x2, and plot the
orbits.
12. In a Hamiltonian system the Hamiltonian given by H(x, y) = x2 + 4y4.
Write down the system and determine the equilibria. Sketch the orbits.
13. A system

is called a gradient system if there is a function G(x, y) for which f = Gx
and g = Gy.
a) If fy − gx = 0, prove that the system is a gradient system. (Recall that fy
− gx is the curl of the two-dimensional vector field (f, g); a zero curl
ensures existence of a potential function on nice domains.)
b) Prove that along any orbit, (d/dt)G(x, t) ≥ 0. Show that periodic orbits
are impossible in gradient systems.
c) Show that if a gradient system has an equilibrium, then it is not a
center or spiral.
d) Show that the system x’ = 9x2 − 10xy2, y’ = 2y − 10x2y is a gradient
system.
e) Show that the system x’ = siny, y′ = xcosy has no periodic orbits.
14. Thoroughly analyze the system x’ = −2x(x − 1)(2x − 1), y’ = −2y.
15. Analyze the system
in the cases a = 0, a < 0, and a > 0, and explain the bifurcations that occur.
16. (Circuits) An RCL circuit with a nonlinear resistance, where the voltage
drop across the resistor is a nonlinear function of current, can be modeled by
the Van der Pol equation
where ρ is a positive constant, and x(t) is the current.
a) In the phase plane, show that the origin is an unstable equilibrium.
b) Sketch the nullclines and the vector field. What are the possible
dynamics? Is there a limit cycle?
c) Use software to sketch the phase diagram when ρ = 1, and plot x = x(t)
if x(0) = 0.05 and x′(0) = 0. Describe the dynamics in this case.
17. (Mechanics) Show that periodic orbits for the mechanical system
are possible only if k = 0.
18. (Biology) Analyze the following nonlinear system, which models cell

differentiation.
19. (Ecology) Consider the scaled predator-prey model
where the carrying capacity of the predator depends upon the prey
population. Examine the dynamics of the model as the predator growth rate r
decreases from 1/2 to a small value.
20. (Predation) In a simple model of predation a fraction of the prey take
refuge and are not subject to predation. If H = H(t) is the number of prey,
and P = P(t) is the number of predators, the model takes the form
where r is the prey growth rate, k is the predator mortality rate, Hr is the
number of prey in refuge, and a and b are predation rates. The model can be
reduced to the dimensionless form
for appropriate choices of α and β. Find the equilibria, nullclines, and the
community matrix. Determine the stability of the equilibria and sketch the
phase diagram.
21. Present a thorough analysis of the model
for p, q  [0, 1].

2.5 Reaction Kinetics
This section and the next contain two mathematically related applications
involving differential equations: the basics of chemical kinetics and simple
models of viruses. These topics are related in that they operate on the same scale,
namely that of molecular biology and biochemical kinetics. There is an often-
repeated cliche, that ‘life is chemistry.’ (Some might modify this and say
‘electrochemistry.’) It is hardly an understatement that chemistry and reaction
kinetics pervade mathematical modeling of processes inside organisms. To drop
a few reminders: metabolic pathways, transport of chemicals in organisms,
photosynthesis, enzyme kinetics, nerve signal propagation, dynamics of viruses
and immune system responses, chemical signalling, and so forth.
This section introduces some basics about chemical kinetics, the law of mass
action, and enzyme kinetics. The next section introduces viral dynamics and the
immune system response. These key ideas about kinetics help us better
understand other dynamical issues on a larger scale, for example, population
modeling and disease ecology.

2.5.1 The Law of Mass Action
The law of mass action is a rule that models the rate of chemical reactions and
what concentrations of the constituents are involved. Elementary texts on
reaction kinetics for chemical engineering students are good resources.
Example 2.22
(Unitary reaction) The simplest reaction is a single unimolecular (unitary)
reaction where one molecule decays into a daughter particle and releases energy.
For example, the unstable radioactive isotope 3H1 (tritium) can decay into a
stable isotope of helium 3He2 while producing an electron and an antineutrino.
We can think of these simple reactions as
and we often model this reaction as radioactive decay by declaring that the rate
of reaction is proportional to the amount present, or r = kX. (There should be no
confusion in using the same letter X for both the molecule and its concentration;
this is easier than using the common but unwieldy [X] for concentration.) This
means X is consumed at the rate kX, or
The constant k is called the rate constant and it is usually written over the arrow
in the chemical formula as
We easily find X(t) = X0e−kt, where X0 is the initial amount of X present.
Figure 2.15 A binary reaction. Molecules X and Y combine to form the product
Z.
Example 2.23
(Binary reaction) The next level of complication is to consider the bimolecular

(binary) reaction
(5.1) 
where one molecule of X and one molecule of Y (the reactants) combine to
produce one molecule of Z (the product). Pictorially, Fig. 2.15 shows the
mechanism. The question is: what is the reaction rate? Suppose the rate r is a
function of the reactant concentrations X and Y, or r = r(X, Y). Clearly we should
have r(X, 0) = r(0, Y) = 0. Because the surface r(X, Y) is identically zero along
the X-axis, any order X partial derivative is zero, or rX(X, 0) = rXX(X, 0) = rXXX(X,
0) = ···; similarly, rY(0, Y) = rYY(0, Y) = rYYY(0, Y) = ···. Therefore, by Taylor’s
theorem,
where the dots denote higher-order terms. Letting k = rXY(0, 0), we have shown
that the rate of the reaction (5.1) is given to leading order by
(5.2) 
This is called the law of mass action. Simply put, the rate of reaction is
proportional to the product of the concentrations of the two reactants. The
constant k is called the rate constant and it is written over the arrow in the
reaction as
Remark 2.24
As it turns out, the rate constant is not constant, so rate constant is a bit of a
misnomer. Chemical reactions almost always involve heat, and the rate of
reaction depends strongly upon temperature. The usual assumption is that
where R is the gas constant, T is temperature in degrees Kelvin, and E′ is the
activation energy which is related to the amount of energy required for the two
reactants to ‘get over the potential hump’ to form the product. This rate is called
the Arrhenius rate. In our discussion, however, we assume that the temperature
is close to constant and the rate constant is independent of temperature. So, the
reactions are isothermal.

Remark 2.25
We point out at this time the importance of the mass action assumption in other
areas of dynamics. For example, in disease ecology we are interested in
measuring the rate that susceptible individuals become infected. The simple
argument is this. If there are S susceptible individuals and I infected individuals,
then the number of possible contacts is SI. Only a fraction c of those contacts
will occur, and of those only a fraction β will result in an infection. We conclude
that the rate of infection is r = bSI, where b = βc. This elementary reasoning led
to the mass action principle, and in an analog of the reaction kinetics, we have
or, a susceptible and an infective combine to make a product (in this case, two
infectives) at rate r = bSI. The constant b is the transmission coefficient. A term
of this form occurs often in modeling disease dynamics. Disease dynamics is
discussed in a later section.
Remark 2.26
In a different context, if X is the number of prey and Y is the number of
predators, then XY is the total number of possible contacts. Only a fraction a of
these will result in a kill, so the rate of predation is aXY, again mass action
dynamics. This model was used earlier in describing predator-prey interactions
in the Lotka–Volterra equations.
Example 2.27
Now let’s return to the main discussion of the binary chemical reaction
In terms of the reaction rate we can write differential equations for the
concentrations X, Y, and Z. The rates that X is consumed, Y is consumed, and Z is
created are given by
By adding the first two equations, it follows that
or X − Y = constant = c. This expression is called a conservation law. If at time t

= 0 we have initial conditions
then c = X0 − Y0. Without loss of generality we can assume c > 0, or the initial
concentration of X is larger than that of Y; this means Y will limit the reaction.
The conservation law gives us a way to reduce the differential equations to a
single equation in one unknown. Obviously we get
We can rewrite this equation in the familiar form
which is the logistic equation with intrinsic growth rate kc and carrying capacity
c. So, the reaction evolves to the stable equilibrium X = c, and Y goes to zero.
Notice also that X + Z = constant = X0 (another conservation law), and so Z goes
to X0 − c = Y0. This makes sense—all of Y is converted to Z during the course of
the reaction.
Example 2.28
Chemists tell us that reactions also go the opposite way. That is, the product can
break down into its reactant constituents. Therefore, instead of a single forward
reaction, we write
The reversible reaction (the second one) is a unimolecular reaction with a
different rate and different rate constant than the first. Again, as in radioactive
decay, the rate is proportional to Z, the concentration of the reactant. We are
using subscripts on the reactions and the rates to denote which reaction. Usually
we write these two reactions in shorthand as
The rate equations are now

We are using the property that for a system of reactions, the rates add. For
example, in the first reaction X is consumed at rate r1 and in the second X is
recreated at rate r−1. Immediately, by combining these rate equations, we get the
conservation laws
The constants c1 and c2 are determined from the initial conditions, for example,
X − Y = c1 = X(0) − Y(0). These expressions allow us to write a single differential
equation for X,
This is a manageable equation and can be analyzed in the standard way with a
phase line diagram (see Chapter 1). We make one important observation, that X
is in equilibrium when the right side is zero, or
Of course, from the dynamical system Y and Z will also be in equilibrium. This
last expression can be written
where the ratio K of the backward to forward rate constants is called the
equilibrium constant. (The X, Y, and Z values on the left are the equilibrium
concentrations.)
A law of mass action applies to more general reactions than stated above. As a
first step toward a generalization, consider a reaction of the form
where m molecules of X react with n molecules of Y to produce p molecules of
W and q molecules of Z. The law of mass action in this case states that the rate of
the reaction is proportional to XmYn, or

The differential equation for the chemical species X is then
because m molecules are consumed during the reaction. Similarly,
As we observed, conservation laws are important in reducing the number of
variables. In this case, we see, for example, that
where the constant of motion is expressed in terms of the initial concentrations.
Consider the following variation of the previous reaction,
Here, the species X appears as a reactant and as a product. The rate depends only
on the reactant concentrations and is the same. But m molecules of X are
consumed, while p are created. To fix the idea assume p > m. Then the net gain
in X is m − n molecules (which is negative). The rate law for X is then
Example 2.29
The reaction with accompanying rate law,
(5.3) 
has dynamics
Independent conservation laws are
Remark 2.30
Now we make an extremely important observation. In the last reaction (5.3) we
ask the likelihood of three molecules (2 X’s and a Y) colliding simultaneously to
react. The answer is that it is very small. In the chemical world, reactions are
either unitary (unimolecular) or binary (bimolecular) involving either one or two

reactants; such reactions are called elementary reactions; a higher-order, or
nonelementary, reaction is unlikely. This means that a reaction like
is not the correct mechanism for the formation of water. The actual mechanism
involves a large number of intermediate, elementary reactions. Sometimes these
intermediate reactions are not even known because intermediate species may be
very short lived and cannot be observed. Determining the mechanism is a
significant problem in chemistry. For nonchemical reactions, it is certainly
possible to have tertiary reactions—e.g., in disease transmission two susceptible
individuals can interact with a single infective at the same time.
Example 2.31
As a warm-up for a general statement of the law of mass action we consider two
unitary reactions with their accompanying rates:
Then the equations for the species (rate equations) are
This can be written in matrix form as
In abbreviated vector notation
where

The matrix S is called the stoichiometric matrix, and it holds the coefficients of
the reaction rates; r is the rate vector.
Now we generalize and state the general law of mass action.
Definition 2.32
Consider m different chemical species Xi, i = 1, 2,…, m and n reactions of the
form
where the stoichiometric coefficients aij and bij are nonnegative integers. Notice
that the aij is the stoichiometric coefficient of the reactant Xi in the jth reaction,
and bij is the stoichiometric coefficient of the product Xi in the the jth equation.
The reaction rates are given by
Then the equation for the jth species is
Letting S = (sij) = (bij − aij) denote the stoichiometric matrix, the rate equations
are expressed by
As we noted, conservation laws enable us to reduce the number of differential
equations expressed by the rate laws. For a small number of equations and
unknown species concentrations we can find conservation laws easily by
inspection. For large systems it is harder. Therefore, let us derive a vector
equation that gives the the conservation laws. A conservation law has the form
where the ci is a set of constants to be determined. Then, in terms of the initial

concentrations,
Letting c = (c1,…, cm)T, this equation can be written in vector form as
Multiplying the rate equation by cT we can write
But
Therefore,
Because this holds for all rates, we have, by independence,
(5.4) 
Consequently, the coefficients c in the conservation law are all the linearly
independent solutions of the homogeneous system (5.4). In an exercise you are
asked to show that this expression does indeed lead to a conservation law. For
those who have studied linear algebra, c  ker ST, where ker denotes the kernel,
or nullspace, of ST.
Example 2.33
Returning to the last example, the coefficients ci in a conservation law must
satisfy
The coefficient can be reduced to row echelon form
Therefore, −c1 + c2 = 0 and c3 = 0. Therefore, the solution is given by

There is only one independent solution, or the kernel is one dimensional. The
only conservation law is
EXERCISES
1. Make a generic plot of the Arrhenius rate k vs. temperature T,
where E′ is a large constant. Assume R and k0 are positive constants.
2. For each of the following, find the rates of the reactions and the
dynamical equations for the chemical constituents. Find all the independent
conservation laws and reduce the dynamics to the fewest number of
equations possible. Find the equilibria and sketch a phase line or phase
plane, whichever is relevant. Sketch sample time series plots.
a) X 
 2Y.
b) 
c) A + X 
 2X. Assume a surplus of A and its concentration is constant.
(This is an autocatalytic reaction where X stimulates its own production.)
3. Consider the reaction
where X is used up in the production of C. Assume A and B are held
constant. Find the reaction kinetics and determine conditions when the
equilibrium X* = 0.
4. Consider the hypothetical kinetics model
where a and b are positive constants. Show that a saddle-to-node bifurcation
occurs when b = −a ± 
.

5. Consider the reactions
Write down the kinetic equations and reduce them to two equations for X
and Y. Analyze the equations in the phase plane and state your conclusions.
6. Show that solutions of equation (5.4), STc = 0, do indeed give a
conservation law d/dt(cTX) = 0.
7. (Chemical oscillator) For many years chemists thought that all reactions
tended to an equilibrium state monotonically and could not oscillate. Then,
in the 1950s, B. Belousov showed that certain reactions could oscillate for
long time periods. This was signalled in a mixture by continual periodic
changes in its color from yellow to clear. His initial work was not accepted
readily by colleagues, but later it was noticed and he was awarded a Nobel
Prize for his work. Now, many reactions have been found that exhibit
oscillations. In this exercise we explore a system that closely approximates
the concentrations of two chemical constituents in the real system:
a) Show that the equilibrium is x* = a/5, y* = 1 + (a/5)2.
b) Sketch the nullclines and the the direction field.
c) Show that the equilibrium is a repeller if
d) Show that there is a closed orbit (limit cycle) bounded by the
rectangular box bounded by x = 0, y = 0, x = , y = , where  is the
point where the x-nullcline crosses the and 
 = 1 + 
2. (Use the
Poincaré–Bendixson theorem.)
e) Perform numerical calculations and sketch the phase diagram in the
cases a = 10, b = 4 and a = 10, b = 2.

2.5.2 Enzyme Kinetics
Many reactions in metabolic pathways are catalyzed by enzymes. Enzymes are
proteins that can react with molecular substrates to break them down; they
significantly speed the reaction and lower the activation energy. A model
enzyme reaction that serves as a prototype to many other biological processes is
the one shown in Fig. 2.16 and whose chemical equations are
Figure 2.16 Schematic of an enzyme reaction.
Here, one molecule of a substrate S reacts with an enzyme E to produce an
intermediate complex C, and then the final product P is produced, along with the
recovery of the enzyme. The formation of the complex C is a rapid reaction, and
usually the initial concentration of the enzyme is small compared to the
substrate. Initially, we assume S(0) = S0, E(0) = E0, P(0) = 0, and C(0) = 0. By
the law of mass action, the rate equations are (we are using τ for real time)
Notice that once C is determined, then P is determined by direct integration; P
does not enter the first three equations. Thus, there are only three equations for
S, E, and C. We can instantly find the conservation laws by observation; they are

These equations allow us to eliminate E and reduce the rate equations to a
system of two nonlinear equations for S and C. These equations are
Quasi-Steady State. These equations have exceedingly interesting behavior
that we examine in Chapter 3. However, at present we can take the chemist’s
approach and gain a few insights to the behavior. The key idea is to use the fact
that some reactions are very fast compared to others and therefore can
equilibrate quickly, essentially being in steady state.
As we stated above, it is observed that the reaction S + E 
 C, where the
complex is formed, is very fast. For a typical enzyme reaction, the order of the
rate constants may be
(5.5) 
where we are measuring concentrations in molarity M (1 M = 6.02(10)23
molecules per liter), and time in seconds. These quantities confirm the dominant
speed of complex formation. The quasi-steady state assumption is the
assumption that the second reaction equilibrates so quickly that we can take,
approximately, dC/dτ = 0. Thus, in the quasi-steady state, the second equation
reduces to an algebraic equation
where
is called the Michaelis-Menten constant. We can now substitute this expression
back into the S equation to obtain the simple equation
This equation for S can actually be solved implicitly (separate variables). More
useful, however, the speed of the reaction, which can be measured, is defined to
be the rate that the product is formed, or

This basic equation is the Michaelis-Menten law. Note that it is a type 2
functional response. See Fig. 2.17. Looking at the graph of V vs. S shows that V
‘saturates’ at the value Vm (or, lim V = Vm); this is the limiting or maximum
speed of the reaction. The value S = Vm gives V = 1/2Vm, half of the saturation
value; Km is called the half-saturation. Although many biochemists may be
satisfied with this analysis, it lacks details. In Chapter 3 we give a more careful
analysis of this important model using singular perturbation theory.
Figure 2.17 Velocity V of an enzyme reaction, which is the rate the product P is
formed.
Example 2.34
(MATLAB code) With initial concentrations S0 = 10−3, E0 = 10−5, we invite the
reader to run the following MATLAB code to obtain plots of the evolution of the
Michaelis–Menten system. (Note kb  k−1.)
function MichaelisMenten
global k1 kb k2 S0 E0 C0
k1=10^9; kb=10^5; k2=10^3; S0=10^(−3); 
E0=10^(−5); C0=0;
tspan=[0 200*10^(−7)];
[T,Y] = ode15s(@kinetics,tspan,[S0 C0]);
plot(T,Y(:,1)/S0,’-’,T,Y(:,2)/E0,’-.’)
xlabel(’time (sec)’,’Fontsize’,14), 

ylabel(’concentration’,’Fontsize’,14),
ylim([0 1.1])
function dy = kinetics(t,y)
global k1 kb k2 S0 E0 C0
dy = zeros(2,1);
dy(1) = -k1*E0*y(1)+(kb+k1*y(1)·*y(2);
dy(2) = k1*E0*y(1)-(k2+kb+k1*y(1)).*y(2);
EXERCISE
1. Sketch a generic phase plane diagram of the Michaelis-Menten system
What are the equilibria? What happens to the concentrations after a long
time?

2.6 Pathogens
It takes only a small amount of reading to realize that viruses and other
pathogens have been one of the great sources in human history of misery and
death; disease from pathogens that enter the body more than rivals the effects of
war. In this section we introduce models of viral infections, epidemics of
common infections in populations, and macroparasite infections.

2.6.1 Virus Infections
A virus is a particle (virion) consisting of a center containing genetic material
(e.g., RNA or DNA) surrounded by a protein coat. On the coating are chemical
sites called antigens, which are macromolecules used for identification. Viruses
have genetic material, but they cannot replicate by themselves. Thus, they hijack
target cells in an organism and use the machinery of the cell to reproduce
themselves.
As a beginning model we look at the primary phase of a viral infection; then
we consider the effects on the immune system. Let V be the population of
virions, X be the population of target, or healthy cells, and Y the population of
infected cells. We can model the interactions using reaction kinetics and mass
action as in previous sections. The model is
(6.1) 
(6.2) 
(6.3) 
The parameters dx, dy, dv are mortality rates; their inverses are average lifetimes.
The parameter a is the rate that virus cells multiply, and β is the infection rate;
finally, c is the rate that uninfected target cells are produced by the body.
The table shows the dimensions and ranges of the parameters. There are six
parameters and scaling is important. It is clear there are four possible time
scales. We can scale X and Y by the virus-free steady-state value for X, namely,
We choose a dimensionless time as

In dimensionless variables the equations become
where
Using values in the table we have
Note that ε is small compared to the other parameters.
In most infection models, we can identify a basic reproduction number,
usually denoted by R0, that is key in determining if an infection will be
established or will die out. For simple epidemics, the value of R0 is easily
understood: it is the number of secondary infections caused by a single infection
in the population. Hence, it is the rate of infection multiplied by the average time
an infective has the disease. Here, for a virus infection, it is more complicated
and we can regard R0 as the expected number of virions that one virion gives rise
to in a virus-free population. One virion infects target cells at the rate βX for a
time of 1/dv, and each infected cell gives rise to virions at the rate a for an
average time of 1/dy. Because X = c/dx is, on average, the number of target cells,
we have
which is the basic reproduction number R0. Notice that it turned up in the
dimensionless formulation.
We can analyze this model in the usual way. There are two equilibria and they
are easily found to be (0, 1, 0) and (1 − R−10, R−10, α−1 (1 − R−10)). The former is
the virus-free state, and the latter, a positive endemic state, exists only for R0 > 1.
A straightforward calculation shows that (0, 1, 0) is unstable, and (1 − R−1
0, R
−1
0, α−1 (1 − R−1
0)) is stable for R0 > 1. We leave this as an exercise for the
reader.

Observe that the parameter ε is small, and therefore we prefer to make the
quasi-steady-state assumption and set dv/dt = 0 to get v = αy. This reflects the
fact that free virus populations turn over at a much faster rate than the
populations of uninfected and infected cells. Under this assumption, the model
becomes
This two-dimensional system is easily analyzed. The equilibria are
and the nullclines are
(6.4) 
(6.5) 
There are two cases: R0 < 1 and R0 > 1. The two phase plane plots in Fig. 2.18
show the nullclines in each case, equilibria, and sample orbits. When R0 < 1
there is only one equilibrium, located on the x axis, and it is an attractor. As R0
increases the x nullcline crosses the vertical y nullcline at R0 = 1, and the
equilibrium bifurcates into two equilibria for R0 > 1. The equilibrium on the x
axis becomes unstable (a saddle) and the new positive equilibrium is an attractor.
Figure 2.18 Phase plane diagrams for (6.5)–(6.5).

Now we confirm the stability of the equilibria. The Jacobian matrix is
At (1,0),
We have tr J = −1 + α(R0 − 1) and det = -α(R0 − 1). Therefore (1,0) is stable for
R0 < 1 and unstable when R0 > 1. At the other equilibrium,
Clearly, tr J < 0 and det J = α(R0 − 1) > 0 when R0 > 1, and so the positive
equilibrium is stable.
In summary, for R0 > 1 the target cell population is reduced by the disease until
each virion gives rise to exactly one new virion, or x*R0 = 1.

2.6.2 Immune System Response
The body’s defense against a pathogen invasion is the immune system. You may
have seen a speeded-up video of a dead animal going through decay; it is an
impressive sight, and it shows what happens when there is no immune response
—the dead animal is completely consumed. Our immune system prevents this by
mounting a battle to fight invading organisms.
The immune system has three main tasks:
– To recognize the invading organism
– To mobilize weapons that intercept and kill the invader
– To remember the invader so that future infections of similar kind may be
destroyed
The immune system response is by killer cells Z produced at a constant rate η
with natural mortality dz. Thus,
We assume they kill infected cells at rate ρYZ, so the Y equation (6.3) becomes
These two equations for Y and Z couple with (6.2) and (6.3) to give the immune
system model. We scale these equations as before, along with
Then we get, in summary,
(6.6) 
(6.7) 
where
With the addition of killer cells from the immune system response, the basic
reproduction number R0 should decrease. Motivated by its appearance in the

steady state, we calculate the nonzero equilibrium for the scaled model
(6.7)–(6.7). Setting the derivatives equal to zero, at equilibrium we have
Letting
the positive equilibrium is
This shows that a positive endemic state occurs when R′0 > 1. Alternately, we
could have shown that the other equilibrium, v* = 0, x* − 0, y* = 0, z* = 1,
becomes unstable at R′0 > 1. Further, we observe that the killer cells can clear the
virus when the immune system response rate satisfies
Example 2.35
(MATLAB code) We invite the reader to sketch solution profiles using the
MATLAB code below along the same values of the parameters in the
nonimmune system response, and
function killercells
global dx dy dv dz k gam beta rho eta
dx=0.1; dy=0.5; dv=5; dz=5; k=100; gam=10^5; 
beta=2*10^(−7); rho=0.1; eta=75; tend=75;
   tspan=[0 tend];
x0=gam/dx; y0=0; v0=1; z0=eta/dz; %actual 
initial values initial values
[T,Y] = ode15s(@killer, tspan, [x0 y0 v0 
z0]);
subplot(1,2,1), 
plot(T,Y(:,2)/10^6,’-’,T,Y(:,3)/10^6,’r’)
xlabel(’days’,’Fontsize’,14), 

ylabel(’concentrations × 10 ^ 
6’,’Fontsize’,14),
title(’infected (dashed), virus (red)’, 
‘Fontsize’, 12)
subplot(1,2,2), 
plot(T,Y(:,1)/x0,’-’,T,Y(:,4)/z0,’g’)
ylim([0 1.1])
xlabel(’days’,’Fontsize’,14), ylabel(’scaled 
cell concentrations’,’Fontsize’,14),
title(’killer (green), target (solid)’, 
‘Fontsize’, 12)
function der = killer(t,y)
global dx dy dv dz k gam beta rho eta
der = zeros(4,1);
der(1) = gam-dx*y(1)-beta*y(1)*y(3);
der(2) = beta*y(1)*y(3)-dy*y(2)-
rho*y(2)*y(4);
der(3) = k*y(2)-dv*y(3);
der(4) = eta-dz*y(4);
EXERCISES
1. The simplest model of a virus is by a density-dependent logistic growth
law,
where v is the virus population. The rate of growth is r, and the virus
population clearly rate is a. The parameter T represents target cell limitation.
Show that if r < a the virus fails to establish an infection. What happens if r
> a?
2. The simplest model of antigenic dynamics describes a virus that is
opposed by a specific immune response. Let v be the population of virions
and x the magnitude of the immune response. Then the model is
Describe the dynamics of the model.

3. Verify the equilibria and their stability for the basic model (6.2), (6.3), and
(6.3) as discussed in the text.
4. Use a numerical differential equation solver (e.g., MATLAB) to obtain a
numerical solution to (6.2)–(6.3) with the values of the parameters given in
the table. For initial conditions take X(0) = 106, Y(0) = 0, and V(0) = 1.
5. In an HIV infection, reverse transcriptase inhibitors are drugs that prevent
the infection of new cells, or β = 0.
What are the long time dynamics of the virus?
6. Protease inhibitors for HIV are drugs that prevent infected cells from
producing additional infected virions. Interpret and analyze the model
where W is the population of uninfected virions produced.
The last two exercises are adapted from Britton (2003).

2.6.3 Epidemics in Populations
In the last section we presented a simple model of a virus infection and how the
immune system attempts to clear it. A virus is one example of a microparasitic
disease. Examples of viruses are common diseases like measles, chicken pox, the
flu, whooping cough, and so forth. Other microparasitic diseases are bacterial
based (TB) and protozoon infections such as malaria. These diseases are
characterized by either having the disease, or not having it. Other infections are
macroparasitic. That is, they are caused by multi-celled organisms, such as
nematodes (schistosomiasis), tapeworms, or mites (ticks), and they have a more
complex, longer life cycle in and out of their hosts. These diseases generally
depend on the parasite load, or the degree of the infection.
Diseases like these can be studied on a population level in terms of
susceptible, infected, and recovered individuals, and that is the topic of this
section. Efforts to connect the microbiology of diseases and the population level
effects is an active area of study in epidemiology.
We consider a simple epidemic model where, in a fixed population of size N,
the function I = I(t) represents the number of individuals that are infected with a
contagious illness and S = S(t) represents the number of individuals that are
susceptible to the illness but not yet infected. We also introduce a removed, or
recovered, class where R = R(t) is the number who cannot get the illness because
they have recovered permanently, are naturally immune, or have died. We
assume N = S(t) + I(t) + R(t), and each individual belongs to only one of the
three classes. Observe that N includes the number who may have died. The
evolution of the illness in the population can be described as follows. Infectives
communicate the disease to susceptibles with a known infection rate; the
susceptibles become infectives who have the disease a short time, recover (or
die), and enter the removed class. Our goal is to set up a model that describes
how the disease progresses with time. These models are called SIR models.
In this model we make several assumptions. First, we work in a time frame
where we can ignore demographic effects such as births and immigration. We
assume that the population mixes homogeneously, where all members of the
population interact with one another to the same degree and each has the same
risk of exposure to the disease. Think of measles, the flu, or chicken pox at an
elementary school. We assume that individuals get over the disease quickly, so
we are not modeling tuberculosis, AIDS, or other long-lasting or permanent

diseases. More complicated models can be developed to account for these factors
and all sorts of others, such as vaccination, sex, disease carriers (or vectors), the
possibility of reinfection, and so on.
The disease spreads when a susceptible comes in contact with an infective. A
reasonable measure of the number of contacts between susceptibles and
infectives is S(t)I(t). For example, if there are five infectives and twenty
susceptibles, then one hundred contacts are possible. However, not every contact
results in an infection. We use the letter a to denote the transmission
coefficient, or the fraction of those contacts that usually result in infection. For
example, a could be 0.02. The parameter a is the product of two effects, the
fraction of the total possible number of encounters that occur, and the fraction of
those that results in infection. The constant a has dimensions time−1 per
individual. The quantity aS(t)I(t) is the infection rate, or the rate at which
members of the susceptible class become infected. Observe that this model is the
same as the law of mass action in chemistry where the rate of chemical reaction
between two reactants is proportional to the product of their concentrations.
Therefore, if no other processes are included, we would have
Remark 2.36
Mass action kinetics is only one possibility for selecting the effective encounter
rate. More generally, we could model the infection process by
where f(I) is the force of infection. For example, f could be a saturating function
of I, leveling off to a constant value as I gets large. For mass action kinetics, f(I)
= aI.
However, as individuals get over the disease, they become part of the removed
class R. The recovery rate r is the rate that infected individuals get over the
disease; thus, the rate of removal is rI(t). Importantly, the parameter r is
measured in time−1 and 1/r can be interpreted as the average time to recover.
Therefore, using the prime notation for derivative, we modify the last set of
equations to obtain
(6.8) 

(6.9) 
(6.10) 
This is the SIR model. We do not need equation (6.10) for R because R can be
determined directly from R = N − S − I. At time t = 0 we assume there are I0
infectives and S0 susceptibles, but no one yet removed. Thus, initial conditions
are
(6.11) 
and S0+I0 = N. SIR models are compartmental models and are commonly
diagrammed as boxes labeled S, I, and R with arrows indicating the rates at
which individuals progress from one compartment to the other. An arrow
entering a compartment represents a positive rate and an arrow leaving a
compartment represents a negative rate.
Remark 2.37
Notice that this model can be deduced from simple chemical reaction kinetics
Other disease models can also be regarded as reaction kinetics as well.
As was the case with a virus, we can identify a priori a basic reproduction
number that tells us if the disease will take hold or die out. If we introduce a
single infective in a population N, then the rate that this individual infects others
is approximately aN; the average time that this infected person has the disease is
1/r. Thus, the expected number of individuals this person infects is
Hence, R0 is the expected number of secondary infections produced by a single
infective.
A qualitative analysis helps us understand how an SIR epidemic evolves. To
carry out this analysis, we work in dimensionless variables. Instead of using the
number of individual in each class, we use the fraction of individuals in each
class. And we scale time by r−1, the average time infected. Therefore, let
The equations easily become
(6.12) 

Further, x + y + z = 1 and x(0) + y(0) = 1. The dynamics take place in a simplex
in the xyz plane: x, y, z ≥ 0, x + y + z ≤ 1. In the xy plane, where we work, this is
the triangle x + y ≤ 1 in the first quadrant. The initial condition x(0) = x0, y(0) =
y0 lies on the line x + y = 1. We track an orbit x = x(t), y = y(t) starting on the line
x + y = 1. Note that x′ is always negative so an orbit always moves to the left,
decreasing x. Because x′ = y(R0x − 1), we see that infectives increase if x > 1/R0,
and infectives decrease if x < 1/R0. The vertical line x = 1/R0 is the y-nullcline.
This information gives us the direction field. There are two cases, when R0 > 1
and R0 < 1, or when the y nullcline is to the left of x = 1 or to the right of x = 1.
We show the case R0 > 1 in Fig. 2.19. (The other case is an exercise for the
reader.) If the initial condition is at point P, the orbit goes directly down and to
the left until it hits y = 0, and the disease dies out. If the initial condition is at
point Q, then the orbit increases to the left, reaching a maximum at x = 1/R0.
Then it decreases to the left and ends at a point x* on y = 0.
Figure 2.19 The xy phase plane showing two orbits in the case R0 > 1. One starts
at P and and one starts at Q, on the line x + y = 1. The second shows an epidemic
where the number of infectives increases to a maximum value and then
decreases to zero; x* represents the number of individuals that do not get the
disease.
We can obtain an equation for the orbits of (6.12) in a simple manner. If we
divide the x and y equations in (6.12) we obtain

Integrating both sides with respect to S yields
where C is an arbitrary constant. Using the initial conditions to determine C, we
obtain the orbit equation
This orbit can be graphed with a calculator or computer algebra system, once
parameter values are specified. Making such plots shows what the orbits looks
like, as plotted in Fig. 2.19. Observe that an orbit cannot intersect the y axis, so it
must intersect the x axis for x > 0, or at the root x* of the nonlinear equation
This root represents the fraction of individuals that do not get the disease. Once
parameter values are specified, a numerical approximation of x* can be obtained.
In all cases, the disease dies out because of lack of infectives.
Finally, we can obtain an implicit differential equation for z = z(τ) by dividing
the x and z equations in (6.12). We get
Therefore,
and, again using (6.12),
(6.13) 
This equation cannot be integrated in closed form, but we can obtain
approximations in special cases.
EXERCISES
1. (SIS epidemic) In an SIS epidemic susceptibles get infected, and then
infectives recover to become susceptible again. Using r and a as the
recovery and infection rates, as in the SIR model, formulate equations for an

SIS epidemic and find the basic reproduction number R0. Assume a constant
population N. Show that the disease dies out if R0 < 1 and the disease is
endemic, or continually present, if R0 > 1. Discuss the dynamics in each
case.
2. In a population of 200 individuals, 20 were initially infected with an
influenza virus. After the flu ran its course, it was found that 100 individuals
did not contract the flu. If it took about 3 days to recover, what was the
transmission coefficient a? What was the average time that it might have
taken for someone to get the flu?
3. In a population of 500 people, 25 have the contagious illness. On the
average it takes about 2 days to contract the illness and 4 days to recover.
How many in the population will not get the illness? What is the maximum
number of infectives at a single time?
4. Beginning with the SIR model, assume that susceptible individuals are
vaccinated at a constant rate v. Formulate the model equations and describe
the progress of the disease if, initially, there are a small number of infectives
in a large population.
5. (SIRS disease) Beginning with the SIR model, assume that recovered
individuals can lose their immunity and become susceptible again after an
average recovery period of time μ. That is, the rate recovered individuals
become susceptible is μR. Draw a compartmental diagram and formulate a
two-dimensional system of model equations for S and I. Find the two
equilibria. By sketching the nullclines and vector field, show that the
disease-free equilibrium is unstable. Can you identify the type of
equilibrium. Can you determine whether the nonzero equilibrium (the
endemic state) is stable or unstable? What does it appear to be?
6. In an SIR epidemic with R0 > 1, where R0Z is small for all time, use
(6.13) to show, approximately,
Note that this is the logistic equation. Sketch a graph of the rate of removal
dz/dτ vs. τ. For example, in the plague, the removal rate closely
approximates the death rate.
7. (SIR with Demographics) We can include demographics in the SIR model
by assuming individuals are born into the susceptible class at the constant

rate b and all classes die at the per capita rate μ. The model is
Assume the population is a constant N, and μ is much smaller that r.
a) What constraint does the assumption of a constant population have on
the parameters in the system?
b) Nondimensionalize the model by taking s = S/N, y = I/N, z = R/N, and
using the time scale r−1.
c) Working in the xy plane, find the nullclines and the equilibria and their
stability. Consider all cases and write a few sentences discussing the
results.

2.6.4 Macroparasitic Infections
Some diseases are not contagious or spread by contact, such as in the flu,
measles, or sexually transmitted diseases. For example, in the case of malaria a
mosquito is a carrier, or vector, in the transmission of the disease to different
individuals. Malaria affects more individuals than any other disease, especially
in tropical areas. Other vector diseases transmitted by mosquitos include West
Nile virus, dengue and yellow fever, and filariasis.
The malaria carrier is the female Anopheles mosquito. The infectious agent is a
protozoan parasite that is injected into the blood stream by a mosquito when she
is taking a blood meal, which is necessary for the development of her eggs. The
parasite develops inside the host and produces gametocytes which then can be
taken up by another biting mosquito.
We present a simplified, classic model of R. Ross, who developed it in 1911,
and which was modified by G. Macdonald in 1957. Sir Ronald Ross is given
credit for first understanding and modeling the complex malarial cycle, for
which he was awarded the Nobel Prize. (See R. M. Anderson & R. M. May,
(1991), the standard reference for diseases, both micro- and macroparasitic.)
We assume that human victims have no immune system response and that they
eventually recover from the disease without dying. We assume the mosquito and
the human populations are approximately constant. Thus, the disease dynamics
are fast compared to the dynamics of either hosts or mosquitos. Let HT and MT
be the total number of hosts (humans) and total number of mosquitos,
respectively, in a fixed region; both are assumed to be constant. Further, let
First we consider the hosts. The rate that a human gets infected depends on the
number of mosquitos, the biting rate a (bites per time), and b, the fraction of
bites that lead to an infection of a human, and the probability of the mosquito
encountering a susceptible human. The fraction of susceptible humans is (HT −
H)/HT. Finally, we assume that the per capita recovery rate of infected humans is
r, where 1/r is the average time to recovery. Therefore, the rate equation for H is

which is the infection rate minus the recovery rate. Notice that the infection rate
is proportional to the product of susceptible hosts and infected mosquitos, which
should remind the reader of the simple SIR model studied earlier. The rate that
mosquitos become infected from biting an infected host depends on a and c (the
fraction of bites by an uninfected mosquito of an infected human that causes
infection in the mosquito). If μ is the per capita death rate of infected mosquitos,
then
and H/HT is the probability of encountering an infected human. Note that the
infection rate is jointly proportional to MT − M, the number of susceptible
mosquitos, and the number of infected hosts, again a reminder of mass action
kinetics. We can simplify these equations by introducing
which are the fractions of the populations that are infected. Then the governing
equations become
(6.14) 
(6.15) 
For convenience, we define the parameters
Then
(6.16) 
(6.17) 
We can analyze this geometrically in the phase plane in the usual way. Setting
the right sides equal to zero gives the nullclines
(6.18) 

(6.19) 
Note that h = m = 0 is always an equilibrium. Also, the h nullcline is concave up
with a vertical asymptote at h = 1; the m nullcline is concave down with a
horizontal asymptote at m = 1. The two possibilities are shown in Fig. 2.20
Figure 2.20 Two cases in the malaria model: the nullclines cross only at the
origin, and the nullclines cross at the origin and at a nonzero state. The second
case occurs only when the slope of the mosquito nullcline exceeds the slope of
the host nullcline at the origin, or β/μ > r/α.
There will be a nonzero equilibrium when these nullclines cross. In that case,
the slope of the m nullcline must be steeper than the slope of the h nullcline at h
= 0. Calculating these slopes from (6.18)–(6.19), respectively, we get
Therefore, for a nonzero equilibrium, we must have
(6.20) 
We show that this nonzero equilibrium is asymptotically stable, which means
the infectious populations approach a nonzero endemic state. First, however,
let’s interpret this result (6.20) in terms of the actual parameter values. We can
rewrite (6.20) as

The first factor is the rate of infection of mosquitos (ac) times their average
lifetime (1/μ). The second factor is the rate of infection of human hosts
(abMT/HT) times the average length of infection (1/r).
Figure 2.21 Orbits in the two cases. In case 1 the origin is a stable node and the
infection dies out. In case 2, the origin is unstable and the disease becomes
endemic.
We can easily check the stability of the nonzero equilibrium by sketching the
direction field. Or, we can approach this analytically by finding the equilibrium
and checking the Jacobian matrix. Setting (6.18) equal to (6.19) and solving for
h gives
Then,
Notice that this is a viable equilibrium only if the numerator is positive, which is
the same as the condition (6.20). Otherwise it is not viable and the origin, (0, 0),
is the only equilibrium. The Jacobian matrix at an arbitrary (h, m) is easily
Clearly
The trace is negative in both cases. The determinant μr − αβ is positive when
condition (6.20) holds and negative when it does not hold. Therefore, the origin

(extinction of the disease) is asymptotically stable when it is the only
equilibrium, and it is unstable when a nonzero equilibrium exists.
For the nonzero equilibrium
The trace is negative and
by condition (6.20), and after considerable simplification. Thus, (h*, m*) is
asymptotically stable.
EXERCISES
1. Using data in the table below, calculate solution curves for the malaria
model. Demonstrate both cases (extinction and coexistence).
Table 2.1 Sample malaria parameter values
Parameter Name
Sample Value
MT/HT
population ratio
2
a
biting rate
0.2–0.5 per day
b
effective bites infecting humans
0.5
c
effective bites infecting mosquitos 0.5
r
recovery rate
0.01–0.05 per day
μ
mortality rate
0.05–0.5 per day
2. (Malaria) In this exercise develop and analyze a simplified version of the
malaria model under the condition that r is much less than μ.
a) Beginning with (6.14)–(6.15), nondimensionalize these equations by
rescaling time by taking τ = μt. Obtain
where
b) Assuming ε is very small, neglect the εh term in the host equation and

draw the phase portrait. Include the equilibria, nullclines, direction field,
and a local stability analysis for the equilibria.
c) For the simplified dimensionless model in part (b), with the values
given in Table 1, specifically, a = 0.5, r = 0.01, and μ = 0.5, use a
numerical method to draw time series plots of h and m for various initial
initial conditions.
3. (Schistosomiasis) Schistosomiasis is a macroparasitic disease of humans
caused by trematode worms, or blood flukes. Trematodes form a class of
flatworms in the phylum Platyhelminthes, or helminths. Schistosomiasis is
highly prevalent in tropical areas, and it is estimated that hundreds of
millions of people suffer from it. The life cycle of the parasite is complicated
and involves a definitive host (humans), where maturity and reproduction
occur, and a secondary host (e.g., snails), in which the intermediate larval
stage develop into infectious larva (cercaria) that are shed and then
penetrate, or are ingested, by the definitive host, completing the cycle.
Figure 2.22 is a diagrammatic flow chart summarizing the principle
processes. In this exercise we formulate a simplified model for the number
of infected snails I and the average worm burden m in the host (the total
number of mature worms divided by the constant number of hosts).
Figure 2.22 Diagrammatic life cycle of schistosome parasites in humans.
The dynamics for parasites in a host is

(6.21) 
where a is the rate that infected snails produce the free-living stage larva that
infects the host through ingestion or skin penetration. The factor I/N is the
fraction of snails infected, and μ is the per capita mortality rate. The
dynamics for the number of infected snails is
(6.22) 
where δ represents the per capita mortality rate of the infected snails, N–I, is
the number of susceptible snails, and C(m) is proportional to the rate of
production of eggs by (paired) female adult worms; the latter includes the
rate of hatching of the eggs that eventually produce the infecting, free-living
larva. Thus, C contains several rates in the life cycle and perhaps
complicated dependence on the fraction of paired females. The function
C(m) is a type 3 functional response (a sigmoid or S-shaped curve).
a) Find the nullclines and sketch them in the mI plane. In terms of the
bifurcation parameter a, show three cases: a < a*, a = a*, a > a*, for
some critical value a* to be determined.
b) For each case in (a), indicate graphically the equilibria and the
direction field. Can you conclude anything about stability?
c) Find an equation, or equations, that determine a*.
d) Sketch a bifurcation diagram of the equilibria m* vs. the parameter a.
Indicate the stability of each branch.
e) Interpret the results in a biological sense.
4. Gregarines (Ph. Apicomplexa) are parasites that infect various insects,
such as flour beetles, damselflies, and dragonflies. They are among the most
evolutionary long-lived, widespread parasite species. In a freshwater
environment, for example, the adult stage of the parasite (the trophont)
infects the intestine of the larval stage of the host insect species; adults pair
and produce a gametocyst, which is shed back into the water environment.
The gametocyst undergoes gametogenesis and eventually releases a large
number of infective oocysts that are ingested by the insects, and the life
cycle proceeds again. Assuming a constant number of hosts and letting P
and C be the average number (per host values) of adults and oocysts,
respectively, the governing dynamics for the parasite life cycle is

where d and μ are mortalities, b is the production rate of adults, and α and γ
are parameters in a type 3 contact rate. (Details can be found in J. D. Logan,
J. Janovy, & B. E. Bunker, 2012. Ecological Modelling 233, 31–40.)
a) In terms of the fitness parameter R defined by
show that the equilibria are given by P = C = 0 (extinction) and
b) Sketch phase plane diagrams for R < 1, R = 1, and R > 1.
c) Describe the bifurcation and sketch a bifurcation diagrams of the
equilibrium C vs. the parameter R.

REFERENCES AND NOTES
An elementary account of systems of differential equations in the spirit of this
book can be found in the author’s text, Logan (2010); most elementary texts
have a good treatment of systems. At the next level we refer to notable treatment
by Strogatz (1994), which discusses applications to physics, biology,
engineering, and chemistry. A readable theoretical text is Kelley and Peterson
(2010).
Models of epidemiology and chemical kinetics can be found in many books.
Chemical engineering texts are especially good for reactions. Epidemiology is an
extensive area of study. The tome by Anderson and May (1989) is a definitive
treatment. Additional discussions, less extensive, can be found in Edelstein-
Keshet (1987), Brauer and Castillo-Chavez (2001), Murray (2002), Britton
(2003), Nowak (2006), Wodarz (2007), Brauer et al. (2008), and Logan and
Wolesensky (2009).
Brauer, F. & Castillo-Chavez, C. 2001. Mathematical Models in Population
Biology and Epidemiology, Springer, New York.
Brauer, F., van den Driessche, P., & Wu, J., eds. 2008. Mathematical
Epidemiology, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 1945, Springer, New York.
Britton, N. J. 2003. Essential Mathematical Biology, Springer-Verlag, New York.
Edelstein-Keshet, L. 1987. Mathematical Models in Biology, Random House,
New York (reprinted by SIAM, Philadelphia 2000).
Kelley, W. G. & Peterson, A. C. 2010. The Theory of Differential Equations, 2nd
ed., Springer, NY.
Logan, J. D. 2010. A First Course in Differential Equations, 2nd ed., Springer,
NY.
Logan, J. D. & Wolesensky, W. R. 2009. Mathematical Methods in Biology, John
Wiley & Sons, New York.
Murray, J. D. 2002. Mathematical Biology, 3rd ed., Springer-Verlag, New York.
Nowak, M. A. 2006. Evolutionary Dynamics, Belnap Press of Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA.
Strogatz, S. H. 1994. Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos, Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA.

Wodarz, D. 2007. Killer Cell Dynamics, Springer-Verlag, New York.
1 Henri Poincaré (1860–1934) was called the last universalist. His
contributions to nearly all areas of mathematics made him one of the most
influential mathematicians of all time. His work in dynamical systems paved
the way to modern topological methods.
2 This fact follows from an application of the chain rule, 
.

Chapter 3
Perturbation Methods and Asymptotic
Expansions
Equations arising from mathematical models usually cannot be solved in exact
form. Therefore, we often resort to approximation and numerical methods.
Foremost among approximation techniques are perturbation methods.
Perturbation methods lead to an approximate solution to a problem when the
model equations have terms that are small. These terms arise because the
underlying physical process has small effects. For example, in a fluid flow
problem the viscosity may be small compared to advection, or in the motion of a
projectile the force caused by air resistance may be small compared to gravity.
These low-order effects are represented by terms in the model equations that,
when compared to the other terms, are negligible. When scaled properly, the
order of magnitude of these terms is represented by a small coefficient
parameter, say ε. By a perturbation solution we mean an approximate solution
that is the first few terms of a Taylor-like expansion in the small parameter ε.
Perturbation methods apply to differential equations (ordinary and partial),
algebraic equations, integral equations, and all of the other types of equations we
encounter in applied mathematics. Their importance cannot be overstated.

3.1 Regular Perturbation
To fix the Idea, consider a differential equation
(1.1) 
where t is the independent variable, I is the time interval, and y is the dependent
variable. The appearance of a small parameter ε is shown explicitly. In general,
initial or boundary conditions may accompany the equation, but for the present
we ignore auxiliary conditions. To denote that ε is a small parameter we write
This means that ε is small compared to unity, a glib phrase in which no specific
cutoff is explicitly defined; certainly 0.001 
 1, but 0.75 is not small compared
to unity. The previous remarks also apply to equations with a large parameter λ,
since in that case we may introduce ε = 1/λ, which is small.
By a perturbation series we understand a power series in ε of the form
(1.2) 
The basis of the regular perturbation method is to assume a solution of the
differential equation of this form, where the functions y0, y1, y2,… are found by
substitution into the differential equation. The first few terms of such a series
form 
an 
approximate 
solution, 
called 
a 
perturbation 
solution 
or
approximation; usually no more than two or three terms are taken. Generally,
the method will be successful if the approximation is uniform; that is, the
difference between the approximate solution and the exact solution converges to
zero at some well-defined rate as ε approaches zero, uniformly on I. These ideas
are made precise later. We emphasize in this context that there is no advantage in
taking a priori a specific value for ε. Rather, we consider ε to be an arbitrary
small number, so that the analysis will be valid for any choice of ε. Of particular
interest in many problems is the behavior of the solutions as ε → 0. Generally,
the perturbation series is a valid representation for ε < ε0 for some undetermined
ε0.
The term y0 in perturbation series is called the leading order term. The terms
εy1, ε2y2,… are regarded as higher-order correction terms that are expected to be
small. If the method is successful, y0 will be the solution of the unperturbed
problem

in which ε is set to zero. In this context (1.1) is called the perturbed problem.
Therefore, when a model equation is obtained in which a small parameter
appears, it is often regarded as a perturbed equation where the term(s) containing
the small parameter represent small perturbations or changes from some basic
unperturbed problem. It is implicit that the unperturbed equation should always
be solvable so that the leading-order behavior of the solution can be found. One
frequently encounters problems of this sort whose solutions are facilitated by the
fact that the governing equation, the boundary condition, or the shape of the
region in higher-dimensional problems is not too different from those of a
simpler problem.
For a variety of reasons, sometimes the naive perturbation approach described
above fails. This failure often occurs when the leading order problem is not well
posed, or its solution is invalid on all parts of the domain, for example, when
there are multiple time or spatial scales. Then we must modify the approach.
These modifications, which are myriad, belong to the class of singular
perturbation methods.
In preparation for the discussion in this chapter and the exercises, we list the
Taylor series expansions of several common functions, along with the interval of
convergence, where restricted.

The basic idea of the perturbation method is easily illustrated by investigating
a simple algebraic equation for which we know the solution.
Example 3.1
Consider the quadratic equation
where ε is a small positive parameter. We are not assigning a value to the
parameter; all we know is that it is small in some sense. Of course we can solve
this equation exactly. But here we illustrate a different method. Assume a
solution in the form of a perturbation series x = x0 + x1ε + x2ε2 + ···, where the
dots represent higher-order terms and the xk are to be determined. Substituting
into the equation gives
Expanding out and collecting terms in powers of ε gives
Equating the coefficients to zero yields
Solving,
Therefore, we obtain two approximate solutions
Each is a three term perturbation approximation. We can calculate as many terms
as we wish, and often computer algebra systems can be quite useful in
performing all the tedious algebra. The approximate solution can be compared to
the exact solution obtained by the quadratic formula. We have
The radical can be expanded by the binomial formula to get

Therefore, the quadratic formula leads to
which is the same as the three-term perturbation approximation. The point is that
we can carry out this procedure to obtain approximate solutions even when we
cannot solve a problem exactly.

3.1.1 Motion in a Resistive Medium
Next consider a differential equation. Suppose a body of mass m, initially with
velocity V0, moves in a straight line in a medium that offers a resistive force of
magnitude av − bv2, where v = v(τ) is the velocity of the object as a function of
time τ, and a and b are positive constants with b 
 a (meaning b is much
smaller than a). Therefore, the nonlinear part of the force is assumed to be small
compared to the linear part. The constants a and b have units of force per
velocity and force per velocity-squared, respectively. By Newton’s second law,
the equation of motion is
We first non-dimensionalize the problem. Later we see why we must do this. A
velocity scale is the maximum velocity, which is clearly V0, because the object
must slow down in the resistive medium. If the small nonlinear term bv2 were
not present, then the velocity would decay like e−aτ/m; therefore, the
characteristic time is m/a. Introducing dimensionless variables
the problem becomes
(1.3) 
(1.4) 
where
Here ε 
 1 means that the dimensionless parameter ε is small compared to unity.
We do not specify exactly what that means; certainly ε = 0.01 satisfies the
condition, but ε = 0.8 probably does not. But the relationship defines precisely
what we mean when we say glibly that b 
 a (a and b do not have the same
dimensions and really cannot be compared); we mean bV0 is much smaller than
a.
Equation (1.3) is a Bernoulli equation and can be solved exactly by making the
substitution w = y−1, and then integrating the resulting linear equation to obtain

Equation (1.3) is a slightly altered or perturbed form of the linear equation
(1.5) 
which is easily solved by y = e−t. Because the nonlinear term εy2 is small, the
function e−t appears to be a good approximate solution to the problem, provided
the scaling was performed correctly. The exact solution can be expanded in a
Taylor series in powers of ε as
(1.6) 
If ε is small, the leading order term y0 = e−t is a reasonable approximation, but it
does not include any effects of the nonlinear term in the original equation.
To obtain an approximate solution by a perturbation method we employ a
perturbation series. That is, we assume that the solution of (1.3) is representable
as
(1.7) 
which is a series in powers of ε. The functions y0, y1, y2,… are determined by
substituting (1.7) into both the differential equation (1.3) and initial condition,
and then equating coefficients of like powers of ε. Thus,
which, when coefficients are collected, gives a sequence of linear differential
equations
The initial condition leads to
or the sequence of initial conditions
Therefore we have obtained a recursive set of linear initial value problems for y0,
y1, y2,…. These are easily solved in sequence to obtain

Notice that y1 and y2 are the first- and second-order correction terms to the
leading-order approximation y0 = e−t, which is in agreement with (1.6).
Therefore we have obtained a three-term perturbation solution
(1.8) 
which is an approximation of yex and includes nonlinear effects due to the term
εy2 in the original differential equation. The approximate solution is the first
three terms of the Taylor expansion of the exact solution. In this problem the
exact solution is known (this is rare), and we can compare it to the approximate
solution. The error in the approximation (1.8) is given by the difference
for bounded functions m1, m2,…. For a fixed positive t the error approaches zero
as ε → 0 as the same rate as ε3 goes to zero. In fact, one can show that the
convergence is uniform as ε → 0 in the interval 0 ≤ t < ∞. Convergence notions
are explored further after an additional example.

3.1.2 Nonlinear Oscillations
In the last example the regular perturbation method led to a satisfactory result,
consistent with intuition and that compared favorably with the exact solution. In
the next example the procedure is the same, but the result does not turn out
favorably; it is the first signal of the need to modify the regular perturbation
method and develop a singular perturbation method. In this example, the
perturbation approximation will be valid only if certain restrictions are placed on
the interval of time that the solution evolves.
Consider a spring-mass oscillator where a mass m is connected to a spring
whose restoring force has magnitude ky+ay3, where y is the displacement of the
mass, measured positively from equilibrium, and k and a are positive constants
characterizing the stiffness properties of the spring. Assume that the nonlinear
portion of the restoring force is small in magnitude compared to the linear part,
or a 
 k. If, initially, the mass is released from a positive displacement A, then
the motion is given by a function y = y(τ) of time τ, which satisfies Newton’s
second law
(1.9) 
and the initial conditions
(1.10) 
Because of the presence of the nonlinear term ay3, this problem cannot be solved
exactly. Because a 
 k, however, a perturbation method is suggested.
From the projectile problem in Chapter 1 the reader should have gained
enough skepticism not to just neglect the term ay3 and proceed without scaling.
Therefore, to properly analyze the problem we seek appropriate time and length
scales that reduce the problem to dimensionless form. The constants in the
problem are k, a, m, and A have dimensions
An obvious choice is to scale y by the amplitude A of the initial displacement. To
scale time τ we argue as follows. If the small term ay3 is neglected, then the
differential equation is my″ = −ky, which has periodic solutions of the form cos 

 with a period proportional to 
 Hence, we choose 
 to be
the characteristic time and introduce dimensionless variables t and u via
Under this change of variables the differential equation (1.9) and initial
conditions become (overdots denote derivatives with respect to t)
(1.11) 
where
is a dimensionless small parameter. It now becomes clear exactly what the
assumption of a small nonlinear restoring force means; the precise assumption is
aA2 
 k. Equation (1.11) is the Duffing equation.
We attempt a solution of the form
where u0, u1,… are to be determined. Substituting into the differential equation
and initial conditions, and equating coefficients of like powers of ε, gives a
sequence of linear initial value problems
(1.12a) 
(1.12b) 
The leading-order solution to (1.12a) is easily found to be
Then the problem (1.12b) for the first correction term becomes
We employ the trigonometric identity cos 3t = 4 cos3 t − 3 cos t to write the
differential equation as
(1.13) 
which can be solved by standard methods. The general solution of the
homogeneous equation ü1 + u1 = 0 is c1 cos t + c2 sin t. A particular solution can
be found by the method of undetermined coefficients and is of the form

Substituting up into the differential equation and equating like terms gives 
, and E = −. Thus the general solution of (1.13) is
Applying the initial conditions on u1 gives
Therefore, in scaled variables, a two-term approximate solution takes the form
(1.14) 
The leading-order behavior of the approximate solution is cos t, which is an
oscillation. The second term, or the correction term, however, is not necessarily
small. For a fixed value of time t the term goes to zero as ε → 0, but if t itself is
of the order of ε−1 or larger as ε → 0, then the term −t sin t will be large. Such a
term is called a secular term. Therefore, we expect that the amplitude of the
approximate solution will grow with time, which is not consistent with the
physical situation or with the exact solution. Indeed, it is easy to show that the
exact solution is bounded for all t > 0. In this approximation, the correction term
cannot be made arbitrarily small for t in (0, ∞) by choosing ε small enough. And,
it is not possible to improve on (1.14) by calculating additional higher-order
terms; they too will contain secular terms that will not cancel the effects of the
lower-order terms. One may legitimately ask, therefore, if there is any value at
all in the approximate solution (1.14). In a limited sense the answer is yes. If we
restrict the independent variable t to a finite interval [0, T], then the correction
term ε [1/2(cos 3t − cos t) − 3/8t sin t] can be made arbitrarily small by choosing
ε sufficiently small, for any t  [0, T]. So, as long as the coefficient 3εt/8 is kept
small by limiting t and taking ε small, the leading-order term cos t is a
reasonable approximate solution.

3.1.3 The Poincaré-Lindstedt Method
A straightforward application of the regular perturbation method on the initial
value problem (1.11) for the Duffing equation led to a secular term in the first
correction that ruined the approximation unless t was restricted. In this section
we present a method to remedy this type of singular behavior, which occurs in
all cases of periodic motion. The key to the analysis is to recognize that not only
does the correction term grow in amplitude, but it also does not correct for the
difference between the exact period of oscillation and the approximate period 2π
of the leading order term cos t. Over several oscillations the error in the period
increases until the approximation and the actual solution are completely out of
phase. To confirm this, the reader should use a software system to solve (1.11)
numerically, and then plot the numerical solution vs. cos t.
The idea of the Poincaré–Lindstedt method is to introduce a distorted time
scale in the perturbation series. In particular, we let
(1.15) 
where
(1.16) 
with
(1.17) 
Here ω0 has been chosen to be unity, the frequency of the solution of the
unperturbed problem. Under the scale transformation (1.16) the initial value
problem (1.11) becomes
(1.18) 
(1.19) 
where u = u(τ) and prime denotes differentiation with respect to τ. Substituting
(1.15) and (1.17) into (1.18) and (1.19) gives
and
Collecting coefficients of powers of ε gives
(1.20) 

(1.21) 
The solution of (1.20) is
Then the differential equation in (1.21) becomes
(1.22) 
Because cos τ is a solution to the homogeneous equation, the cos τ term on the
right side of the equation leads to a particular solution with a term τ cos τ, which
is a secular term. The key observation is that we can avoid a secular term if we
choose
Then (1.22) becomes
which has the general solution
The initial conditions on u1 lead to
Therefore, a first-order, uniformly valid perturbation solution of (1.11) is
where
The Poincaré–Lindstedt method is successful on a number of similar problems,
and it is one of a general class of multiple scale methods. Generally, it works
successfully on some (not all) equations of the form
These are problems whose leading order is oscillatory with frequency ω0. The
basic technique is to change variables to one with a different frequency, τ = (ω0
+ ω1ε + …)t, and then assume u = u(τ) is a perturbation series in ε. The constants

ω0, ω1,… are chosen at each step to avoid the presence of secular terms in the
expansion.

3.1.4 Asymptotic Analysis
With insight from the previous examples we define some notions regarding
convergence and uniformity. We observed that substitution of a perturbation
series into a differential equation does not always lead to a valid approximate
solution. Ideally we would like to say that a few terms in a truncated
perturbation series provides, for a given ε, an approximate solution for the entire
range of the independent variable t. Unfortunately, as we have seen, this is not
always the case. Failure of this regular perturbation method is the rule rather
than the exception.
To aid the analysis of approximate solutions we introduce some basic notation
and terminology that permits the comparison of two functions as their common
argument approaches some fixed value. These comparisons are called order
relations.
Let f(ε) and g(ε) be defined in some neighborhood (or punctured
neighborhood) of ε = 0. We write
(1.23) 
if
and we write
(1.24) 
if there exists a positive constant M such that
for all ε in some neighborhood (punctured neighborhood) of zero. The
comparison function g is called a gauge function.
In this definition, ε → 0 may be replaced by a one-sided limit or by ε → ε0,
where ε0 is any finite or infinite number, with the domain of f and g defined
appropriately. If (1.23) holds, we say f is little oh of g as ε → 0, and if (1.24)
holds we say f is big oh of g as ε → 0. Common gauge functions are g(ε) = εn for
some exponent n, and g(ε) = εn(ln ε)m for exponents m and n. The statement f(ε)
= O(1) means f is bounded in a neighborhood of ε = 0, and f(ε) = o(1) means f(ε)
→ 0 as ε → 0. If f = o(g), then f goes to zero faster than g goes to zero as ε → 0,
and we write f(ε) 
 g(ε). The following examples illustrate a few methods to

prove order relations.
Example 3.2
Verify ε2 ln ε = o(ε) as ε → 0+. By L’H pital’s rule,
Example 3.3
Verify sin ε = O(ε) as ε → 0+. By the mean value theorem there is a number c
between 0 and ε such that
Hence |sin ε| = |ε cos c| ≤ |ε|, because |cos c| ≤ 1. An alternate argument is to note
that (sin ε)/ε → 1 as ε → 0+. Because the limit exists, the function (sin ε)/ε must
be bounded for 0 < ε < ε0, for some ε0. Therefore |(sin ε)/ε| ≤ M, for some
constant M and sin ε = O(ε).
The order definitions may be extended to functions of ε and another variable t
lying in an interval I. First we review the notion of uniform convergence. Let h(t,
ε) be a function defined for ε in a neighborhood of ε = 0, possibly not including
the value ε = 0 itself, and for t in some interval I, either finite or infinite. We say
if the convergence to zero is at the same rate for each t  I; that is, if for any
positive number η there can be chosen a positive number ε0, independent of t,
such that |h(t, ε)| < η for all t  I, whenever |ε| < ε0. In other words, if h(t, ε) can
be made arbitrarily small over the entire interval I by choosing ε small enough,
then the convergence is uniform. If merely limε→0 h(t0, ε) = 0 for each fixed t0 
I, then we say that the convergence is pointwise on I.
To prove limε→0 h(t, ε) = 0 uniformly on I it is sufficient to find a function
H(ε) such that |h(t, ε) ≤ H(ε) holds for all t  I, with H(ε) → 0 as ε → 0. To prove
that convergence is not uniform on I, it is sufficient to produce a   I such that
|h( , ε)| ≥ η for some positive η, regardless of how small ε is chosen.
Let f(t, ε) and g(t, ε) be defined for all t  I and all ε in a (punctured)
neighborhood of ε = 0. We write

if
(1.25) 
pointwise on I. If the limit is uniform on I, we write f(t, ε) = o(g(t, ε)) as ε → 0,
uniformly on I. If there exists a positive function M(t) on I such that
for all t  I and ε in some neighborhood of zero, then we write
If M(t) is a bounded function on I, we write
The big oh and little oh notations permit us to make quantitative statements
about the error in a given approximation. We can make the following definition.
A function ya(t, ε) is a uniformly valid asymptotic approximation to a function
y(t, ε) on an interval I as ε → 0 if the error E(t, ε)  y(t, ε) − ya(t, ε) converges to
zero as ε → 0 uniformly for t  I. We often express the fact that E(t, ε) is little oh
or big oh of εn (for some n) as ε → 0 to make an explicit statement regarding the
rate at which the error goes to zero, and whether or not the convergence is
uniform.
Example 3.4
Let
The first three terms of the Taylor expansion in powers of ε provide an
approximation
The error is
For a fixed t the error can be made as small as desired by choosing ε sufficiently
small. Thus E(t, ε) = O(ε2) as ε → 0. If ε is fixed, however, regardless of how
small, t may be chosen large enough so that the approximation is totally invalid.
Thus, the approximation is not uniform on I = [0, ∞). Clearly, by choosing t = 1/
ε we have E(1/ε, ε) = e−1 − , which is not small. We may not write E(t, ε) =

O(ε2) as ε → 0 uniformly on [0, ∞).
Example 3.5
(Transcendentally small) Some functions cannot be gauged against
polynomials. Consider f(ε) = e−1/ε for small, positive ε. From calculus, this
function does not have a Taylor expansion about ε; further,
because exponentials decay faster than polynomials grow. This means
for any n = 0, 1, 2,…. Thus, e−1/ε goes to zero faster than any positive power of
ε. In this case we say the function f(ε) is transcendentally small.
The difficulty of these definitions with regard to differential equations is that
the exact solution to the equation is seldom known, and therefore a direct error
estimate cannot be made. Consequently, we require some notion of how well an
approximate solution satisfies the differential equation and the auxiliary
conditions. For definiteness consider the differential equation in (1.1). We say
that an approximate solution ya(t, ε) satisfies the differential equation (1.1)
uniformly for t  I as ε → 0 if
uniformly on I as ε → 0. The quantity r(t, ε) is the residual error, which
measures how well the approximate solution ya(t, ε) satisfies the equation.
Example 3.6
Consider the initial value problem
Substituting the perturbation series y = y0 + εy1 + ··· gives the initial value
problem
for the leading-order term y0. It is easily found that y0(t) = ln(t + 1), and hence

Thus r(t, ε) = O(ε) as ε → 0, but not uniformly on [0, ∞). On any finite interval
[0, T], however, we have |ε ln(t + 1)| ≤ ε ln(T + 1), and so r(t, ε) = O(ε) as ε → 0
uniformly on [0, T].
Specifically, the regular perturbation method produces an asymptotic
expansion
for which an approximate solution can be obtained by taking the first few terms.
Such an expansion in the integral powers of ε, that is, 1, ε, ε2,…, is called an
asymptotic power series. In some problems the expansion may take the form
in terms of the sequence 1, ε1/2, ε ε3/2,…. In yet other problems the required
expansion must have the form
The type of expansion depends on the problem. In general, we say a sequence of
gauge functions {gn(t, ε)} is an asymptotic sequence as ε → 0, t  I, if
for n = 0, 1, 2,…. That is, each term in the sequence tends to zero faster than its
predecessor, as ε → 0. Given a function y(t, ε) and an asymptotic sequence {gn(t,
ε)} as ε → 0, the formal series
(1.26) 
is said to be an asymptotic expansion of y(t, ε) as ε → 0, if
for every N. In other words, for any partial sum the remainder is little oh of the
last term. If the limits just cited are uniform for t  I, then we speak of a uniform
asymptotic sequence and uniform asymptotic expansion. In most cases the
sequence {gn(t, ε)} is of the form of a product, gn(t, ε) = yn(t)ϕn(ε), as in the
previous examples. The notation

often denotes an asymptotic expansion.
The formal series (1.26) need not converge to be valuable. The value of such
expansions, although perhaps divergent, is that often only a few terms are
required to obtain an accurate approximation, whereas a convergent Taylor series
may yield an accurate approximation only if many terms are calculated.
A rather obvious question arises. If a given approximate solution ya(t, ε)
satisfies the differential equation uniformly on t  I, is it in fact a uniformly valid
approximation to the exact solution y(t, ε)? A complete discussion of this
question is beyond our scope, but a few remarks are appropriate to caution the
reader regarding the nature of this problem. Probably more familiar is the
situation in linear algebra where we consider a linear system of equations Ax =
b. Let xa be an approximate solution. A measure of how well it satisfies the
system is the magnitude |r| of the residual vector r defined by r = Axa − b. If r =
0, then xa must be the exact solution . But if |r| is small, it does not necessarily
follow that the magnitude |e| is small, where e = 
 − xa is the error. In ill-
conditioned systems, where det A is close to zero, a small residual may not imply
a small error. A similar state of affairs exists for differential equations. Therefore
one must proceed cautiously in interpreting the validity of a perturbation
solution. Numerical calculations or the computation of additional correction
terms may aid in the interpretation. Often a favorable comparison with
experiment leads one to conclude that an approximation is valid.
EXERCISES
1. In a spring–mass problem assume that the restoring force is −ky and that
there is a resistive force numerically equal to 
2, where k and a are
constants 
with 
appropriate 
units. 
With 
initial 
conditions 
, determine the correct time and displacement scales
for small damping and show that the problem can be written in
dimensionless form as
where ε 
 aA/m is a dimensionless parameter and prime denotes the
derivative with respect to the scaled time .
2. Consider the initial value problem

Find a two-term perturbation approximation for 0 < ε 
 1 and compare it
graphically to a six-term Taylor series approximation (centered at t = 0)
where ε = 0.04. Use a numerical differential equation solver to find an
accurate numerical solution and compare.
3. Write down an order relation (big oh or little oh) that expresses the fact
that e−t decays to zero faster that 1/t2 as t → ∞, and prove your assertion.
4. Let
Expand f in powers of ε up to O(ε2).
5. Verify the following order relations:
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
g) 
h) 
i) 
j) 
6. Consider the algebraic equation ϕ(x, ε) = 0, 0 < ε 
 1, where ϕ is a
function having derivatives of all order. Assuming ϕ(x, 0) = 0 is solvable to
obtain x0, show how to find a three-term perturbation approximation of the
form x = x0 + x1ε + x2ε2. What condition on ϕ is required to determine x1 and
x2? Find a three-term approximation to the roots of exp(εx) = x2 − 1.
7. Find a three-term approximation to the real solution of (x + 1)3 = εx.
8. Use the Poincaré-Lindstedt method to obtain a two-term perturbation
approximation to the following problems:

9. To find approximations to the roots of the cubic equation
why is it easier to examine the equation
Find a two-term approximation to this equation.
10. Consider the algebraic system
In the first equation ignore the apparently small first term 0.01x and obtain
an approximate solution for the system. Is the approximation a good one?
Analyze what went wrong by examining the solution of the system
11. In elementary physics courses it is often stated that for the pendulum
equation
if the oscillations θ = θ(t) are small, then sin θ ≈ θ and the equation can be
approximated by
In what sense is this true? In what sense is this false?
12. In Section 1.3 we obtained the initial value problem
governing the motion of a projectile. Use regular perturbation theory to
obtain a three-term perturbation approximation. Up to the accuracy of ε2
terms, determine the value tm when h is maximum. Find hmax 
 h(tm) up
through order ε2 terms.
13. A mass m is attached to an aging spring that exerts a force Fs = −kye−rt,
where k and r are positive constants, and y = y(t) is the displacement from
equilibrium. The system is also immersed in a medium that exerts a drag

force Fd = −ay’, where a is a positive constant. Initially, the mass is
displaced to position y0 and released.
a) Formulate an initial value problem that governs the motion of the mass
on the spring.
b) Make a table of the parameters in the problem and state their
dimensions.
c) Non-dimensionalize the problem in the simplest way in the case that
the constant k is very small. Use y0 as the characteristic length. Denote
the small dimensionless parameter by ε.
d) Use a perturbation method to obtain a two-term approximation (up to
O(ε)) to the scaled problem.
e) In mks units, take m = 0.01, a = 0.01, r = 0.07, k = 0.0001. Plot an
accurate numerical approximation and the two-term approximation on the
same set of axes, and comment on the accuracy of the approximation.
14. Consider the boundary value problem
Obtain an approximation by considering the equation
for small ε and then setting ε = 3. How accurate is the approximation?
15. Find the exact solution to the initial value problem
Next, use perturbation to find an approximate solution. What went wrong?
Explain why regular perturbation doesn’t work.
16. Consider the problem
Find the leading order approximation and derive initial value problems for
the O(ε) and O(ε2) terms. (Do not solve.) Write down the exact solution of
the problem.
17. Consider the scaled pendulum problem

a) Apply the regular perturbation method to find a two-term expansion.
Show that the correction term is secular and comment on the validity of
the approximation.
b) Show that the exact period of oscillation is
c) Show that 
 Find an expansion for the frequency
ω.
18. Consider the initial value problem y″ = εty, 0 < ε 
 1, y(0) = 0, y’(0) = 1.
Using regular perturbation theory obtain a three-term approximate solution
on t ≥ 0. Does the approximation satisfy the differential equation uniformly
on t ≥ 0 as ε → 0+?
19. Consider the boundary value problem
a) Use regular perturbation to find the leading-order behavior y0(t).
b) Compute an upper bound for |Ly0| on 1 ≤ t ≤ e when ε = 0.01. Can you
conclude that y0 is a good approximation to the exact solution?
20. Find a two-term perturbation solution of
21. A wildebeest starts at t = 0 from a point (a, b) in the xy-plane and moves
along the line x = a. A lion, starting from the origin at t = 0 begins the chase,
always running in a direction pointing at the wildebeest. The differential
equation for the lion’s path y(x) is
where ε is a small parameter giving the ratio of the speed of the wildebeest
to the speed of the lion.

a) Find a leading order perturbation approximation. Based upon your
answer, do you expect the lion to catch the wildebeest?
b) Find the equation for a correction term in the perturbation
approximation, but do not solve.

3.2 Singular Perturbation
3.2.1 Algebraic Equations
As we observed in Section 2.1 for the Duffing equation, a straightforward
application of the regular perturbation method failed because secular terms
appeared in the expansion, making the approximation nonuniform for large
times. We remedied this by adjusting the frequency of oscillations using a scale
transformation. Now we indicate a different type of singular behavior, first for a
simple algebra problem.
Example 3.7
Solve the quadratic equation
This equation can be solved exactly, of course, but our goal is to illustrate the
failure of the regular perturbation method. Observe that the equation is a slight
alteration of the unperturbed equation
which has solution x = −, and the unperturbed problem (linear) is fundamentally
different from the original problem (quadratic). If we attempt regular
perturbation by substituting the perturbation series
then we obtain, after setting the coefficients of like powers of ε equal to zero, the
sequence of equations
Hence, 
, 
and 
we 
obtain 
a single
perturbation solution
What happened to the other solution? Regular perturbation assumed a leading
term of order unity, and it is not surprising that it recovered only one root, of

order unity. The other root could be different order, either large or small. To find
the second root we examine the three terms, εx2, 2x, and 1, of the equation more
closely. Discarding the εx2 gave the root close to x = −, and in that case, the
term εx2 is small compared to 2x and 1. So it is reasonable to ignore εx2; the
apparent small term is indeed small. For the second root, εx2 may not be small
(because x may be large). Two cases are possible if one term is to be neglected
from the equation to make a simplification. (i) εx2 and 1 are the same order and
2x 
 1, or (ii) εx2 and 2x are the same order and both are large compared to 1.
In case (i) we have x = O(1/
); but then 2x 
 1 could not hold because 2x
would be large. This in inconsistent. In case (ii) we have x = O(1/ε); hence εx2
and 2x both are of order 1/ε and both are large compared to 1. Therefore case (ii)
is consistent and the second root is of order 1/ε, which is large. This provides a
clue to a scaling. Let us choose a new variable y of order 1 defined by
With this change of variables the original equation becomes
Now the principle of proper scaling holds—each term has a magnitude defined
by its coefficient. Assuming a regular perturbation series
and substituting into the last equation, we obtain
Hence y0 = −2, y1 = 1/2,…, giving
or
as the second root. In summary, the roots are different order, and one expansion
does not reveal both.
The reasoning we used in this example is called dominant balancing. We
examine each term carefully and determine which ones combine to give a
dominant balance. In the next section we show type of balancing argument

applies equally well to differential equations.
First, however, before continuing with additional examples, we review the
procedure for finding roots of complex numbers. This is useful in solving the
exercises.
Example 3.8
(Roots of complex numbers) Let z0 be a fixed, given, complex number. We are
interested in finding its nth roots, or solving the equation
(2.1) 
for z. Here, n ≥ 2 is a positive integer. From the fundamental theorem of algebra
we know that (2.1) has n roots. First, write z and z0 in polar form,
where r and r0 are the moduli (distances from the origin in the complex plane),
and θ and θ0 are the arguments (the angles measured counterclockwise from the
positive real axis between 0 and 2π.) Then,
Thus, 
 and 
. The latter
follows from the 2πi periodicity of eiθ. Thus, the n roots of z0 are
(2.2) 
where k = 0, 1, 2,…, n − 1. (Only n of the roots in (2.2) are different.)
If z0 = 1, then the nth roots of 1 are called the roots of unity. These are spaced
uniformly around the unit circle in the complex plane.
Example 3.9
The three roots of the equation z3 = 1 are given by (2.2) as
Thus, the roots are
Example 3.10
Find a leading order approximation of the four roots to the equation

where 0 < ε 
 1. When ε = 0 we get only a single root x = − 1, which is order 1.
To determine the leading order of the other roots we use dominant balancing. If
the first and third terms balance then x = O(ε−1/4), which is large; this is
inconsistent. If the first and second terms balance, then x = O(ε−1,/3), which is
large compared to 1; this case is consistent. Therefore, we re-scale according to y
= ε1/3x, which gives
To leading order y4 − y = 0, giving y = 1, e2πi/3, e−2π/i3. We discarded y = 0
because that corresponds to x = 0, which is clearly not a valid approximation to
the equation. Consequently, the leading order behavior of the four roots is
Three of them are large. We can obtain higher-order correction terms using the
perturbation series

3.2.2 Differential Equations
Now we encounter a different type of singular behavior from that caused by the
appearance of secular terms in the perturbation series. Often, with a perturbation
series, some problems do not even permit the calculation of the leading-order
term because the perturbed problem is of totally different character from the
unperturbed problem.
Consider the boundary problem
(2.3) 
and assume a naive perturbation series of the form
Substitution into the differential equation gives
Equating the coefficients of like powers of ε to zero gives a sequence of
problems
The boundary conditions force
Therefore, we have obtained a sequence of boundary value problems for y0, y1,
…. The leading-order problem is
(2.4) 
Already we see a difficulty. The differential equation is first-order, yet there are
two conditions to be satisfied. The general solution of the equation is
(2.5) 
Application of the boundary condition y0(0) = 0 gives c = 0, and so y0(x) = 0.
This function cannot satisfy the boundary condition at x = 1. Conversely,
application of the boundary condition y0(1) = 1 in (2.5) gives c = e, and so

(2.6) 
This function cannot satisfy the condition at x = 0. Therefore we are at an
impasse; regular perturbation fails at the first step.

3.2.3 Boundary Layers
Careful examination of the preceding problem shows what went wrong and
points the way toward a correct, systematic method to obtain an approximate
solution. First of all, we should have been suspicious from the beginning. The
unperturbed problem, found by setting ε = 0, is
(2.7) 
This problem is of a different character than the perturbed problem (2.3) in that it
is first order rather than second. Because the small parameter multiplied the
highest derivative in (2.3), the second derivative term disappeared when ε was
set to zero. This type of phenomenon signals in almost all cases the failure of the
regular perturbation method.
Equation (2.3), a linear equation with constant coefficients, can be solved
exactly to get
(2.8) 
A look at the graph of the solution of (2.3) reveals the reason for the difficulty.
See Fig. 3.1. We observe that y(x) is changing very rapidly in a narrow interval,
called the boundary layer, near the origin, and more slowly in the larger
interval, called the outer layer away from the origin. One spatial scale does not
describe the variations in both layers. Rather, two spatial scales are indicated,
one for each zone. It is instructive and revealing to compute the derivatives of y
and estimate the size of the terms in the equation. An easy calculation shows
Figure 3.1 The exact solution (2.8) showing a narrow layer near x = 0 where
rapid changes are occurring.

First we examine the second derivative. Suppose ε is small and x is in the
narrow boundary layer near x = 0. For definiteness assume x = ε. Then
Thus y″ is very large inside this narrow band, and therefore the term εy″ is not
small, as would be anticipated in a regular perturbation calculation; in fact εy″ =
O(ε−1). We see again that terms that appear small in a differential equation are
not always necessarily small. The problem is that the differential equation (2.3),
as it stands, is not scaled properly for small x, and a rescaling must occur in the
boundary layer if correct conclusions are to be drawn. For values of x away from
the boundary layer, the term εy″ is indeed small. For example, if x = 1/2, then
Consequently, in the outer layer εy″ is small and may be safely neglected. The

reader may deduce similar conclusions regarding the first derivative term.
This calculation suggests that in the outer region, the region away from the
boundary layer, the leading-order problem (2.7) obtained by setting ε = 0 in the
original problem is a valid approximation provided we take only the right (x = 1)
boundary condition. Thus,
(2.9) 
This is consistent with the exact solution (2.8). For, if ε is small, then e−1 − e−1/ε
≈ e−1 and y may be approximated by
(2.10) 
For x of order 1 we have e1−x/ε ≈ 0, and so
The approximate solution (2.9), which is valid in the outer region, is called the
outer approximation and is plotted in Fig. 3.2.
Figure 3.2 The exact solution (2.9) and inner and outer approximations.
What about an approximate solution in the narrow boundary layer near x = 0?
From (2.10), if x is small, then

(2.11) 
This approximate solution, which is valid only in the boundary layer where rapid
changes are taking place, is called the inner approximation and is denoted by
yi(x); it is also plotted in Fig. 3.2.
In this problem we have the advantage of knowing the exact solution, and as
yet we have little clue how to determine the inner solution if the exact solution is
unknown. The key to the analysis in the boundary layer is rescaling, as in the
polynomial equations examined earlier. In the layer, the term εy″ in the
differential equation is not small, as it appears. Consequently, we must rescale
the independent variable x in the boundary layer by selecting a small spatial
scale that will reflect rapid and abrupt changes and will force each term in the
equation into its proper form in the rescaled variables, namely as the product of a
coefficient representing the magnitude of the term and a term of order unity. In
the next section we develop a general procedure for dealing with boundary
layers.
Before embarking on an analysis of the boundary layer phenomena, we
summarize our observations and make some general remarks. We have noted
that a naive regular perturbation expansion does not always produce an
approximate solution. In fact, there are several indicators that often suggest its
failure.
1. When the small parameter multiplies the highest derivative in the
problem.
2. When setting the small parameter equal to zero changes the character of
the problem, as in the case of a partial differential equation changing type
(elliptic to parabolic, for example), or an algebraic equation changing
degree. In other words, the solution for ε = 0 is fundamentally different in
character from the solutions for ε close to zero.
3. When problems occur on infinite domains, giving, for example, secular
terms.
4. When singular points are present in the interval of interest.
5. When the equations that model physical processes have multiple time or
spatial scales.
Such perturbation problems fall in the general category of singular
perturbation problems. For ordinary differential equations, problems involving
boundary layers are common. The procedure is to determine whether there is a
boundary layer and where it is located. If there is a boundary layer, then the

leading-order perturbation term found by setting ε = 0 in the equation often
provides a valid approximation in a large outer region. The inner approximation
in the boundary layer is found by rescaling, which we discuss below. We show
that the inner and outer approximations can be matched to obtain a uniformly
valid approximation over the entire interval of interest. The singular perturbation
method applied in this context is also called the method of matched asymptotic
expansions or boundary layer theory. The latter arises from its inception in the
study of boundary layer phenomena in air flow over a wing.
EXERCISES
1. Use a dominant balancing method to determine the leading-order behavior
of the roots of the following algebraic equations. In all cases 0 < ε 
 1.
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
2. In (1b) find a first-order correction for the leading behavior (Hint: for the
scaled equation assume 
3. Find a two-term approximation to the three roots x3 + εx + 2ε2 = 0, 0 < ε 
 1.
4. Show that regular perturbation fails on the boundary value problem
Find the exact solution and sketch it for ε = 0.05 and ε = 0.005. If x = O(ε),
show that εy″(x) is large; if x = O(1), show that εy″(x) = O(1). Find the inner
and outer approximations from the exact solution.

3.3 Boundary Layer Analysis
3.3.1 Inner and Outer Approximations
We return to the boundary value problem
(3.1) 
where 0 < ε 
 1. By examining the exact solution near x = 0 we found that rapid
changes were occurring in y, y’, and y″, suggesting a small characteristic length;
the term εy″ was not small as it appears to be in the equation. Away from the
boundary layer, in the region where x = O(1), it was noted that εy″ and εy’ are
small, and so the solution could be approximated accurately by setting ε = 0 in
the equation to obtain
and selecting the boundary condition y(1) = 1. This gives the outer
approximation
(3.2) 
To analyze the behavior in the boundary layer, we notice that significant
changes in y take place on a very short spatial interval, which suggests a length
scale on the order of a function of ε, say δ(ε). If we change variables via
(3.3) 
and use the chain rule, the differential equation (3.1) becomes
(3.4) 
where prime denotes derivatives with respect to ξ. Another way of looking at the
rescaling is to regard (3.3) as a scale transformation that permits examination of
the boundary layer close up, as under a microscope.
The coefficients of the four terms in the differential equation are
(3.5) 

If the scaling is correct, each will reflect the order of magnitude of the term in
which it appears. To determine the scale factor δ(ε) we estimate these
magnitudes by considering all possible dominant balances between pairs of
terms in (3.5). In the pairs we include the first term because it was ignored in the
outer layer, and it is known that it plays a significant role in the boundary layer.
Because the goal is to make a simplification in the problem, we do not consider
dominant balancing of three terms. If all four terms are equally important, no
simplification can be made at all. Therefore there are three cases to consider. For
notation we will sometimes use the symbol ~ to denote “of the same order.”
(i) The terms ε/δ(ε)2 and 1/δ(ε) are of the same order and ε/δ(ε) and 1 are
small in comparison.
(ii) The terms ε/δ(ε)2 and 1 are of the same order and 1/δ(ε) and ε/δ(ε) are
small in comparison.
(iii) The terms ε/δ(ε)2 and ε/δ(ε) are of the same order and 1/δ(ε) and 1 are
small in comparison.
Only case (i) is possible. For, in case (ii), ε/δ(ε)2~1 implies δ(ε) = O(√ε); but
then 1/δ(ε) is not small compared to 1. This case is inconsistent. In case (iii), ε/
δ(ε)2 ~ ε/δ(ε) implies δ(ε) = O(1), which leads to the outer approximation. In
case (i), ε/δ(ε)2~1/δ(ε) forces δ(ε) = O(ε); then ε/δ(ε)2 and 1/δ(ε) are both order
1/ε, which is large compared to ε/δ(ε) and 1. Therefore, a consistent scaling is
possible if we select δ(ε) = O(ε); hence, we take
(3.6) 
Therefore, the scaled differential equation (3.4) becomes
(3.7) 
Now, (3.7) is amenable to regular perturbation. Because we are interested only in
the leading-order approximation, which we denote by Yi, we set ε = 0 in (3.7) to
obtain
(3.8) 
The general solution is
Because the boundary layer is located near x = 0, we apply the boundary
condition y(0) = 0, or Yi(0) = 0. This yields C2 = −C1, and so
(3.9) 

In terms of y and x,
(3.10) 
This is the inner approximation for x = O(ε).
In summary, we have the approximate solution
(3.11) 
each valid for an appropriate range of x. There remains to determine the constant
C1, which is accomplished by the process of matching.

3.3.2 Matching
By matching we do not mean selecting a specific value of ε, say ε0, and requiring
that y0(ε0) = yi(ε0) to obtain the constant C1. This process is nothing more than
patching the two approximations together so as to be continuous at some fixed x
= ε0. Rather, the goal is to construct a single composite expansion in ε that is
uniformly valid on the entire interval [0, 1] as ε → 0. Thus, there is little gain in
pinpointing the edge of the boundary layer, since it becomes narrower as ε → 0.
We stated figuratively that the boundary layer for this problem has width ε. In
general, it is the scaling factor δ(ε) that defines the width of the boundary layer.
One can proceed as follows, however. It seems reasonable that the inner and
outer expansions should agree to some order in an overlap domain, intermediate
between the boundary layer and outer region (see Fig. 3.3). If x = O(ε), then x is
in the boundary layer, and if x = O(1), then x is in the outer region; therefore, this
overlap domain could be characterized as values of x for which x = O(
), for
example, because 
 is between ε and 1 (
 goes to zero slower than ε does, or
ε 
 
). This intermediate scale suggests a new scaled independent variable η
in the overlap domain defined by
Figure 3.3 The overlap domain where inner and outer approximations are
matched.

(3.12) 
The condition for matching is that the inner approximation, written in terms of
the intermediate variable η, should agree with the outer approximation, written
in terms of the intermediate variable η, in the limit as ε → 0+. In symbols, for
matching we require that for fixed η
(3.13) 
For the present problem,
and
Therefore, matching requires C1 = e and the inner approximation becomes
(3.14) 
Because we are seeking only a leading order approximation, we can avoid

introducing an intermediate variable and just write the matching condition
(3.13) simply as
(3.15) 
This states that the outer approximation, as the outer variable moves into the
inner region, must equal the inner approximation, as the inner variable moves
into the outer region. Finally, we point out that we have only introduced
approximations of leading order. Higher-order approximations can be obtained
by more elaborate matching schemes, and we refer to the references for
discussions of these methods. For example, see Bender and Orszag (1978). In
the sequel we usually use (3.15) instead of introducing an intermediate variable.

3.3.3 Uniform Approximations
To obtain a composite expansion that is uniformly valid throughout [0, 1], we
note the sum of the outer and inner approximations is
By subtracting the common limit (3.13), which is e, we have
(3.16) 
When x is in the outer region the second term is small and yu(x) is approximately
e1−x, which is the outer approximation. When x is in the boundary layer the first
term is nearly e and yu(x) is approximately e(1 − e−x/ε), which is the inner
approximation. In the intermediate or overlap region, both the inner and outer
approximations are approximately equal to e. Therefore, in the overlap domain
the sum of y0(x) and yi(x) gives 2e, or twice the contribution. This is why we
must subtract the common limit from the sum. In summary, yu(x) provides a
uniform approximate solution throughout the interval [0, 1].
Briefly summarizing, the matching condition is:
Substituting yu(x) into the differential equation shows that
so yu(x) satisfies the differential equation exactly on (0, 1). Checking the
boundary conditions,
The left boundary condition is satisfied exactly and the right boundary condition
holds up to O(εn), for any n > 0, because
for any n > 0. Consequently, yu is a uniformly valid approximation on [0, 1].
Example 3.11

We work through another simple example without the detailed exposition of the
preceding paragraphs. We determine an approximate solution of the boundary
value problem
using singular perturbation methods. Clearly, regular perturbation will fail since
the unperturbed problem is
which has the general solution
Such a function cannot satisfy both boundary conditions. Consequently we
assume a boundary layer at x = 0 and impose the boundary condition y(1) = 1
(since x = 1 is in the outer layer) to get the outer approximation
To determine the width δ(ε) of the boundary layer we rescale near x = 0 via
In scaled variables the differential equation becomes
If ε/δ(ε)2 ~ 2δ(ε) is the dominant balance, then δ(ε) = O(ε1/3) and the second term
1/δ(ε) would be O(ε−1/3), which is not small compared to the assumed dominant
terms. Therefore assume ε/δ(ε)2 ~ 1/δ(ε) is the dominant balance. In that case
δ(ε) = O(ε) and the term 2δ(ε) has order O(ε), which is small compared to ε/δ(ε)2
and 1/δ(ε), both of which are O(ε−1). Therefore δ(ε) = ε is consistent and the
scaled differential equation is
The inner approximation to first order satisfies
whose general solution is
In terms of y and x

Applying the boundary condition y(0) = 1 in the boundary layer gives C1 = 1 −
C2, and therefore the inner approximation is
To find C2 we introduce an overlap domain of order 
 and an appropriate
intermediate scaled variable
Then x = 
η and the matching condition becomes (with η fixed)
or
This gives C2 = 1, and thus the inner approximation is
A uniform composite approximation yu(x) is found by adding the inner and outer
approximations and subtracting the common limit in the overlap domain, which
is zero in this case. Consequently,
As an exercise, the reader should plot this approximation for different values of
ε. Again, as a shortcut, the matching condition may be written
which gives the same result.

3.3.4 General Procedures
In the preceding examples the boundary layer occurred at x = 0, or at the left
endpoint. In the general case boundary layers can occur at any point in the
interval, at the right endpoint or an interior point; in fact, multiple boundary
layers can occur in the same problem. Boundary layers also appear in initial
value problems, which we discuss in the next section. The Exercises point out
different boundary layer phenomena. When solving a problem one should
assume a boundary layer at x = 0 (or the left endpoint) and then proceed. If this
assumption is in error, then the procedure will break down when trying to match
the inner and outer approximations. At that time make an assumption of a
boundary layer at the right endpoint. The analysis is exactly the same, but the
scale transformation to define the inner variable in the boundary layer becomes
where x = x0 is the right endpoint, and Y(ξ) = y(x0 − δ(ε)ξ). To compute
transformed derivatives in this case, the chain rule shows
Observe the negative sign on the first derivative. The matching condition at a
right boundary layer is
In words, the limit of the inner solution as the inner variable moves out of the
layer equals the limit of the outer solution as the outer variable moves into the
layer.
To reemphasize, boundary layers can occur at the left endpoint, right endpoint,
at both endpoints, or neither. There can also be internal layers, called shock
layers. The latter often leads to difficult computations.
Further, even though preceding examples exhibit a boundary layer width of
δ(ε) = ε, this is not the rule. Also, we have only matched the leading-order
behavior of the inner and outer approximations. Refined matching procedures
can include matching the higher order terms in expansions. (For reference, the
reader should search on Van Dyke’s matching principle.) Finally we point out
that this method is not a universal technique. For certain classes of problems it

works well, but for other problems significant modifications must be made.
Singular perturbation theory is an active area of research in applied mathematics
and a well-developed rigorous theory is only available for restricted classes of
differential equations.
We conclude with a theorem for linear equations with variable coefficients.
For this class of problems, the boundary layer can be completely characterized,
provided suitable restrictions are placed on the coefficients.
Theorem 3.12
Consider the boundary value problem
(3.17) 
where p and q are continuous functions on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, and p(x) > 0 for 0 ≤ x < 1.
Then there exists a boundary layer at x = 0 with inner and outer approximations
given by
(3.18) 
(3.19) 
where
(3.20) 
Proof
To demonstrate the theorem, we show that the assumption of a boundary layer at
x = 0 is consistent and leads to the approximations given above. If the boundary
layer is at x = 0, then the outer solution y0(x) will satisfy
and the condition y0(1) = b. Separating variables and applying the condition at x
= 1 gives (3.19). In the boundary layer we introduce a scaled variable ξ defined
by ξ = x/δ(ε), where δ(ε) is to be determined. If Y(ξ) = y(δ(ε)ξ), then the
differential equation becomes

(3.21) 
As ε → 0+ the coefficients behave like
It is easy to see that the dominant balance is ε/δ(ε)2 ~ p(0)/δ(ε), and therefore the
boundary layer has thickness δ(ε) = O(ε). For definiteness take δ(ε) = ε. Equation
(3.21) then becomes
which to leading order is
The general solution is
Applying the boundary condition Yi(0) = a yields C2 = a − C1, and thus the inner
approximation is
(3.22) 
To match we introduce the intermediate variable η = x/
 and require that for
fixed η,
In this case the matching condition becomes
which forces
Consequently, the inner approximation is given as stated in (3.18) and (3.20),
and the proof is complete. A uniform composite approximation yu(x) is given by
It can be shown that yu(x) − y(x) = O(ε) as ε → O+, uniformly on [0, 1], where
y(x) is the exact solution to (3.17).

Remark 3.13
If p(x) < 0 on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, then no match is possible because yi(x) would grow
exponentially, unless C1 = a. On the other hand, a match is possible if p(x) < 0 if
the boundary layer is at x = 1. In summary, one can show that the boundary layer
is at x = 0 if p(x) > 0 and at x = 1 if p(x) < 0. As a final observation, there can be
no boundary layer at an interior point 0 < x < 1 in either case. If p changes sign
in the interval, then interior layers are possible; these problems are called
turning point problems.
EXERCISES
1. Use singular perturbation methods to obtain a uniform approximate
solution to the following problems. In each case assume 0 < ε 
 1 and 0 < x
< 1.
2. Examine the exact solution to show why singular perturbation methods
fail on the boundary value problem
3. Determine values of a for which the problem

has a solution with a boundary layer structure.
4. Obtain a uniform approximation to the problem
5. Is the problem
a singular perturbation problem? Discuss.
6. Attempt singular perturbation methods on the boundary value problem
Give a complete discussion of your results.
7. Find a leading order approximation to
8. Let f be a smooth function, monotonic on [0, 1], and let f’(0) = b ≠ 0.
Either find a uniformly valid approximation to the problem
or show that such an approximation does not exist. Does the answer depend
upon the value b?
9. Find a uniformly valid approximation to
where 0 < ε 
 1 and b > 0. For what values of b is the approximation valid?
10. Find a uniformly valid approximation to
where 0 < ε 
 1 and a > 0, and a and f have infinitely many derivatives on 
.
11. Find a uniform approximation to the boundary value problem

Draw a graph of the approximation.
12. Consider the boundary value problem on 0 < x < 1:
Find a uniform approximation. (Hint: try a multiple layer.)
13. Find a uniform approximation:
14. Find a uniform approximation:
15. Find a uniform approximation to the boundary value problem
(Hint: try an interior, or shock, layer.)
16. Investigate the problem
17. Find uniform asymptotic approximations to the solutions of the
following problems on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 with 0 < ε 
 1.

3.4 Initial Layers
3.4.1 Damped Spring-Mass System
Initial value problems containing a small parameter can have a layer near t = 0.
For evolution problems these layers are called initial layers. They are a zones in
which there are rapid temporal changes. We will illustrate the idea on a simple,
solvable initial value problem. Consider a damped spring-mass system with y
denoting the positive displacement of the mass m from equilibrium, and with the
forces given by
where k and a are the spring constant and damping constant, respectively. By
Newton’s second law the governing differential equation is
(4.1) 
Initially, we assume the displacement is zero and that the mass is put into motion
by imparting to it (say, with a hammer blow) a positive impulse I. Therefore, the
initial conditions are given by
(4.2) 
We want to determine the leading-order behavior of the system in the case that
the mass has very small magnitude.
The first step is to recast the problem in dimensionless form. The independent
and dependent variables are t and y having dimensions of time T and length L,
respectively. The constants m, a, k, and I have dimensions
where M is a mass dimension. We can identify three possible time scales,
(4.3) 
These correspond to balancing inertia and damping terms, the inertia and the
spring terms, and the damping and the spring terms, respectively. Possible length
scales are
(4.4) 

By assumption m 
 1, and so 
, and
aI/km 
 1. Such relations are often important in determining appropriate time
and length scales, because scales should be chosen so that the dimensionless
dependent and independent variables are of order 1.
Before proceeding further, we use our intuition regarding the motion of the
mass. The positive impulse given to the mass will cause a rapid displacement to
some maximum value, at which time the force due to the spring will attempt to
restore it to its equilibrium position. Because the mass is small there will be very
little inertia, and therefore it will probably not oscillate about equilibrium; the
system is strongly over-damped. Consequently we expect the graph of y = y(t) to
exhibit the features shown in Fig. 3.4—a quick rise and then a gradual decay.
Such a function is indicative of a multiple time-scale description. In the region
near t = 0, where there is an abrupt change, a short time scale seems appropriate;
we call this the initial layer. Away from the initial layer an order 1 time scale
seems appropriate. In all, the problem has the characteristics of a singular
perturbation problem, namely multiple time scales and an apparent small
quantity m multiplying the highest derivative term. Of the length scales given in
(4.4), it appears that only I/a is suitable. The remaining two are large, which
violates our intuition regarding the maximum displacement. Of the time scales,
only a/k is first order. The remaining two are small, and one of them may be
suitable in the assumed initial layer near t = 0. As a guess, since m/a depends on
the mass and the damping, and 
 depends on the mass and the spring, we
predict the former. The reason lies in intuition concerning the dominant
processes during the early stages of motion. The high initial velocity should
influence the damping force more than the force due to the spring. Therefore, the
terms mÿ and 
 should dominate during the initial phase, whereas mÿ should be
low-order in the later phase.
Figure 3.4 Displacement vs. time.

With these remarks as motivation, we introduce scaled variables
(4.5) 
which seem appropriate for the outer layer, away from the initial layer at t = 0.
Note that both  and  are of order 1. In terms of these variables the initial value
problem becomes
(4.6) 
where prime denotes the derivative with respect to , and the dimensionless
constant ε is given by
(4.7) 
Notice, by proper scaling, the small term occurs where we expect it, namely in
the inertia term. Using singular perturbation techniques we can obtain an
approximate solution to (4.5). The leading order approximation in the outer layer
is
where we have set ε = 0. Then,

(4.8) 
is the outer approximation. Neither initial condition is appropriate to apply
because both are at  = 0, which is in the assumed initial layer. To obtain an inner
approximation we rescale according to
(4.9) 
Then (4.6) becomes
(4.10) 
The dominant balance is ε/δ(ε)2 ~ 1/δ(ε), which gives the width of the initial
layer, δ(ε) = ε. (The balance ε/δ(ε)2 ~ 1 implies δ(ε) = O(
), but then 1/δ(ε) is
not small, giving inconsistency.) Consequently, the initial layer has width ε, or
O(m). The scale transformation (4.9) is then
and the differential equation (4.10) becomes
Setting ε = 0 and solving the resulting equation gives the inner approximation
or
The initial condition (0) = 0 forces B = −A, and the condition 
forces A = 1. Therefore, the inner approximation is completely determined by
(4.11) 
Next we use matching to determine the constant C. We can introduce an overlap
domain with time scale 
 and scaled dimensionless variable 
, but we
prefer to apply the simple condition (3.15), or
Both limits give C = 1. A uniformly valid approximation is therefore
or

Here the limits are taken with η fixed. In terms of the original dimensioned
variables t and y,
(4.12) 
Intuition proved to be correct; for small t we have
which describes a rapidly rising function with time scale m/a. For larger t the
first term in (4.12) dominates and
which represents a function that is decaying exponentially on a time scale a/k.
This example shows how physical reasoning can complement mathematical
analysis in solving problems arising out of empirics. The constant interplay
between the physics and the mathematics leads to a good understanding of a
problem and gives insight into its structure, as well as strategies for obtaining
solutions.

3.4.2 Enzyme Kinetics
In chemical processes it is important to know the concentrations of the chemical
species when reactions take place. The differential equations of reaction kinetics
provide a rich source of singular perturbation phenomena because reactions in a
chain often occur on different time scales. For example, some intermediary
chemical species may be short-lived, and reactions creating those species may be
able to be ignored, thereby leading to simplification of the system.
In Section 2.6 of Chapter 2 we introduced mass action dynamics for chemical
kinetics. We review some of those ideas and we recommend readers review that
material as well, especially enzyme kinetics.
The basic enzyme reaction is
(4.13) 
where reactant molecules S (a substrate) and E (an enzyme) combine to form a
complex molecule C. The molecule C breaks up to form a product molecule P
and the original enzyme E, or the reverse reaction, C disassociating into the
original reactants S and E can occur. There are three reactions in (4.13), namely
S + E 
 C, C 
 S + E, and C 
 P + E. Here, one molecule of a substrate S
reacts with an enzyme E to produce an intermediate complex C, and then the
final product P is produced, along with the recovery of the enzyme. The
formation of the complex C is a rapid reaction, and usually the initial
concentration of the enzyme is small compared to the substrate. Initially, we
assume S(0) = S0, E(0) = E0, P(0) = 0, and C(0) = 0. By the law of mass action,
the rate equations are (we are using τ for real time)
Notice that once C is determined, then P is determined by direct integration; P
does not enter the first three equations. Thus, there are only three equations for

S, E, and C. We can instantly find the conservation laws by observation; they are
These equations permit elimination of E and the reduction to a system of two
nonlinear equations for S and C,
(4.14) 
(4.15) 
Singular Perturbation. Let us rescale
where T is a yet unchosen time scale. Then the system becomes
From these equations we can note that there are two obvious possible time scales
T,
where the subscripts s and f denote slow and fast; typically, E0 is much smaller
than S0. To understand the longer time behavior we use the slow time scale Ts.
Substituting into the equations, while letting
we get
It is usually the case that μ and λ are order 1 quantities, but ε 
 1.
Outer approximation. The equations are

This gives
Solving the second equation gives
where A is a constant of integration.
Inner approximation. Let
which is the fast time scale. Letting X = x and Y = y we get
We may apply the initial conditions X(0) = 1 and Y(0) = 0. Then to leading order,
This means X0 = D = const. = 1. Thus
The general solution of the differential equation is
Applying the initial condition gives M = − 1/(λ + 1). Therefore,
Matching. We must have

or
This gives consistency. Therefore,
or A = 1. In summary, the outer and inner solutions are
The uniform approximation is the outer solution plus the inner solution, minus
the common limit. Thus,
Figures 3.5 and 3.6 show the fast time solution that approximates the initial
layer where the complex is rapidly formed and the slow time solution that
approximates the longer behavior.
Figure 3.5 Fast time solution. The dashed curve is the complex and the solid
curve is the substrate.

Figure 3.6 Slow time solution. The dashed curve is the complex and the solid
curve is the substrate.

EXERCISES
1. Use a singular perturbation method to find a leading-order approximation
to the initial value problem
on t ≥ 0. Calculate the residual and show that it converges to zero uniformly
on t ≥ 0 as ε → 0.
2. Find a uniformly valid approximation to the problem
as ε → 0. Here, b is smooth and b(t) > 0, and T, β, γ > 0.
3. Find a uniformly valid approximation to the problem
4. Consider a nonlinear damped oscillator whose dynamics is governed by
the initial value problem
where the mass m is small.
a) Non-dimensionalize the problem with a correct scaling.
b) Find a leading-order perturbation approximation.
5. Find approximations to the following systems where 0 < ε 
 1:
6. Find a uniform approximation to the initial value problem
7. Consider an object of mass m falling through a fluid. It experiences the
force of gravity and a resistive force proportional to its velocity. At time τ =
0 it is located at height H and at some time T it is located at height 0.
a) Set up a boundary value problem for the height h = h(τ). (Orient h > 0
upward.)
b) Assume the mass is very small and nondimensionalize the problem by
the obvious scales. (Use y for dimensionless height and t for

dimensionless time.) Obtain
for appropriate choices of ε and Q.
c) Obtain a uniform approximation using perturbation methods and plot it
for generic small ε. Finally, compute the residual.
8. Consider an exothermic reaction X → products that releases heat.
Initially, the concentration and temperature are x(0) = x0 and T(0) = T0,
respectively. The rate k = k(T) is a function of temperature and is given by
the Arrhenius form
where E is the activation energy, R is the gas constant, and r is a
multiplicative constant. As the reaction proceeds, T is related to x via the
constitutive equation T = T0 + h(x0 − x), where h is the increase in
temperature when one gram of x is consumed by reaction.
a) If y = (x0 − x)/x0 is a progress variable that measures the extent of the
reaction, find a differential equation for y.
b) Define a scaled temperature and time by θ = T/T0 and τ = rt,
respectively, and show that the model can be written
for appropriately chosen constants A and β
c) Find an initial value problem for the scaled temperature θ.
d) Assume the parameter A is small and obtain approximations for θ and
y.
e) Does a perturbation method work for A large? Perform some numerical
experiments to support your answer to this question.
9. A thermochemical model for the scaled concentration u and temperature q
in a reacting fluid is given by
where u(0) = q(0) = 0 and ε 
 1. Find a two-term perturbation solution.
10. Consider the system

where ε 
 1. Find the outer and inner approximations and use matching to
find a uniform composite approximation.
11. Modify the Michaelis–Menten model by including the reverse reaction P
+ E 
 C where the enzyme and product reform into the complex.
a) Make the quasi-steady-state assumption and find C = C(S).
b) Find the velocity V = dP/dt and compare it to the original model.

3.5 The WKB Approximation
The WKB method (Wentzel–Kramers–Brillouin) is a perturbation method that
applies to a variety of problems—in particular, to linear differential equations of
the form
(5.1) 
(5.2) 
(5.3) 
We note that (5.1) and (5.3) have a small parameter, while (5.2) has a large
parameter; the latter may be changed to the former by letting ε = λ−1.
It is not possible, in general, to obtain a closed-form solution, in terms of
elementary functions, to differential equations with variable coefficients like
equations (5.1)–(5.3). So approximation methods are often useful. The WKB
method was developed by several individuals. The first work was by Liouville1
in the mid 1800s; in the early 1900s Liouville’s method was extended by others,
for example, Rayleigh (in the context of sound wave reflection) and Jeffrey
(Mathieu’s equation); the method now bears the initials of Wentzel, Kramers,
and Brillouin because of their important application of the method in quantum
mechanics. In the next few paragraphs we briefly develop some of the basic
concepts of quantum mechanics, which gives a physical context in which to
examine the WKB approximation.
For simplicity, consider a particle of mass m moving on the x axis under the
influence of a conservative force given by F(x). The potential V(x) is defined by
the equation F(x) = −V’(x). According to the canon of classical particle
mechanics, the motion x = x(t) is governed by the dynamical equation
(5.4) 
which is Newton’s second law of motion. If the initial position x(0) and velocity
dx/dt(0) are specified, then one can, in theory, determine the state of the particle
(position and velocity) for all times t > 0. In this sense, classical mechanics is a
deterministic model. The dynamics can be easily analyzed using the
conservation of energy law

where y = x’ is the velocity and E is the constant energy in the system,
determined by the initial state. In xy (position-velocity) phase space the orbits
are given by
These orbits are valid in the domain where E > V(x), which is the classical
region. The particle cannot occupy the domain E < V(x), which is the
nonclassical region. Values of x for which E = V(x) are called turning points.
In the early 1900s it was found that this classic model of motion fails on the
atomic scale. Out of this revolution quantum mechanics was developed.
Quantum theory dictates that the particle has no definite position or velocity;
rather, it postulates a statistical or probabilistic interpretation of the state of the
particle in terms of a wave function (x, t), which is complex. The square of the
wave function is the probability density for the position, which is a random
variable X. Therefore,
is the probability of the particle being in the interval a < x ≤ b at time t. Also,
because the particle is located somewhere on the x axis. From elementary
probability theory it is known that the probability density contains all of the
statistical information for a given problem (for example, the mean and variance
of position).
The question is how to find the wave function. The equation that governs the
evolution of a quantum mechanical system (the analog of Newton’s law for the
classic system) is the Schrödinger2 equation, a second-order partial differential
equation having the form
(5.5) 
where V is the potential energy, m is the mass, and  = h/2π, where h = 6.625 ·
10−34 kg m2/ sec is Planck’s constant.
Assuming solutions have the form of a product Φ(x, i) = y(x)ϕ(t), we obtain,

upon substitution into (5.5) and after rearrangement,
The left side of this equation depends only on t, and the right side depends only
on x. The only way equality can occur for all t and x is if both sides are equal to
the same constant, which we shall call E. Therefore we obtain two equations,
one for ϕ(t),
and one for y(x), namely
(5.6) 
The solution of the time equation is the periodic function ϕ = C exp(−iEt/ ),
where C is a constant. Equation (5.6), whose solution y(x) gives the spatial
(steady-state) part of the wave function, is called the time-independent
Schrödinger equation, and it is one of the fundamental equations of
mathematical physics. The condition
is a normalizing condition.
Because  is extremely small, we may set 
 and obtain a
problem of the form (5.1), where q(x) = E − V(x). From our knowledge of
constant coefficient equations, if q(x) = E − V(x) > 0 we expect the equation
has rapidly varying oscillatory solutions (this is the classical region), and if q(x)
= E − V(x) < 0 we expect exponentially growing and decaying solutions
(nonoscillatory). The latter region is forbidden in classical physics, but we shall
observe later that in quantum mechanics there can be nonzero probability of the
particle existing in this region.

3.5.1 The Nonoscillatory Case
We first consider equation (5.1) in the case that q(x) is strictly negative on the
interval of interest. For definiteness, let us write q(x) = −k(x)2, where k(x) > 0,
and consider the equation
(5.7) 
If k were a constant, say k = k0, then (5.7) would have real, rapidly increasing or
decreasing exponential solutions of the form exp(±k0x/ε). This suggests making
in (5.7) the substitution
Then (5.7) becomes
(5.8) 
Now we try a regular perturbation expansion
Substituting this expansion into (5.8) gives
at O(1) and O(ε), respectively. Therefore,
and the expansion for v becomes
Consequently, u is given by
where a is an arbitrary constant; the other constants are incorporated into the
indefinite integral. Finally, the expansion for y(x) is
This equation defines two linearly independent approximations (one with the
plus sign and one with the minus sign) to the linear equation (5.7); taking the

linear combination of these gives the WKB approximation to (5.7) in the
nonoscillatory case:
(5.9) 
The arbitrary constants c1 and c2 can be determined by boundary data; the
arbitrary lower limit of integration a should be taken at the point where the data
is given. We note that the solutions may also be expressed in terms of the
hyperbolic functions cosh and sinh.
Example 3.14
Find the WKB approximation to the equation
Here, k(x) = 1 + x and 
. Therefore the WKB
approximation is
If we append boundary conditions y(0) = 0 and limx→∞ y(x) = 0, then c1 = 0 to
ensure the latter condition at infinity. Then the condition at x = 0 forces c2 = 1.
So
The quantum mechanical interpretation of exponential solutions is discussed in
Chapter 8. See also the highly readable text by D. J. Griffiths (2005).

3.5.2 The Oscillatory Case
In the case that q(x) is strictly positive, we expect oscillatory solutions of (5.1).
In quantum mechanics, this is the classical region. So, we consider the equation
(5.10) 
where k(x) > 0. Nearly the same calculation can be made as for the
nonoscillatory case. Now we make the substitution y(x) = exp(iu(x)/ε) into
equation (5.10) and proceed exactly as before to obtain the WKB approximation
in the oscillatory case as
This is the same result except for the presence of the complex number i in the
exponential. Using Euler’s formula, eiθ = cos θ + i sin θ, we can rewrite the
approximation to (5.10) in terms of sines and cosines as
(5.11) 
These are rapidly oscillating solutions.
Example 3.15
(Schrödinger equation) In the case that E > V(x), which is the oscillatory case,
the WKB approximation (5.11) to the Schrödinger equation (5.6) is often written
in terms of an amplitude A and phase ϕ (which play the role of arbitrary
constants) as
Example 3.16
The WKB approximation can be used to determine the large eigenvalues for
simple differential operators. (A detailed discussion of eigenvalue problems is
presented in Chapter 5.) For the present, consider the boundary value problem
(5.12) 

We assume q(x) > 0. A number λ is called an eigenvalue of the boundary value
problem (5.12) if there exists a nontrivial solution of (5.12) for that particular
value of λ; the corresponding nontrivial solutions are called eigenfunctions. It is
an important problem to determine all the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions for a
given boundary value problem. In the present case, if we define ε = 1/√λ and k(x)
= √q(x), then the differential equation in (5.12) has the form
for which the WKB method applies, provided ε is small or, equivalently, if λ is
large in (5.12). The WKB approximation is given by
But y(0) = 0 forces c2 = 0, and y(π) = 0 forces
Choosing c1 = 0 gives the trivial solution, which we are trying to avoid; so we
force
which can be satisfied by choosing λ such that
where n is a large integer (recall, the approximation is valid only for large values
of λ ). Thus, the large eigenvalues of problem (5.12) are given by
for large n. The corresponding eigenfunctions are
for large n.
If the function q(x) has zeros in the interval of interest, then the problem of
determining asymptotic approximations of (5.1) is significantly more difficult.
On one side of a simple zero of q the solution is oscillatory, and on the other side

it is exponential; therefore these two solutions must be connected, or matched, in
a layer located at that root. As we remarked earlier, the points x where q(x) = 0
are called turning points; in terms of quantum mechanics and the Schrödinger
equation (5.6), the turning points are the values of x where E = V(x), or where
the total energy equals the potential energy. We refer the reader to Holmes
(1995) for an elementary treatment of turning point problems. Murray (1984)
shows how to apply the WKB method to the more general Liouville equation
Interestingly enough, even though the WKB approximation is valid for λ 
 1
or ε 
 1, it often provides a good approximation even when λ and ε are O(1).
Several numerical examples are discussed in Bender and Orszag (1978).
EXERCISES
1. Use the WKB method to find an approximate solution to the initial value
problem
for large λ.
2. Show that the large eigenvalues of the problem
are given approximately by
for large integers n, and find the corresponding eigenfunctions.
3. Consider the eigenvalue problem
Find an approximation for the large eigenvalues and eigenfunctions.
4. Show that the differential equation y″ + p(x)y’ + q(x)y = 0 can be
transformed into the equation u″ + r(x)u = 0, r = q − p′/2 − p2/4, without a
first derivative, by the Liouville transformation u = y exp(1/2 ƒx
a p(ξ) dξ).
5. Find a formula in terms of the sinh function for the WKB approximation
to the initial value problem

6. The slowly varying oscillator equation is
where ε 
 1 and q is strictly positive. Find an approximate solution. Why is
the equation called “slowly varying”?
7. Find an approximation for the large eigenvalues of
8. Find an approximation for the general solution of
Hint: let y = exp(iu/ε), ε = 1/λ.

3.6 Asymptotic Expansion of
Integrals
The solution of differential equations often leads to formulas involving
complicated integrals that cannot be evaluated in closed form. For example, the
initial value problem
has solution
but we cannot calculate the integral because there is no antiderivative in terms of
simple functions. For some problems, however, we may want to know the
behavior of y for large t (with λ fixed), or we may want to determine the value of
y for a fixed value of t in the case that λ is a large parameter. Problems like this
are common in applied mathematics, and in this section we introduce standard
techniques to approximate certain kinds of integrals.

3.6.1 Laplace Integrals
One type of integral we wish to study has the form
(6.1) 
where g is a strictly increasing function on [a, b] and the derivative g′ is
continuous. Here, a < b ≤ +∞, and λ 
 1 is another notation for the asymptotic
statement “as λ → ∞.” An example is the Laplace transform
Actually, it is sufficient to examine integrals of the form
(6.2) 
To observe this, we can make a change of variables s = g(t) − g(a) in (6.1) to
obtain
where t = t(s) is the solution of the equation s = g(t) − g(a) for t. The integral on
the right has the form of (6.2).
The fundamental idea in obtaining an approximation for (6.2) is to determine
what subinterval gives the dominant contribution. The function exp(−λt) is a
rapidly decaying exponential; thus, if f does not grow too fast at infinity and if it
is reasonably well behaved at t = 0, then it appears that the main contribution
comes from a neighborhood of t = 0. A detailed example will illustrate our
reasoning; the method is called Laplace’s method.
Example 3.17
Consider the integral
(6.3) 
Figure 2.8, which shows a graph of the integrand for different values of λ,
confirms that the main contribution to the integral occurs near t = 0. To proceed

we partition the interval of integration into two parts, [0, T] and [T, ∞], to obtain
(6.4) 
where T is any positive real number. For any T, the second integral is an
exponentially small term (EST); that is, it has order λ−1 exp(−λT) as λ → ∞. A
simple calculation confirms this fact:
We note that an exponentially small term is o(λ−m), for any positive integer m,
which means that it decays much faster than any power of λ. Thus,
In the finite interval [0, T] we can replace sin t/t by its Taylor series about t = 0,
Thus
Now change variables via u = λt to obtain
But now the upper limit can be replaced by ∞ since the error incurred by doing
this is exponentially small as λ → ∞. (Since we are already discarding
algebraically small terms, there is no worry about adding exponentially small
terms to the integral.) Consequently, we obtain
We can now use the integration formula
(6.5) 
to obtain the asymptotic approximation of (6.3) given by

Before discussing general problems, we pause to define a special function, the
gamma function, which plays an important role in subsequent calculations. It is
defined by
Because the gamma function has the property
it generalizes the idea of a factorial function to non-integer values of the
argument; note that Γ(n) = (n − 1)! for positive integers n, and Γ(1/2) = √π. Other
values of the gamma function are tabulated in handbooks on special functions.
We now formulate a general result known as Watson’s lemma, which gives
the asymptotic behavior of a large number of integrals. We shall only outline the
proof, and those interested in a more detailed discussion should consult, for
example, Murray (1984).
Theorem 3.18
(Watson’s Lemma) Consider the integral
(6.6) 
where α > −1, where h(t) has a Taylor series expansion about t = 0, with h(0) ≠ 0,
and where |h(t)| < kect, 0 < t < b, for some positive constants k and c. Then
(6.7) 
Proof
The condition on α will guarantee the convergence of the improper integral at t =
0 and the exponential boundedness of h is required to ensure that the integral
converges as t goes to infinity. The argument is similar to the one in the previous
example. We split up the integral (6.6) for any T > 0, where T lies in the radius of
convergence of the power series for h. Then

The second integral is exponentially small. Now we substitute the Taylor series
expansion for h about t = 0 in the first integral to obtain
Making the substitution u = λt and then replacing the upper limit of integration
by ∞ gives
The result (6.7) now follows from the definition of the gamma function.
Example 3.19
Some integrals that do not have the form (6.6) can be transformed into an
integral that does. For example, consider the complementary error function, erfc
defined by
(6.8) 
Letting t = s − λ gives
Watson’s lemma applies, and we leave it as an exercise to show that
(6.9) 

3.6.2 Integration by Parts
Sometimes an asymptotic expansion can be found by a simple, successive
integration by parts procedure. However, this method is not often as applicable
as the Laplace method, and it usually involves more work. Let us consider the
erfc function. Using integration by parts, we have
The integral on the right may be integrated by parts to get
Thus,
By repeated integration by parts we can eventually reproduce (6.9). It is
important in this method to ensure that each succeeding term generated in the
expansion is asymptotically smaller than the preceding term; this is required by
the definition of asymptotic expansion in Section 2.1.
Using the ratio test, we can easily observe that for fixed λ the series in (6.9) for
erfc is not convergent. One may legitimately ask, therefore, how a divergent
series can be useful in approximating values of erfc(λ); for fixed λ we cannot
obtain a good approximation by taking more and more terms. For calculations,

the idea is to fix the number of terms n and apply the resulting approximation for
large values of λ. The error in this approximation is about the magnitude of the
first discarded term. Practically, then, to approximate erfc(λ), we compute the
magnitude of the first few terms of the series and then terminate the series when
the magnitude begins to increase.
To illustrate this strategy, we approximate erfc(2). We have
After the fifth term, the magnitude of the terms begins to increase. So we
terminate after five terms and obtain erfc(2) ≈ 0.004744; the tabulated value is
0.004678 and thus our approximation has an error of 0.000066.
The reader might inquire why one shouldn’t just write
and then replace exp(−t2) by its Taylor series expansion and integrate term-by
term. This procedure would yield a convergent series. So, adopting this strategy
we get
The reader should check that it takes about 20 terms to get the same accuracy
that the divergent, asymptotic series gave in only five terms. Therefore,
asymptotic expansions can be significantly more efficient than traditional Taylor
series expansions. For small λ, however, the Taylor series in preferable.

3.6.3 Other Integrals
We can extend the previous ideas to approximate integrals of the form
(6.10) 
where f is continuous and g is sufficiently smooth and has a unique maximum at
the point t = c in (a, b). Specifically, g′(c) = 0, g″(c) < 0. Again we expect the
main contribution of (6.10) to come from where g assumes its maximum. To
obtain a leading order approximation we replace f(t) by f(c), and we replace g by
the first three terms of its Taylor series (the g′ term is zero) to obtain
(6.11) 
(6.12) 
Letting 
, we get
(6.13) 
We may now replace the limits of integration by −∞ and +∞ and use 
 to obtain
(6.14) 
Remark 3.20
If the maximum of g occurs at an endpoint, then c = a or c = b and one of the
limits of integration in (6.11) is zero; thus we will obtain one-half of the value
indicated in (6.12).
Example 3.21
Approximate the integral

for large λ. Here f(t) = 1, and g(t) = sin t has its maximum at t = π/2 with g″(π/2)
= −1. Thus, by (6.12), 
.
EXERCISES
1. Verify (6.9).
2. Find a two-term approximation for large λ for
3. Consider the integral in (6.10), where the maximum of g occurs at an
endpoint of the interval with a nonzero derivative. To fix the idea assume
that the maximum occurs at t = b with g′(t) > 0 for a ≤ t ≤ b. Derive the
formula
4. Verify the following approximations for large λ.
a) 
b) 
c) 
5. Use integration by parts to show
6. Find a three-term asymptotic expansion of
for large λ.
7. Find a leading-order asymptotic approximation for the following integrals,
λ 
 1.
a) 
b) 
c) 

d) 
8. The modified Bessel function In(x) has integral representation
Find the leading-order asymptotic approximation of In(x) as x → +∞.
9. Find the first two terms in the asymptotic expansion of the integral
10. Show that
11. Use integration by parts to find a two-term asymptotic approximation of
the function
for large λ.
12. Consider the real exponential integral
for large values of λ.
a) Use integration by parts to show that
where
b) Show that for fixed n, |rn(λ)| → 0 as λ → ∞.
c) Show that for fixed 
, and
conclude that Ei(λ) has asymptotic expansion

d) Show that the asymptotic series in part (c) diverges for fixed λ.
e) Approximate Ei(10).
13. Use integration by parts to obtain an asymptotic expansion for large λ of

REFERENCES AND NOTES
The four books listed below cover a large amount of material on perturbation
methods and asymptotic analysis. Bender and Orszag (1978) is a definitive
treatment with many challenging exercises.
Bender, C. M. & and Orszag, S. A. 1978. Advanced Mathematical Methods for
Scientists and Engineers, McGraw-Hill, New York (reprinted by Springer-
Verlag, New York 1998).
Griffiths, D. J. 2005. Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, 2nd ed., Pearson
Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Holmes, M. 1995. Introduction to Perturbation Methods, Springer-Verlag, New
York (1995).
Lin, C. C. & Segel, L. A. 1974. Mathematics Applied to Deterministic Problems
in the Natural Sciences, Macmillan, New York (reprinted by SIAM, Philadelphia
1988).
Murray, J. D. 1984. Asymptotic Analysis, Springer-Verlag, New York (1984).
1 J. Liouville (1809–1882) was one of the great mathematicians of the 19th
century. His name is attached to key results in differential equations, complex
analysis, and many other areas of mathematics.
2 E. Schrödinger was one of the major scientists in the early 20th century who
developed the theory underlying quantum mechanics.

Chapter 4
Calculus of Variations
Generally, the calculus of variations is concerned with the optimization of
variable quantities called functionals over some admissible class of competing
objects. Many of its methods were developed over two hundred years ago by L.
Euler1, L. Lagrange2, and others. It continues to the present day to bring
important techniques to many branches of engineering, physics, and optimal
control theory, and it introduces many important methods to applied analysis.
This chapter is more or less independent from the remainder of the text. One
concept, that of a normed linear space, appears in later chapters; at that time the
reader may refer here, to Section 4.2.1, for the basic definitions.

4.1 Variational Problems
4.1.1 Functionals
To motivate the basic concepts of the calculus of variations we review some
simple notions in elementary differential calculus. One of the central problems in
the calculus is to maximize or minimize a given real valued function of a single
variable. If f is a given function defined in an open interval I, then f has a local
(or relative) minimum at a point x0 in I if f(x0) ≤ f(x) for all x, satisfying |x − x0|
< δ for some δ. If f has a local minimum at x0 in I and f is differentiable in I, then
it is well known that
(1.1) 
where the prime denotes the ordinary derivative of f. Similar statements can be
made if f has a local maximum at x0. Condition (1.1) is called a necessary
condition for a local minimum; that is, if f has a local minimum at x0, then (1.1)
necessarily follows. However, equation (1.1) is not sufficient for a local
minimum; that is, if (1.1) holds, it does not guarantee that x0 provides an actual
minimum. The following conditions are sufficient conditions for f to have a
local minimum at x0,
provided f″ exists. Again, similar conditions can be formulated for local maxima.
If (1.1) holds, we say f is stationary at x0 and that x0 is an critical point of f.
The calculus of variations deals with generalizations of this problem from the
calculus. Rather than find conditions under which functions have extreme
values, the calculus of variations deals with extremizing general quantities called
functionals. A functional is a rule that assigns a real number to each function
y(t) in a well-defined class. Like a function, a functional is a rule or association,
but its domain is a set of functions rather than a subset of real numbers. To be
more precise let A be a set of functions y, z,…; then a functional J on A is a rule
that associates to each y  A a real number denoted by J(y). Figure 4.1 illustrates
this notion and it is symbolically represented as J : A → . We say J maps A into
.

Figure 4.1 Schematic of a functional J: A → reals mapping a function space A
into the real numbers.
A fundamental problem of the calculus of variations can be stated as follows:
Given a functional J and a well-defined set of functions A, determine which
functions in A afford a minimum (or maximum) value to J. The word minimum
can be interpreted as a local minimum (if A is equipped with some device to
measure closeness of its elements) or an absolute minimum, that is, a minimum
relative to all elements in A. The set A is called the set of admissible functions,
and those in A are the competing functions for extremizing J. For example, the
set of admissible functions might be the set of all continuous functions on an
interval [a, b], the set of all continuously differentiable functions on [a, b]
satisfying the condition f(a) = 0, or whatever, as long as the set is well defined.
Later we impose some general conditions on A. For the most part the classical
calculus of variations restricts itself to functionals that are defined by certain
integrals and to the determination of both necessary and sufficient conditions for
extrema. The problem of extremizing a functional J over the set A is also called a
variational problem. Several examples are presented in the next section.
In summary, the calculus of variations may be characterized as the ‘calculus of
functionals.’ In this chapter we restrict ourselves to an analysis of necessary
conditions for extrema. Applications of the calculus of variations are found in
geometry, physics, engineering, numerical analysis, ordinary and partial
differential equations, and optimal control theory.

4.1.2 Examples
We now formulate a few classical variational problems to illustrate the notions
of a functional and the corresponding admissible functions.
Example 4.1
(Arclength) Let A be the set of all continuously differentiable functions on an
interval a ≤ x ≤ b that satisfy the boundary conditions y(a) = y0, y(b) = y1. Let J
be the arclength functional on A defined by
To each y in A the functional J associates a real number that is the arclength of
the curve y = y(x) between the two fixed points P: (a, y0) and Q: (b, y1). The
associated problem in the calculus of variations is to minimize J, that is, the
arclength, over the set A. Clearly the minimizing arc is the straight line between
P and Q given by
The general methods of the calculus of variations lead to a proof of this fact: the
shortest distance between two points is a straight line.
Example 4.2
(Brachistochrone problem) A bead of mass m with initial velocity zero slides
with no friction under the force of gravity g from a point (0, b) to a point (a, 0)
along a wire defined by a curve y = y(x) in the xy plane. Which curve leads to the
fastest time of descent? Historically this problem was important in the
development of the calculus of variations. J. Bernoulli posed it in 1696 and
several well-known mathematicians of that day proposed solutions; Euler’s
solution led to general methods that were useful in solving a wide variety of such
problems. The solution curve itself is an arc of a cycloid, the curve traced out by
a point on the rim of a rolling wheel; so the brachistochrone, or the curve of
shortest time, is a cycloid. To formulate this problem analytically we compute
the time of descent T for a fixed curve y = y(x) connecting the points (0, b) and
(a, 0) (see Fig. 4.2). Letting s denote the arc-length along the curve measured

from the initial point (0, b), we have
Figure 4.2 The brachistochrone problem.
where S is the total arc-length of the curve and v denotes the velocity. Because ds
= (1 + y′(x)2)1/2 dx we have
To obtain an expression for v in terms of x we use the fact that energy is
conserved energy conservation; that is,
In terms of our notation,
Solving for v gives
Therefore the time required for the bead to descend is
(1.2) 
where we have explicitly noted that T depends on the curve y. Here, the set of
admissible functions A is the set of all continuously differentiable functions y

defined on 0 ≤ x ≤ a that satisfy the boundary conditions y(0) = b, y(a) = 0, and
the conditions
Equation (1.2) defines a functional on A. A real number is associated to each
curve, namely the time required for the bead to descend the curve. The
associated variational problem is to minimize T(y), where y  A, that is, to find
which curve y in A minimizes the time. Because of the fixed boundary
conditions, this problem, like Example 4.1, is called a fixed-endpoint problem.
Example 4.3
Let A be the set of all nonnegative continuous functions on an interval x1 ≤ x ≤ x,
and define the functional J on A by
which gives the area under the curve y = y(x). Clearly y(x) = 0 provides an
absolute minimum for J and there is no maximum.
The types of functional that are of interest in the classic calculus of variations
are ones defined by integral expressions of the form
(1.3) 
where L = L(x, y, y′) is some given function and A is a well-defined class of
functions. In the last three examples the functionals are each of the form (1.3)
with
(1.4) 
(1.5) 
(1.6) 
respectively. The function L is called the Lagrangian (after Lagrange). We
assume that L is twice continuously differentiable in each of its three arguments.
It is customary to drop the independent variable x in parts of the integrand in
(1.3) and just write

As is customary practice in physics, in problems where time is the independent
variable we often write
where the overdot on y denotes differentiation with respect to t.
EXERCISES
1. Show that the functional
where y is continuously differentiable on 0 ≤ t ≤ 1, actually assumes its
maximum value 2/π for the function y(t) = −t.
2. Consider the functional J(y) = ƒ10 (1 + x) (y′)2 dx, where y is twice
continuously differentiable and y(0) = 0, y(1) = 1. Of all functions of the
form y(x) = x + c1x(1 − x) + c2x2(1 − x), where c1 and c2 are constants, find
the one that minimizes J.

4.2 Necessary Conditions for Extrema
4.2.1 Normed Linear Spaces
As noted in Section 4.1, a necessary condition for a function f to have a local
minimum at some point x0 is f′(x0) = 0. A similar condition holds for functionals,
provided the concept of derivative can be defined. In elementary calculus the
derivative of a function f at x0 is defined by a limit process, that is,
if the limit exists. For a functional J: A → , this formula makes no sense if f is
replaced by J, and x0 and Δx are replaced by functions in A. However, the
essence of the derivative, namely the limit process, can be carried over in a
natural way to functionals.
To define the derivative of a functional J at some function y0 in its domain A,
we require a notion of closeness in the set A so that the value J(y0) can be
compared to J(y) for a function y close to y0. To carry out this idea in a general
manner we assume that the set of admissible functions A has a linear algebraic
structure imposed on it. In particular, we assume A is a subset of a normed
linear space where addition of functions and multiplication by scalars (real
numbers) are defined, and there is some measuring device that gives definiteness
to the idea of the size of a function. Actually, the objects in the normed linear
space may be vectors (in a geometric sense), functions, numbers, tensors,
matrices, and so on. Normed linear spaces whose elements are functions are
frequently called function spaces. We make a precise definition in two parts—
first we define a linear space, and then we define a norm.
A collection V of objects u, v, w,… is called a real linear space if the
following conditions are satisfied:
1. There is a binary operation + on V such that u + v  V whenever u, v  V.
That is, V is closed under the operation +, which is called addition.
2. Addition is commutative and associative; that is, u + v = v + u and u + (v +
w) = (u + v) + w.
3. There is zero element 0 in V that has the property that u + 0 = u for all u 

V. The zero element is also called the identity under addition and it is
unique.
4. For each u  V there is a v  V such that u + v = 0. The element v is called
the inverse and u and is denoted by − u.
5. For each u  V and α  , scalar multiplication αu is defined and αu  V.
6. Scalar multiplication is associative and distributive; that is,
for all α, β  , and u, v  V.
7. 1u = u for all u  V.
These conditions, or axioms, put algebraic structure on the set V. The first four
conditions state that there is an addition defined on V that satisfies the usual rules
of arithmetic; the last three conditions state that the objects of V can be
multiplied by real numbers and that reasonable rules governing that
multiplication hold true. The reader is already familiar with some examples of
linear spaces. In linear algebra courses, linear spaces are usually called vector
spaces.
Example 4.4
(The set 
n) Here an object is an n-tuple of real numbers (x1, x2,…, xn), where xi 
 . Addition and scalar multiplication are defined by
and
The zero element is (0, 0,…, 0) and the inverse of (x1,…, xn) is (−x1,…, −xn). It
is easily checked that the remaining properties hold true. The objects of 
n are
called vectors and they are represented by directed arrows in two and three
dimensions.
Example 4.5
(Continuous functions) The function space C[a, b] represents the set of all
continuous functions f, g, h,… defined on an interval a ≤ x ≤ b3 Addition and

scalar multiplication are defined pointwise by
From calculus we know that the sum of two continuous functions is a continuous
function, and a continuous function multiplied by a constant is also a continuous
function. The zero element is the 0 function, that is, the function that is
constantly zero on [a, b]. The inverse of f is −f, which is the reflection of f(x)
through the x axis. Again it is easily checked that the other conditions are
satisfied. Geometrically the sum of the two functions f and g is the graphical
sum, and multiplication of f by α stretches the graph of f vertically by a factor α.
Example 4.6
The function space C1[a, b] is the set of all continuous functions on an interval
[a, b] whose derivative is also continuous. Addition and scalar multiplication are
defined as in the last example. It is clear that C1[a, b] satisfies the other axioms
for a linear space. This linear space is commonly called the set of continuously
differentiable, or smooth, functions on the interval [a, b]. In a similar way we
define C2[a, b] as the set of continuous functions on [a, b] whose second
derivatives are also continuous. Similarly, we define Cn[a, b] as the set of
continuous functions whose nth derivatives are continuous.
The linear spaces, or function spaces, in the last two examples are typical of
those occurring in the calculus of variations. Later, in Chapter 5, we define the
Lp spaces, which play a key role in modern applied analysis.
A linear space is said to have a norm if there is a rule that determines the size
of a given element in the space. In particular if V is a linear space, then a norm
on V is a mapping that associates to each y  V a nonnegative real number
denoted by ||y||, called the norm of y, and that satisfies the following conditions:
1. ||y|| = 0 if, and only if, y = 0.
2. ||αy|| = |α|||y|| for all α  , y  V.
3. ||y1 + y2|| ≤ ||y1|| + ||y2|| for all y1, y2  V.
A normed linear space is a linear space V on which there is defined a norm ||
·||. The number ||y|| is interpreted as the magnitude or size of y. Thus, a norm puts
geometric structure on V. The examples show that there are several ways to
define a norm on a given space.

Example 4.7
The linear space 
n is a normed linear space if we define a norm by
It is not difficult to show that this (Euclidean) norm satisfies the conditions 1
through 3. A norm on a linear space is not unique. In 
n the quantity
also defines a norm.
Example 4.8
C[a, b] becomes a normed linear space if we define a norm of a function by
(2.1) 
This norm is called the strong norm. The quantity
(2.2) 
also defines a norm on C[a, b], called the L1-norm. Both these norms provide a
way to define the magnitude of a continuous function on [a, b], and both easily
satisfy the Axioms 1 through 3.
Example 4.9
In the function space C1[a, b] the norm defined by
(2.3) 
is called the weak norm and it plays an important role in the calculus of
variations. The same norm could also be defined in Cn[a, b], n ≥ 2.
If V is a normed linear space with norm ||·||, then the distance between the
elements y1 and y2 in V is defined by
The motivation for this definition comes from the set of real numbers 
, where
the absolute value |x| is a norm. The distance between two real numbers a and b
is |a − b|. Another example is the distance between two functions y1 and y2 in
C1[a, b] measured in the weak norm (2.3),

(2.4) 
Having the notion of distance allows us to talk about nearness. Two elements of
a normed linear space are close if the distance between them is small. Two
functions y1 and y2 in C1[a, b] are close in the weak norm (2.3) if the quantity
||y1 − y2||w is small; this means that y1 and y2 have values that do not differ
greatly, and their derivatives do not differ greatly. The two functions y1 and y2
shown in Fig. 4.3 are not close in the weak norm, but they are close in the strong
norm because max |y1(x) − y2(x)| is small. Hence, closeness in one norm does not
imply closeness in another.
Figure 4.3 Two functions in C1[a, b] close in the strong norm but not close in
the weak norm.

4.2.2 Derivatives of Functionals
For a variational problem we assume the set of admissible functions A is a subset
of a normed linear space V. Then the set A can inherit the norm and algebraic
properties of the space V. Therefore the notions of local maxima and minima
make sense. If J: A →  is a functional on A, where A ⊆ V and V is a normed
linear space with norm ||·||, then J has a local minimum at y0  A, provided J(y0)
≤ J(y) for all y  A with ||y − y0|| < d, for some positive number d. We call y0 an
extremal of J and say J is stationary at y0. In the special case that A is a set of
functions and A ⊆ C1[a, b] with the weak norm, we say J has a weak relative
minimum at y0. If the norm on C1[a, b] is the strong norm, then we say J has a
strong relative minimum at y0.
In the calculus of variations the norm comes into play only in the theory of
sufficient conditions for extrema. In this chapter we focus only on necessary
conditions.
To motivate the definition of a derivative of a functional, let us rewrite the
limit definition of derivative of a function f at x0 as
The differential of f at x0, defined by df (x0, Δx) = f’(x0) Δx, is the linear part in
the increment Δx of the total change Δf  f(x0 + Δx) − f (x0). Therefore,
Now consider a functional J: A → 
, where A is a subset of a normed linear
space V. Specifically, V may be a function space. Let y0  A. To increment y0 we
fix an element h  V such that y0 + εh is in A for all real numbers ε sufficiently
small. The increment εh is called the variation of the function y0 and is often
denoted by δy0; that is, δy0 
 εh. Then we define the total change in the
functional J due to the change εh in y0 by
Our goal is to calculate the linear part of this change. To this end, we define the
real-valued function
which is a function of a real variable ε defined by evaluating the functional J on

the one parameter family of functions y0 + εh. Assuming 
 is sufficiently
differentiable in ε, we have
Therefore, 
’(0)ε is like a differential for the functional J, being the linear part,
or lowest order, of the increment ΔJ Thus, we are led to the following definition.
Definition 4.10
Let J: A →  be a functional on A, where A ⊆ V, and V a normed linear space.
Let y0  A and h  V such that y0 + εh  A for all ε sufficiently small. Then the
first variation (also called the G teaux derivative) of J at y0 in the direction of
h is defined by
(2.5) 
provided the derivative exists. Such a direction h for which (2.5) exists is called
an admissible variation at y0.
There is an analogy of δJ with a directional derivative. Let f(X) be a real
valued function defined for X = (x, y) in 
2, and let n = (n1, n2) be a unit vector.
We recall from calculus that the directional derivative of f at X0 = (x0, y0) in the
direction n is defined by
When (2.5) is written out in limit form, it becomes
and the analogy stands out clearly.
The recipe for calculating the first variation δJ(y0, h) is to use (2.5); that is,
evaluate J at y0 + εh, where h is chosen such that y0 + εh  A; then take the
derivative with respect to ε, afterwards setting ε = 0. Examples are in the next
section.

4.2.3 Necessary Conditions
Let J: A → 
 be a functional on A, where A ⊆ V, and let y0  A be a local
minimum for J relative to a norm ||·|| in V. Guided by results from the calculus,
we expect that the first variation δ J of J should vanish at y0. It is not difficult to
see that this is indeed the case. Let h ε V be such that y0 + εh is in A for
sufficiently small values of ε. Then the function 
(ε) defined by
has a local minimum at ε = 0. Hence from ordinary calculus we must have 
’(0)
= 0 or δJ(y0, h) = 0. This follows regardless of which h  V is chosen. Hence we
have proved the following theorem that gives a necessary condition for a local
minimum.
Theorem 4.11
Let J: A →  be a functional, A ⊆ V. If y0  A provides a local minimum for J
relative to the norm ||·||, then
(2.6) 
for all admissible variations h.
The fact that (2.6) holds for all admissible variations h often allows us to
eliminate h from the condition and obtain an equation just in terms of y0, which
can then be solved for y0. In the calculus of variations, the equation for y0 is a
differential equation. Since (2.6) is a necessary condition we are not guaranteed
that solutions y0 actually will provide a minimum. Therefore, all we know is that
y0 satisfying (2.6) are extremals, which are the candidates for maxima and
minima. In other words, J(y) is stationary at y0 in the direction h.
Example 4.12
Consider the functional J(y) = ƒ10 (1 + y′(x)2)dx, where y  C1[0, 1] and y(0) = 0,
y(1) = 1. Let y0(x) = x and h(x) = x(1 − x). Two members of the family of curves
y0 + εh = x + εx(1 − x) are sketched in Fig. 4.4. These are the variations in y0(x)
= x. We evaluate J on the family y0 + εh to get

Figure 4.4 Two members of the one-parameter family of curves y0(x) + εh(x) = x
+ εx(1 − x) (dashed) for two different values of the parameter ε.
Then 
 and ’(0) = 0. Hence we conclude that δJ(y0, h) = 0 and y0 =
x is an extremal; J is stationary at y0 = x in the direction h = x(1 − x).
EXERCISES
1. Determine whether the given set constitutes a real linear space under the
usual operations associated with elements of the set.
a) The set of all polynomials of degree ≤2.
b) The set of all continuous functions on [0, 1] satisfying f(0) = 0.
c) The set of all continuous functions on [0, 1] satisfying f(1) = 1.
2. If J(y) = ƒ1
0(x2 − y2 + (y′)2)dx, y  C2[0, 1], calculate ΔJ and δJ(y, h) when
y(x) = x and h(x) = x2.
3. Consider the functional 
 where y  C2 and
y(0) = 0 and y(1) = 1. Show that δJ(y0, h) = 0 for all h  C2 and h(0) = h(1) =
0, where y0(x) = ln(1 + x)/ln 2.
4. Consider the functional 
. Sketch the function y0(x) =
x and the family y0(x) + εh(x), where h(x) = sin x. Compute 
(ε)  J(y0 + εh)

and show that (0) = 0. Deduce that J is stationary at x in the direction sin x.
5. Let 
, where y is a continuous function
on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. Let y = x and h = x + 1, 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. Compute δJ(x, h).
6. Prove that (2.1) and (2.2) both satisfy properties for a norm on C[a, b].
7. In C1[0, 1] compute the distances between the two functions y1(x) = 0 and 
 in both the weak and strong norms.
8. Show that the first variation δJ(y0, h) satisfies the homogeneity condition
9. A functional J: V →  is linear if
and
Which of the following functionals on C1 [a, b] are linear?
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
 where G is a given differentiable
function
10. A functional J: V → , where V is a normed linear space, is continuous
at y0  V if for any ε > 0 there is a δ > 0 such that |J(y) − J(y0)| < ε whenever
||y − y0|| < δ.
a) Let V = C1 [a, b]. Prove that if J is continuous in the strong norm, then
it is continuous in the weak norm.
b) Give a specific example to show that continuity in the weak norm does
not imply continuity in the strong norm.
11. Compute the first variation of the functionals on C1[a, b] given in
Exercise 5(a)−(f).
12. Let J: V →  be a linear functional and V a normed linear space. Prove
that if J is continuous at y0 = 0, then it is continuous at each y  V.

13. The second variation of a functional J: A →  at y0  A in the direction h
is defined by
Find the second variation of the functional
where y  C2[0, 1].

4.3 The Simplest Problem
4.3.1 The Euler Equation
The simplest problem in the calculus of variations is to find a local minimum for
the functional
(3.1) 
where y  C2[a, b] and y(b) = y0, y(b) = y1. Here L is a given, twice continuously
differentiable function on [a, b] × 
2, and ||·|| is some norm in C2[a, b]. Actually,
our assumption that y is of class C2 could be weakened to y  C1 [a, b]. The
increased smoothness assumption, however, will make the work a little easier. In
this discussion we assume that the competing functions are class C2. The
references at the end of the chapter can be consulted to see how the analysis
changes if smoothness conditions are relaxed.
We seek a necessary condition. Guided by the last two sections we compute
the first variation of J. Let y be a local minimum and h a twice continuously
differentiable function satisfying h(a) = h(b) = 0. Then y + εh is an admissible
function and
Therefore,
where Ly denotes ∂L/∂y and Ly’ denotes ∂L/∂y’. Hence,
Therefore, a necessary condition for y(x) to be a local minimum is

(3.2) 
for all h  C2[a, b] with h(a) = h(b) = 0.
Condition (3.2) is not useful as it stands for determining y(x). Using the fact
that it must hold for all h, however, we can eliminate h and thereby obtain a
condition for y alone. First we integrate the second term in (3.2) by parts to
obtain
(3.3) 
Because h vanishes at a and b, the boundary terms vanish and the necessary
condition becomes
(3.4) 
for all h  C2[a, b] with h(a) = h(b) = 0. The following lemma, due to Lagrange,
provides the final step in our calculation by effectively allowing us to eliminate h
from condition (3.4). This lemma is one version of what is called the
fundamental lemma of the calculus of variations.
Lemma 4.13
If f(x) is continuous on [a, b] and if
(3.5) 
for every twice continuously differentiable function h with h(a) = h(b) = 0, then
f(x) = 0 for x  [a, b].
Proof
The proof is by contradiction. Assume for some x0 in (a, b) that f(x0) > 0.
Because f is continuous, f(x) > 0 for all x in some interval (x1, x2) containing x0.
For h(x) choose

a graph of which is shown in Fig. 4.5. The cubic factors (x − x1)3 and (x2 − x)3
appear so that h is smoothed out at x1 and x2 and is, therefore, of class C2. Then
Figure 4.5 Plot of the C2 function h(x).
because f is positive on (x1, x2). This contradicts (3.5) and the lemma is proved.
Applying the lemma to (3.4) with f(x) = Ly(x, y, y′) − (d/dx)Ly’ (x, y, y′), which
is continuous because L is twice continuously differentiable, we obtain the
following important theorem.
Theorem 4.14
If a function y provides a local minimum for the functional
where y  C2[a, b] and
then y must satisfy the differential equation
(3.6) 
Equation (3.6) is called the Euler equation or Euler-Lagrange equation. It is
a second-order ordinary differential equation that is, in general, nonlinear. It
represents a necessary condition for a local minimum and it is analogous to the
derivative condition f′(x) = 0 in differential calculus. Therefore its solutions are
not necessarily local minima. The solutions of (3.6) are (local) extremals. If y is

an extremal, then δJ(y, h) = 0 for all h, and J is stationary at y.
By writing out the total derivative in (3.6) using the chain rule, the Euler
equation becomes
Thus it is evident that the Euler equation is second order, provided Ly’y′ ≠ 0.

4.3.2 Solved Examples
We now determine the extremals for some specific variational problems.
Example 4.15
Find the extremals of the functional
The Lagrangian is L = (y’)2 + 3y + 2x. Then Ly = 3, Ly′ = 2y′ and the Euler
equation is
Integrating twice gives the extremals
The boundary conditions readily give C2 = 0 and C1 = 1/4. Therefore the
extremal of J satisfying the boundary conditions is
Further calculations would be required to determine whether this maximizes or
minimizes J.
Example 4.16
The arclength functional is
where y  C2[a, b], y(a) = y0 and y(b) = y1. A necessary condition for J to have a
local minimum at y is that y satisfy the Euler equation
or

Hence,
where C is a constant. Solving for y′ gives
where K is a constant. Therefore,
and the extremals are straight lines. Applying the boundary conditions
determines the constants K and M,
Therefore the unique extremal is 
, which is the equation
of the straight line connecting (a, y0) and (b, y1).

4.3.3 First Integrals
The Euler equation is a second-order ordinary differential equation and the
solution will generally contain two arbitrary constants. In special cases, when the
Lagrangian does not depend explicitly on one of its variables x, y, or y′, it is
possible to make an immediate simplification of the Euler equation. We consider
three cases:
1. If L = L(x, y), then the Euler equation is Ly(x, y) = 0, which is an algebraic
equation.
2. If L = L(x, y′), then the Euler equation is
(3.7) 
where C is any constant.
3. If L = L(y, y’), then the Euler equation is
(3.8) 
where C is any constant.
Propositions (1) and (2) follow obviously from the Euler equation. To prove
(3) we note that
Equations (3.7) and (3.8) are first integrals of the Euler equation. A first
integral of a second-order differential equation F(x, y, y’, y”) = 0 is an
expression of the form g(x, y, y′), involving one lower derivative, which is
constant whenever y is a solution of the original equation F(x, y, y’, y”) = 0.
Hence
represents an integration of the second-order equation. In the calculus of
variations, if L is independent of x, then L − y’Ly’ is a first integral of the Euler
equation and we say L − y′Ly’ is constant on the extremals. In mechanics, first
integrals are called conservation laws.

Example 4.17
(Brachistochrone) We determine the extremals of the brachistochrone problem.
The functional is
subject to the boundary conditions y(0) = b, y(a) = 0. The Lagrangian is
independent of x, and therefore a first integral of the Euler equation is given by
(3.8). Then
which simplifies to
Taking the square root of both sides and separating variables gives
where the minus sign is taken because dy/dx < 0. The last equation can be
integrated by making the trigonometric substitution
(3.9) 
One obtains
which yields
(3.10) 
Equations (3.9) and (3.10) are parametric equations for a cycloid. Here, in
contrast to the problem of finding the curve of shortest length between two
points, it is not clear that the cycloids just obtained actually minimize the given
functional. Further calculations would be required for confirmation.
Example 4.18

(Fermat’s principle) In the limit of geometric optics the principle of Fermat
(1601–1665) states that the time elapsed in the passage of light between two
fixed points in a medium is an extremum with respect to all possible paths
connecting the points. For simplicity we consider only light rays that lie in the xy
plane. Let c = c(x, y) be a positive continuously differentiable function
representing the velocity of light in the medium. Its reciprocal n = c−1 is called
the index of refraction of the medium. If P: (x1, y1) and Q: (x2, y2) are two fixed
points in the plane, then the time required for light to travel along a given path y
= y(x) connecting the two points is
Therefore, the actual light path connecting P and Q is the one that extremizes the
integral T(y). The differential equation for the extremal path is the Euler equation
EXERCISES
1. Find the extremal(s).
a) 
b) 
c) 
2. Find extremals for the following functionals:
3. Show that the Euler equation for the functional
has the form
4. Find an extremal for

5. 
Prove 
that 
the 
functional 
, where p and q are positive, assumes its absolute minimum value for the
function y = Y(x), where Y is the solution to the Euler equation.
6. Obtain a necessary condition for a function y  C[a, b] to be a local
minimum of the functional
where K(s, t) is a given continuous function of s and t on the square R: {(s, t)
| a ≤ s ≤ b, a ≤ t ≤ b}, K(s, t) = K(t, s), and f  C[a, b]. (The Euler equation is
an integral equation.)
7. Find the extremal for J(y) = ƒ1
0(1 + x)(y′)2dx, y  C2 and y(0) = 0, y(1) =
1. What is the extremal if the boundary condition at x = 1 is changed to y′(1)
= 0?
8. Describe the paths of light rays in the plane where the medium has index
of refraction given by
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
9. Show that the Euler equation for the problem
can be written in the form
10. Show that the minimal area of a surface of revolution is a catenoid, that
is, the surface found by revolving a catenary
about the x axis.

11. Find the extremals for
12. A Lagrangian has the form
where G is a given differentiable function. Find Euler’s equation and a first
integral.
13. Find extremals of the functional
over the domain 
. Show that J
does not assume a maximum value at these extremals. Explain why it does,
or does not, follow that the extremals yield minimum values of J.
14. (Economics) Let y = y(t) be an individual’s total capital at time t and let r
= r(t) be the rate that capital is spent. If U = U(r) is the rate of enjoyment,
then his total enjoyment over a lifetime 0 ≤ t ≤ T is
where the exponential factor reflects the fact that future enjoyment is
discounted over time. Initially, his capital is Y, and he desires y(T) = 0.
Because his capital gains interest at rate α,
Assume α < 2β < 2α. Determine r(t) and y(t) for which the individual’s total
enjoyment is maximized if his enjoyment function is U(r) = 2√r.

4.4 Generalizations
4.4.1 Higher Derivatives
In the simplest variational problem the Lagrangian depends on x, y, and y’. An
obvious generalization is to include higher derivatives in the Lagrangian. Thus
we consider the second-order problem
(4.1) 
where A is the set of all y  C4[a, b] that satisfy the boundary conditions
(4.2) 
The function L is assumed to be twice continuously differentiable in each of its
four arguments.
Again we seek a necessary condition. Let y  A provide a local minimum for J
with respect to some norm in C4[a, b], and choose h  C4[a, b] satisfying
(4.3) 
To compute the first variation, we form the function J(y + εh). Then
where Ly, and Ly’, and Ly″ are evaluated at (x, y, y’, y”). In this calculation two
integrations by parts are required on the term Ly″h“. Proceeding,
(4.4) 

By (4.3) the terms on the boundary at x = a and x = b vanish. Therefore,
(4.5) 
for all h  C4[a, b] satisfying (4.3). To complete the argument, another version of
the fundamental lemma is needed.
Lemma 4.19
If f is a continuous function on [a, b], and if
for all h  C4[a, b] satisfying (4.3), then f(x)  0 for x  [a, b].
The proof is nearly the same as before and is left as an exercise. Applying this
lemma to (4.5) gives a necessary condition for y to be a local minimum, that is,
(4.6) 
This is the Euler equation for the second-order problem defined by (4.1).
Equation (4.6) is a fourth-order ordinary differential equation for y, and its
general solution involves four arbitrary constants that can be determined from
the boundary conditions.
The nth-order variational problem is defined by the functional
y  C2n[a, b], with
The Euler equation in this case is
which is an ordinary differential equation of order 2n.

4.4.2 Several Functions
The functional J may depend on several functions y1,…, yn. To fix the notion, let
n = 2 and consider the functional
(4.7) 
where y1, y2  C2[a, b] with boundary conditions given by
(4.8) 
In this case suppose the pair y1 and y2 provide a local minimum for J. We vary
each independently by choosing h1 and h2 in C2[a, b], satisfying
(4.9) 
and forming a one-parameter admissible pair of functions y1 + εh1 and y2 + εh2.
Then
and 
 has a local minimum at ε = 0. Now
Integrating the last two terms in the integrand by parts and applying conditions
(4.9) gives
(4.10) 
for all h1, h2  C2[a, b]. Picking h2 = 0 on [a, b] gives
for all h1  C2[a, b]. By the fundamental lemma,
(4.11) 

Now in (4.10) pick h1 = 0 on [a, b]. Then
for all h1  C2[a, b]. Applying the fundamental lemma again yields
(4.12) 
Consequently, if the pair y1, y2 provides a local minimum for J, then y1 and y2
must satisfy the system of two ordinary differential equations (4.11) and (4.12).
These are the Euler equations for the problem. The four arbitrary constants
appearing in the general solution can be determined from the boundary data.
In general, if J depends on n functions,
(4.13) 
where yi  C2[a, b], and
then a necessary condition for y1,…, yn to provide a local minimum for J is that
y1,…, yn satisfy the Euler system of n ordinary differential equations
(4.14) 
If the Lagrangian L is independent of explicit dependence on x, that is, Lx = 0,
then it is left as an exercise to show that
is a first integral of (4.14).

4.4.3 Natural Boundary Conditions
Let us consider the following problem: A river with parallel straight banks b
units apart has stream velocity given by v(x, y) = v(x)j, where j is the unit vector
in the y direction (see Fig. 4.6). Assuming that one of the banks is the y axis and
that the point (0, 0) is the point of departure, what route should a boat take to
reach the opposite bank in the shortest possible time? Assume that the speed of
the boat in still water is c, where c > v.
Figure 4.6 Path y = y(x) across a river with velocity field v(x, y) = v(x)j.
This problem differs from those in earlier sections in that the right-hand
endpoint, the point of arrival on the line x = b, is not specified; it must be
determined as part of the solution to the problem. It can be shown (see the
Exercises) that the time required for the boat to cross the river along a given path
y = y(x) is
(4.15) 
The variational problem is to minimize J(y) subject to the conditions
Such a problem is called a free endpoint problem, and if y(x) is an extremal
then a certain condition must hold at x = b. Conditions of these types, called
natural boundary conditions, are the subject of this section. Just as common
are problems where both endpoints are unspecified.
To fix the notion we consider the problem

(4.16) 
where y  C2[a, b] and
(4.17) 
Let y be a local minimum. Then the variations h must be C2 functions that satisfy
the single condition
(4.18) 
Figure 4.7 shows several variations y + εh of the extremal y. No condition on h
at x = b is required, because the admissible functions are unspecified at the right
endpoint.
Figure 4.7 Variations y = y(x) + εh(x) of y(x) satisfying h(a) = 0.
The first variation is
Because h(a) = 0, a necessary condition for y to be a local minimum is
(4.19) 
for every h  C2(a, b) satisfying h(a) = 0. Because (4.19) holds for these h, it
must hold for h also satisfying the condition h(b) = 0. Hence

(4.20) 
and by the fundamental lemma, y must satisfy the Euler equation
(4.21) 
Then, substituting (4.21) into (4.19) gives
(4.22) 
Now, because (4.22) holds for all choices of h(b), we must have
(4.23) 
which is a condition on the extremal y at x = b. Equation (4.23) is called a
natural boundary condition. The Euler equation (4.21), the fixed boundary
condition y(a) = A, and the natural boundary condition (4.23) are enough to
determine the extremal for the variational problem (4.16) and (4.17). By similar
arguments if the left endpoint y(a) is unspecified, then the natural boundary
condition on an extremal y at x = a is Ly’(a, y(a),y′(a)) = 0.
Example 4.20
We find the natural boundary condition at x = b for the river crossing problem
(4.15). In this case
The boundary condition (4.23) becomes
which can be simplified to
Thus, the slope that the boat enters the bank at x = b is the ratio of the water
speed at the bank to the boat velocity in still water.
Example 4.21
Find the differential equation and boundary conditions for the extremal of the
variational problem

where p and q are positive smooth functions on [0, 1]. In this case Ly = −2q(x)y,
Ly’ = 2p(x)y′, and the Euler equation is
which is a Sturm–Liouville type equation. The natural boundary condition at x =
1 is given by (4.23), or
Because p > 0, the boundary conditions are
EXERCISES
1. Find extremals for the following functionals:
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
2. Prove that the Euler equation for 
 has first
integral Ly’ − (d/dx)Ly″ = C when L is independent of y. If L is independent
of x, show that
is a first integral.

3. One version of the Ramsey growth model in economics involves
minimizing the total product
over a fixed planning period [0, T], where M = M(t) is the capital at time t
and M(0) = M0 is the initial capital. If M(t) minimizes J, find the capital
M(T) at the end of the planning period.
4. Find the extremals for a functional of the form
given that L satisfies the condition 
.
5. Find the extremals for
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
6. Determine the natural boundary condition at x = b for the variational
problem defined by
where G is a given differentiable function on .
7. Find the extremal(s) of the functional
in the class of all C2[0, b] functions with y(0) = 0 and y(b) free. Take 0 < k <
1.
8. Find the natural boundary condition at x = 2 associated with the functional

4.5 Hamilton’s Principle
According to the doctrine of classical dynamics, one associates with the system
being described a set of quantities or dynamical variables, each of which has a
well-defined value at each instant of time and which defines the state of the
dynamical system at that instant. Further, it is assumed that the time evolution of
the system is completely determined if its state is known at some given instant.
Analytically this doctrine is expressed by the fact that the dynamical variables
satisfy a set of differential equations (the equations of motion of the system) as
functions of time, along with initial conditions. The program of classical
dynamics consists of listing the dynamical variables and formulating the
equations of motion that predict the system’s evolution in time. Newton’s second
law of motion describes the dynamics of a mechanical system.
Another method of obtaining the equations of motion is from a variational
principle. This method is based on the idea that a system should evolve along a
path of least resistance. Principles of this sort have a long history in physical
theories dating back to antiquity when Hero of Alexandria stated a minimum
principle concerning the path of reflected light rays. In the 17th century,
Fermat’s principle, that light rays travel along the path of shortest time, was put
forth. For mechanical systems, Maupertuis’s principle of least action stated that a
system should evolve from one state to another in such a way that the action (a
vaguely defined term with the energy × time) is smallest. Lagrange and Gauss
were advocates of similar principles. In the early part of the 19th century,
however, W. R. Hamilton (1805–1865) stated what has become an
encompassing, aesthetic principle that can be generalized to embrace many areas
of physics.
Hamilton’s principle states that the time evolution of a mechanical system
occurs in such a manner that the integral of the difference between kinetic and
potential energy is stationary. To be more precise, let y1,…, yn denote a set of
generalized coordinates of a given dynamical system. That is, regarded as
functions of time, we assume that y1,…, yn completely specify the state of the
system at any instant. Further, we assume that there are no relations among the
yi, so that they may be regarded as independent. In general, the yi may be
lengths, angles, or whatever. The time derivatives yi,…, yn are called the

generalized velocities. The kinetic energy T is, in the most general case, a
quadratic form in the yi, that is,
(5.1) 
where the aij are known functions of the coordinates y1,…, yn. The potential
energy V is a scalar function
(5.2) 
We define the Lagrangian of the system by
(5.3) 
Hamilton’s principle for these systems may then be stated as follows: Consider
a mechanical system described by generalized coordinates y1,…, yn with
Lagrangian given by (5.3). Then the motion of the system from time t0 to t1 is
such that the functional
(5.4) 
is stationary for the functions y1(t),…, yn(t), which describe the actual time
evolution of the system. If we regard the set of coordinates y1,…, yn as
coordinates in n dimensional space, then the equations
are parametric equations of a curve C that joins two states S0: (y1(t0),…, yn(t0))
and S1: (y1(t1),…, yn(t1)). Hamilton’s principle then states that among all paths in
configuration space connecting the initial state S0 to the final state S1, the actual
motion takes place along the path that affords an extreme value to the integral
(5.4). The actual path is an extremal. In physics and engineering, Hamilton’s
principle is often stated concisely as
The functional ƒ L dt is called the action integral for the system.
Because the curve yi = yi(t), i = 1,…, n, along which the motion occurs, makes
the functional J stationary, it follows from the calculus of variations that the yi(t)
must satisfy the Euler equations

(5.5) 
In mechanics, the Euler equations (5.5) are called Lagrange’s equations. They
form the equations of motion, or governing equations, for the system. We say
that the governing equations follow from a variational principle if we can find
an L such that δ ƒ L dt = 0 gives those governing equations as necessary
conditions for an extremum.
If the Lagrangian L is independent of time t, that is, Lt = 0, then a first integral
is
This equation is a conservation law. The quantity 
 is called
the Hamiltonian of the system, and it frequently represents the total energy.
Thus, if L is independent of time, then energy is conserved.
Example 4.22
(Harmonic oscillator) Consider the motion of a mass m attached to a spring
obeying Hooke’s law, where the restoring force is F = −ky. The variable y is a
generalized coordinate representing the positive displacement of the mass from
equilibrium, and k > 0 is the spring constant. The kinetic and potential energies
are
The Lagrangian is therefore
and Hamilton’s principle states that the motion takes place in such a way that
is stationary. Lagrange’s equation is
or

which expresses Newton’s second law that force equals mass times acceleration.
Its solution gives the extremals
where C1 and C2 are constants that can be determined from boundary conditions.
Example 4.23
(Pendulum) Consider a simple pendulum of length l and bob mass m suspended
from a frictionless support. To describe the state at any time t we choose the
generalized coordinate θ measuring the angle displaced from the vertical
equilibrium position. If s denotes the actual displacement of the bob along a
circular arc measured from equilibrium, then the kinetic energy is
where we have used s = lθ. The potential energy of the bob is mg times the
height above its equilibrium position, or
By Hamilton’s principle the motion takes place so that
is stationary. Lagrange’s equation is
or
which describes the evolution the system. For small displacements sin θ ≈ θ and
the equation becomes  + (g/l)θ = 0, whose solution exhibits simple harmonic
motion.
Example 4.24
(Central force field) Consider the planar motion of a mass m that is attracted to
the origin with a force inversely proportional to the square of the distance from
the origin (see Fig. 4.8). For generalized coordinates we take the polar
coordinates r and θ of the position of the mass. The kinetic energy is

Figure 4.8 The motion of a mass in an inverse-square, central force field.
The force is −k/r2 for some constant k, and thus the potential energy is
Hamilton’s principle requires that
is stationary. Lagrange’s equations are
or
These can be rewritten as

which is a coupled system of ordinary differential equations. The Exercises
request a solution.
In summary, Hamilton’s principle gives us a procedure for finding the
equations of motion of a system if we can write down the kinetic and potential
energies. This offers an alternative approach to writing down Newton’s second
law for a system, which requires that we know the forces. Because Hamilton’s
principle only results in writing the equations of motion, why not just directly
determine the governing equations and forgo the variational principle altogether?
Actually, this may be a legitimate objection, particularly in view of the fact that
the variational principle is usually derived a posteriori, that is, from the known
equations of motion and not conversely, as would be relevant from the point of
view of the calculus of variations. Moreover, if a variational principle is given as
the basic principle for the system, then there are complicated sufficient
conditions for extrema that must be considered, and they seem to have little or
no role in physical problems. Finally, although variational principles do to some
extent represent a unifying concept for physical theories, the extent is by no
means universal; it is impossible to state such principles for some systems with
constraints or dissipative forces.
On the other hand, aside from the aesthetic view, the ab initio formulation of
the governing law by a variational principle has arguments on its side. The
action integral plays a fundamental role in the development of numerical
methods for solving differential equations (Rayleigh–Ritz method, Galerkin
methods, etc.); it also plays a decisive role in the definition of Hamilton’s
characteristic function, the basis for the Hamilton–Jacobi theory. Furthermore,
many variational problems occur in geometry and other areas apart from
physics; in these problems the action or fundamental integral is an a priori
notion. In summary, the calculus of variations provides a general context in
which to study wide classes of problems of interest in many areas of science,
engineering, and mathematics.

4.5.1 Hamilton’s Equations
The Euler equations for the variational problem
(5.6) 
form a system of n second-order ordinary differential equations. We now
introduce a canonical method for reducing these equations to a system of 2n
first-order equations. For simplicity we examine the case n = 1,
(5.7) 
The Euler equation is
(5.8) 
First we define a new variable p, called the canonical momentum by
(5.9) 
If 
, then the implicit function theorem guarantees that (5.9) can be
solved for y in terms of t, y, and p to get
(5.10) 
Now we define the Hamiltonian H by
(5.11) 
Notice that H is just the expression 
, where  is given by (5.10). In
many systems H is the total energy.
Example 4.25
For a particle of mass m moving in one dimension with potential energy V(y), the
Lagrangian is given by 
. Hence 
, which is the
momentum of the particle, and
which is the total energy of the particle written in terms of position and
momentum.

Now, from (5.11),
and
Therefore, we have shown that the Euler equation (5.8) can be written as an
equivalent system of equations
(5.12) 
Equations (5.12) are called Hamilton’s equations. They form a system of first-
order differential equations for y and p.
Example 4.26
Consider the harmonic oscillator whose Lagrangian is
(5.13) 
The canonical momentum is
Solving for  gives
and therefore the Hamiltonian is
which is the sum of the kinetic and potential energy, or the total energy of the
system. Now
and so Hamilton’s equations are
(5.14) 

One way to solve these equations in the yp (phase) plane is to divide them to
obtain
Separating variables and integrating yields
which is a family of ellipses in the yp plane.
For the general action integral
depending on n functions y1,…, yn, the canonical momenta are
(5.15) 
Assuming
we can solve the system of n equations (5.15) for y1,…, yn to obtain
The Hamiltonian H is defined by
Using an argument exactly like the one used for the case n = 1, we obtain the
canonical form of the Euler equations,
(5.16a) 
(5.16b) 
i = 1,…, n, which are Hamilton’s equations. They represent 2n first-order
ordinary differential equations for the 2n functions y1,…, yn, p1,…, pn. A
complete discussion of the role of the canonical formalism in the calculus of

variations, geometry, and physics can be found in Rund (1966).

4.5.2 The Inverse Problem
In general, a variational principle exists for a given physical system if there is a
Lagrangian L such that the Euler equations
corresponding to the action integral ƒ L dt coincide with the governing equations
of the system. For conservative mechanical systems Hamilton’s principle tells us
that L = T − V. How can we determine the Lagrangian L for other systems if we
know the equations of motion? This problem is known as the inverse problem of
the calculus of variations. Let us formulate the inverse problem for n = 1. Given
a second-order ordinary differential equation
(5.17) 
find a Lagrangian 
 such that (5.17) is the Euler equation
(5.18) 
Generally, the problem has infinitely many solutions. To determine L we write
the Euler equation as
or
There is a general procedure for characterizing all such Lagrangians, but it is
often simpler to proceed directly by matching terms in the Euler equation to
terms in the given differential equation.
Example 4.27
Consider a damped spring-mass oscillator where a mass m is suspended from a
spring with spring constant k and there is a dashpot offering a resistive force
numerically equal to 
, where a is the damping constant, and y is the
displacement of the mass from equilibrium. By Newton’s law
or
(5.19) 

Equation (5.19) is the damped harmonic oscillator equation. The system is not
conservative because of the damping, and there is not a scalar potential. We
cannot apply Hamilton’s principle directly. We seek a Lagrangian L(t, y, y) such
that (5.19) is the Euler equation. Multiplying (5.19) by a nonnegative function
f(t) we obtain
(5.20) 
Equation (5.20) must coincide with the Euler equation
An obvious choice is to take 
, so that
and
where M and N are arbitrary functions. It follows that
or
Thus mf’(t) = af(t), or f(t) = eat/m. Hence
Selecting M = 0 gives N = −(k/2)y2eat/m, and therefore a Lagrangian for the
damped harmonic oscillator is
This expression is the Lagrangian for the undamped oscillator times a time-
dependent factor.
EXERCISES
1. Consider the functional 
. Find the
Hamiltonian H(t, y, p) and write down Hamilton’s equations for the problem.
2. Write down Hamilton’s equations for the functional
Solve the equations and sketch the solution curves in the yp plane.

3. Derive Hamilton’s equations for the functional
representing the motion of a pendulum in a plane.
4. A particle of unit mass moves along a y axis under the influence of a
potential given by
where ω and a are positive constants.
a) What is the potential energy V(y)? Determine the Lagrangian and write
down the equation of motion.
b) Find the Hamiltonian H(y, p) and show it coincides with the total
energy. Write down Hamilton’s equations. Is energy conserved? Is
momentum conserved?
c) If the total energy E is ω2/10, and at time t = 0 the particle is at y = 0,
what is the initial velocity?
d) Sketch the possible phase trajectories in phase space when the total
energy in the system is given by E = ω6/12a2. [Hint: note that p = 
 What is the value of E above which oscillatory
motion is not possible?
5. Give an alternate derivation of Hamilton’s equations by rewriting the
action integral
as
where 
, treating y and p as independent and finding the
Euler equations.
6. A particle of mass m moves in one dimension under the influence of a
force F(y, t) = ky−2et, where y is position, t is time, and k is a constant.
Formulate Hamilton’s principle for this system and derive the equation of
motion. Determine the Hamiltonian and compare it with the total energy. Is
energy conserved?

7. A particle of mass m is falling under the action of gravity with resistive
forces neglected. If y denotes the distance measured downward, find the
Lagrangian for the system and determine the equation of motion from a
variational principle.
8. Consider a system of n particles where mi is the mass of the ith particle
and (xi, yi, zi) is its position in space. The kinetic energy of the system is
and assume that the system has a potential energy
such that the force acting on the ith particle has components
Show that Hamilton’s principle applied to this system yields
which are Newton’s equations for a system of n particles.
9. Consider a simple plane pendulum with a bob of mass m attached to a
string of length l. After the pendulum is set in motion the string is shortened
by a constant rate dl/dt = −α = const. Formulate Hamilton’s principle and
determine the equation of motion. Compare the Hamiltonian to the total
energy. Is energy conserved?
10. Consider the differential equations
governing the motion of a mass in an inverse square central force field.
a) Using the chain rule show that
and therefore the equations of motion may be written
b) Let r = u−1 and show that

c) Solve the differential equation in part (b) to obtain
where ε and θ0 are constants of integration.
d) Show that elliptical orbits are obtained when ε < 1.
11. Find a Lagrangian 
 such that the Euler equation coincides with
the Emden–Fowler equation
12. A particle moving in one dimension in a constant external force field
with frictional force proportional to its velocity has equation of motion
Find a Lagrangian 
.
13. Using the electrical–mechanical analogy and the result for the damped
harmonic oscillator, determine a Lagrangian for an RCL electrical circuit
whose differential equation is
where I(t) is the current, L the inductance, C the capacitance, and R the
resistance.
14. Consider the nonlinear equation
where p and f are continuous functions with antiderivatives P(t) and F(y),
respectively. Find a Lagrangian L = L(t, y, y’) such that the Euler equation
associated with the functional J(y) = ƒb
a L dt is equivalent to the given
equation. (Hint: Multiply the equation by ep(t).)

4.6 Isoperimetric Problems
In differential calculus the problem of minimizing a given function f(x, y) subject
to a subsidiary condition g(x, y) = constant is a common one. Now we consider
classes of variational problems in which the competing functions are required to
conform to certain restrictions, in addition to the normal endpoint conditions.
Such restrictions are called constraints and they may take the form of integral
relations, algebraic equations, or differential equations. In this section we limit
the discussion to integral constraints.
One method for solving the constraint problem in calculus is the Lagrange
multiplier rule. We state this necessary condition precisely because it is used in
the subsequent discussion.
Theorem 4.28
Let f and g be differentiable functions with gx(x0, y0) and gy(x0, y0) not both zero.
If (x0, y0) provides an extreme value to f subject to the constraint g = C =
constant, then there exists a constant λ such that
(6.1) 
(6.2) 
and
(6.3) 
where
The proof can be found in most calculus books. For practical calculations the
three conditions in the theorem can be used to determine x0, y0, and the Lagrange
multiplier λ.
A variational problem having an integral constraint is known as an
isoperimetric problem. In particular, consider the problem of minimizing the
functional
(6.4) 
subject to

(6.5) 
where y  C2 [a, b] and
(6.6) 
and k is a fixed constant. The given functions L and G are assumed to be twice
continuously differentiable. The subsidiary condition (6.5) is called an
isoperimetric constraint.
In essence, we follow the procedure in earlier sections for problems without
constraints. We embed an assumed local minimum y(x) in a family of admissible
functions. A one-parameter family y(x) + εh(x) is not, however, a suitable
choice, because those curves may not maintain the constancy of W. Therefore we
introduce a two-parameter family
where h1, h2  C2[a, b],
(6.7) 
and ε1 and ε2 are real parameters ranging over intervals containing the origin. We
assume that W does not have an extremum at y. Then for any choice of h1 and h2
there will be values of ε1 and ε2 in the neighborhood of (0, 0) for which W(z) = k.
Evaluating J and W at z gives
Because y is the local minimum for (6.4) subject to the constraint (6.5), the point
(ε1, ε2) = (0, 0) must be a local minimum for 
(ε1, ε2) subject to the constraint 
(ε1, ε2) = k. This is just a differential calculus problem and so the Lagrange
multiplier rule may be applied. There must exist a constant λ such that
(6.8) 
where 
* is defined by

with
(6.9) 
We now calculate the derivatives in (6.8), afterward setting ε1 = ε2 = 0.
Accordingly,
Integrating the second term by parts and applying conditions (6.7) give
From (6.8), and because of the arbitrary character of h1 or h2, the fundamental
lemma implies
(6.10) 
which is a necessary condition for an extremum.
In practice, the solution of the second-order differential equation (6.10) will
yield a function y(x) that involves two arbitrary constants and the unknown
multiplier λ. These may be evaluated by the two boundary conditions (6.6) and
by substituting y(x) into the isoperimetric constraint (6.5).
Example 4.29
(Shape of a Hanging Rope) A rope of length l with constant density ρ hangs
from two fixed points (a, y0) and (b, y1) in the plane. Let y(x) be an arbitrary
configuration of the rope with the y axis adjusted so that y(x) > 0. A small
element of length ds at (x, y) has mass ρds and potential energy ρgy ds relative to
y = 0. Therefore, the total potential energy of the rope hanging in the arbitrary
configuration y = y(x) is given by the functional
(6.11) 
It is known that the actual configuration minimizes the potential energy.
Therefore, we are faced with minimizing (6.11) subject to the isoperimetric
condition

(6.12) 
Hence, we form the auxiliary function
and write the associated Euler equation (6.10). In this case L* does not depend
explicitly on x, and thus a first integral is
or
Solving for y′ and separating variables yields
Letting u = ρ gy + λ and using the antiderivative formula
gives
Then
Therefore, the shape of a hanging rope is a catenary. The constants C, C2, and λ
may be determined from (6.12) and the endpoint conditions y(a) = y0 and y(b) =
y1. In practice this calculation is difficult, and there may not be a smooth
solution for large values of l. (Why?)
Example 4.30
Consider the problem of minimizing
subject to the constraint

(6.13) 
Here  and m are constants, and V = V(x) is a given function. The auxiliary
Lagrangian
where −E is a Lagrange multiplier. The Euler equation is
or
(6.14) 
Equation (6.14) is the Schrödinger equation for the wave function  in quantum
mechanics for a particle of mass m under the influence of a potential V. Equation
(6.13) is a normalization condition for the wave function , whose square is a
probability density. In general, solutions  of (6.14) will exist only for discrete
values of the multiplier E, which are identified with the possible energy levels of
the particle and are the eigenvalues. These problems are discussed in Chapter 5.
EXERCISES
1. Find extremals of the isoperimetric problem
subject to
2. Find extremals for the isoperimetric problem
3. Derive a necessary condition for an extremum for the isoperimetric
problem: Minimize

subject to
and
where C, A1, A2, B1, and B2 are constants.
4. Use the result of the preceding exercise to maximize
subject to
Show that J represents the area enclosed by a curve with parametric
equations x = x(t), y = y(t), and the constraint fixes the length of the curve.
Thus, this is the problem of determining which curve of a specified
perimeter encloses the maximum area. The term isoperimetric, meaning
same perimeter, originated in this context.
Answer: Circles (x − c1)2 + (y − c2)2 = λ2.
5. Determine the equation of the shortest arc in the first quadrant that passes
through (0, 0) and (1, 0) and encloses a prescribed area A with the x axis,
where 0 < A ≤ π/8.
6. Write down equations that determine the solution of the isoperimetric
problem
subject to
where p, q, and r are given functions and y(a) = y(b) = 0. The result is a
Sturm–Liouville eigenvalue problem (Chapter 5).

7. Consider the problem of minimizing the functional
(6.15) 
subject to the algebraic constraint
(6.16) 
and boundary conditions
with all of the functions possessing the usual differentiability conditions. If
y(t) and z(t) provide a local minimum, show that there exists a function λ(t)
such that
(Hint: Solve (6.16) to get z = g(t, y), and substitute into (6.15) to obtain a
functional depending only upon y. Find the Euler equation and use the
condition (∂/∂y)G(t, y, g(t, y)) = 0.)

REFERENCES AND NOTES
The calculus of variations is an old subject dating back to the late 17th century.
As such, the literature is vast, and there are many excellent treatments of the
theory for both necessary and sufficient conditions. The references below
represent a few of the recent books that complement this text. A classical
reference is Gelfand and Fomin (1963). More recent are Pinch (1993) and van
Brunt (2004). A definitive treatise on the canonical formalism is in Rund (1966),
and a treatment of invariance of functionals under local Lie groups of
transformations, leading to conservation laws and Noether’s theorem, is
contained in Logan (1977) and Neuenschwander (2010). This material is also
covered in detail in the first edition of this text (J. D. Logan, 1987). An
important generalization of the calculus of variations is optimal control theory,
which is not covered in the present text; see Pinch (1993) for an accessible
introduction, and Lenhart and Workman (2007) for applications to biology.
Finally, an outstanding, elementary treatment of the basic calculus concepts for
functions of a real variable can be found in the classic by Spivak (2008).
Gelfand, I. M. & Fomin, S. V. 1963. Calculus of Variations, Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ (reprinted by Dover Publications, Inc., 2000).
Lenhart, S. & Workman, J. T. 2007. Optimal Control Applied to Biological
Models, Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, FL.
Logan, J. D. 1987. Applied Mathematics: A Contemporary Approach, Wiley-
Interscience, New York.
Logan, J. D. 1977. Invariant Variational Principles, Academic Press, New York.
Neuenschwander, D. E. 2010. Emmy Noether’s Wonderful Theorem, Johns
Hopkins University Press.
Pinch, E. R. 1993. Optimal Control and the Calculus of Variations, Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Rund, H. 1966. The Hamilton-Jacobi Theory in the Calculus of Variations, Van
Nostrand, London.
Spivak, M. 2008. Calculus, 4th ed., Publish or Perish Inc., Houston.
van Brunt, B. 2004. The Calculus of Variations, Springer-Verlag, New York.
1 Leonard Euler (1701–1783), a Swiss mathematician who spent much of his

professional life in St. Petersburg, was perhaps one of the most prolific
contributors to mathematics and science of all time. Some may rank him at the
top of all mathematicians. His name is attached to major results in nearly
every area of study in mathematics.
2 Joseph Louis Lagrange (1736–1813) was one of the great mathematicians in
the 18th century, whose work had a deep influence on subsequent research.

Chapter 5
Boundary Value Problems and Integral
Equations
Topics in this chapter form the traditional core of applied mathematics—
boundary value problems, orthogonal expansions, integral equations, Green’s
functions, and distributions. All of these subjects are interrelated in one of the
most aesthetic theories in all of mathematics. The descriptive term ‘far-reaching’
is an understatement.
We can take a very general overview and summarize our perspective as
follows. In an abstract sense, mathematics can be thought of as imposing
structures on sets of objects and studying their properties. In linear algebra, for
example, the algebraic structure of a vector space is imposed, and addition and
scalar multiplication are defined that satisfy certain rules. We can further define
a geometric structure on a vector space that imposes concepts like
perpendicularity and distance. Finally, linear transformations between vector
spaces are introduced and we study how they interrelate with the algebraic and
geometric structures. This all leads to the solution of linear systems, the
eigenvalue problem, and the decomposition of the vector space and the
transformation into fundamental, or canonical, forms. These ideas extend in a
straightforward manner to infinite-dimensional function spaces and linear
differential and integral operators on those spaces. This theory is not only
insightful, but it has far-reaching applications to science, engineering, and
mathematics.
To go further, elementary linear algebra deals with finite dimensional vector
spaces, such as 
n. The vector space 
n is the set of all n-tuples of real numbers,
and we represent a vector as column vector x. Any set of n independent vectors
forms a basis for 
n, which means every vector in 
n can be uniquely expanded
as a linear combination of those n vectors. Then, a linear transformation A
between two vector spaces, A : 
n → 
m, can be represented by an n × m

matrix. The important problems can then be formulated using matrices.
1. (Solvability Problem) Given a linear transformation A : 
n → 
m and a
vector f  
m, find a vector x  
n for which
This is the problem of solving m equations in n unknowns and characterizing
the solution structure.
2. (The Eigenvalue Problem) Given a linear transformation A : 
n → 
n
from a vector space into itself, find values A (eigenvalues) and
corresponding nonzero vectors x (eigenvectors) for which
Recall that all n × n matrices have n eigenvalues, but they do not necessarily
have a full set of n independent eigenvectors. For special matrices, however, e.g.,
real symmetric matrices where AT = A, there is a basis of n orthogonal
eigenvectors for the entire space 
n. This permits us to decompose the space into
orthogonal subspaces (the eigenspaces) and write the matrix itself as a sum of
projections onto those eigenspaces.
In this and subsequent chapters we want to extend these ideas from 
n and 
n
to structures on infinite dimensional function spaces and transformations that
lead to ordinary and partial differential equations, and integral equations.
In Chapter 4 we introduced different kinds of vector spaces whose elements
are not classical, geometric vectors with magnitude and direction, but rather
functions. For example, the set of all continuous functions on an interval [a, b],
denoted by C[a, b], is a vector space or, using other language, a linear space. A
linear space like C[a, b] is infinite dimensional, not finite dimensional; there is
not a finite number of continuous functions on [a, b] for which every continuous
function in C[a, b] can be written as a linear combination of those functions.
There is no finite basis. We can consider linear transformations on C[a, b] and
the solvability problem. For example, define the linear operator K : C[a, b] →
C[a, b] by
where k(x, y) is a given continuous function for x, y  [a, b]. (In the function
space context, we use the term linear operator rather than linear
transformation.) As above, the solvability problem can be represented
That is, if f = f(x) is a given continuous function on C[a, b], does there exist a

function u = u(x) satisfying this equation? An equation like this, where the
unknown u occurs under an integral sign, is called an integral equation.
Similarly, we can study the eigenvalue problem
Are there values of λ and corresponding continuous functions u for which this
equation holds? Integral equations are the subject of Section 5.3.
First, in Section 5.2, we extend these ideas of linear differential operators L :
C2[a, b] → C[a, b] that associate to every twice continuously differentiable
function u = u(x), satisfying conditions u(a) = ua and u(b) = ub, a continuous
function. Then we can consider the solvability problem
where f  C[a, b] is given. This is the problem of solving a nonhomogeneous
differential equation with boundary conditions. Similarly, the differential
eigenvalue problem is to find values of λ and corresponding C2[a, b] functions u,
again satisfying the boundary conditions, for which
A simple example is the differential operator
where the boundary conditions comprise part of the definition of the operator.
We show that differential and integral operators of special types have an
eigenstructure similar to matrices. They have a full set of eigenfuctions that are
orthogonal and form a basis for the (infinite dimensional) space. Along with that
comes the spectral decomposition, or diagonalization, of the operators,
orthogonal projections, and all the machinery of finite dimensional linear
algebra. One can envision a large body of literature in mathematics, science, and
engineering that addresses all these questions. And these issues only scratch the
surface of a vast subject.

5.1 Boundary-Value Problems
Chapters 1 and 2 focused on initial value problems for differential equations,
where the auxiliary, initial conditions are given at a single value of time, usually
t = 0, and the system evolves dynamically from that initial state. Now we bring
boundary value problems (BVPs) into focus, where conditions on a differential
equation are specified at two different points. We use the independent variable x
instead of time t because BVPs are on a spatial domain. We illustrate the idea
with a model in heat flow.
Let us consider the following problem in steady-state heat conduction. A
cylindrical, uniform, metallic bar of length L and cross-sectional area A is
insulated on its lateral side. We assume the left face at x = 0 is maintained at T0
degrees and that the right face at x = L is held at TL degrees. What is the
temperature distribution u = u(x) in the bar after it comes to equilibrium? Here
u(x) represents the temperature at each point of the entire cross-section of the bar
at position x, where 0 < x < L. We are assuming that heat flows only in the axial
direction along the bar, and we are assuming that any transients caused by initial
temperatures in the bar have decayed away. In other words, we have waited long
enough for the temperature to reach a steady state. One might conjecture that the
temperature distribution is a linear function of x along the bar; that is, u(x) = T0 +
((TL − T0)/L)x. This is indeed the case, which we show below. But also we want
to consider a more complicated problem where the bar has both a variable
conductivity and an internal heat source along its length. An internal heat source,
for example, could be resistive heating produced by a current running through
the medium.
The physical law that provides the basic model is conservation of energy. If [x,
x + dx] is any small section of the bar, then the rate that heat flows in at x, minus
the rate that heat flows out at x + dx, plus the rate that heat is generated by
sources, must equal zero, because the system is in a steady state. See Fig. 5.1.
Figure 5.1 Cylindrical bar, laterally insulated, through which heat is flowing in
the x-direction. The temperature is uniform in a fixed cross-section.

We denote the heat flux by ϕ(x), which is the rate that heat flows to the right at
any section x, measured in energy/(area· time), and we let f(x) denote the rate
that heat is internally produced at x, measured in energy/(volume · time), then
Cancelling A, dividing by dx, and rearranging gives
Taking the limit as dx → 0 yields
(1.1) 
This is an expression of energy conservation in terms of energy flux. But what
about temperature? Empirically, the flux ϕ(x) at a section x is found to be
proportional to the negative temperature gradient −u’(x) (which measures the
steepness of the temperature distribution, or profile, at that point), or
(1.2) 
This is Fourier’s heat conduction law. The given proportionality factor K(x) is
called the thermal conductivity, in units of energy/(length · degrees · time),
which is a measure of how well the bar conducts heat at location x. For a
uniform bar, K is constant. The minus sign in (1.2) means that heat flows from
higher temperatures to lower temperatures. Fourier’s law seems intuitively
correct and it conforms with the second law of thermodynamics; the larger the
temperature gradient, the faster heat flows from high to low temperatures.
Combining (1.1) and (1.2) leads to the equation
(1.3) 
which is the steady-state heat conduction equation. When the boundary
conditions
(1.4) 
are appended to (1.3), we obtain a boundary value problem for the temperature

u(x). Boundary conditions are conditions imposed on the unknown temperature u
= u(x) at two fixed values of the independent variable x, unlike initial conditions
that are imposed at a single value. For boundary value problems we usually use x
as the independent variable because boundary conditions usually refer to the
boundary of a spatial domain.
Note that we could expand the heat conduction equation to
(1.5) 
but in general there is little advantage in doing so.
Example 5.1
If there are no sources (f(x) = 0) and if the thermal conductivity K(x) = K is
constant, then the boundary value problem reduces to
Thus the bar is homogeneous and can be characterized by a constant
conductivity. The general solution of u″ = 0 is u(x) = c1x + c2; applying the
boundary conditions determines the constants c1 and c2 and gives the linear
temperature distribution u(x) = T0 + (TL − T0)/L)x, as we previously conjectured.
The thermal conductivity K and heat source f may also depend on the
temperature u as well. In this case the steady-state heat conduction equation (1.3)
takes the more general form
which is a nonlinear second-order equation for the temperature distribution u =
u(x).
Boundary conditions at the ends of the bar may also specify the flux rather
than the temperature. For example, if heat is injected at x = 0 at a rate of N
calories per area per time, then the left boundary condition takes the form ϕ(0) =
N, or
Thus, a flux condition at an endpoint imposes a condition on the derivative of
the temperature at that endpoint. If the end x = 0, say, is insulated, so that no heat
passes through that end, then the boundary condition is simply
which is called an insulated boundary condition. We may also have conditions

of the combination
at the boundary, where h and c are given constants. These types of conditions are
called radiation conditions, and we examine their origin in Chapter 6. As the
reader may imagine, there are myriad interesting boundary value problems
associated with heat flow. Similar equations arise in diffusion processes in
biology and chemistry, for example, in the diffusion of toxic substances where
the unknown is the chemical concentration.
Boundary value problems are much different from initial value problems in
that they may have no solution, or they may have infinitely many solutions.
Consider the following.
Example 5.2
When K = 1 and the heat source term is f(u) = 9u and both ends of a bar of length
L = 2 are held at u = 0 degrees, the boundary value problem becomes
The general solution to the DE is u(x) = c1 sin 3x + c2 cos 3x, where c1 and c2 are
arbitrary constants. Applying the boundary condition at x = 0 gives u(0) = c1
sin(3 · 0) + c2 cos(3 · 0) = c2 = 0. So the solution must have the form u(x) = c1
sin 3x. Next apply the boundary condition at x = 2. Then u(2) = c1 sin(6) = 0, to
obtain c1 = 0. We have shown that the only solution is u(x) = 0. There is no
nontrivial steady state. However, if we make the bar length π, then we obtain the
boundary value problem
The reader should check that this boundary value problem has infinitely many
solutions u(x) = c1 sin 3x, where c1 is any number. If we change the right
boundary condition, one can check that the boundary value problem
has no solution at all.
The next example illustrates the type of problem that occupies much of the
remaining part of the book—an eigenvalue problem. In an eigenvalue problem

we seek values of a parameter in a boundary value problem so that a solution
exists. This is the differential equation analog of the eigenvalue problem for
matrices.
Example 5.3
Problem: Find all real values of λ for which the boundary value problem
has a nontrivial solution. These values of λ are called the eigenvalues, and the
corresponding nontrivial solutions are called the eigenfunctions. Interpreted in
the heat flow context, the left boundary is held at zero degrees and the right end
is insulated. The heat source is f(u) = λu. We are trying to find which linear heat
sources lead to nontrivial steady states. To solve this problem we consider
different cases because the form of the solution will be different for λ = 0, λ < 0,
λ > 0. If λ = 0 then the general solution of u” = 0 is u(x) = ax+b. Then u’(x) = a.
The boundary condition u(0) = 0 implies b = 0 and the boundary condition u’(π)
= 0 implies a = 0. Therefore, when λ = 0, we get only a trivial solution (and thus,
λ = 0 is not an eigenvalue). Next consider the case λ < 0 so that the general
solution has the form
The condition u(0) = 0 forces b = 0. Then u’(x) = 
 cosh 
. The right
boundary condition becomes u′(π) = 
 cosh 
 = 0, giving a = 0.
Recall that cosh 0 = 1. Again there is only the trivial solution, and there are no
negative eigenvalues. Finally, assume λ > 0. Then the general solution takes the
form
The boundary condition u(0) = 0 forces b = 0. Then u(x) = a sin 
 and u′(x) = 
. Applying the right boundary condition gives
Now we do not have to choose a = 0 (which would again give the trivial
solution) because we can satisfy this last condition with
by choosing the yet unknown values of λ. The cosine function is zero at the
values π/2 ± nπ, n = 0, 1, 2, 3,…. Therefore

Solving for λ yields
Consequently, the values of λ for which the original boundary value problem has
a nontrivial solution are 
. These are the eigenvalues. The
corresponding solutions are
These are the eigenfunctions associated with the eigenvalues. Notice that the
eigenfunctions are unique only up to a constant multiple. In terms of heat flow,
the eigenfunctions represent possible steady-state temperature profiles in the bar.
The eigenvalues are those values λ for which the boundary value problem will
have steady-state profiles.
Boundary value problems are of great interest in applied mathematics, science,
and engineering, occurring in many contexts other than heat flow, for example,
in wave motion, quantum mechanics, and the partial differential equations.
EXERCISES
1. A homogeneous bar of length 40 cm has its left and right ends held at
30°C and 10°C, respectively. If the temperature in the bar is in steady state,
what is the temperature in the cross-section 12 cm from the left end? If the
thermal conductivity is K, what is the rate that heat is leaving the bar at its
right face?
2. The thermal conductivity of a bar of length L = 20 and cross-sectional
area A = 2 is K(x) = 1, and an internal heat source is given by f(x) = 0.5x(L −
x). If both ends of the bar are maintained at zero degrees, what is the steady-
state temperature distribution in the bar? Sketch a graph of u(x). What is the
rate that heat is leaving the bar at x = 20?
3. For a metal bar of length L with no heat source and thermal conductivity
K(x), show that the steady temperature in the bar has the form
where c1 and c2 are constants. What is the temperature distribution if u(0) =
0 and −K(L)u’(L) = 1? Find an analytic formula and plot the temperature
distribution in the special case that K(x) = 1 + x.

4. Determine the values of λ for which the boundary value problemz
has a nontrivial solution.
5. Consider the nonlinear heat flow problem
where the thermal conductivity depends on temperature and is given by K(u)
= u. Find the steady-state temperature distribution.
6. Show that if there is a solution u = u(x) to the boundary value problem
(1.3)–(1.4), then the following condition must hold.
Interpret this condition physically.
7. Consider the boundary value problem
where a, b, L, and ω are fixed parameters with a, b ≠ 0. When does a unique
solution exist?
8. Find the eigenvalues λ for the boundary value problem
9. Show that the eigenvalues of the boundary value problem
are given by the numbers λn = p2n, n = 1, 2, 3,…, where the pn are roots of
the equation tan p = 1/p. Plot graphs of tan p and 1/p and indicate
graphically the locations of the values pn. Numerically calculate the first
four eigenvalues.
10. Find the eigenvalues λ of the boundary value problem
[Hint: this is a Cauchy–Euler equation.]
11. Derive the steady-state heat equation in the case that the cross-sectional

area of the bar varies a function of x, or A = A(x).

5.2 Sturm–Liouville Problems
The eigenvalue boundary value problem in heat conduction introduced in the last
section is a special case of a far more general problem, called a Sturm–Liouville
problem (SLP). A Sturm–Liouville differential equation has the form
(2.1) 
where λ is constant and p and q are real-valued functions defined on [a, b]. We
take y 
 C2, and complex-valued. The equation is usually accompanied by
homogeneous boundary conditions on y(x) of the form
(2.2) 
where the constants α1 and α2 are not both zero, and the constants β1 and β2 are
not both zero (i.e., the boundary condition at an endpoint does not collapse). Two
special cases of the boundary conditions (2.2) are
and
On a bounded interval [a, b], if p, p′, and q are continuous functions on the
interval [a, b], and p is never zero in [a, b], then the boundary value problem
(2.1)–(2.2) is called a regular Sturm–Liouville problem (SLP). Otherwise it is
called singular. Singular problems arise when the interval [a, b] is infinite or
when p(x0) = 0 for some x0  [a, b]. SLPs are named after J. C. F. Sturm and J.
Liouville, who studied such problems in the mid-1800s.

5.2.1 The Eigenvalue Problem
A regular SLP always has the trivial solution y(x)  0. The question is when will
it have a nontrivial solution. A value of λ for which there is a nontrivial solution
of (2.1)–(2.2) is called an eigenvalue, and the corresponding nontrivial solution
is called an associated eigenfunction. Notice that any constant multiple of an
eigenfunction gives another eigenfunction (but not an independent one).
Remark 5.4
(Quantum mechanics) Readers of the the section on the WKB approximation in
Chapter 4 will recognize the Sturm–Liouville differential equation is a general
version of the one-dimensional, time-independent Schrodinger equation
where V(x) is the potential function and E is the energy. Under certain boundary
conditions, the problem is to find the values of the energy (eigenvalues) for
which there is a wave function y(x). The eigenvalue problem is often singular
because of an infinite domain. Also, the potential function may be a piecewise
continuous function.
As we observe in the sequel, the interesting fact about regular SLPs is that they
have an infinite number of eigenvalues, and the corresponding eigenfunctions,
which are in C2, form an orthonormal set in the space of all square-integrable
functions, which makes orthogonal expansions possible. These facts generalize
results from finite-dimensional linear algebra, say in 
n or 
n regarding the
existence of eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a matrix and the representation of
vectors in orthogonal coordinates.
Example 5.5
A simple example of a regular SLP is the problem
which is similar to the steady-state heat conduction problem from the last
section. Here, p(x) = q(x) = 1 and the interval is [0, π]. This problem has
eigenvalues λ = λn = n2 and corresponding eigenfunctions y = yn(x) = sin nx, n =

1, 2,…. Thus, the problem has solution y = sin x when λ = 1, y = sin 2x when λ =
4, and so on. One way to find the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions is to go
through a case-by-case argument separately considering λ = 0, λ > 0, and λ < 0.
(We prove later that λ cannot be a complex number.) We examine different cases
because the solution of the differential equation has a different form depending
on the sign of λ. If λ = 0, then the equation has the form y″ = 0, whose general
solution is the linear function y(x) = Ax + B. But y(0) = 0 implies B = 0, and y(π)
= 0 implies A = 0. Thus we get only the trivial solution in this case and so λ = 0
is not an eigenvalue. If λ < 0, say for definiteness λ = −k2, then the equation has
the form y″ − k2y = 0 with general solution
The boundary conditions require
which in turn force A = B = 0, and therefore we obtain only the trivial solution in
this case. Thus, there are no negative eigenvalues. Finally, consider the case λ >
0, or λ = k2. Then the differential equation takes the form
which has general solutions
First, y(0) = 0 forces A = 0. Thus y(x) = B sin kx. The right boundary condition
yields
But now we are not required to take B = 0; rather, we can select k to make this
equation hold. Because the sine function vanishes at multiples of π, we can
choose k − n, a nonzero integer (we have already considered the case when k =
0), or
The corresponding solutions, or eigenfunctions, are
Here we have arbitrarily selected the constant B = 1 for each eigenfunction; we
can always multiply eigenfunctions by a constant to get another (not
independent) eigenfunction. Alternately, we could write the eigenfunctions as,
for example, yn(x) = Bn sin nx, where a different constant is chosen for each
eigenfunction. The constants Bn are chosen to normalize the eigenfunction in

some manner. We can easily plot the eigenfunctions; they are just sine curves
with higher and higher frequencies as n increases. Note that the eigenfunctions
are real, and, generally, we can always take the eigenfunctions of a SLP to be
real.
We can always carry out the preceding argument to determine the eigenvalues
and eigenfunctions of a SLP. But these calculations can be tedious, or
impossible, and so it is advantageous to have some general results that give the
properties of eigenvalues and eigenfuntions. We discuss this matter in the sequel,
but first we review the finite-dimensional problem for both guidance and
comparison.
Finite dimensional problems. Let 
n denote the vector space of all n-tuples of
complex numbers equipped with the usual definitions of addition and scalar
multiplication. We regard the elements as column vectors x, y, and so on, without
arrows or boldface type. Geometry in 
n can be imposed by defining an inner
product (or dot product),
Then, the norm, or size, of a vector is defined by
and the distance between two vectors is ||x − y||. We say two vectors are
orthogonal if (x, y) = 0. A set of vectors forms an orthogonal set if they are
mutually orthogonal, and the set of vectors forms an orthonormal set if it is an
orthogonal set and each element in the set has norm 1. Recall that a vector can
always be normalized by dividing by its norm. The inner product satisfies the
conditions:
(i) (x, y) = 
.
(ii) (x, y + z) = (x, y) + (x + z).
(iii) αx, y) = α(x, y), α  .
(iv) (x, x) ≥ 0 and (x, x) = 0 if, and only if, x = 0.
The properties of the norm are
(i) ||x|| ≥ 0 for x ≠ 0, and ||x|| ≥ 0 implies x = 0.
(ii) ||αx|| = |α|||x||.
(iii) ||x + y|| ≤ ||x|| + ||y||. (triangle inequality)
(iv) |(x, y) |≤ ||x|| ||y||. (Cauchy–Schwartz inequality)

Now consider the algebraic eigenvalue problem
where A is an n × n matrix with complex entries. For certain classes of matrices
the eigenvalue problem has extraordinarily useful properties and they give direct
insight into the treatment of Sturm–Liouville problems; in fact, one can see that
both the algebraic EVP and the SLP are really special cases of the same
overarching concept.
We say that a complex matrix A is Hermitian if
That is, the matrix is equal to its complex conjugate transposed. Then, a simple
calculation shows
Thus, for Hermitian matrices, the matrix operator can be taken off the first vector
and put on the second vector in an inner product; that is, the matrix A is
symmetric with respect to the inner product. This leads to a key definition.
Definition 5.6
For any matrix A, the adjoint of A is the matrix A* where (Ax, y) = (x, A*y) for
all x, y  
n. A matrix is self-adjoint if A = A*.
Therefore, Hermitian matrices are self-adjoint. In the same way, if A is a real
symmetric matrix, that is, A = AT, then A is self-adjoint because (Ax, y) = (x,
ATy) = (x, Ay).
For self-adjoint matrices on finite dimensional vector spaces we can prove the
following important results.
Theorem 5.7
If A is a self-adjoint matrix, then:
(a) (Ax, x) is real.
(b) The eigenvalues are real.
(c) Eigenvectors associated with distinct eigenvalues are orthogonal.
(d) There is an orthonormal basis formed by the eigenvectors.
(e) There is a matrix matrix U, whose columns are the eigenvectors, such
that U* = U−1

where D is a diagonal matrix with the eigenvalues on the diagonal.
Proof
The proofs of these facts, except (d), are straightforward. To prove (a) observe
If Ax = λx, then it follows that 
, which proves (b). To
prove (c) assume that Ax = λx and Ay = μy. Then
Subtracting, we get (λ − μ)(x, y) = 0. Because λ and μ are distinct, (x, y) = 0. If
(d) is true, then take U as indicated, a matrix whose columns are the n
eigenvectors of A. For the proof of (d), which is more difficult, we refer the
reader to a text on linear algebra.
Differential operators. The Sturm–Liouville differential equation (2.1) can be
written in the same way and produces similar results as in the finite-dimensional
case. We write the equation in operator form as
where L is a differential operator defined by
where y is a C2, complex-valued function on [a, b]. The boundary conditions
(2.2) are considered to be a part of the definition of the operator L; in other
words, the domain of the operator L is DL = {y  C2 : (2.2) holds}. These
functions form a linear space, or vector space (Chapter 4), over the complex
numbers. The geometrical concepts of inner product and norm can be defined in
a space of functions; these are generalizations of the inner (or dot) product, and
the length of vectors in 
n.
Definition 5.8
If u, v  C2, then the inner product of u and v is a complex number defined by
(2.3) 
It is easy to check using properties of integrals that the inner product satisfies the
same properties of scalar products of complex vectors. This inner product
induces a norm defined by

This norm is called the L2-norm. It satisfies the same properties as the norm of
complex vectors. The same definitions of orthogonal, orthogonal sets, and
orthonormal sets hold.
Example 5.9
Consider the set of complex-valued exponential functions
for −π ≤ x ≤ π. Clearly, for m ≠ n,
So, the functions are orthogonal. If m = n, then obviously (eimx, einx) = 2π, and
the norm is 
. Hence, the set
is an orthonormal set on −π ≤ x ≤ π.
Example 5.10
In Example 5.5 we found the eigenvalues λn = n2 and eigenfunctions yn(x) = sin
nx, for n = 1, 2,… for the SLP −y″ = λy, y(0) = y(π) = 0. It is an exercise1 to
show that the eigenfunctions satisfies the property
so the eigenfunctions form an orthogonal set. Each of these eigenfunctions can
be normalized by dividing by its norm. We have
Therefore the functions
form an orthonormal set of eigenfunctions for the SLP. Thus,

The self-adjoint property of a real or complex matrix was the the important
property that led to the symmetric relation (Ax, y) = (x, Ay) with the inner
product. Now we show that the same is true for a Sturm–Liouville operator L.
We want to show, therefore, that
where u and v satisfy the boundary conditions (2.2). We first prove a
fundamental identity.
Lemma 5.11
(Green’s identity) Let u and v be continuously differentiable, complex-valued
functions on the interval [a, b], and let p be real and continuously differentiable.
Then
Proof
We can remove the differential operator from u and put it on  using two
integrations by parts. We have
Applying this lemma to the Sturm–Liouville operator Lu = −(pu′)′ + qu gives
In terms of the inner product, this is exactly
(2.5) 
Many may recognize the expression
which is the Wronskian of u and . Now we apply the boundary conditions (2.2).
For simple Dirichlet or Neumann boundary conditions, it is clear that the
Wronskian is zero at both x = a and x = b because both eigenfunctions, and their

complex conjugates, satisfy the boundary conditions. For the general, mixed
boundary conditions (2.2) the Wronskian is zero as well. For example, without
loss of generality we can assume α1 ≠ 0. Then, the first boundary condition for u
and  can be written
Then, substituting into the right side of (2.5),
Similarly, we can show W(b) = 0.
In summary, we have proved:
Theorem 5.12
For the regular Sturm–Liouville problem (2.1)–(2.2), the differential operator L
is self-adjoint, or
Finally we show each eigenvalue has only eigenfunction. Let λ be an
eigenvalue and u and v be corresponding, independent real eigenfunctions. [Note
that we may always take the eigenfunctions to be real, because the real and
imaginary parts of a complex-valued eigenfunction are eigenfunctions.] Then, by
definition of independence, the only solution of the system
is c1 = c2 = 0 for all x. This means the coefficient determinant, which is the
Wronskian W(x), must be nonzero for all x. But we have W(a) = 0, a
contradition. Thus u and v must be dependent.
Now we can state a fundamental theorem for eigenvalues of a regular Sturm–
Liouville problem.
Theorem 5.13
The regular Sturm–Liouville problem (2.1)–(2.2) has infinitely many real
eigenvalues λn, n = 1, 2,…, which can be arranged in an increasing sequence
To each eigenvalue corresponds a single real eigenfunction, up to a constant
multiple. Finally, eigenfunctions corresponding to distinct eigenvalues are
orthogonal on [a, b].

Proof
For the proof of existence and ordering of the eigenvalues we refer to the refer
ences (e.g., see Birkhoff and Rota, 1989). The remaining parts follow from the
self-adjointness of L and the proofs of the results in Theorem 5.7.
In general, a set of boundary conditions for which
is called symmetric. Symmetric boundary conditions guarantee that the operator
is self-adjoint and has eigenvalues with independent, orthogonal eigenfunctions.
Example 5.14
(Sign of eigenvalues) Another issue concerns the sign of the eigenvalues. The
following argument, called an energy argument, is useful to show that the
eigenvalues are of one sign, without resorting to a case argument. We consider a
Schrodinger equation with Dirichlet boundary conditions. Other SLPs can be
treated similarly. As an illustration we show that the regular SLP
(2.6) 
(2.7) 
where q > 0 on [a, b], has only positive eigenvalues. Multiplying the differential
equation (2.6) by y and integrating gives
The first integral can be integrated by parts to obtain
Under Dirichlet boundary conditions (2.7), the boundary terms in the last
equation are zero. Hence
Because q is positive, the second integral on the left side is positive. Thus, the
eigenvalues λ for (2.6)–(2.7) must be positive.
Example 5.15
(Periodic boundary conditions) Now we consider a SLP differential equation

on the interval [−π, π] with periodic boundary conditions:
(2.8) 
(2.9) 
These types of problems are useful in Chapter 6, where we examine partial
differential equations with periodic boundary conditions. Moreover, periodic
boundary conditions are symmetric. We can either use a case argument or an
energy argument to show that the eigenvalues are nonnegative. We leave this as
an exercise. The energy argument does not eliminate λ = 0. But it is easy to see
from the problem that λ = 0 is an eigenvalue with a constant eigenfunction; so λ0
= 0, y0(x) = 1 is an eigenpair. Now assume λ = k2 > 0. The differential equation
(2.8) has general solution
for arbitrary constants a and b. The first boundary condition in (2.9) forces
or
This boundary condition can be satisfied if k = ±n, or
With these values the second boundary condition is satisfied automatically.
Hence the eigenvalues are λn = n2, n = 1, 2, 3,…, and with each eigenvalue
corresponds to two independent eigenfunctions, cos nx and sin nx. These, along
with 1, form an orthonormal set. At this point we can check orthogonality. Using
trigonometic identities we can show, for example, that
Thus the functions 1, cos nx, sin nx form an orthogonal set of eigenfunctions for
a periodic SLP. Observe that the operator L defined in (2.8)–(2.9) is self-adjoint.
Later, we see that these functions form the basis of classical Fourier series.

5.2.2 Eigenfunction Expansions and
Bases
In the last section we proved a key result for regular SLPs regarding the
existence of eigenvalues and orthogonal eigenfunctions. Now we take up the
basis concept. Having a set of orthonormal eigenfunctions for a regular SLP
suggests the possibility of expanding a given function in terms of those
functions. We recall the finite dimensional case stated in Theorem 5.7. If A is a
self-adjoint matrix, there are n real eigenvalues and a set of n orthonormal
eigenvectors, say, v1, v2,… vn, and the eigenvectors form a basis for the space;
that is, every vector x can be expanded as a linear combination of those
eigenvectors, or
and the coefficients, or coordinates, cn are the projections of the vector x onto
the coordinate directions, or
If the basis vn were only an independent set, and not orthogonal, then it would be
very difficult to compute the coefficients in the representation of x!
We seek an analogous result for regular SLPs. To illustrate the point we revisit
an example.
Remark 5.16
In Example 5.5 we solved the eigenvalue problem
and found orthogonal eigenfunctions sin nx, n = 1, 2,…. Which functions f can
be expanded in the sine series
for some set of coefficients cn, and how can we compute the coefficients cn? This
expansion is not a finite sum, so the answer to this question must come to terms
with the notion of convergence of the series. As stated previously, the L2 norm
defines a distance measure, and that will be used to define convergence.
We now cut to the chase and state the basis theorem for regular SLPs. We give

at this point only an informal proof and a few examples, with the more analytic
result coming later.
Theorem 5.17
Let ϕn(x), n = 1, 2,,…, be the set of orthonormal eigenfunctions for a regular
Sturm–Liouville problem. Then every square-integrable function f on [a, b] can
be expanded as
(2.10) 
where the convergence is in L2 norm. This means, in terms of the partial sums of
the series,
that ||f − sN|| → 0 as N → 0, or
The coefficients are given by
(2.11) 
The series (2.10) is called the (generalized) Fourier series for f, and the
coefficients (2.11) are called the Fourier coefficients, and we interpret them as
projection coefficients of f onto the subspace generated by the eigenfunction ϕn.
Convergence in L2 is often called mean-square convergence, or convergence
in the mean.
Proof
Assume the series (2.10) converges in the mean. Multiplying (2.10) by ϕm(x) and
integrating gives
where we formally pulled the integral under the sum. (This can be shown to be a

valid operation). By orthogonality, the sum collapses to a single term, occurring
when n = m. Thus,
But this is true for all m. Thus, in terms of the inner product, this gives the
Fourier coefficients (2.11). Note that orthogonality was essential in this
argument.
Remark 5.18
If the orthogonal set yn(x) is used in the expansion instead of the orthonormal set
ϕn (x), that is, if
then the same argument as in the proof shows that the Fourier coefficients are
given by
(2.12) 
Usually, for theoretical calculations it is easier to work with the orthonormal
set; for practical examples we work with the orthogonal set because we can
avoid the complicated normalizing constants.
Example 5.19
Expand the function f(x) = x, 0 < x < π, in terms of the orthogonal eigenfunctions
sin nx determined in Example 5.5. The Fourier coefficients are, from (2.12),
Now,
and, using integration by parts,
Therefore the generalized Fourier series for f(x) = x is

We are guaranteed that this series converges in the mean-square sense. Observe
that the series cannot be differentiated term-by-term; the derived series does not
even converge, much less to 1.
Convergence. Consider an orthogonal expansion
(2.13) 
When we write a series like (2.13), a natural question is, “What is meant by
convergence of the infinite series?” There are many answers to this question,
depending on how we measure the error of an N-term approximation SN(x) 
∑N
n=1 cnfn(x) to f(x). On one hand, by the pointwise error EN(x) we mean the
function
Therefore, for a fixed number N (giving the number of terms), EN(x) is a function
whose value gives the error at each point x. On the other hand, we can define an
integrated error; the number eN defined by
is called the mean-square error in the approximation. Note that eN is just the
square of the pointwise error, integrated over the interval [a, b]. Thus, the mean-
square error is a type of average over all the pointwise errors. Each error
expressions leads to a definition of convergence.
If for each fixed x in [a, b] we have limN→∞ EN(x) = 0, then we say that the
infinite series (2.13) converges pointwise to f on the interval [a, b]; in this case,
for each fixed x the series is a numerical series that converges to the numerical
value f(x), at that x; pointwise convergence means that the error goes to zero at
each point. We say that the infinite series (2.13) converges to f in the mean-
square sense if
Mean-square convergence is convergence in L2[a, b], or ||sN − f|| → 0 as N → ∞,
and it requires that the integrated pointwise error-squared go to zero as more and

more terms are taken.
There is a stronger type of convergence, called uniform convergence. The
series (2.13) converges uniformly to f(x) on [a, b] if for any given tolerance ε >
0, we can find a number N (representing the number of terms) such that n > N
implies |En(x)| < ε for all x in [a, b]. That is, the error can be made uniformly
small over the entire interval by choosing the number of terms large enough. For
uniform convergence, N (the number of terms) depends only on the tolerance ε
and not on where in the interval the error is taken. Uniform convergence can be
expressed practically as
To prove uniform convergence of the series on the right side of (2.13) it is
sufficient to show2 there is a numerical sequence Mn such that ∑ Mn converges
and |cnfn(x)| < Mn for all x  [a, b].
Remark 5.20
One can show that pointwise convergence does not imply mean-square
convergence, and conversely. However, uniform convergence implies both mean-
square and pointwise convergence.
A novice may not appreciate the subtle differences in convergence and wonder
why we have defined three types (actually, there are others). Suffice it to say that
the error may not go to zero in a pointwise or uniform manner, but that does not
mean the approximation is not useful; a weaker form of convergence, like mean-
square convergence, may be all that is required. By the way, the definitions
above are valid whether or not the functions fn(x) are orthogonal. However,
mean-square convergence and the orthogonality of the fn make computation of
the coefficients in the series easier.
EXERCISES
1. Show that the SLP
has eigenvalues λn = n2π2/l2 and corresponding eigenfunctions yn(x) =
sin(nπx/l), n = 1, 2,…

2. Show that the SLP
with mixed Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions has eigenvalues
and corresponding eigenfunctions
for n = 0, 1, 2,….
3. Find the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions for the problem with periodic
boundary conditions:
4. Consider the SLP
Is λ = 0 an eigenvalue? Are there any negative eigenvalues? Show that there
are infinitely many positive eigenvalues by finding an equation whose roots
are those eigenvalues, and show graphically that there are infinitely many
roots.
5. Show that the SLP
has exactly one negative eigenvalue. Is zero an eigenvalue? How many
positive eigenvalues are there?
6. For the SLP
show that λ = 0 is an eigenvalue if and only if a + b = −l.
7. Use an energy argument to show that the eigenvalues for the problem

must be nonnegative. Find the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions.
8. Find eigenvalues and eigenfunctions for the problem
9. What, if anything, can be deduced about the sign of the eigenvalues for
the problem
What are the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions? (Use a computer algebra
system to investigate this problem.)
10. Consider the regular problem
where q(x) > 0 on [0, l]. Show that if λ and y are an eigenvalue and
eigenfunction pair, then
Is λ > 0? Can y(x) = constant be an eigenfunction?
11. Prove the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality |(f, g)|≤ Vert f|| ||g|| using the fact
that Q(t) = (f + tg, f + tg) ≥ 0 for any real number t. Expand out to get a
polynomial in t.

5.2.3 Best Approximation and Hilbert
Spaces
The last section outlined a recipe for expanding an L2 function f in a basis
consisting of the orthonormal eigenfunctions of a regular Sturm–Liouville
problem. In the next chapter we examine underpinnings of the origin and
applications of SLP in the subject of partial differential equations; in this chapter
we examine its utility in solving integral equations.
To dig deeper into the mathematical foundations of orthogonal expansions in
function spaces we require some definitions. A vector space on which there is a
norm is called a normed linear space, and a vector space on which there is
defined an inner product is an inner product space. An inner product space is a
normed linear space under the natural norm associated with the inner product. A
normed linear space may not be an inner product space. We have seen examples
of both.
In a normed linear space X, with norm ||·||, a sequence yn is said to converge to
y  X if ||yn − y|| → 0 as n → +∞. But we can make the following definition
without knowledge of the limit.
Definition 5.21
A sequence yn in X is a Cauchy sequence if for every ε > 0 there in an integer N,
independent of ε, such that ||yn − ym|| < ε for all m, n > N. In other words, the
terms of the sequence get as close as we desire far out in the sequence.
Must convergent sequences be Cauchy sequences? Yes. Must Cauchy sequences
converge to a limit? Maybe surprisingly, no. For example,
is a sequence of rational numbers, and it is a Cauchy sequence. However it does
not converge to a rational number. (It in fact converges to the number e, which is
not rational.) Thus the rational numbers are deficient in some way. This leads to
the following definition.
Definition 5.22

A normed linear space is complete if every Cauchy sequence in X has a limit in
X. A complete normed linear space is called a Banach space. An inner product
space that is complete in its natural norm is called a Hilbert space.
Thus, the rational numbers are not complete. They are useful for calculations, by
hand or on computers, but are not good if we are interested in convergence. So,
what we do is to complete the set of rational numbers by adding in all possible
limits of Cauchy sequences. We get the real numbers when this is done, and then
we can do, for example, calculus. This construction of completion, by the way, is
not trivial.
These concepts may be familiar to students in physics, where in the
foundations of quantum mechanics the wave functions are assumed,
axiomatically, to belong to a Hilbert space.
Example 5.23
Consider the normed linear space of continuous functions with the L2 norm. It is
an inner product space with
But it is not a Banach space or Hilbert space. Let [a, b] = [0, 1] and consider the
sequence of functions
We leave it to the reader to sketch plots of fn and fm for different values m and n
and then compute the L2 norm
showing that the sequence is Cauchy. Yet the limit is f(x) = 0 for x <  f(x) = 1 for
x > , which is not continuous.
This example invites us to append to this normed linear space the set of all
possible limits of Cauchy sequences. But this leads to a serious issue. The limits
of such sequences can be very bizarre and the integral of those functions is not
defined if we use the classical Riemann integral from calculus. H. Lebesgue in
the early 1900s remedied this problem by defining a new, more general, integral,
called the Lebesgue integral, for which all these limiting functions of Cauchy

sequences are defined. With this redefinition of the L2 norm in C[a, b] the space
is complete and therefore both a Banach space and a Hilbert space.
Using the Lebesgue integral we can rigorously treat the convergence of
Fourier series. We approach this task by asking about the best approximation in a
Hilbert space of a function by a finite sum of orthonormal functions.
Specifically, if f(x) is in L2 and ϕ1,…, ϕN is an orthonormal set, what is the best
approximation f by a linear combination of the (ϕn?
Theorem 5.24
If f  L2[a, b], ϕ1, ϕ2,…, ϕN is an orthonormal set in L2[a, b], and cn are the
Fourier coefficients given by
then
(2.14) 
for any set of coefficients an.
Proof
The demonstration of (2.14) is straightforward using the definition of norm and
properties of the inner product. We have
Adding and subtracting 
, gives

The second term on the right is nonnegative, so (2.14) holds.
In the last line of the preceding proof we used the fact that
(2.15) 
which the reader should verify. This equality is actually Pythagoras’ theorem: the
square of the length of f is the sum of the squares of the lengths of the projection
and the error. It leads to another interesting inequality. Because the left side is
nonnegative, we have
We record a simple, but important, conclusion that follows from this inequality.
Because it holds for each N, we have:
Theorem 5.25
(Bessel’s inequality) If f  L2 and ϕ1, ϕ2, ϕ3, ··· is an orthonormal set in L2, and
if cn = (f, ϕn), then
Bessel’s inequality shows the series of squared Fourier coefficients converges,
and thus cn → 0 as n → ∞. Therefore the Fourier coefficients get smaller and
smaller. But, in addition, using completeness, it shows that the infinite series 
 converges in L2.
Theorem 5.26
Under the assumptions of Theorem 5.25, the Fourier series

converges to a function in L2.
Proof
Let
be a partial sum of the series. We know ∑|cn|2 converges and so its partial sums
form a Cauchy sequence of real numbers and we have
Thus the partial sums Sn form a Cauchy sequence in L2, and, by completeness,
the series ∑cnϕn converges to some function h  L2.
The question is: does the limit h of the Fourier series for f equal f? The next
example shows this is a valid question.
Example 5.27
Let f(x) = cos x on [0, π] and 
 sin nx be an orthonormal set. Clearly
for all n. So the Fourier series converges to zero, not cos x.
This leads to the important definition:
Definition 5.28
A set ϕn, n = 1, 2,…, is a complete orthonormal set if
for all f  L2.
This definition should not be confused with the earlier definition of
completeness of a normed linear space. In summary, the question of whether a

Fourier series converges to the given function comes down to proving that the
orthonormal system is complete. For specific orthonormal systems, we leave this
exercise to more advanced treatments. Many of the proofs rely on one of the
conditions given in the following theorem.
Theorem 5.29
The following are equivalent:
(1) An orthonormal system ϕn, n = 1,2,… is complete.
(2) For every f  L2,
(2.16) 
(3) If (f, ϕn) = 0 for all n, then f = 0.
Proof
We prove Parseval’s condition only. It follows from
In the limiit as N → ∞ the left side goes to zero by completeness.
Pointwise convergence results and stronger uniform convergence results are
more difficult to obtain, and they usually require continuity and smoothness
assumptions on the function f. In the next section we discuss convergence results
for the classical Fourier system {1, cos(nπx/l), sin(nπx/l)}, which, by the way, is
a complete orthonormal system.
Finally, we mention the modal interpretation of the generalized Fourier series.
Thinking of f as a signal and the orthonormal set fn as the fundamental modes,
the Fourier coefficient cn determines the contribution of the nth mode, and the
generalized Fourier series is the decomposition of the signal into fundamental
modes. The sequence of squared coefficients, |c1|2, |c2|2, |c3|2,…, is called the
energy spectrum, and |cn|2 is called the energy of the nth mode; by Parseval’s
equality, the total energy in a signal is ||f||2.
EXERCISES
1. Verify that the set of functions cos(nπx/l), n = 0, 1, 2…, form an

orthogonal set on the interval [0, l]. If
converges in the mean-square sense on [0, l], what are the formulae for the
cn? This series is called the Fourier cosine series on [0, l]. Find the Fourier
cosine series for f(x) = 1 − x on [0, 1].
2. Let f be defined and integrable on [0, l]. The orthogonal expansion
is called the Fourier sine series for f on [0, 1]. Find the Fourier sine series
for f(x) = cos x on [0, π/2]. What is the Fourier sine series of f(x) = sin x on
[0, π]?
3. (Gram–Schmidt orthogonalization) A result from linear algebra is that
any set of linearly independent vectors may be turned into a set of
orthogonal vectors by the Gram–Schmidt orthogonalization process. The
same process works for functions in L2 [a, b]. Let f1, f2, f3,… be an
independent set of functions in L2 and define the set gn by
Show that gn is an orthogonal set.
4. (Lengendre polynomials) The functions 1, x, x2, x3 are independent
functions on the interval [−1, 1]. Use the Gram–Schmidt method to generate
a sequence of four orthogonal polynomials P0(x),…, P3(x) on [−1, 1]. Find
an approximation of ex on [−1, 1] of the form
that is best in the mean-square sense, and plot ex and the approximation.
Compute the pointwise error, the maximum pointwise error over [−1, 1], and
the mean-square error.
5. (Haar wavelets) Let ϕ be a function defined by ϕ(x) = 1 for x  [0, 1), and
ϕ(x) = 0 otherwise. Let (x) = ϕ(2x) − ϕ(2x − 1). Then the Haar wavelets are
the functions
for m, n = 0, ±1, ±2,…. Sketch a graph of (x), and then sketch a graph of 

mn(x) for m, n = 0, ±1, ±2. Generally, what is the graph of 
mn(x)? If f is
square integrable and
find coefficients cmn.
6. (Hermite polynomials) The Schrodinger equation on the real line for a
simple harmonic oscillator with potential energy 1/2Kx2, K > 0, can be
written in scaled coordinates as
(2.17) 
where E is the energy level. Here,
a) Let y(x) = w(x)e−x2/2 and show that w satisfies
which is Hermite’s differential equation.
b) Assume a power series solution of the form w(x) = ∑∞
0 akxk and derive
the recursion relation
c) If E = 2n + 1, where n is a nonnegative integer, show that solutions are
nth degree polynomials w(x) = Hn(x). (Hermite polynomials) Show that,
appropriately normalized, the first few Hermite polynomials are
d) Plot the resulting solutions y0(x),…, y3(x). (For other values of energy
E the power series for w is an infinite series and behaves like ex2; thus the
normalization condition cannot hold and those energy levels are not
eigenvalues.)

5.3 Classical Fourier Series
We introduced the idea of representing a given function f(x) in terms of an
infinite series of orthogonal functions arising from a regular Sturm–Liouville
problem. Now we focus on a special set of orthogonal functions given by sines
and cosines. One can think of these as the orthogonal set of functions arising
from a SLP with periodic boundary conditions (Example 5.15). The resulting
orthogonal series is called a classical Fourier series. It is a special case of the
orthogonal series discussed in the previous sections, but Fourier series have a
long history of applications to signal processing, remote sensing, and other areas
of modern engineering and physics. Although first investigated by Euler and
Bernoulli in the mid-1700s, it was refined by Joseph Fourier in the early 1800s
to solve partial differential equations in heat transfer. Euler, Bernoulli, and
Fourier all had a vague notion of convergence (and even the definition of a
function!), and few of their contemporaries could hardly imagine representing a
discontinuous function by sums of continuous ones. Questions about
convergence of Fourier series spawned much of the development and
underpinnings of classical analysis and modern analysis in the 1800s and 1900s.
For that reason Fourier analysis is one of the monuments of mathematics, and
the material in this section could be expanded to volumes; and it has.
Here we do not focus on solving BVPs and SLPs. Rather, we are motivated by
the approximation of time-periodic signals for all times t. The question is how to
resolve such a signal, e.g., think of a musical signal, into its fundamental
frequencies and overtones. As a result, we abandon our use of x as an
independent variable and we use t.
We work on an arbitrary symmetric interval (−l, l) about the origin. If f is an
integrable function on (−l, l), then its Fourier series is the trigonometric series
(3.1) 
where the Fourier coefficients an and bn are given by the formulas

Here, the ~ sign only means that the right side is the Fourier series for f and
means nothing regarding convergence of the series to f. The set of functions
(3.2) 
is orthogonal on the interval (−l, l). It is shown in more advanced texts that the
set of functions (3.2) is complete, and therefore the Fourier series (3.1)
converges in the mean-square sense to f when f  L2(−l, l). As an aside, it does
not matter in our discussion if we include the endpoints of the interval (−l, l); the
values of the integrals defining the coefficients give the same value whether or
not an endpoint is included. However, we are interested in the convergence of
the series at the points.
The next examples give interesting observations regarding the behavior of
Fourier series.
Example 5.30
Let f(x) = t on −l < t < l. The Fourier coefficients are easily computed to be
Therefore the Fourier series for f is
We note that series is 2l periodic and is the same as the Fourier sine series of f(t)
= t on the interval (0, l). Therefore, the Fourier sine series on (0, l) converges to
the odd extension of f(t) = t to the entire interval (−l, l). At t = ±l the series
converges to zero and thus does not converge to f(t) at these two points. Next,
the derived series, obtained by differentiating term-by-term, does not converge at
all, much less to the derivative f′(t) = 1. So the series cannot be differentiated
term-by-term. However, the integrated series does converge.
Example 5.31
Because the Fourier series for f(t) is 2l periodic, it is valid on the entire real line 
. Whatever behavior we observe on (−l, l) will repeat itself on every interval (l,
3l), (3l, 5l),…, (−3l, −l), (−5l, −3l),…. Therefore, the Fourier series is the

Fourier series of the extension of f(t) on (−l, l) to a 2l periodic function3 on all of
. Of course, because of our use of an open interval (−l, l), the periodic
extension of f remains undefined at odd multiples of l; however, the Fourier
series may be valid at those missing points. To illustrate, consider the odd
function f(t) = t, −1 < t < l′ in the last example. The 2l periodic extension of f to
all of  is shown in Fig. 5.2.
Figure 5.2 The 2l periodic extension of f(t) = t, -l < t < l.
It is clear that the Fourier series simplifies considerably if f is an even, f(−t) =
f(t), or an odd, f(−t) = −f(t), function; for example, the function sin 
 is odd
and cos 
 is an even function. Moreover, an even function times an odd
function is odd. Therefore, if f is an even function, then the product f(x) sin 
is an odd function; so all of the coefficients bn are zero because an odd function
integrated over a symmetric interval about the origin is zero. Hence, if f is an
even function, then its Fourier series reduces to a cosine series of the form
Similarly, if f is an odd function, then the coefficients an vanish, and the Fourier
series reduces to a sine series
Reiterating some of the comments in the last example, a Fourier series (3.1),
although computed only on the interval [−l, l], is a 2l-periodic function because
the sines and cosines are 2l-periodic. Thus, the series repeats its values in every
interval of length 2l. Therefore, if f is defined on all of  and is 2l-periodic, we
can represent it by its Fourier series on all of . Relevant to signal processing, if
f is some given signal or data set 2l-periodic in time (say a signal from an

electrical circuit or an electrocardiogram), then we could digitize the signal and
save it by storing the Fourier coefficients, or some finite subset of them.
Knowledge of the coefficients allows us reproduce the signal via (3.1) and the
Fourier coefficients. Of course, the music industry has made great advances in
applying these ideas.
In the Fourier series (3.1) the nth harmonic is
Each harmonic in the series has a higher frequency, and thus more oscillations,
than the preceding harmonic. The energy spectrum of the series is the sequence
of numbers ω2
n defined by
These energies are the squares of the amplitudes of the various harmonics. One
can show that Parseval’s inequality takes the form
It is often simpler in calculations to work with the complex form of Fourier
series. Using the Euler relation eiθ = cos θ + i sin θ, we can show that (3.1) can
be written equivalently as
(3.3) 
for coefficients cn, where f is defined on (−l, l). This is the complex form of the
Fourier series for f. Clearly, for m ≠ n,
so the functions einπt/l are orthogonal on (l, l). If m = n, then (einπt/l, e−inπt/l) = 2l,
and the norm is 
. Hence, the set
is an orthonormal set on −l ≤ t ≤ l. The Fourier coefficients are given by

(3.4) 
Recall also that the function eiθ is 2πi periodic.
Example 5.32
Let f(t) = et for −π < t < π. Then the Fourier coefficients are, by direct
integration,
Hence
We leave it to the reader to obtain the real Fourier series of f(t) = et.
Example 5.33
Fourier series can be used to solve various kinds of equations. In this example
we find the solution to the differential-difference equation
Assume the complex form
Formally differentiating term-by-term and substituting the results into the left
side of the given equation yields
where we used 
. Expanding the right side of the equation, sin 
, and then equating the terms, we get
and otherwise cn = 0, n ≠ −1, 1. We can solve for c−1 and c1 to get c−1 = −(2i +
1)/10, c1 = (2i − 1)/10. Then the solution is
This is easily checked for validity.
In Section 5.3 we introduced the ideas of pointwise, uniform, and mean-square

convergence. We have noted that if f is square integrable on (−l, l), then mean-
square convergence is automatic. Pointwise convergence requires additional
assumptions about the smoothness of f. It is remarkable, for example, that there
exists a continuous function whose Fourier series diverges at infinitely many
points in the interval. The case when the graph of f is made up of finitely many
continuous, smooth (a continuous derivative) segments will cover most of the
interesting functions encountered in science and engineering. A function f is
piecewise continuous on [a, b] if it is continuous except possibly at a finite
number of points in [a, b] where it has simple jump discontinuities; f has a
simple jump discontinuity at x = c if both one-sided limits of f(x) exist and are
finite at c. The function may or may not be defined at a jump discontinuity. We
say f is piecewise smooth on [a, b] if both f and f’ are piecewise continuous on
[a, b], and we say f is piecewise smooth on (−∞, ∞) if it is piecewise smooth on
each bounded subinterval [a, b] of the real line. Then the basic pointwise
convergence theorem can be stated as follows.
Theorem 5.34
If f is piecewise smooth on [−l, l] and otherwise 2l-periodic, then its Fourier
series (3.1) converges pointwise for all x0   to the value f(x0) if f is continuous
at x0, and to the mean value of its left and right limits at x0, namely, to (f(x0−) +
f(x0+)), if f is discontinuous at x0.
Stronger convergence results, like uniform convergence, require additional
smoothness conditions on f. For example, if f and f′ are continuous on [−l, l] with
f(−l) = f(l) and f′(−l) = f′(l), then the Fourier series converges uniformly to f.
EXERCISES
1. Consider a triangular wave given analytically by: f(t) = t + 1 if −1 < t ≤ 0;
f(t) = 1 − t if 0 < x ≤ 1; and otherwise 2-periodic. Compute its Fourier series,
and plot f and two-term, three-term, and four-term Fourier approximations.
2. Find the Fourier series for f(t) = t2 on [−π, π]. Sketch a graph of the
function defined on  to which the Fourier series converges pointwise. Use
the Fourier series to show
Graph the frequency spectrum.

3. By considering f(x) = x2 on (−π, π), show that
4. Find the Fourier series for f(t) = l |sin t| for t  (−π, π).
5. On the interval (0, 4) let f(x) = 0, x  (0, 2); f(x) = 1, x  [2, 4).
a) Sketch the odd extension of f to an 8π periodic function on .
b) Sketch the even extension of f to an 8π periodic function on .
c) To what value(s) will the Fourier series converge at the points x = nπ, n
= 0, ±1, ±2,…, in (a) and in (b)?
d) Find the Fourier series in (b).
6. Consider the signal defined by f(t) = t + 1 for −2π < t ≤ 0 and f(t) = t for 0
< t ≤ 2π, and otherwise 4π-periodic. Plot the signal, and find its Fourier
series. Plot the frequency spectrum. To what value does the Fourier series
converge at t = 0, t = 2π, and t = π? Plot the sum of the first four harmonics
and compare it to f.
7. In Example 5.32 find the Fourier series in terms of sines and cosines.
8. Find the Fourier series for f(t) = e−|t|, |t| < π, with otherwise f(t + 2π) = f(t).
9. Show that the Fourier series for f(x) = cos at on (−π, π), where a is not an
integer, is
Show
10. What is the sum of the Fourier series for f(t) = (t + 1) cost, −π < t < π, at t
= 3π?
11. Let f(t) = − on −π < t ≤ 0 and f(t) =  on 0 ≤ t ≤ π. Show that the Fourier
series for f is
If sN(t) denotes the sum of the first N terms, sketch graphs of s1(t), s3(t),
s7(t), and s10(t) and compare with f(t). Observe that the approximations
overshoot f(t) in a neighborhood of t = 0, and the overshoot is not improved

regardless of how many terms are taken in the approximation. This
overshoot behavior of Fourier series near a discontinuity is called the Gibbs’
phenomenon.
12. Use Fourier series to solve to find a solution y = y(t) of period 2 of the
differential-difference equation
13. Find a 4π periodic solution on  of the differential equation
where F(t) = 1, |t| < π, and F(t) = 0, π < |t| < 2π.

5.4 Integral Equations
An integral equation is an equation where the unknown function occurs under an
integral sign. Integral equations arise in the analysis of differential equations,
and, in fact, many initial and boundary value problems for differential equations
may be reformulated as integral equations, and vice-versa. But integral equations
naturally arise in modeling as well. The two types of linear equations we discuss
are the Fredholm equation
(4.1) 
and the Volterra equation
(4.2) 
Here u is the unknown function, f is a given continuous function, and λ is a
parameter. The given function k is called the kernel, and we assume that k is a
continuous function on the square a ≤ x ≤ b, a ≤ y ≤ b. The interval [a, b] is
assumed to be finite. Because Volterra equations have an intimate relationship
with initial value problems, we often replace the variables x and y by t and s. The
difference between the Fredholm and Volterra equations is the variable upper
limit of integration in the Volterra equation. By a solution of (4.1) or (4.2) we
mean a continuous function u = u(x) defined on the interval [a, b] that, when
substituted into the equation, reduces the equation to an identity on the interval.
If f 
 0, then the equation is called homogeneous; otherwise it is
nonhomogeneous. If λ = 0, then the unknown appears only under the integral
sign and the equation is said to be of the first kind; otherwise it is of the second
kind. If k(x, y) = k(y, x) then the kernel is said to be symmetric. Although (4.1)
and (4.2) are similar, they require different methods of analysis. Most of the
discussion deals with continuous solutions to integral equations; however, a
more complete theory can be developed for square integrable functions.
We can streamline the discussion by introducing integral operator notation. For
example, if we define the Fredholm operator K by
(4.3) 
then (4.1) can be written simply as

(4.4) 
where we have, as is common practice, suppressed the independent variable x.
We think of K as operating on a function u to produce another function K u. If
the kernel k is continuous, then K maps continuous functions to continuous
functions. Symbolically, K : C[a, b] → C[a, b]. Ultimately, we want to determine
the solution (if any), which could be written symbolically in the form
If this were true, then (K − λI)−1 would be the inverse of K − λI, and we would
have succeeded in defining the inverse of an integral operator.
In the same way that we consider eigenvalue problems for matrices and for
differential equations (Sturm–Liouville problems), we can consider eigenvalue
problems for integral equations. A number λ is called an eigenvalue for the
integral operator K if there exists a nontrivial solution u to the integral equation
(4.5) 
The set of eigenvalues form the spectrum of K, and the (geometric) multiplicity
of an eigenvalue is the dimension of the function space spanned by its
corresponding eigenfunctions. Much of the theory of integral equations deals
with solvability questions for the Fredholm equation (4.4) (or the Volterra
equation) and the solution to the eigenvalue problem (4.5).

5.4.1 Volterra Equations
Volterra integral equations arise naturally in many settings and we begin with an
example.
Example 5.35
(Inventory control problem) A shop manager determines that a percentage k(t)
of goods remains unsold at time t after she purchased the goods. At what rate
should she purchase goods so that the stock remains constant? Typical of
inventory problems, as well as population problems, we assume that this process
is continuous. Let u(t) be the rate (goods per unit time) at which goods are to be
purchased, and let a be the amount of goods initially purchased. In the time
interval [τ, τ + Δτ] she will buy an amount u(τ) Δτ, and at time t the portion
remaining unsold is k(t − τ)u(τ) Δτ. Therefore the amount of goods in the shop
unsold at time t is
The first term represents the amount of the initial purchase left unsold at time t.
Hence, this is the total amount of goods in the shop left unsold at time t, and so
the shop manager should require that
So the solution to the shop manager’s problem satisfies a nonhomogeneous
Volterra integral equation. For example, if k(t) = e−bt, then we can rearrange the
problem as
Differentiating with respect to t gives the solution u(t) = ab.
Example 5.36
(Demography) We set up an integral equation governing the number of
newborns in a population where the mortality and fecundity rates are known. Let
u(a, t) be the population density of females of age a at time t. Thus, u(a, t) da is
approximately the number of females between the ages of a and a + da at time t.

Further, let f(a) denote the fecundity rate of females at age a, measured in births
per female per time. Then f(a)u(a, t) da is the rate of births at time t contributed
by females between the ages a and a + da. Integrating over all ages gives the
total number of births per unit time at time t, or
There is no difficulty in using ∞ as the upper limit on the integral because the
fecundity will be zero after some age when females cease reproduction. Now we
separate ages into the two cases a < t and a > t. For a < t, females of age a at
time t were born at time t − a. So u(a, t) da = B(t − a)s(a) da, where s(a) is the
survivorship, or the fraction that survive from birth to age a. For a > t, females
of age a were present at time t = 0 having age a − t. If u0(a) is the age density of
females at time zero, then u(a, t) da = u0(a − t)s(t) da for a > t. Consequently, the
birthrate must satisfy the Volterra equation
The second integral is a known function of time, say ϕ(t); thus the birthrate B
satisfies the Volterra equation
which is called the renewal equation. The renewal equation occurs often in
applied mathematics, especially probability theory.
Some integral equations, like the one obtained in the preceding examples, have
kernels of a special type that permit a direct solution by Laplace transform
methods. The Volterra integral equation
(4.6) 
is said to be of convolution type because the integral is the convolution k * u of
k and u. We recall that the Laplace transform of a convolution is the product of
the Laplace transforms, that is, 
. Therefore, taking the
Laplace transform of both sides of (4.6) gives
Solving for 
 gives

Thus, the solution u is the inverse transform of the right side.
Example 5.37
Consider the integral equation
Here f(t) = t and k(t) = t, both with transform 1/s2. Then, taking the Laplace
transform of the equation gives
or
Therefore
Initial value problems for ordinary differential equations can be reformulated
as a Volterra integral equation. Consider
(4.7) 
and assume that f is a continuous function. If u = u(t) is a solution of (4.7), then
for all t we have
Replacing t by s and integrating from t0 to t gives
or
(4.8) 
where in the last step the fundamental theorem of calculus was applied. Equation
(4.8) is a Volterra integral equation for u, and it is entirely equivalent to the
initial value problem (4.7). To recover (4.7) from (4.8), we can differentiate (4.8)
with respect to x. The initial condition is automatically contained in the integral
form (4.8). One procedure for solving a Volterra equation, which sometimes
works, is to recast it into an initial value problem and solve the differential

problem.
To reformulate differential equations as integral equations, we can continually
integrate the equation until all the derivatives are removed. The following lemma
contains a formula for a repeated integral that is useful in carrying out this
procedure for second-order equations.
Lemma 5.38
Let f be a continuous function for x ≥ a. Then
Proof
Let F(s) = ƒs
a ƒ(y) dy. Then, using integration by parts,
which is the result.
The next example shows how a second-order initial value problem can be
transformed into an integral equation.
Example 5.39
Consider the second-order initial value problem:
(4.9) 
Solving for u″ and integrating from a to t gives
If the first integral is integrated by parts the result is

Integrating again gives
Lemma 5.38 finally implies
which is a Volterra equation is of the form
Remark 5.40
(Leibniz rule) The reverse process, transforming an integral equation into a
differential equation, requires the Leibniz rule for differentiating an integral with
respect to a variable appearing in the upper limit of the integral and in the
integrand:
(4.10) 
(see Exercise 1).
Iteration. It is common practice in applied science to apply iterative procedures
to determine approximate solutions to various kinds of problems for which
analytic solutions cannot be found. The integral equation (4.8), and therefore the
initial value problem (4.7), can be solved approximately by fixed-point iteration.
Beginning with an initial approximation ϕ0 (t) we generate a sequence of
successive approximations ϕ1(t), ϕ2(t),…, via
This method is called Picard’s method, and it can be shown under certain
assumptions that the sequence ϕn(t) converges to the unique solution of (4.8).
For the linear Volterra equation of the form

a similar type of iteration can be defined. Let us write this equation in operator
form as
(4.11) 
where K is the Volterra integral operator
(4.12) 
By making a heuristic calculation we can guess what the solution representation
is. First we write the integral equation as
Then, formally inverting the operator,
This result is the content of the next theorem. Therefore, letting u0 = u0(t) be
given, we may define a sequence of successive approximations un(t) by
(4.13) 
We have the following result on convergence of this process.
Theorem 5.41
If u0, f, k are continuous, then the sequence un(t) defined by (4.13) converges
uniformly to the unique solution of (4.11) on [a, b] given by
(4.14) 
where Kj denotes the composition operator K(K(…(K)…)), j times.
Remark 5.42
The representation (4.14) of the solution to (4.11) is called the Neuman series
for u, or the Born series in physics. It represents the inverse operator (I − λK).
Proof
To prove the theorem, note that after repeated iteration we can write

(4.15) 
To examine the convergence of (4.15) we must look at the remainder term λn+1
Kn+1 u0 as n → ∞. Denoting M = max|k| and C = max|u0|, we have
Next
Continuing with an induction argument we obtain
This bound is independent of t and it approaches zero as n → ∞. Consequently |
λn+1Kn+1u0| → 0 uniformly on [a, b], and the unique solution of (4.11) is given
by (4.14).
Examples are left to the exercises. We point out, however, one important
consequence of the Theorem 5.41, namely that the equation Ku = μu (set f = 0
and μ = 1/λ) has only the trivial solution. Therefore, there can be no eigenvalues
for a Volterra operator (4.12).
Corollary 5.43
The Volterra operator (4.12) has no eigenvalues.
This result is consistent with our comment that Volterra equations come from
initial value problems, and linear initial value problems for differential equations
have no eigenvalues. The conclusion is in sharp contrast to Fredholm equations,
which arise from boundary value problems. We already know that boundary
value problems (e.g., Sturm–Liouville problems) have a rich spectral structure,
and we expect the same from Fredholm operators.

5.4.2 Fredholm Equations with
Degenerate Kernels
Generally, integral equations are problems in infinite-dimensional spaces.
However, a special class of Fredholm equations reduces, or degenerates, to a
finite-dimensional problem. To this class belongs Fredholm integral equations
whose kernel k(x, y) is a finite sum of products of functions of x and y. These are
essentially finite-dimensional problems, or problems leading to a linear system
of algebraic equations.
Linear Algebra. To understand the mathematical issues for integral equations,
we retreat to a familiar problem in linear algebra, the algebraic eigenvalue
problem: Given an n × n matrix A, determine numbers λ for which the matrix
equation
(4.16) 
has a nontrivial solution u  
n. The values of λ for which a solution u exists are
the eigenvalues, and the corresponding solutions u are the associated
eigenvectors. Eigenvalues may be real or complex numbers.
There are many reasons the algebraic eigenvalue problem is important, but we
focus our thinking on a specific notion, namely using the eigenstructure of A to
address the nonhomogeneous solvability problem. We know from matrix theory
that there are n eigenvalues, not necessarily distinct. Suppose, for our discussion,
that the matrix A is a real, symmetric matrix (A = AT). Then A has n real
eigenvalues λ1,…, λn, and a full set of n orthonormal eigenvectors ei, i = 1, 2,…,
n. Therefore, the eigenvectors from an orthonormal basis for the space 
n and
each vector u in 
n can be written uniquely as a linear combination of the ei, or
(4.17) 
The ci are the coordinates of u in this basis and are given by ci = u · ei = (u, ei),
which are the projections of u onto the ith eigenvector.
The point we make is that knowledge of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors can
be used to solve other algebraic problems. Take, for example, the
nonhomogeneous linear system
(4.18) 

where f is a given vector, and μ is a given constant. If a solution u exists, it must
have the form (4.17) for some choice of the constants ci, which are to be
determined. Further, because f is a given vector, it has a known expansion in
terms of the eigenvectors,
where the coefficients fi = (f, ei) are known. Substituting these two expressions
for u and f into (4.18) gives
Combining terms,
But Aei = λiei, because λi and ei form an eigen-pair. Consequently,
Equating coefficients of the independent vectors ei then gives
Solving for the unknown coefficients ci gives
Therefore, if μ is not an eigenvalue, then there is a unique solution to (4.18)
given by
The right side represents (A − μI)−1f, and so we have inverted the finite-
dimensional operator A − μI.
If μ is an eigenvalue, say μ = λJ, then
and cJλJ = μcJ + fJ. If fJ = (f, eJ) ≠ 0, that is, f is not orthogonal to the Jth
eigenspace, then (4.18) cannot have a solution. On the other hand, if fJ = 0, then

cJ can be any arbitrary constant and (4.18) has infinitely many solutions of the
form
We have proved the following important result about the solution structure of
(4.18).
Theorem 5.44
(Fredholm Alterative theorem) Consider the system (4.18), where A is a real
symmetric matrix.
(a) If μ is not an eigenvalue of A, then (4.18) has a unique solution.
(b) If μ = λJ is an eigenvalue of A, then either there is no solution, or there
are infinitely many solutions. In other words, in this case there are solutions
if, and only if, f is orthogonal to the the eigenspace corresponding to λJ.
In summary, knowledge of the eigen-structure of a matrix A makes the solution
of other problems straightforward. This same idea, based on expansions in terms
of eigenfunctions, remains applicable to other operators, such as integral
operators and differential operators. Knowledge of the eigen-structure makes it
possible to invert such operators.
Separable kernels. Let us now consider the integral equation of the form
(4.19) 
where λ is a parameter, f is a given continuous function, and K is the operator
given by (4.3) with kernel
(4.20) 
where the αj and βj are real-valued continuous functions. A kernel of this form is
called separable, or degenerate.
Example 5.45
The Fredholm integral operator
has a separable kernel with

Without loss of generality, we can always assume that the αj are independent,
and the βj are independent. When we write out equation (4.19), after substituting
the kernel, we obtain
The inner product notation is convenient for the remaining discussion. We notice
that this last equation is just
(4.21) 
where the unknown constants cj are defined by the inner products
(4.22) 
If we multiply (4.21) by βi(x) and integrate (this is the same as taking the inner
product), we obtain
These equations represent n linear, algebraic equations in the unknowns c1, c2,
…, cn. The system can be written concisely in matrix format by introducing the
unknown column vector c = (c1,…, cn)T, the column vector F = ((f, β1),…, (f,
βn))T, and the coefficient matrix A with entries (βi, αj). Thus we have reduced the
solution of the integral equation (4.19) to the solution of the linear system
(4.23) 
Determining c gives the cj, and therefore (4.21) can be used (provided λ ≠ 0) to
determine the solution u(x) of the separable integral equation (4.19).
Notice that there are several cases to be considered, depending upon whether λ
is an eigenvalue or not, and whether λ = 0. The problem Ku − λu = f contains
both the eigenvalue problem Ku = λu and the solvability problem Ku = f.
(1) The case λ ≠ = 0. First consider equation (4.19) for λ ≠ 0. In this case
(4.24) 
where the cj are obtained from (4.23). If λ is not an eigenvalue of the matrix A,

then (4.23) has a unique solution c; then the solution of Ku − λu = f is given by
(4.24). If is an eigenvalue of A, then (4.23) either has no solution or infinitely
many solutions, depending on whether F is orthogonal to the eigenspace
generated by λ.
If f = 0, then (4.19) reduces to the eigenvalue problem Ku = λu for K; so the
nonzero eigenvalues of the matrix A coincide with the eigenvalues of K. There
are finitely many such eigenvalues, and the corresponding eigenfunctions u(x)
are defined by (4.21) with f = 0, where the cj are the components of the
corresponding eigenvectors of A. We can summarize our conclusions in the
following alternative theorem.
Theorem 5.46
Consider the Fredholm integral equation (4.19), where the kernel is given by
(4.20) and λ ≠ 0. Let A be the matrix A  ((βi, αj)). If λ is not an eigenvalue of A,
then (4.19) has a unique solution given by (4.24); if λ is an eigenvalue of A, then
(4.19) either has no solution or infinitely many solutions. In particular, the
eigenvalue problem Ku = λu has finitely many eigenvalues and eigenfunctions.
(2) The case λ = 0. Next consider the case λ = 0. First, if f = 0, then (4.21)
becomes
which implies cj = (u, βj) = 0 for all j, or u is orthogonal to all the βj. There are
infinitely many independent functions u that satisfy this condition. Suffice it to
say that the n functions βj span a finite-dimensional space, whereas u lies
generally in an infinite dimensional space, the square integrable functions. The
space of functions orthogonal to the span of β1,…, βn is infinite dimensional.
Thus, there are infinitely many nontrivial solutions to the equation Ku = 0. This
means, of course, that zero is an eigenvalue of K with infinite multiplicity; that
is, the dimension of the eigenspace corresponding to λ = 0 is infinite.
If λ = 0 and f ≠ 0, then (4.21) becomes
Now it is clear that no solution can exist if f is not a linear combination of the αj.

If f is a linear combination of the αj, say 
, then we must
have cj = (u, βj) = fj for all j. Again, there are infinitely many solutions. We
summarize the discussion in the following alternative theorem.
Theorem 5.47
Consider the equation Ku = f with separable kernel (4.20). If f is not a linear
combination of the αj then there is no solution; if f is a linear combination of the
αj, then there are infinitely many solutions. In particular, there are infinitely
many eigenfunctions corresponding to a zero eigenvalue.
In summary, the preceding discussion implies the following theorem regarding
the spectrum of a Fredholm operator with a separable kernel.
Theorem 5.48
The integral operator K with separable kernel (4.20) has finitely many nonzero
eigenvalues of finite multiplicity, and zero is an eigenvalue of infinite
multiplicity.
Example 5.49
Find the nonzero eigenvalues of the operator
Here the kernel is degenerate with
The matrix A is given by
and 
 gives the eigenvalues 
. An
eigenvector corresponding to λ = 1/2 is c = (3, 1)T and an eigenvector
corresponding to λ = − is (1, 1)T. By formula (4.21), with f = 0, the
eigenfunctions are
But eigenfunctions are unique only up to a constant multiple, and therefore the
eigenfunctions corresponding to λ =  and λ = − are u(x) = a(1 − x) and u(x) =

b(1 − 3x), respectively, where a and b are arbitrary constants. Next consider the
nonhomogeneous equation
(4.25) 
From the alternative theorem, if λ ≠ ±1/2, then (4.25) has a unique solution.

5.4.3 Symmetric Kernels
Many problems in the physical sciences lead naturally to Fredholm equations
with continuous, symmetric kernels. First we consider the eigenvalue problem
(4.26) 
where K is the integral operator given by (4.3) and the kernel is real, symmetric,
and continuous on the square a ≤ x, y ≤ b. That is, k(x, y) = k(y, x). We need the
following lemma.
Lemma 5.50
If k is a real, continuous, symmetric kernel, then the integral operator K defined
by (4.3) has the symmetry property
for all continuous functions u, v.
Proof
The proof is a straightforward calculation using the symmetry of k definition of
and interchanging order of integration. We have
Integral operators that have the properties assumed in the lemma are called
symmetric operators. Such operators, as we have noted in the case of
symmetric matrices and Sturm–Liouville operators, have an extremely nice
spectral structure. First we prove the following lemma.
Lemma 5.51
Let K be the integral operator defined by (4.3) with a real, symmetric,
continuous kernel. Then the eigenvalues, if they exist, are real, and
eigenfunctions corresponding to distinct eigenvalues are orthogonal.

Proof
First observe that (Ku, u) is real for all u. This follows from
If a number equals its complex conjugate, then it must be real. Now let λ, u be an
eigenpair; that is, Ku = λu. Then (Ku, u) = (λu, u) = λ(u, u). Since (Ku, u) and (u,
u) are real, λ must be real. Finally, let Ku = λu and Kv = vv, where λ ≠ v. Then (u,
v) = 0 follows from
which completes the proof.
Just as for Sturm–Liouville problems, the question of existence of eigenvalues
is more difficult and beyond the scope of this text; we refer the reader to other
sources for a proof (e.g., see Stakgold, 1998).
We already know the spectral structure of Fredholm operators with degenerate
kernels; there are finitely many nonzero eigenvalues of finite multiplicity, and
zero is an eigenvalue of infinite multiplicity. Now we formulate a theorem for
nonseparable kernels; the result is the Hilbert–Schmidt theorem.4
Theorem 5.52
Consider the integral operator K defined by
where the kernel k is real, continuous, symmetric, and not degenerate. Then K
has infinitely many eigenvalues λ1, λ2,…, each with finite multiplicity, and they
can be ordered as
with lim λn = 0. Moreover, any square integrable function f can be expanded in
terms of the set of orthonormal eigenfunctions ϕk (x) associated with the
eigenvalues as
where the series converges to f in L2 [a, b], and the coefficients are given by
(4.27) 

Having eigenfunctions opens the possibility of solving integral equations using
eigenfunction expansions. Consider the integral equation
(4.28) 
where the kernel of K is real, continuous, and symmetric, and f is a given
continuous function. First we expand f and u in terms of the eigenfunctions of K
as
where the fk are known and given by (4.27), and where the uk are unknown and
to be determined. Substituting these expansions into (4.28) gives
But
Therefore, equating the coefficients of ϕk yields
(4.29) 
Therefore, if μ is not an eigenvalue, we have the unique solution representation
of (4.28) given by
From the definition of the inner product, we can write this formula as
The right side is a representation of (K − μI)−1, the inverse operator of K − μI,
acting upon f. (In this discussion we have ignored questions of convergence, but
the calculations can be made rigorous.)
If μ = λm for some fixed m, then in order to have a solution we must have fm =
(f, ϕm) = 0, or f orthogonal to ϕm. In this case, then, um is arbitrary and we obtain
infinitely many solutions of (4.28) given by

where c is an arbitrary constant.
Numerical solution. When there is a unique solution, a Fredholm integral
equation of the form (4.28) can be resolved numerically by discretizing the
domain and approximating the integral by a quadrature formula (e.g., the
trapezoid rule). To this end, let xi = a + (i − 1)h for i = 1, 2,…, N, where h = (b −
a)/(N − 1) is the step size, and there are N − 1 subintervals; note that a = x1 and b
= xN. Then, evaluating the integral equation at the xi gives
Now recall the trapezoid rule:
Replacing the integral in the integral equation by its trapezoidal approximation,
and introducing the notation ui for the approximation to u(xi), we obtain
(4.30) 
for i = 1, 2,…, N. This is a system of N linear equations for the N unknowns u1,
u2,…, uN, and it can be solved easily by matrix methods using a computer
algebra system.
EXERCISES
1. Prove Leibniz rule (4.10) Hint: Call the integral I(x, a, b), where a and b
depend on x, and differentiate, using the chain rule.
2. Let
a) Find the eigenvalues and an orthonormal set of eigenvectors, and then

determine the solvability of the following systems.
b) Au = 5u + (1, −, 0)T.
c) Au = u + (1/2, −1, 0)T.
d) Au = 5u + (5, 2, 0)T.
3. Let
and consider the system (A − 4I)u = b. Find conditions on the vector b for
which this system has a solution.
4. Discuss the solvability of the following integral equations, and solve if
possible.
a) u(x) = f(x) + λ 
.
b) u(x) = b + λ 
.
c) u(x) = f(x) + 
.
5. Find the eigenvalues and orthonormal eigenfunctions associated with the
following integral operators:
a) Ku = 
 where 
 cos nx,
where kn is a strictly decreasing sequence of positive numbers. Note that
the set {1, cos nx, sin nx} forms an orthogonal set on the interval.
b) Ku = ƒ10 min(x, y)u(y) dy.
c) Ku = 
 where k(x, y) = y(π − x) if x > y, and k(x, y) =
x(π − y) if x < y.
d) Ku = 
 sin x cos 2y u(y) dy.
6. Find the expansion of the function
in terms of the eigenfunctions of the operator K in Exercise 5(c).
7. Formulate the integral equation
as an initial value problem.

8. Let K be the operator in Exercise 4(c). Solve the following problems, or
state why there is no solution.
a) Ku − 2u = 0.
b) Ku − π/9 u = x(π − x).
c) Ku − 2u = x(π − x).
d) Ku − π/9u = cos 3x.
9. Find the first three nonzero terms of the Neumann series for the solution
to the integral equation
10. Solve the integral equation 
.
11. Reformulate the initial value problem
as a Volterra integral equation.
12. Solve the integral equation
where f is continuous and λ ≠ 0. Hint: as an artifice, assume f’ exists and then
write the solution only in terms of f.
13. Consider the operator 
, where k(x) is a
continuous, even, periodic function with Fourier expansion
Find the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of K.
14. Determine if the integral operator
has eigenvalues.
15. Solve the integral equation
using eigenfunction expansions, where k(x, y) = x(1 − y) if x < y, and k(x, y)

= y(1 − x) if x > y. Hint: Transform the problem into a Sturm–Liouville
problem.
16. Replace sin xy by the first two terms in its power series expansion to
obtain an approximate solution to
17. Investigate the solvability of
18. Solve the integral equation
considering all cases.
19. Solve the nonlinear integral equation u(x) = λ ƒ10 yu(y)2 dy.
20. Solve the integral equation
considering all cases.
21. For the following integral equation, find a condition on μ for which the
equation has a solution, and find the solution.
22. For which value(s) of λ is there a unique solution to the integral equation
23. Reformulate the boundary value problem
as a Fredholm integral equation.
24. Reformulate the initial value problem
as a Volterra integral equation of the form u + Ku = f, and find f and the
kernel of K.

25. Find all solutions to the integral equation
that correspond to negative values of μ.
26. Find the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of the integral operator
27. Solve the Hammerstein integral equation
where λ is a real parameter and β is a continuous function.
28. Consider the differential-integral equation
Treating λ as a bifurcation parameter, determine how the amplitude of the
solution depends on λ and sketch a bifurcation diagram of the amplitude vs.
λ.
29. (This exercise requires perturbation methods from Chapter 3.) Consider
the differential-integral equation
where ε is a small, positive parameter, which models a population u = u(t)
undergoing logistics growth and the cumulative effect of a toxin on the
population. Find a uniformly valid approximation for t > 0. [See K. G.
TeBeest, 1997. SIAM Review, 39(3), 484–493.]
30. Consider the differential–integral operator
Prove that eigenvalues of K, provided they exist, are positive. Find the
eigenfunctions corresponding to the eigenvalue λ = 4π2.
31. Use (4.30) to numerically solve the integral equation


5.5 Green’s Functions
What is a Green’s function?5 Mathematically, it is the kernel of an integral
operator that represents the inverse of a differential operator; physically, it is the
response of a system when a unit point source is applied to the system.
For example, it is the electric field induced by a single point charge. In this
section we show how these two apparently different interpretations are actually
the same.

5.5.1 Inverses of Differential Operators
To fix the notion we consider a regular, nonhomogeneous Sturm–Liouville
problem (SLP), which we write in the form
(5.1) 
(5.2) 
(5.3) 
where p, p’, q, and f are continuous on [a, b], and p > 0. So that the boundary
conditions do not disappear, we assume that not both α1 and α2 are zero, and
similarly for β1 and β2. For conciseness we represent this problem in operator
notation
(5.4) 
where we consider the differential operator L as acting functions in C2 [a, b] that
satisfy the boundary conditions (5.2)–(5.3). Thus, L contains the boundary
conditions in its definition.
Recall the procedure in matrix theory when we have a matrix equation Lu = f,
where u and f are vectors and L is a square, invertible matrix. We immediately
have the solution u = L−1 f, where L−1 is the inverse matrix. The inverse matrix
exists if λ = 0 is not an eigenvalue of L, or when det L ≠ 0. We want to perform a
similar calculation with the differential equation (5.4) and write the solution
where L−1 is the inverse operator of L. Because L is a differential operator, we
expect that the inverse operator to be an integral operator of the form
(5.5) 
with kernel g. Again drawing inferences from matrix theory, we expect the
inverse to exist when λ = 0 is not an eigenvalue of L, that is, when there are no
nontrivial solutions to the differential equation equation Lu = 0. If there are
nontrivial solutions to Lu = 0, then L is not a one-to-one transformation (u = 0 is
always a solution) and so L−1 does not exist.
If the inverse L−1 of the differential operator L exists, then the kernel function
g(x, ξ) in (5.5) is called the Green’s function associated with L (recall that L

contains in its definition the boundary conditions). This is the mathematical
characterization of a Green’s function. Physically, as we observe subsequently,
the Green’s function g(x, ξ) is the solution to (5.4) when f is a unit point source
acting at the point ξ thus, it is the response of the system at x to a unit, point
source at ξ.
The approach here is to first present the methodology and a heuristic physical
motivation. Then the mathematical result unfolds with a precise representation
of the Green’s function.
Example 5.53
(Inversion) In this example we compute the inverse operator directly using
integration. Consider the boundary value problem
(5.6) 
Here Lu = −u″ is the differential operator, and it includes the boundary
conditions as part of its definition. We can invert L by direct integration.
Integrating from 0 to x gives
Integrating again,
where we used the left boundary condition and Lemma 5.38. Applying the right
boundary condition gives
Therefore,
Now we break up the last integral from 0 to x and x to 1, and then combine the
two integrals from 0 to x to get
We can combine the two integrals by defining the function g(x, ξ) by

Then,
The function g(x, ξ) is the kernel of the inverse differential operator L and is the
Green’s function for L. Using the Heaviside function, the Green’s function can
be written
The reader should verify that u(x) is indeed the solution to the differential.
[Break up the integral into two integrals over [0, x] and [x, 1], and then
differentiate using Leibniz rule.] The Green’s function is shown in Fig. 5.3. In
g(x, ξ) we are regarding x as the variable and ξ as a parameter.
Figure 5.3 Green’s fucntion for (5.6)
It is important to note the properties of the Green’s function in the last
example: (a) It satisfies the differential equation for all x ≠ ξ. (b) It satisfies both
boundary conditions. (c) It is continuous for all x, and in particular, at x = ξ. (d)
The derivative of g(x, ξ) has a simple jump discontinuity at x = ξ. We shall see
later that these properties are shared by all Green’s functions for Sturm-Liouville
operators.

5.5.2 Physical Interpretation
Next we investigate the physical interpretation of the Green’s function. Our
discussion is heuristic and intuitive, but it is made precise in the next section on
distributions. To fix the context we consider the steady-state heat flow problem
that we derived in Section 5.1. Refer to Fig. 5.1. We briefly repeat the derivation
because it is relevant here. We have a cylindrical bar of length L and cross-
sectional area A, and u = u(x) denote the temperature at cross section x. Further,
ϕ = ϕ(x) denotes the energy flux across the face at x, measured in energy/(area ·
time), and f(x) is a given, distributed heat source over the length of the bar,
measured in energy/(volume · time). If x and x + dx denote two arbitrary
locations in the bar, then conservation of energy yields
or, rearranging,
Taking the limit as dx → 0 gives ϕ’(x) = f(x). Fourier’s heat conduction law
states that
where K is the thermal conductivity of the bar, a physical constant. Then
which is the steady-state heat equation. For simplicity, we assume that the ends
of a bar of unit length are held at zero degrees, and K = 1. Then the steady
temperature distribution u = u(x) along the length of the bar satisfies the
boundary value problem
(5.7) 
which is the same as (5.6).
Next imagine that f = δ(x, ξ) is an idealized heat source of unit strength that
acts only at a single point x = ξ in (0, 1)6. Thus, it is assumed to have the
properties
and

Moreover, we assume that
for all ε > 0 and all nice functions θ(ξ).
A little reflection reveals that there is no ordinary function δ with these two
properties; a function that is zero everywhere but one point must have zero
integral. Further, there is no integrable function δ(x, ξ) that ‘sifts out’ the value of
a function θ(x) when integrated. Nevertheless, this δ symbol has been used since
the inception of quantum mechanics in the late 1920s (it was introduced by the
mathematician-physicist P. Dirac7; in spite of not having a rigorous definition of
the symbol until the early 1950s, when the mathematician L. Schwartz8 gave a
precise characterization of point sources, both physicists and engineers used the
“δ function” with great success. In the next section we give a careful definition
of the delta function, but for the present we continue with an intuitive discussion.
The differential equation for steady heat flow becomes, symbolically,
(5.8) 
Thus, for x ≠ ξ we have −u” = 0, which has solutions of the form u = Ax + B. To
satisfy the boundary conditions we take
We summarize the calculation we made in the last example. To determine the
two constants A and B we use the fact that the temperature should be continuous
at x = ξ, giving the relation Aξ = B(1 − ξ). To obtain another condition on A and
B we integrate the symbolic differential equation (5.8) over an interval [ξ − ε, ξ +
ε] containing ξ to get
The right side is unity because of the unit heat source assumption; the
fundamental theorem of calculus is then applied to the left side to obtain
Taking the limit as ε → 0 and multiplying by −1 yields

This condition is a jump condition on the derivative at the point x = ξ; because
the flux is ϕ(x) = −Ku’(x), it requires a jump in the flux. This last condition
forces − B − A = −1. Therefore, solving the two equations for A and B
simultaneously gives
Therefore the steady-state temperature in the bar, caused by a point source at x =
ξ is
or
This is precisely the Green’s function for the operator L = −d2/dx2 with boundary
conditions u(0) = u(1) = 0 that we calculated in Example 5.53. Consequently,
this gives a physical interpretation for the Green’s function; it is the response of
a system (in this case the steady temperature response) caused by a point source
(in this case a unit heat source).
The method above is characteristic of calculations of Green’s function. We
solve the homogeneous differential equation (with no source) for x < ξ and for x
> ξ. We apply the two appropriate boundary conditions at the endpoints and then
require continuity at x = ξ. Finally we obtain the jump condition on the
derivative by integrating the point source differential equation over an interval [ξ
− ε, ξ + ε] containing the singular point ξ, using the properties of the delta
function. These four conditions determine the Green’s function.
This idea is fundamental in applied mathematics. The Green’s function g(x, ξ)
is the solution to the symbolic boundary value problem
(5.9) 
(5.10) 
where δ represents a point source at x = ξ of unit strength. Furthermore, the
solution Lu = f to the boundary value problem (5.7) can therefore be regarded as
a superposition of point sources of magnitude f(ξ) over the entire interval a < ξ <
b.
Example 5.54
Consider the differential operator L = −d2/dx2 on 0 < x < 1 with the boundary
conditions u′(0) = u′(1) = 0 being part of the definition of L. In this case the
Green’s function does not exist because the equation Lu = 0 has nontrivial

solutions (any constant function will satisfy the differential equation and the
boundary conditions); stated differently, λ = 0 is an eigenvalue. Physically we
can also see why the Green’s function does not exist. This problem can be
interpreted in the context of steady-state heat flow. The zero-flux boundary
conditions imply that both ends of the bar are insulated, and so heat cannot
escape from the bar. Thus it is impossible to impose a point source, which would
inject heat energy at a constant, unit rate, and have the system respond with a
time-independent temperature distribution; energy would build up in the bar,
precluding a steady state.
In this heuristic discussion we noted that δ is not an ordinary function.
Furthermore, the Green’s function g is not differentiable at x = ξ, so it remains to
determine the meaning of applying a differential operator to g as in formulas
(5.9)–(5.10). Our goal in the next section is to put these notions on firm ground.
Example 5.55
(Causal Green’s function) The causal Green’s function is the Green’s function
for an initial value problem. Consider the problem
(5.11) 
We assume p, p′, and q are continuous for t ≥ 0 and p > 0. The causal Green’s
function, also called the impulse response function, is the solution to (5.11) when
f is a unit impulse applied at time τ, or, in terms of the delta function notation,
when f = δ(t, τ). Thus, symbolically, Lg(t, τ) = δ(t, τ), where g denotes the causal
Green’s function. We give a physical argument to determine g. Because the
initial data is zero, the response of the system is zero up until time τ; therefore,
g(t, τ) = 0 for t < τ. For t > τ require Lg(t, τ) = 0, and we demand that g be
continuous at t = τ, or
At t = τ, the time when the impulse is given, we require that g have a jump in its
derivative of magnitude
This jump condition is derived in the same way that the jump condition was
obtained earlier, namely, by integrating Lg = δ(t, τ) over an interval (τ − ε, τ + ε).
The continuity condition and the jump condition, along with the fact that g
satisfies the homogeneous differential equation, are enough to determine g(x, τ)
for t > τ.

Finally, we present the general result.
Theorem 5.56
Consider the SLP (5.1)–(5.3), and assume that λ = 0 is not an eigenvalue of L.
Then L−1 exists and is given by (5.5) with
(5.12) 
Here, u1 = u1(x) and u2 = u2(x) are two linearly independent solutions of the
homogeneous differential equation Lu = −(pu′)’ + qu = 0 with B1u1(a) = 0 and
B2u2(b) = 0, and W(x) = u1u′2 − u′1u2 is the Wronskian of u1 and u2. Finally, the
solution to the nonhomogeneous problem Lu = f is given by
(5.13) 
Clearly, the Green’s function can be expressed as a single equation in terms of
the Heaviside unit step function H(x) by
(5.14) 
In general, the basic properties of the Green’s function are straightforward
calculations from the expression (5.12).
(a) g(x, ξ) satisfies the differential equation Lg(x, ξ) = 0 for x ≠ ξ.
(b) g(x, ξ) satisfies the boundary conditions (5.2) and (5.3).
(c) g(x, ξ) is a continuous function of x on [a, b], in particular, at x = ξ.
(d) g(x, ξ) is not differentiable at x = ξ; rather, there is a jump in the
derivative at x = ξ given by
Here, prime denotes differentiation with respect to x. Thus g is a continuous
curve with a corner at x = ξ.
Now we return to the SLP problem (5.1)–(5.3) and ask what can be said if λ =
0 is an eigenvalue, that is, if the homogeneous problem has a nontrivial solution.
In this case there may not be a solution, and if there is a solution, it is not unique.

The following theorem gives a partial result.
Theorem 5.57
Consider the Sturm–Liouville problem
and assume there exists a nontrivial solution ϕ of the homogeneous problem Lϕ
= 0. Then, if the SLP has a solution, then f is orthogonal to ϕ, or
Proof
Assume a solution u exists. Then
The first integral may be integrated by parts twice to remove the derivatives
from u and put them on ϕ. Performing this calculation gives, after collecting
terms,
because Lϕ = 0. Both ϕ and u satisfy the boundary conditions, so one easily
shows that 
.

5.5.3 Green’s Function via
Eigenfunctions
In this section we show that the eigenvalues and eigenvalues of a regular Sturm–
Liouville operator L determine the Green’s function, or the solution to the
nonhomogeneous problem Lu = f. This is not surprising because we have already
seen that solutions to a nonhomogeneous problem in matrix theory and in
integral equation can be determined from the eigenstructure of the operator.
As usual, we study the more general problem
(5.15) 
where L is the regular Sturm–Liouville operator, which includes the boundary
conditions (5.3), and f is continuous. We know from Section 5.2 that the SLP
problem
(5.16) 
has infinitely many eigenvalues and corresponding orthonormal eigenfunctions
λn and ϕn(x),n = 1,2,…, respectively. Moreover, the eigenfunctions form a basis
for the square-integrable functions on (a, b). Therefore we assume that the
solution u of (5.15) is given in terms of the eigenfunctions as
(5.17) 
where the coefficients cn are to be determined. Further, we write the given
function f in terms of the eigenfunctions as
Next we multiply (5.15) by ϕn and integrate to obtain, using inner product
notation,
Because L is a symmetric operator,
and therefore

Hence
There are two cases. If μ, is not an eigenvalue, then the cn are determined
uniquely by
(5.18) 
Therefore we have a unique solution to (5.15). If μ = 0, and if zero is not an
eigenvalue of L, then the solution collapses into the inverse operator and Green’s
function as follows:
Consequently, we have inverted the operator L and so we must have
which gives the Green’s function in terms of the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions
of the operator L. This expansion for g is called the bilinear expansion.
Now case two: μ is an eigenvalue; that is, μ = λJ for some index J. Then, using
(5.18), we observe that cJ · 0 = fJ. Thus, if fJ ≠ 0, there is no solution to (5.15).
On the other hand, if fJ = 0, then cJ is arbitrary, and there are infinitely many
solutions to (5.15) of the form
The key result is the differential equation version of the Fredholm alternative:
If μ is not an eigenvalue of the operator L in (5.15), then there is a unique

solution (and a Green’s function if λ ≠ 0). If μ = λJ is an eigenvalue of L, then
there exists a solution if, and only if, f is othogonal to the eigenspace spanned by
ϕJ.
Example 5.58
Consider the operator L = −d2/dx2 with Dirichlet boundary conditions u(0) = u(π)
= 0. The eigenvalues and eigenfucntions are
Therefore the Green’s function is
EXERCISES
1. A function y = f(x) has a second derivative f”(x) that is continuous at all
points except x = ξ, where it has a simple jump discontinuity (finite left and
right derivatives at ξ). Explain carefully why f’(x) is continuous at ξ.
2. Consider the steady-state heat conduction equation with a piecewise
continuous conductivity K(x):
where K(x) = K1(x) for 1 ≤ ξ, K(x) = K2(x), for ξ < x ≤ 1, where ξ is a fixed
value in (0, 1). What are the conditions on the temperature u and flux ϕ at ξ?
Hint: Integrate over a small interval about ξ.
3. Using direct integration, show that the boundary value problem
has a solution only if f is orthogonal to the constant function 1. Find u(x) in
this case.
4. Discuss the solvability of the boundary value problem
5. Determine if there is a Green’s function associated with the operator Lu =
u” + 4u, 0 < x < π with u(0) = u(π) = 0. Find the solution to the boundary
value problem

6. Consider the boundary value problem
Find Green’s function or explain why there isn’t one.
7. Consider the boundary value problem
Find Green’s function or explain why there isn’t one.
8. Use the method of Green’s function to solve the problem
(Note: This differential equation is a steady-state heat equation in a bar with
variable thermal conductivity K(x).)
9. Consider a spring–mass system governed by the initial value problem
where u = u(t) is the displacement from equilibrium, f is an applied force,
and m and k are the mass and spring constants, respectively.
a) Show that the causal Green’s function is
b) Find the solution to the initial value problem and write it in the form
10. By finding Green’s function in two different ways, evaluate the sum
11. Find the inverse of the differential operator Lu = −(x2u′)’ on 1 < x < e
subject to u(1) = u(e) = 0.
12. Consider a symbolic eigenvalue problem with a ‘delta function’
coefficient aδ(x, 0), a > 0, at the origin:
subject to the boundary conditions u(x) → 0 as |x| → ∞. Find the negative
eigenvalues and eigenfunctions. Hint: To obtain a jump condition, integrate
the equation about a small interval surrounding x = 0 and then use the
properties of the delta function.
13. Consider the eigenvalue problem for the Schrodinger equation

where the potential V is given by V(x) = 0, x < 1, and V(x) = V0 > 0, x > 1.
Find the eigenvalues in the range 0 < λ < V0 and the associated wave
functions. Sketch a generic wave function and associated probability density.
Hints: At discontinuities require continuity of y and y′ (Why?); determine the
eigenvalues graphically.

5.6 Distributions
In the last section we showed, in an intuitive manner, that the Green’s function
satisfies a differential equation with a unit point source. Because the Green’s
function is not a smooth function, it leads us to the question of what it means to
differentiate such a function. Also, we have not pinned down the properties of a
point source (a delta function) in a precise way. If a point source is not a
function, then what is it? The goal of this section is to answer these questions.
New notation, terminology, and concepts are required.

5.6.1 Test Functions
Let K be a set of real numbers. A real number c is said to be a limit point of set
K if every open interval containing c, no matter how small, contains at least one
point of K. If K is a set, then the closure of K, denoted by 
, is the set K along
with all its limit points. A set is called closed if it contains all of its limit points.
For example, the closure of the half-open interval (a, b] is the closed interval [a,
b]. A useful set in characterizing properties of a function ϕ is the set of points
where it takes on nonzero values. The closure of this set is called the support of
the function; precisely, we define supp 
. So, the support of a
function is the set of points where it is nonzero, along with the limit points of
that set.
Now we introduce an important class of functions that plays a crucial role in
our discussion. In the following, (a, b) denotes an open interval, which may be
infinite. By the set C∞
0(a, b) we mean the set of all continuous functions on (a,
b) whose derivatives of all order exist and are continuous on (a, b), and which
have their support contained in a closed, bounded subset of (a, b). These
functions are called test functions. An example of a test function on 
 is the
bell-shaped curve (see Fig. 5.4).
Figure 5.4 Plot of the test function (6.1).
(6.1) 
Therefore, a test function in a very smooth function on (a, b) with no corners or
kinks in its graph or in any of its derivatives; its support must be entirely
contained in (a, b) and, in fact, must lie in a closed, bounded interval strictly
contained in (a, b); if a and b are finite, then a test function must be zero at a and
b.
Finally, a function f is said to be locally integrable on (a, b) if

for all subintervals [c, d] of (a, b). Recall from calculus that an integrable
function need not be differentiable, or even continuous.
As we know, a function with a corner (such as Green’s function or the function
|x|), does not have a derivative (tangent line) at that corner. However, it is
possible to generalize the notion of derivative so that it makes sense to discuss
the concept in a broader context. First we introduce the idea of a weak
derivative. Let u = u(x) be a continuously differentiable function on (a, b) and let
f = f(x) be its derivative. That is,
Multiplying both sides by a test function ϕ  C∞0 (a, b) and integrating from a to
b gives
Integrating the left side by parts and using the fact that ϕ(a) = ϕ(b) = 0 gives
(6.2) 
Now observe that equation (6.2) does not require u to be differentiable, just
integrable. The integration by parts removed the derivative from u and put it on
ϕ, which has derivatives of all order. We can take (6.2) as the basis of a
definition for a derivative of an integrable function. If u and f are locally
integrable functions, we say that f is the weak derivative of u on (a, b) if (6.2)
holds for all ϕ  C∞
0 (a, b). Clearly, if u is continuously differentiable, then it has
a weak derivative (the ordinary one); but a function can have a weak derivative
without having an ordinary derivative. In fact, this idea can be extended so as not
to require even local integrability of u or f.
Example 5.59
On the interval (a, b) = (−1, 1) let u(x) = |x| and f(x) = H(x) − H(−x), where H is
the Heaviside function. The function u is not differentiable at x = 0 in the usual
sense. Yet u′ = f in the weak sense on (−1, 1) because, from (6.2),

This is easily checked. The left side is
where we have integrated by parts and used the fact that ϕ vanishes at x = −1, 1.
The right side is
and therefore (6.2) holds and (d/dx)|x| = H(x) − H(−x) in a weak sense.
Example 5.60
Again take (a, b) = (−1, 1) and let u(x) = H(x). What is u′ in the weak sense?
Suppose u’ = f weakly. Then, by definition (6.2), we should have
The left side simplifies to
So we require that
(6.3) 
But, as the following calculation shows, there is no locally integrable function f
for which (6.3) holds for all ϕ in C∞0(−1, 1). Take the test function ϕa(x) =
exp(−a2/(a2 − x2)) for |x| < a < 1, and ϕa(x) = 0 otherwise. Then
The right side goes to zero as a → 0 (because f is locally integrable), and so we
obtain the contradiction e−1 ≤ 0. Therefore the weak derivative of the Heaviside
function cannot be a locally integrable function. Intuitively, the derivative should
be zero everywhere except at x = 0, where there is a unit jump in H; so the
derivative should be localized at the point x = 0, similar to a point source. In fact,
as we shall show, the derivative of the Heaviside function is the “delta function,”
in a sense to be defined.

5.6.2 Distributions
The last example showed that the concept of a weak derivative needs to be
generalized further if we are to define the derivative of any locally integrable
function. To accomplish this task we need to expand our idea of function and not
think of the values of a function at points in its domain, but rather think of a
function in terms of its action on other objects. For example, suppose u = u(x)
represents the distributed temperature at locations x in a bar. This is an idealized
concept, because when we measure temperature at a point x, for example, we use
a thermometer that has finite extent; it is not just localized at x. So, in fact, we
are really measuring the average temperature (x) of the points near x, or more
precisely, a weighted average
over some interval containing x. We cannot measure the exact, idealized u(x),
just the average. The weight function θ(x, ξ) is characterized by properties of the
thermometer placed at x. So sometimes it is better to think of a function in terms
of its integrated values rather than its point values. In fact, often we have to give
up our idea of requiring our functions to have values or local properties. To
extend the idea further, a ‘delta function’ δ(x, ξ) is just an idealized thermometer
that measures the temperature exactly; that is,
This idea leads us to define the notion of a distribution, or generalized
function. A distribution is a mapping (transformation) that associates with each
test function ϕ in C∞
0(a, b) a real number. (Think of the ϕ as a temperature
profile.) We met the idea of mapping a function space to 
 in Chapter 4 on
calculus of variations, where we considered functionals. A distribution is just a
continuous linear functional on the set of test functions. If we denote the set of
distributions by D’, then f  D’ implies f: C∞
0(a, b) → 
. We denote the image
of ϕ  C∞
0(a, b) under f by (f, ϕ) rather than the usual function notation f(ϕ).
Linearity implies (f, αϕ) = α(f, ϕ) and (f, ϕ1 + ϕ2) = (f, ϕ1) + (f, ϕ2).9 The
requirement that f is continuous is a slightly more technical concept, namely that
of convergence in C∞0(a, b). We say that a sequence ϕn of test functions in

C∞0(a, b) converges to zero in C∞0(a, b) (and we write ϕn → 0 in C∞0(a, b)), if
there is a single, closed bounded interval K in (a, b) containing the supports of
all the ϕn, and on that interval K the sequence ϕn and the sequence of the
derivatives ϕ(m)n converge uniformly to zero on K as n → ∞. Then we say that f
is continuous if (f, ϕn) → 0 for all sequences ϕn → 0 in C∞0(a, b).
Example 5.61
With each locally integrable function u on (a, b) there is a natural distribution u
defined by
(6.4) 
Note that we speak of the distribution u and use the same symbol as for the
function. One can verify that u defined by (6.4) satisfies the linearity and
continuity properties for a distribution. Therefore, every locally integrable
function is a distribution via (6.4).
Example 5.62
The distribution δξ, ξ  (a, b), defined by
(6.5) 
is called the Dirac or delta distribution with pole at ξ. It is easily checked that
δξ is linear and continuous, and thus defines a distribution. The Dirac
distribution δξ acts by sifting out the value of δ at ξ. Note that we cannot
represent (6.5) by an integral
because of the argument following equation (6.3); there we showed that there is
no locally integrable function with this property. A distribution, like the Dirac
distribution, that cannot be represented as (6.4) is called a singular distribution.
The customary notation used in distribution theory is confusing. Even when f
is a singular distribution and no locally integrable function f exists for which (f,
ϕ) = ƒb
a f(x)ϕ(x) dx, we still write the integral, even though it makes no sense.
The integral expression here is only symbolic notation for the mathematically
correct expression (f, ϕ). Further, even though it is impermissible to speak of the

values of a distribution f at points x, we still on occasion write f(x) to denote the
distribution. For example, the Dirac distribution δ0 with pole at zero is often
written δ(x), and also δξ is written δξ(x) or δ(x − ξ).
Example 5.63
Consider u(x) = H(x), the Heaviside function. We found earlier, in order for u’ = f
to exist in a weak sense, it is necessary that
(6.6) 
for all test functions ϕ. There is no integrable function f that satisfies this
equation. However, if f is the Dirac distribution f = δ0 with pole at zero, then
according to (6.5), equation (6.6) is satisfied if we interpret the integral
symbolically. Thus, in a distributional sense, H′ = δ0, or H′(x) = δ(x).
Now let us take a more formal approach and underpin the issues we raised. For
conciseness, we use D  C∞0(a, b) to denote the set of test functions on (a, b),
and D′ to denote the set of distributions (continuous linear functionals) on D.
The interval (a, b) can be (−∞, ∞) or (0, ∞). Equality of two distributions is
defined by requiring the two distributions have the same action on all the test
functions; we say that two distributions f1 and f2 are equal if (f1, ϕ) = (f2, ϕ) for
all ϕ  D, and we write f1 = f2 in D′.
It is possible to do algebra and calculus in the set D′ of distributions just as we
do with ordinary functions. It is easy to see that D′ is a linear space under the
definition (f1 + f2, ϕ) = (f1, ϕ) + (f2, ϕ) of addition, and (cf, ϕ) = c(f, ϕ), c  , of
scalar multiplication. To define rules for distributions we use the guiding
principle that any general definition should be consistent with what is true for
locally integrable functions, since locally integrable functions are distributions.
For example, let α = α(x) be an infinitely differentiable function (i.e., α  C∞(a,
b)), and suppose we wish to define the multiplication αf, where f  D′. If f is a
locally integrable function, then
(6.7) 
Observe that αϕ  D. Therefore we make the definition

for any f  D′; we have then defined the distribution αf by its action on test
functions through the action of f.
We can also define the derivative of a distribution f. Again, assume f and f’ are
locally integrable. Using the same argument that led to (6.2), namely integration
by parts and the fact that test functions have support in the interval (a, b), we are
led to
Therefore, if f  D′ we define the derivative f’  D′ by
f′ is called the distributional derivative of f. In the same way (integrating by
parts n times), we define the nth distributional derivative f(n) of a distribution f by
It is routine to verify that these definitions do indeed satisfy the requirements of
a distribution (linearity and continuity). Thus, we have the interesting fact that a
distribution has derivatives of all orders.
Example 5.64
Calculate the derivative of the Dirac distribution δξ. By definition,
Example 5.65
A function like f(x) = 1/x is not locally integrable. If we try to define a regular
distribution by
then it is invalid because the integral does not exist in any interval containing the
origin. We can avoid this difficulty if we define the distribution using the
principal value of the integral. That is, define

One can check that these integrals exist. So we define
which is a distribution. Note that it is linear and continuous because 
.
Other properties of distributions are useful as well. For example, if c   and
f(x)  D′( ), then we can define the translated distribution f(x − c)  D′( ) by
(See Exercise 5.) For example, if f(x) = δ(x), the Dirac distribution with pole at
zero, then δ(x − c) is defined by (δ(x − c), ϕ(x)) = (δ(x), ϕ(x + c)) = ϕ(c). But
also, (δc(x), ϕ(x)) = ϕ(c). Therefore δ(x − c) has the same action on test functions
as δc(x) and so
Thus we have yet another way to write the delta distribution with pole at c. The
sifting property of the delta “function” is often written, as we have already done,
symbolically as
In summary, a distribution is a generalization of the idea of a function. Rather
than defined at points with local properties as functions are, distributions are
global objects defined in terms of their integrated values, or their action on test
functions.
In Chapter 6 we show how Laplace transforms of distributions can be defined.

5.6.3 Distribution Solutions to
Differential Equations
We are now poised to define what is meant by a weak solution and a distribution
solution to a differential equation. Consider the differential operator L defined by
(6.8) 
where α, β, and γ are C∞ functions on (a, b). By a classical solution, or genuine
solution, to the differential equation
(6.9) 
where f is continuous, we mean a twice, continuously differential function u =
u(x) that satisfies the differential equation identically for all x. In other words, a
genuine solution has enough derivatives so that it makes sense to substitute it
into the differential equation to check, pointwise, if it is indeed a solution. We
can also interpret (6.9) in a distributional sense. That is, if u and f are
distributions, then Lu is a distribution; if Lu = f, as distributions, then we say u is
a distribution solution of (6.9). Recall, for Lu = f as distributions, that we mean
(Lu, ϕ) = (f, ϕ) for all test functions ϕ  D. Clearly, if u is a classical solution,
then it is a distribution solution, but the converse is not true.
There is still more terminology. A fundamental solution associated with L is a
distribution solution to
where the right side of (6.9) is a Dirac distribution. A fundamental solution must
satisfy only a differential equation in a distributional sense, and it need not be
unique.
To elaborate, let u be a distribution. Then Lu is a distribution and it is defined
by the action
where L* is the formal adjoint operator defined by
It follows that if u is a distribution solution to Lu = f, then

(6.10) 
If both u and f are locally integrable, then (6.10) can be written
(6.11) 
and we say u is a weak solution of (6.9) if (6.11) holds. Note that (6.11) does not
require u to have derivatives in the ordinary sense. A weak solution is a special
case of a distribution solution; a weak solution is a function solution whose
(weak) derivatives are functions, and (6.11) holds. Obviously, a classical solution
is a weak solution, but the converse is not true.
In passing, we call an operator L formally self-adjoint if L* = L. Specifically,
a Sturm–Liouville operator Lu = −(pu′)’ + qu (regardless of boundary
conditions) is formally self-adjoint, as integration by parts shows (see Exercise
9). In other words,
where B(u, v) denotes the boundary conditions. Given boundary conditions on u,
the boundary conditions on v that force B(u, v) = 0 are called the adjoint
boundary conditions. If L = L* and the adjoint boundary coincide with those of
L, then L is said to be self-adjoint.
What we accomplished in the preceding discussion is significant. We replaced
the usual question “Does this problem have any function solutions?” with the
question “Does this problem have any distribution solutions or weak solutions?”
Thus, we are not discarding physically meaningful solutions because of minor
technicalities, for example, not having a derivative at some point. Now the
symbolic differential equation for the Green’s function,
as discussed in Section 5.4, is meaningful. It is to be interpreted as an equation
for distributions and actually means
or, equivalently,

Example 5.66
We verify that the function
is the Green’s function associated with the operator L = −d2/dx2 on (0, 1) subject
to the boundary conditions u(0) = u(1) = 0. That is, we show g satisfies the
problem
(6.12) 
(6.13) 
in a distributional sense. We must show
(6.14) 
for all ϕ  D(0, 1). To this end,
Now we integrate the two integrals by parts to get
and
Upon substitution we obtain (6.14). So, interpreted properly, the Green’s
function is the solution to the boundary value problem (6.12)–(6.13) with a point
source.
EXERCISES
1. Does (u, ϕ) = ϕ(0)2 define a distribution in D′( )?
2. Is the function ϕ(x) = x(1 − x) on (0, 1) a test function? Why or why not?
3. Is f(x) = 1/x locally integrable on (0, 1)?
4. Let ϕ  D( ) be a test function. For which of the following does 
n → 0
in D( )?

(a) 
(b) 
.
(c) 
.
5. Prove the following statements:
(a) 
.
(b) 
, where 
.
6. Show that 
 is a fundamental solution for the operator
L = d2/dx2 on .
7. Let c ≠ 0 be a constant and f(x) a distribution in D′( ). Show that it is
appropriate to define the distributions f(x − c) and f(cx) by
and
8. Find 
.
9. Compute the distributional derivative of H(x) cos x, where H is the
Heaviside function. Does the derivative exist in a weak sense?
10. Show that the Sturm–Liouville operator Lu  −(pu′)′ + qu is formally
self-adjoint.
11. Find a fundamental solution associated with the operator L defined by Lu
= −x2u″ − xu’ + u, 0 < x < 1, such that u(x, ξ) = x for 0 < x < ξ.
12. In D′( ) compute 
.
13. Find the adjoint of the derivative operator L = −d/dx on x > 0. Is L
formally self-adjoint?
14. Consider the operator L = d2/dx2 − x2 on 0 < x < 1. (a) Find the formal
adjoint of L? Is L formally self-adjoint? (b) Suppose the boundary conditions
accompanying L are u(0) = u′(1) = 0. Find the adjoint boundary conditions.
Is L self-adjoint?

REFERENCES AND NOTES
This chapter presented the core of classical applied mathematics—boundary
value problems, Green’s functions, integral equations, and distributions. There
are many texts that specialize in one or more of these subjects. Comprehensive
treatments, all more advanced than the present text, are given in Keener (2000)
and Stakgold (1998). For elementary linear algebra Kwak and Hong (2004) is a
highly readable text, and Kelley and Peterson (2010) is an upper-level
differential equations text that discusses boundary value problems. Spivak’s
(2008) classic calculus text provides an unsurpassed treatment of the basic
results and techniques in analysis. Strauss (1992) and Vretblat (2006) both have
excellent discussions on Fourier analysis and their applications. Quantum
mechanics is a rich source of examples of all the ideas in this chapter; Griffiths
(2005) is an excellent introduction to this material.
Birkhoff, G. & Rota, G.-C. 1978. Ordinary Differential Equations, 2nd ed., John
Wiley & Sons, New York.
Griffiths, D. J. 2005. Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, 2nd ed., Pearson
Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Keener, J. P. 2000. Principles of Applied Mathematics, revised edition, Perseus
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Kelley, W. G. & Peterson, A. 2010. The Theory of Differential Equations, 2nd
ed., Springer-Verlag, New York.
Kwak, J. H. & Hong, S. 2004. Linear Algebra, 2nd ed., Birkhauser, Boston.
Spivak, M. 2008. Calculus, 4th ed., Publish or Perish, Inc., Houston.
Stakgold, I. 1998. Green’s Functions and Boundary Value Problems, 2nd, ed.,
Wiley–Interscience, New York.
Strauss, W. A. 1992. Partial Differential Equations, John Wiley & Sons, New
York.
Vretblad, A. 2006. Fourier Analysis and Its Applications, Springer-Verlag, NY.
1 The trigonometric identities sin A sin B = (cos(A − B) − cos(A + B)) and sin
A cos B = (sin(A + B) + sin(A − B)), along with others, are useful in these
calculations.

2 This result is the Weierstrass M-test for uniform convergence; e.g., see
Spivak (2008), p 507.
3 A function f is P-periodic, or periodic of period P, if it repeats itself in every
interval of length P; that is, f(x + P) = f(x) for all x.
4 David Hilbert (1862–1943) was one of the great mathematicians in the early
20th century. His formalist approach to problems became a key idea in
studying abstract concepts in functional analysis. Hilbert spaces are now core
structures in mathematics and science, especially quantum theory.
5George Green, 1793–1841.
6 The unit source function δ(x, ξ) is also denoted by δξ(x) or δ(x − ξ).
7 Paul Dirac (1902–1984) won the Nobel Prize in physics in 1933 for his
ground breaking work in quantum mechanics.
8 Laurent Schwartz (1915–2002).
9In physics, the notation for the action of a distribution f on a test function ϕ is
< f | ϕ >; this is the bracket notation; < f | denotes the ‘bra’, or the functional,
and | ϕ > denotes the ‘ket’, or the function (or, vector).

Chapter 6
Partial Differential Equations
Partial differential equations is one of the most fundamental areas in applied
analysis, and it is hard to imagine any area of science and engineering where the
impact of this subject is not felt. Partial differential equation models, for
example, form the basis of electrodynamics (Maxwell’s equations), quantum
mechanics (the Schrödinger equation), continuum mechanics (equations
governing fluid, solid, and gas dynamics; acoustics), and reaction–diffusion
systems in biological and chemical sciences, only to mention a few. The goal in
this and the next chapter are to introduce some important models and key
techniques that expose the solution structure of such equations.

6.1 Basic Concepts
Ordinary differential equations describe how systems evolve in time. Yet many
systems, perhaps most, evolve in both space and time, giving rise to two or more
independent variables. For example, the temperature u in a slender, laterally
insulated, metal bar of length l, subject to prescribed temperatures at its ends,
depends upon the location x in the bar and upon the time t. That is, u = u(x, t).
Later we show, using conservation of energy, that the temperature u must satisfy
a partial differential equation
where k > 0 is a numerical constant characterizing the thermal properies of the
material composing the bar; the equation holds for t > 0 and 0 < x < l. It is called
the heat equation, and it is the basic equation of heat transfer.
Consider another example from population dynamics. Imagine, for example,
toxic bacteria distributed throughout a canal of length L. If we ignore spatial
variation then we may model the total population u = u(t) of bacteria by the
usual logistic equation
where r is the growth rate and K is the carrying capacity. Here, the population
depends only on time t and we have an ordinary differential equation. However,
in a nonhomogeneous environment the parameters r and K may depend upon
geographical location x. Even if the environment is homogeneous, the bacteria
may be distributed nonuniformly in the canal, and they may move from high
population densities to low densities (this is called diffusion), giving changes in
spatial dependence. If we wish to consider how the spatial distribution of
bacteria changes in time, then we must include a spatial independent variable
and write u = u(x, t), where now u is interpreted as a population density, or
population per unit length; that is, u(x, t)Δx represents approximately the number
of bacteria between x and x + Δx. If we include diffusion of the bacteria then the
model modifies to
where D is the diffusion constant. This is Fisher’s equation,1 one of the

fundamental equations in structured population dynamics.
It is common, as in ordinary differential equations, to drop the independent
variables in the notation and just write, for example, the heat equation as ut −
kuxx = 0, the dependence of u on x and t being understood. In the next section we
derive these model equations.
In general, a second-order partial differential equation in two independent
variables is an equation of the form
(1.1) 
where (x, t) lies in some domain D in 
2. By a solution we mean a twice
continuously differentiable function u = u(x, t) on D, which when substituted
into (1.1), reduces it to an identity for (x, t) in D. We assume that u is twice
continuously differentiable so that it makes sense to calculate the second-order
derivatives and substitute them into (1.1). A solution of (1.1) may be represented
graphically as a smooth surface in three-dimensional xtu space lying above the
domain D. We regard x as a position or spatial coordinate and t as time. The
domain D in 
2 where the problem is defined is referred to as a space-time
domain, and problems that include time as an independent variable are called
evolution problems. Such problems model how a system evolves in time,
particularly those that govern diffusion processes and wave propagation. When
two spatial coordinates, say x and y, are the independent variables we refer to the
problem as an equilibrium or steady-state problem; time is not involved. A
large portion of the literature on theoretical partial differential equations deals
with questions of regularity of solutions. That is, given an equation and auxiliary
conditions, how smooth are the solutions? We do not address many of these
issues here, but we refer to an advanced text (see References and Notes).
A partial differential equation of type (1.1) has infinitely many solutions.
Similar to the general solution of an ordinary differential equation, which
depends on arbitrary constants, the general solution of a partial differential
equation depends on arbitrary functions.
Example 6.1
Consider the simple partial differential equation
Integrating with respect to x gives

where f is an arbitrary function. Integrating with respect to t gives the general
solution
where h is an arbitrary function and g(t) = ƒ f(t)dt is also an arbitrary function.
Thus the general solution depends on two arbitrary functions; any choice of g
and h yields a solution provided they are suitably differentiable.
A general first-order partial differential equation has the form
where H is a given function. These equations are examined in detail in Chapter
7. Here we give only an example.
Example 6.2
Notice that the second-order equation
reduces immediately to the first-order equation
by making the substitution v = ux. The v equation looks much like an ordinary
differential equation because there is only a t derivative. Let’s multiply by the
integrating factor e2t as we would do for an ODE. The left side becomes
When we integrate both sides with respect to t, we obtain
where the ‘constant’ of integration is a function C = C(x) of the other variable x,
as indicated. Then v(x, t) = C(x)e−2t. Therefore, ux = C(x)e−2t, and we can
integrate with respect to x to obtain the general solution of the original equation,
where 
 and B are arbitrary functions (an integral of an arbitrary function is an
arbitrary function). Any PDE that has only partial derivatives with respect to
only one of the variables can be treated like an ODE in that variable with the
other variable as a parameter.
For ordinary differential equations, initial or boundary conditions fix values
for the arbitrary constants of integration and thus often pick out a unique

solution. Similarly, partial differential equations have auxiliary conditions. They
are usually accompanied by initial or boundary conditions that select out one of
its many solutions. A condition given at t = 0 along some segment of the x axis is
called an initial condition. A condition given along any other curve in the xt
plane is called a boundary condition. Initial or boundary conditions involve
specifying values of u, its derivatives, or combinations of both along the given
curves in the xt plane.
Example 6.3
Heat flow in a bar of length l is governed by the heat equation
where k is a physical constant and u = u(x, t) is the temperature in the bar at
location x at time t. An auxiliary condition of the form
is an initial condition because it is given at t = 0. We regard f(x) as the initial
temperature distribution in the bar. Conditions of the form
are boundary conditions, and h(t) and g(t) represent specified temperatures
imposed at the boundaries x = 0 and x = l for t > 0, respectively. These functions
are depicted in Fig. 6.1. Graphically, the surface u = u(x, t) representing the
solution has f, g, and h as its boundaries. We can visualize the solution by
sketching the solution surface or by plotting several time snapshots, or spatial
profiles frozen in time. Figure 6.1 shows a graph of one profile u(x, t0) for some
fixed t0. It is a cross section of the solution surface. Often a sequence of profiles
u(x, t1), u(x, t2),…, for t1 < t2 < …, are plotted on the same set of xu axes to
indicate how the temperature profiles change in time.
Figure 6.1 A solution surface u = u(x, t) representing the temperature at (x, t)
and a time snapshot u = u(x, t0) at time t = t0. The functions h and g define the
boundary conditions, and f specifies the initial condition. We think of the heat
equation as propagating the initial temperature profile into the region at future
times.

The general solution of a partial differential equation is usually difficult or
impossible to find. Therefore, for partial differential equations, we seldom solve
a boundary value problem by determining the general solution and then finding
the arbitrary functions from the initial and boundary data. This is in sharp
contrast to ordinary differential equations where the general solution is found
and the arbitrary constants are evaluated from the initial or boundary conditions.
Generalizations of the partial differential equation (1.1) can be made in various
directions—higher-order derivatives, several independent variables, and several
unknown functions (governed by several equations). Later we observe that there
are fundamentally three types of partial differential equations, those that govern
diffusion processes, those that govern wave propagation, and those that model
equilibrium phenomena. These types are termed parabolic, hyperbolic, and
elliptic equations, respectively. Mixed types also occur.

6.1.1 Linearity and Superposition
The separation of partial differential equations into the classes of linear and
nonlinear equations is a significant one. Linear equations have a linear algebraic
structure to their solution set; that is, the sum of two solutions of a linear
homogeneous equation is again a solution, as is a constant multiple of a solution.
These facts, termed the superposition principle, often aid in constructing
solutions. Superposition for linear equations often allows one to construct
solutions that can meet diverse boundary or initial requirements. This
observation is the basis of the Fourier method, or method of eigenfunction
expansions, for linear equations. Linear equations are also amenable to transform
methods for finding solutions, for example, Laplace transforms and Fourier
transforms. On the other hand, none of these principles or methods are valid for
nonlinear equations. In summary, there is a profound difference between these
two classes of problems. (See Logan (2008), for example, for an introductory
treatment of nonlinear partial differential equations.)
To formulate these concepts more precisely, we can regard the partial
differential equation (1.1) as defining a differential operator L acting on the
unknown function u(x, t) and we write (1.1) as
Or, suppressing the independent variables,
(1.2) 
In (1.2) all terms involving u are put on the left in the term Lu, and f is a given
function of x and t, often called the source term. If f = 0 on D, then (1.2) is
homogeneous; if f is not identically zero, then (1.2) is nonhomogeneous. The
heat equation ut − kuxx = 0 can be written Lu = 0, where L is the partial
differential operator ∂/∂t − k∂2/∂x2, and it is clearly homogeneous. The partial
differential equation uut + 2txu − sin tx = 0 can be written Lu = sin tx, where L is
the differential operator defined by Lu = uut + 2txu. This equation is
nonhomogeneous. The definition of linearity depends on the operator L in (1.2).
We say that (1.2) is a linear equation if L has the properties
(i) L(u + w) = Lu + Lw,
(ii) L(cu) = cLu,
where u and w are functions and c is a constant. If (1.2) is not linear, then it is

nonlinear.
Example 6.4
The heat equation is linear because
and
Example 6.5
The differential equation uut + 2txu − sin tx = 0 is nonlinear because
yet
Note that the nonhomogeneous term sin tx does not affect linearity or
nonlinearity.
It is clear that Lu = f is linear if Lu is first-degree in u and its derivatives; that
is, no products involving u and its derivatives occur. Hence the most general
linear equation of second order is of the form
(1.3) 
where the functions a, b, c, d, e, g, and f are given continuous functions of (x, t)
on D. If any of the coefficients a,…, g, or f depend on u, we say that the equation
is quasi-linear. Referring to an earlier remark, (1.3) is hyperbolic (wave-like),
parabolic (diffusion-like), or elliptic (equilibrium type) on a domain D if the
discriminant b(x, t)2 − 4a(x, t)c(x, t) is positive, zero, or negative, respectively,
on that domain. For example, the heat equation ut − kuxx = 0 has b2 − 4ac = 0
and is parabolic on all of 
2. Two other well-known equations of mathematical
physics, the wave equation utt − c2uxx = 0 and Laplace’s equation uxx + uyy = 0,

are hyperbolic and elliptic, respectively.
If Lu = 0 is a linear homogeneous equation and u1 and u2 are two solutions,
then it obviously follows that u1 + u2 is a solution because L(u1 + u2) = Lu1 +
Lu2 = 0 + 0 = 0. Also cu1 is a solution because L(cu1) = cLu1 = c·0 = 0. A simple
induction argument shows that if u1,…, un are solutions of Lu = 0 and c1,…, cn
are constants, then the finite sum, or linear combination, c1u1 + ··· + cnun is also
a solution; this is the superposition principle for linear equations. If certain
convergence properties hold, the superposition principle can be extended to
infinite sums c1u1 + c2u2 + ···.
Another form of a superposition principle is a continuous version of the one
just cited. In this case let u(x, t; ξ) be a family of solutions on D, where ξ is a real
parameter ranging over some interval I. That is, suppose u(x, t; ξ) is a solution of
Lu = 0 for each ξ  I. Then we formally superimpose these solutions by forming
where c(ξ) is a function representing a continuum of coefficients, the analog of
c1, c2,…, cn. If we can write
then u(x, t) is also a solution. This sequence of steps, and hence the superposition
principle, depends on the validity of pulling the differential operator L inside the
integral sign. For such a principle to hold, these formal steps would need careful
analytical verification.
Example 6.6
Consider the heat equation
(1.4) 
It is straightforward to verify that

is a solution of (1.4) for any ξ  I = . This solution is called the fundamental
solution of the heat equation. We can formally superimpose these solutions to
obtain
where c(ξ) is some function representing the coefficients. It can be shown that if
c(ξ) is continuous and bounded, then differentiation under the integral sign can
be justified and u(x, t) is therefore a solution. The fundamental solution is
recognized as a normal probability density function (bell-shaped curve) with
mean ξ and variance 2kt. Therefore, as time increases the spatial profiles, or
temperature distributions, spread. We should not be surprised that a probability
density is related to solutions to the heat equation because heat transfer involves
the random collisions of the particles making up the medium. We discuss the
connection between diffusion and randomness in a later section.
Example 6.7
This example shows how we can use superposition to construct solutions that
satisfy auxiliary conditions. The pure initial value problem for the heat equation,
is called the Cauchy problem. If f is bounded and continuous, then the solution
is given by the integral representation
Later we derive this formula by the Fourier transform method. But we can
observe formally that the solution is valid by the superposition principle and the
fact that u(x, 0) = f(x). This latter fact comes from making the change of
variables r = (x − ξ)/√4kt and rewriting the solution as
Taking the limit as t → 0+ and formally pulling the limit under the integral gives 

EXERCISES
1. Use software to sketch the solution surface and temperature time profiles
of the fundamental solution of the heat equation (1.4)
for different times t. What is the behavior of the profiles as t approaches
zero? Comment on the differences one would observe in the profiles for
large values of k and for small values of k.
2. Find the general solution of the following partial differential equations in
terms of arbitrary functions.
a) uxx + u = 6y, where u = u(x, y).
b) tuxx − 4ux = 0, where u = u(x, t). (Hint: Let v = ux.)
c) uxt + (1/x)ut = t/x2, where u = u(x, t).
d) utx + ux = 1, where u = u(x, t).
e) uut = x − t, where u = u(x, t). (Hint: (u2)t = 2uut.)
3. Find a formula for the solution to the
that satisfies the auxiliary conditions u(x, 0) = g(x), x > 0 and u(0, t) = h(t), t
> 0, where f, g, and h are given, well-behaved functions with g(0) = h(0), g
′(0) = h′(0).
4. Find the general solution of the first-order linear equation
by changing variables to the new spatial coordinate z = x − ct, where c is a
constant. (Hint: take τ = t, z = x − ct.)
5. Show that the general solution u = u(x, y) of the equation
is 
, where  is an arbitrary function.
6. 
Determine 
regions 
in 
the 
plane 
where 
the 
equation 
 is hyperbolic, elliptic, or parabolic.
7. Show that a parabolic equation αutt + βutx + γuxx = F(x, t, u, ux, ut), where
α, β, γ are constant, can be reduced to an equation of the form 
 by a linear transformation of
the variables, 
.

8. Find all solutions of the heat equation ut = kuxx of the form u(x, t) = U(z),
where 
.

6.2 Conservation Laws
Many fundamental equations in the natural and physical sciences are obtained
from conservation laws. Conservation laws are balance laws, or equations that
express the fact that some quantity is balanced throughout a process. In
thermodynamics, for example, the first law states that the change in internal
energy in a given system is equal to, or is balanced by, the total heat added to the
system plus the work done on the system. Thus the first law of thermodynamics
is an energy balance law, or conservation law. As another example, consider a
fluid flowing in some region of space that consists of chemical species
undergoing chemical reaction. For a given chemical species, the time rate of
change of the total amount of that chemical in the region must equal the rate at
which the chemical flows into the region, minus the rate at which it flows out,
plus the rate at which the species is created, or consumed, by the chemical
reactions. This is a verbal statement of a conservation law for the amount of the
given chemical species. Similar balance or conservation laws occur in all
branches of science. In population ecology, for example, the rate of change of a
given animal population in a certain region must equal the birthrate, minus the
deathrate, plus the migration rate into or out of the region.

6.2.1 One Dimension
Mathematically, conservation laws translate into differential equations, which
are then regarded as the governing equations or equations of motion of the
process. These equations dictate how the process evolves in time. First we
formulate the basic one-dimensional conservation law, out of which will come
some of the basic models and concepts.
Let us consider some quantity (mass, animals, energy, momentum, or
whatever) distributed along a tube of cross-sectional area A (see Fig. 6.2), and let
u = u(x, t) denote its density, or concentration, measured in the amount of the
quantity per unit volume. An implicit assumption is that there is enough of the
quantity distributed in space that it makes sense to talk about its density. (If there
were only a few items, then a probability model would be more appropriate.) By
definition, u varies in only one spatial direction, the axial direction x. Therefore,
by assumption, u is constant in any cross section of the tube, which is the one-
dimensional assumption. Next consider an arbitrary segment of the tube denoted
by the interval I = [a, b]. The total amount of the quantity u inside I at time t is
Figure 6.2 Cylindrical tube of cross-sectional area A showing a cross section at x
and a finite section I: a ≤ x ≤ b. u(x, t) is the concentration at x at time t.
Assume there is motion of the quantity in the tube in the axial direction. We
define the flux of u at x at time t to be the scalar function J(x, t); that is, J(x, t) is
the amount of the quantity u flowing through the cross section at x at time t, per
unit area, per unit time. Thus the dimensions of J are [J] = amount/(area·time).
Notice that flux is density times velocity. By convention we take J to be positive
if the flow at x is in the positive x direction, and J is negative at x if the flow is in
the negative x direction. Therefore, at time t the net rate that the quantity is
flowing into the interval I is the rate it is flowing in at x = a minus the rate it is
flowing out at x = b. That is,

Finally, the quantity u may be created or destroyed inside I by some external or
internal source (e.g., by a chemical reaction if u were a species concentration, or
by birth or death if u were a population density, or by a heat source or sink if u
were energy density—a heat source could be resistive heating if the tube were a
wire through which a current is flowing). We denote this source function, which
is a local function acting at each x, by f(x, t, u) with dimensions
[f]=amount/(vol·time). Consequently, f is the rate that u is created (or destroyed)
at x at time t, per unit volume. Note that the source function f may depend on u
itself, as well as space and time. If f is positive, we say that it is a source, and if f
is negative, we say that it is a sink. Given f, we may calculate the total rate that u
is created in I by integration. We have
Rate that quantity is produced in I by sources 
.
The fundamental conservation law may now be formulated for the quantity u.
For any interval I, we have
In terms of the expressions we introduced above, after canceling the constant
cross-sectional area A, we have
(2.1) 
In summary, (2.1) states that the rate that u changes in I must equal the net rate
at which u flows into I plus the rate that u is produced in I by sources. Equation
(2.1) is called a conservation law in integral form, and it holds even if u, J, or f
are not smooth (continuously differentiable) functions. The latter remark is
important when we consider in subsequent chapters physical processes giving
rise to shock waves, or discontinuous solutions.
If some restrictions are place on the triad u, J, and f, (2.1) may be transformed
into a single partial differential equation. Two results from elementary
integration theory are required to make this transformation: (i) the fundamental
theorem of calculus, and (ii) the result on differentiating an integral with respect
to a parameter in the integrand. Precisely,

(i) 
.
(ii) 
.
These results are valid if J and u are continuously differentiable functions on 
2. Of course, (i) and (ii) remain correct under less stringent conditions, but the
assumption of smoothness is all that is required in the subsequent discussion.
Therefore, assuming smoothness of u and J, as well as continuity of f, equations
(i) and (ii) imply that the conservation law (2.1) may be written
(2.2) 
Because the integrand is a continuous function of x, and because (2.2) holds for
all intervals of integration I, it follows that the integrand must vanish identically;
that is,
(2.3) 
Equation (2.3) is a partial differential equation relating the density u = u(x, t) and
the flux J = J(x, t). Both are regarded as unknowns, whereas the form of the
source f is given. Equation (2.3) is called a conservation law in differential
form, in contrast to the integral form (2.2). The Jx term is called the flux term
because it arises from the movement, or transport, of u through the cross section
at x. The source term f is often called a reaction term (especially in chemical
contexts) or a growth or interaction term (in biological contexts). Finally, we
have defined the flux J as a function of x and t, but this dependence on space and
time may occur through dependence on u or its derivatives. For example, a
physical assumption may require us to posit J(x, t) = J(x, t, u(x, t)), where the
flux is dependent upon u itself.
If there are several quantities with densities u1, u2,…, then we can write down
a conservation law for each. The fluxes and source terms may involve several of
the densities, leading to a coupled system of conservation laws.
Remark 6.8
(Small box method) We derived the differential form of the conservation law
(2.3) by balancing mass in an interval and then appealing to the arbitrariness of
the interval. This is sometimes referred to as the large box method. Another
common approach is to use a small box, or small interval [x, × + dx], where dx
is a small increment. Then we could write a conservation law on this interval as

where 
. Dividing by the volume of the box Adx gives
Now, taking the limit as dx → 0 gives the conservation law

6.2.2 Several Dimensions
It is straightforward to formulate conservation laws in several spatial
dimensions. For review, and to set the notation, we introduce some basic
definitions. In 
n, points are denoted by x = (x1,…, xn), and dx = dx1… dxn
represents a volume element. In 
2 we often use (x, y), and in 
3 we use (x, y, z).
If u = u(x, t) is a scalar function (a density), then its integral over a suitable
region (volume) Ω is
In 
2 we have dx = dxdy, and in 
3 we have dx = dxdydz. The boundary of Ω is
denoted by ∂Ω. We always assume that the domain Ω has a smooth boundary
∂Ω, or piecewise smooth boundary composed of finitely many smooth
components. We say Ω is open if it includes none of its boundary, and we denote
 = Ω ∪ ∂Ω as the closure of Ω. This assumption will cover the cases of
spheres, rectangles, parallelepipeds, cylinders, and so on, which are the domains
important in most science and engineering problems. We refer to these type of
domains as well behaved. The set of continuous functions on a domain Ω is
denoted by C(Ω). Surface integrals are denoted by
Nearly always, surface integrals are flux integrals (discussed below). Partial
derivatives are represented by subscripts, or ∂u/∂xk = uxk. The gradient of u is
the vector
The gradient points in the direction of the maximum increase of the function.
The directional derivative of u in the direction of a unit vector n = (n1,…, nn) is
denoted by
It measures the change in u in the direction n. If J(x, t) = (x, t) = (J1(x, t),…,
Jn(x, t)) is a vector field, then its divergence is the scalar function

Two common, alternate notations for the divergence and gradient are div J and
grad u, respectively.
The flux of a vector field J(x, t) through an oriented surface element ndA,
where n is an outward oriented unit normal vector (see Fig. 6.3 for a diagram in 
3), is defined to be
Figure 6.3 A surface with surface element ndA, oriented by its outward unit
normal vector n, along with the flux vector J.
There are two useful differential identities that are straightforward to prove.
The first is a formula for the divergence of a gradient, and the second is a
product rule for the divergence of a scalar function times a vector field:
The first expression defines the Laplacian Δu as the sum of the second partial
derivatives. Another common notation for the Laplacian of u is
Next we formally catalog two useful integral theorems in 
n that are analogs
of the one-dimensional results from the preceding section.
Theorem 6.9
(a) Let f be a continuous function on a well-behaved domain Ω with

for every subdomain D ⊂ Ω. Then f(x) = 0 for all x  Ω.
(b) Let u = u(x, t) and ut(x, t) be continuous on a well-behaved domain x 
Ω, and for all t  I, where I is an open interval. Then the time derivative can
be pulled under the integral sign, or
The most important integral identity in multivariable calculus in the
divergence theorem, which is an n-dimensional version of the fundamental
theorem of calculus. It states that the integral of a partial derivative over a
volume is a boundary, or surface, integral. It has been proved for very
general domains Ω, but we only require it for well-behaved domains. A
natural mathematical question concerns conditions on the functions for
which the divergence theorem holds. Generally, we assume that all functions
are continuous on the closed domain consisting of Ω and its boundary ∂Ω,
and have as many continuous partial derivatives in Ω that occur in the
formula. We do not formulate the most general conditions. Let Ω be an open,
well-behaved domain. By 
 we mean that u is continuous on Ω,
and its first partial derivatives are continuous on Ω, and can be extended
continuously to the boundary of Ω. By u  C2(Ω) to mean that u has
continuous second partial derivatives in Ω. Many of our theorems require u 
, that is, u is twice continuously differentiable in the
open domain Ω and its first derivatives can be extended to the closure. With
all this said, we in fact do not require detailed mathematical analysis in our
work; so these technical issues do not enter the discussion.
Theorem 6.10
(Divergence theorem) Let Ω be a well-behaved, open, bounded region in 
n and let u 
. Then
where nk is the kth component of the outward unit normal vector n on the
bounding surface.
If J is a vector field, we can apply this result to each component and add to

obtain the standard vector version of the theorem:
The divergence theorem leads immediately to fundamental integral
identities. We state these important results.
Corollary 6.11
Under the assumptions of the Theorem 6.10:
(a) Integration by parts formula
(a) Green’s first identity
(c) Green’s second identity
It is impossible to overestimate the utility of integration by parts formulae
in partial differential equations. Green’s second identity is just an integration
by parts formula for the Laplacian operator. The proofs of these relations are
requested in the Exercises.
With this preparation we are ready to write down the conservation law in
several variables. Let Ω be a region in 
n and let u = u(x, t) be the density, or
concentration, of some quantity distributed throughout Ω. Let J(x, t) be the
flux vector for that quantity, where J · ndA measures the rate that the
quantity crosses an oriented surface element in the medium. In this domain
Ω let V be an arbitrary, well-behaved bounded region (for example, a
sphere). Then the total amount of the quantity in V is given by the volume
integral
The time rate of change of the total amount of the quantity in V must be
balanced by the rate that the quantity is produced in V by sources, plus the
net rate that the quantity flows through the boundary of V. We let f(x, t, u)
denote the source term, so that the rate that the quantity is produced in V is

given by
The net outward flux of the quantity u through the boundary ∂V is given by
the surface integral
where n = n(x) is the outward unit normal. Therefore, the conservation law,
or balance law, is given by
(2.4) 
The minus sign on the flux term occurs because outward flux decreases the
rate that u changes in V. This integral law is the higher-dimensional analog
of (2.2).
The integral form of the conservation law (2.4) can be reformulated as a
local condition, that is, a partial differential equation, provided that u and J
are sufficiently smooth functions. In this case the surface integral can be
rewritten as a volume integral over V using the divergence theorem, and the
time derivative can be brought under the integral sign by Theorem 6.9(b).
Hence,
From Theorem 6.9(a), the arbitrariness of V implies the local form of the
conservation law throughout the domain Ω:
(2.5) 
Equation (2.5) is the higher-dimensional version of equation (2.3), the local
conservation law in one dimension.

6.2.3 Constitutive Relations
Because the one-dimensional conservation law (2.3) [or (2.5)] is a single
partial differential equation for two unknown quantities (the density u and
the flux J), our intuition indicates that another equation is required to have a
well-determined system. This additional equation is often an equation that is
based on an assumption about the physical properties of the medium, which,
in turn, is based on empirical reasoning or experimental observation.
Equations expressing these assumptions are called constitutive relations or
equations of state. Thus constitutive equations are on a different level from
the basic conservation law; the latter is a fundamental law of nature
connecting the density u to the flux J, whereas a constitutive relation is often
an approximate equation whose origin lies in empirics. In the next few
paragraphs we examine some possibilities for modeling the flux, or motion
of the quantity under examination.
Example 6.12
(Diffusion) In many physical problems it is observed that the amount of the
substance that moves through a cross section at x at time t is proportional to
its density gradient ux, or J(x, t)  ux(x, t). If ux > 0, then J < 0 (the substance
moves to the left), and if ux < 0, then J > 0 (the substance moves to the
right). Figure 6.4 illustrates the situation. The substance moves down the
density gradient, from regions of high concentration to regions of low
concentrations. We say the motion is “down the gradient.” By the second
law of thermodynamics, heat behaves in this manner; heat flows from hotter
regions to colder regions, and the steeper the temperature distribution curve,
the more rapid the flow of heat. This movement is closely connected to the
random motion of molecules caused by collisions of the particles. If u
represents a concentration of organisms, one may observe that they move
from high densities to low densities with a rate proportional to the density
gradient. Therefore, we assume the basic constitutive law
Figure 6.4 Time snapshot of the concentration u(x, t) at a fixed time t. The
arrows indicate the direction of the flow, from higher concentrations to
lower concentrations. The flow is said to be down the gradient. The minus
occurs because positive flux requires a negative derivative.

(2.6) 
which is known as Fick’s law. It models diffusion. The positive
proportionality constant D is called the diffusion constant and has
dimensions [D] =length2/time. Fick’s law accurately describes the behavior
of many physical and biological systems. This assumption reduces the
conservation law (2.3) to a single second-order linear partial differential
equation for the unknown density u = u(x, t) given by
(2.7) 
In several dimensions Fick’s law is
(2.8) 
giving
(2.9) 
Equations (2.7) and (2.9) are called reaction–diffusion equations, and they
govern processes where the flux, called a diffusive flux, is specified by
Fick’s law. If the source term vanishes, they are called diffusion equations.
The diffusion constant D defines a characteristic time, or time scale, τ for a
diffusion process. If L is a length scale (e.g., the length of the container), the
quantity
is the only constant in the process with dimensions of time, and τ gives a
measure of the time required for discernible changes in concentration to
occur. The diffusion constant may depend upon x in a nonhomogeneous
medium, as well as the density u itself. These cases are mentioned below.
Example 6.13

(Classical heat equation) In the case where u is an energy density (i.e., a
quantity with dimensions of energy per unit volume), the diffusion equation
describes the transport of energy in the medium. In a homogeneous medium
with density ρ and specific heat C, the energy density is
where T is the temperature. The dimensions are [C] =energy/(mass·degree)
and [ρ] =mass/volume. For example, the units of energy could be joules or
calories. The conservation law may be written
where f is a heat source. In heat conduction Fick’s law has the form
(2.10) 
where K is the thermal conductivity, measured in energy/(mass·time·degree).
In the context of heat conduction, Fick’s law is called Fourier’s law of heat
conduction. It follows that the temperature T satisfies the equation
or
(2.11) 
Equation (2.11) is called the heat equation with heat source f, and the
constant k, which plays the role of the diffusion constant, is called the
diffusivity, measured as length-squared per unit time. Thus the diffusivity k
in heat flow problems is the analog of the diffusion constant, and the heat
equation is just the diffusion equation. In this discussion we have assumed
that the physical parameters C, K, and ρ of the medium are constant;
however, these quantities could depend on the temperature T, which is an
origin of nonlinearity in the problem. If these parameters depend on location
x, then the medium is nonhomogeneous and the conservation law in this case
becomes
The variable conductivity cannot be pulled outside the divergence. Notice
that if the system is in a steady-state where the temperature is not changing
in time and the source is independent of t, then Tt = 0 and the temperature
depends on x alone, T = T(x). Then the last equation becomes

This is the steady-state heat equation, and it is addressed in detail in later
sections.
Example 6.14
(Advection) Advection, or convection or drift, occurs when the bulk motion
of the medium carries the substance under investigation along with it at a
given velocity. For example, wind can carry propagules, water can carry
chemicals or animals, air motion can transport heat energy, and so on. The
advective flux, which measures the amount of the substance crossing a
section, is given by the velocity times the concentration, or
where c = c(x, t) is the velocity of the medium. Then, combined with the
conservation law, we obtain the reaction-advection equation
If the advection speed c is a constant vector, this equation reduces to a first-
order PDE
These types of equations give rise to wave propagation, rather than
diffusion, and are examined in Chapter 7.
Example 6.15
(Advection–diffusion) When both advection and diffusion occur, the flux is
composed of two parts and the model becomes
Here we have assumed D and c are spatially dependent. In one dimension,
with constant diffusion,
This is the reaction–advection–diffusion equation.
Example 6.16
(Growth) If u = u(x, t) is a population density that grows logistically and
Fick’s law models its diffusion, then the population law in one dimension is
which is Fisher’s equation (see Section 6.1). This important equation is a
prototype of nonlinear reaction-diffusion equations. Other types of growth

rates are also of great interest in population ecology. For example, the
reaction term f(u) = ru models growth or decay, and the Allee growth rate
f(u) = ru(a − u)(u − b), 0 < a < b, models growth where the growth rate is
negative for small populations.

6.2.4 Probability and Diffusion
There is a strong connection between diffusion and randomness. For
example, we think of heat flow, governed by the diffusion equation, being
caused by random molecular collisions which cause the energy to disperse
from high-energy regions to low-energy regions. This idea is based upon the
kinetic theory of gases, and the quantities involved are statistical averages of
the behavior of large numbers of particles. For animal populations, diffusion
is a different type of mechanism, but the constitutive law is the same as for
heat flow (Fick’s law). If there are only a few particles or a few animals,
then it is not sensible to define a density and we cannot apply the direct
arguments above to obtain a partial differential equation. In this case we
must rely on probability theory and make deductions about the spread of the
quantity of interest. We fix the idea by examining animal populations. As we
shall observe, information about how an organism moves on a short time
scale can be used to determine where it is likely to be at any time. We
translate the short time behavior into a probability density function (pdf) u(x,
t) for the random variable X = X(t) giving the location of the organism at
time t. The analysis leads to a partial differential equation for u(x, t).
Suppose an organism is located at the origin x = 0 at time t = 0. The
movement rule is a simple random walk in one dimension. At each time step
the organism jumps a distance h either to the left or right with equal
probability. As time advances in equal discrete steps, the organism moves on
the lattice of points 0, ±h, ±2h, ±3h,… on the x axis. We let u(x, t)h be the
probability that the organism is located in the interval between x and x + h at
time t, given that it was at x − 0 at t = 0. Rather than calculating the
probability density function directly, we show that it must satisfy a special
partial differential equation, the Fokker–Planck equation. This result follows
from the master equation
which states that the probability that the organism is in the interval [x, × +
h] at time t + τ equals the probability that it was either in [x − h, x] at time t
and jumped to the right, or it was in the interval [x + h, x + 2h] at time t and
it jumped to the left (we have canceled a h factor in the last equation).
Expanding each term in the master equation in Taylor series, we get

where the “dots” denote higher-order terms in the increments h and τ.
Simplifying, we obtain
Now we pass from a discrete random walk to a continuous random walk.
Taking the limit as h, τ → 0 in such a way that the ratio of h2 to 2τ remains
constant, or h2/2τ = D, we get
which is the one-dimensional diffusion equation. If the probabilities of
moving to the left or right in the random walk are not equal, then a drift term
arises in the preceding argument and the probability density function
satisfies the advection-diffusion equation (see the Exercises). These
equations for the probability densities in the random walk models are special
cases of the Fokker–Planck equation. In passing from a discrete random
walk to a continuous one, we have masked a lot of detailed analysis; suffice
it to say that this process can be put on a firm mathematical foundation using
the theory of stochastic processes.
We have derived the diffusion equation in two ways—from a conservation
law and from a probability model. Previously, we defined the fundamental
solution to the one-dimensional diffusion equation as
It will be derived later using Fourier transforms. This solution is the
probability density function for the random variable X = X(t), which is the
location of an individual performing a continuous random walk beginning at
the origin. That is,

It is straightforward to show that 
. We recognize the
distribution u as a normal density with variance 2Dt. Therefore, the
probability density profiles spread as time increases, and the location of the
individual becomes less certain. As t → 0+ we have u(x, t) → 0 if x ≠ 0, and
u(0, t) → +∞. In fact, we have u(x, 0) = δ0(x), in a distributional sense
(fundamental solution).
The fundamental solution to the diffusion equation ut = DΔu in 
n is
This solution, which one can verify, can be derived using Fourier transforms
(Section 6.5). The function u(x − ξ, t) describes the evolution of organisms
or heat, for example, from a point release of unit magnitude at a location ξ at
time t − 0. Thus, the initial condition is a delta distribution ∂ξ(x). So it is the
solution to a problem with a unit point source. An example from population
ecology illustrates the utility of this solution.
Example 6.17
(Invasion of species) In two spatial dimensions, consider a diffusing animal
population whose growth rate is λu. The model is the growth-diffusion
equation
A change of dependent variables to v(x, t) = u(x, t)e−λt transforms the
growth-diffusion equation into the diffusion equation for v,
The fundamental solution is, using 
,
Therefore, a point release of u0 animals at the origin will result in the radial
population density
We ask how fast the animals invade the region. Imagine that the population
is detectable at a given radius when it reaches a critical threshold density uc;
that is,

This leads to
For large times t the limit is
Therefore the invasion speed approaches a constant determined by the
growth rate λ and the diffusion constant D. This result has been confimed by
various observations, one of the most famous being the muskrat invasion in
Europe and Asia beginning in 1905 by an accidental release in Bohemia.

6.2.5 Boundary Conditions
In the context of heat conduction, we now discuss the types of auxiliary
conditions that lead to a well-defined mathematical problem that is
physically meaningful. The heat conduction equation is the canonical
example of a parabolic partial differential equation. Basically, evolution
problems require an initial condition, and if spatial boundaries are present,
then boundary conditions are needed. We want to formulate problems with
conditions that make the mathematical problem well posed. This means that
a solution must exist, the solution must be unique, and the solution should be
stable in the sense that it should depend continuously on initial and boundary
data.
Consider a bar of length l and constant cross-sectional area A. The
temperature u = u(x, t) (we use u as the dependent variable, rather than T)
must satisfy the one-dimensional heat equation (see (2.11))
(2.12) 
where we have assumed no heat sources.
An auxiliary condition on the temperature u at time t = 0 is called an
initial condition and is of the form
(2.13) 
where f(x) is the given initial temperature distribution. Conditions prescribed
at x = 0 and x = l are boundary conditions. If the temperature u at the ends of
the bar are prescribed, then the boundary conditions take the form
(2.14) 
where g and h are prescribed functions. Boundary conditions of this type are
called Dirichlet conditions. Other boundary conditions are possible. It is
easy to imagine physically that one end of the bar, say at x = 0, is insulated
so that no heat can pass through. By Fourier’s heat law this means that the
flux at x = 0 is zero or
(2.15) 
Condition (2.15) is called an insulated boundary condition. Or, one may
prescribe the flux at an end as a given function of t, for example,
(2.16) 
which is called a Neumann condition. If the conductivity K depends on u,

then condition (2.16) is a nonlinear boundary condition. Finally, a boundary
condition may be specified by Newton’s law of cooling,
which requires the flux be proportional to the difference between the
temperature at the end and the temperature  of the outside environment.
This is a Robin condition, or radiation condition.
Remark 6.18
For the advection–diffusion equation
the flux is J(x, t) = −Dux + cu; so specifying the flux at a boundary amounts
to specifying J, and not just the diffusive flux −Dux.
If an initial condition is given and a boundary condition is prescribed at
one end (say at x = 0) of a very long rod, then the problem can be considered
on a semi-infinite domain x ≥ 0 on which the heat conduction equation
holds. For example, the initial boundary value problem
models heat flow in an infinite medium x ≥ 0 of constant diffusivity k,
initially at zero degrees, subject to the maintenance of the end at x = 0 at g(t)
degrees. Here we expect the problem to model heat conduction in a long bar
for short enough time so that any condition at the far end would not affect
the temperature distribution in the portion of the rod that we are interested in
studying. As a practical example, heat flow in an infinite medium arises
from the study of the underground temperature variations, given the
temperature changes at ground level on the earth (x = 0).
It seems clear that problems on the infinite interval −∞ < x < ∞ are also
relevant in special physical situations where the medium is very long in both
directions. In this case only an initial condition can be prescribed. To restrict
the class of solutions to those that are physically meaningful, a condition is
sometimes prescribed at infinity, for example, u is bounded at infinity or
limx→∞ u(x, t) = 0, t > 0.
In summary, by an initial boundary value problem for the heat
conduction equation we mean the problem of solving the heat equation

(2.12) subject to the initial initial condition (2.13) and some type of
boundary conditions imposed at the endpoints. It may be clear from the
physical context which auxiliary conditions should be prescribed to obtain a
unique solution; in some cases it is not clear. A large body of mathematical
literature is devoted to proving existence and uniqueness theorems for
various kinds of partial differential equations subject to sundry auxiliary
data. An example of a uniqueness theorem is the following:
Theorem 6.19
The initial boundary value problem
where f  C[0, l] and g, h  C[0, T], has a solution u(x, t) on the rectangle R:
0 ≤ x ≤ l, 0 ≤ t ≤ T, then the solution is unique.
Proof
We prove this theorem by an energy argument. By way of contradiction,
assume solutions are not unique and there are two distinct solutions u1(x, t)
and u2(x, t). Then their difference w(x, t)  u1(x, t) − u2(x, t) must satisfy the
boundary value problem
If we show w(x, t) 
 0 on R, then u1(x, t) = u2(x, t) on R, which is a
contradiction. To this end define the energy integral
Taking the time derivative,
where the last equality was obtained using integration by parts. Because the
boundary term vanishes,

Thus E(t) is nonincreasing, which along with the facts that E(t) ≥ 0 and E(0)
= 0, implies E(t) = 0. Therefore w(x, t) = 0 identically in 0 ≤ x ≤ l, 0 ≤ t ≤ T,
since w is continuous in both its arguments. Existence of a solution is
established later by actually exhibiting the solution.
The energy method is an important technique in proving uniqueness and
obtaining estimates of solutions in partial differential equations in one and in
several dimensions. In addition to existence and uniqueness questions the
notion of continuous dependence of the solution on the initial or boundary
data is important. From a physical viewpoint it is reasonable that small
changes in the initial or boundary temperatures should not lead to large
changes in the overall temperature distribution. A mathematical model
should reflect this stability in that small changes in the auxiliary data should
lead to only small changes in the solution. Stated differently, the solution
should be stable under small perturbations of the initial or boundary data.
(We remark, parenthetically, that although stability seems desirable, many
important physical processes are unstable, and so ill-posed problems are
often studied as well.)
Example 6.20
(Hadamard’s2 example) Consider the partial differential equation
(2.17) 
subject to the initial conditions
(2.18) 
Note that (2.17) is elliptic and not parabolic like the heat equation. The
solution of this pure initial value problem is clearly the zero solution u(x, t) 
 0 for t ≥ 0, x  . Now let us change (2.18) to
(2.19) 
which represents a very small change in the initial data, provided n is large.
As one can check, the solution of (2.17) subject to this new boundary
condition is
(2.20) 
For large values of t, the function sinh(10nt) behaves like exp(10nt).
Therefore the solution grows exponentially with t. Therefore, for the initial

value problem (2.17)–(2.18), an arbitrarily small change in the initial data
leads to an arbitrarily large solution, and the problem is not well posed.
Observe that the PDE here is Laplace’s equation which models steady state
phenomena; an initial value problem for Laplace’s equation is not well
posed.
Initial value problems for elliptic equations are not well posed. In
numerical calculations stability is essential. For example, suppose a
numerical scheme is devised to propagate the initial and boundary
conditions. Those conditions can never be represented exactly in the
computer, as small errors will exist because of roundoff or truncation of the
data. If the problem itself is unstable, then these small errors in the data may
be propagated in the numerical scheme in such a way that the calculation
becomes meaningless.
EXERCISES
1. Solve the nonlinear Cauchy problem
by making the transformation w = eu.
2. Use the energy method to prove that a solution to the initial boundary
value problem
must be unique.
3. Use the energy method to prove uniqueness for the problem
4. A homogeneous (constant ρ, C, and K) metal rod has cross-sectional
area A(x), 0 < x < l, and there is only a small variation of A(x) with x, so
that the assumption of constant temperature in any cross section remains
valid. There are no sources and the flux is given by −Kux(x, t). From a

conservation law obtain a partial differential equation for the
temperature u(x, t) that reflects the area variation of the bar.
5. In the absence of sources, derive the diffusion equation for radial
motion in the plane,
from first principles. That is, take an arbitrary domain between circles r
= a and r = b and apply a conservation law for the density u = u(r, t),
assuming the flux is J(r, t) = −Dur. Assume no sources.
6. A fluid, having density ρ, specific heat C, and conductivity K, flows at
a constant velocity V in a cylindrical tube of length L and radius R. The
temperature at position x is T = T(x, t), and diffusion of heat is ignored.
As it flows, heat is lost through the lateral side at a rate jointly
proportional to the area and to the difference between the temperature Te
of the external environment and the temperature T(x, t) of the fluid
(Newton’s law of cooling). Derive a partial differential differential
equation model for the temperature T(x, t). Find the general solution of
the equation by transforming to a moving coordinate system z = × − Vt,
τ = t.
7. Show that the growth-diffusion equation ut = DΔu + ru can be
transformed into a pure diffusion equation via the transformation v = ue
−rt.
8. Repeat the random walk argument in Section 6.2.4 in the case that the
probabilities of moving to the right and to the left are p and 1 − p,
respectively, and show in appropriate limits that one obtains the
advection-diffusion equation ut = −cux + Duxx.
9. Show that the nonhomogeneous problem
can be transformed into a problem with homogeneous boundary
conditions by subtracting from u a linear function of x that satisfies the
boundary conditions for all time.
10. Consider the following initial boundary value problem for the

diffusion equation.
Show that if the solution is independent of time, i.e., u = u(x), then DA
− DB = ƒl0 f(x) dx. Give a physically meaningful interpretation of this
condition.
11. Solve the initial, boundary value problem
for the heat equation by assuming a solution of the form u(x, t) = U(z)
where 
 Write the solution in terms of the error function erf.
12. Green’s theorem in the plane is usually stated in calculus texts as
where P and Q are smooth functions in a well-behaved domain R in the
xy plane with boundary C. The line integral is taken counterclockwise.
Verify that Green’s theorem is really the divergence theorem in two
dimensions.
13. Show that the nonlinear initial boundary value problem
has only the trivial solution. (Hint: multiply by u and integrate.)
14. Let u = u(x, t) be a positive solution to the equation
where Ω, is a well-behaved, bounded domain, and let s = ln u be the
local entropy of u. Let 
 denote the total entropy in Ω, let J
= 
 be the net entropy flux through the boundary, and
let Q = ƒΩ fu−1 dx. be the entropy change due to the source f in Ω. Prove
that

15. Two homogeneous rods of length L1 and L2 have the same density
and specific heats, but their thermal conductivities are K1 and K2, which
differ. The two rods are welded together with a weld joint that puts them
in perfect contact. The composite rod is laterally insulated and the
temperature of the left end is held at 0 degrees, while the right end is
held at τ degrees. Assume the system is allowed to come to a steady
state where the temperature distribution in the system depends only
upon x.
a) Discuss why the temperature and the flux should be continuous at
the joint.
b) Determine the steady-state temperature distribution in the
composite rod.

6.3 Equilibrium Equations
6.3.1 Laplace’s Equation
Laplace’s equation, the prototype of elliptic equations, is one of the basic
equations of mathematics. Elliptic equations model equilibrium, or time-
independent, phenomena. One way to motivate equilibrium states is to
imagine that these states arise from a long-time, or asymptotic, limit of
transient states, which are solutions to evolution problems. For example,
suppose that conditions on the boundary ∂Ω are fixed and do not depend on
time, and sources, if present, are time-independent. Then, after a long time
we expect that the effects of the initial condition in the region Ω, will decay
away, giving an equilibrium state u = u(x) that satisfies a steady-state type
equation.
Consider the initial boundary value problem for the diffusion equation,
Over the long run we may expect the effects of the initial data to be small
and an equilibrium solution u = u(x) to emerge that satisfies the equilibrium
problem
(3.1) 
(3.2) 
Equation (3.1) is Poisson’s3 equation.
If there are no sources, then the equation (3.1) reduces to
(3.3) 
which is Laplace’s equation. This partial differential equation is possibly
the most analyzed equation in analysis. It also arises in many other natural
settings. Readers who have studied complex analysis may recall that the
two-dimensional Laplace equation is satisfied by both the real and imaginary
parts of a holomorphic (analytic) function F(z) = u(x, y) + iv(x, y) on a
domain Ω in the complex plane; that is, Δu = 0 (or uxx + uyy = 0) and Δv = 0

in Ω. Thus Laplace’s equation plays an important role in complex analysis;
conversely, complex analysis can be the basis of an approach to study
Laplace’s equation in two dimensions. These equations also arise naturally
in potential theory. For example, if E is a static electric field in Ω induced by
charges lying outside Ω, then ∇ × E = 0. If V(x) is a potential function,
which means E = −∇V, then it follows that the potential function V satisfies
Laplace’s equation. Laplace’s equation is also important in fluid mechanics
and many other areas of application. Solutions to Laplace’s equation are
called harmonic functions. In one dimension Laplace’s equation is just −u
″(x) = 0, which has linear solutions u(x) = ax + b. So, steady-state
temperature profiles in a rod are linear. The constants a and b are determined
from boundary conditions.
What kinds of auxiliary conditions are appropriate for Laplace’s equation,
or equation (3.1)? From the preceding remarks we expect to impose only
boundary conditions along ∂Ω, and not initial conditions (in Hadamard’s
example we observed that the initial value problem for Laplace’s equation in
two dimensions was not well posed). Therefore, we impose only boundary
conditions, such as the Dirichlet condition (3.2), the Neuman condition,
(3.4) 
which specifies the flux across the boundary, or a Robin condition,
(3.5) 
In some applications in three dimensions, it is convenient to work in either
cylindrical or spherical coordinates. These coordinates are defined by the
equations
and
where θ is the polar angle and ϕ is the azimuthal angle. An application of the

chain rule permits us to write the Laplacian in cylindrical and spherical
coordinates as
and
The details of these calculations are left as an exercise that should be done
once in everyone’s life; but not twice. For two-dimensional problems with
circular symmetry, polar coordinates are appropriate.
Example 6.21
Find all radial solutions to Laplace’s equation in two dimensions. We write
Laplace’s equation in polar coordinates as
Notice that the partial derivatives are actually ordinary derivatives. We can
immediately write
This equation is separable and can be integrated to get
where a is a constant. Then
where b is another arbitrary constant. For example, equilibrium temperatures
between two concentric circles, with constant values on the boundaries, vary
logarithmically. This is in contrast to the linear distribution in a bar, or linear
geometry.
Example 6.22
(Gradient in polar coordinates) It is straightforward, yet tedious, to
calculate the standard differential operators (gradient, divergence, curl) in
curvilinear coordinates. For example, the gradient operator in polar
coordinates is

(3.6) 
where er and eθ are the unit polar vectors. This follows from the chain rule
for derivatives and the fact that
Verification is requested in the exercises. Expressions for the gradient,
divergence, and curl in all coordinate systems can easily be found in
handbooks or on the web.

6.3.2 Basic Properties
The identities in the previous subsection permit us to obtain in an easy
manner some basic properties of equilibrium problems. For example, we can
prove that solutions to the Dirichlet problem are unique.
Theorem 6.23
Let h be a continuous function on 
 and f be continuous on 
. If the
Dirichlet problem
has a solution 
, then it is unique.
Proof
Assume that there are two solutions, u1 and u2. Then
Therefore the difference w  u1 − u2 must satisfy the homogeneous problem
Now, in Green’s identity, take u = w to obtain
Hence ∇w = 0 and so w = const. in Ω; since w is continuous in 
 and zero
on the boundary we must have u1 − u2 = w = 0 in , or u1 = u2.
In the same way we can prove the following theorem.
Theorem 6.24
Let g be continuous on ∂Ω and f be continuous on 
. If the Neumann
problem
has a solution u 
, then necessarily
(3.7) 
The proof follows immediately from setting w = 1 in Green’s identity.
Physically, (3.7) means that, in a steady state, the net flux (of heat, for

example) through the boundary should be balanced by the total amount of
heat being created in the region by the sources.
Additional applications of the Green’s identities are found in the
Exercises.
Another important property of (nonconstant) solutions to Laplace’s
equation is that they attain their maximum and minimum values on the
boundary of the domain, and not the interior. This result is called the
maximum principle, and we refer to the references for a proof.
Theorem 6.25
(Maximum principle) Let Ω, be an open, bounded, well-behaved domain in
n. If Δu = 0 in Ω, and u is continuous in 
, then the maximum and
minimum values of u are attained on ∂Ω.
EXERCISES
1. Start with the product rule for derivatives and derive the integration
by parts formula in Corollary 6.11.
2. Use the divergence theorem to derive Green’s identities stated in
Corollary 6.11.
3. Consider the initial boundary value problem for the n-dimensional
heat equation given by
where ρ, g, and f are continuous. Use an energy argument to prove that
solutions are unique under reasonable smoothness conditions on u.
4. Let q > 0 and continuous in 
 ⊂ 
n, f be continuous in 
, and g
be continuous on ∂Ω. Prove that the Neumann problem
can have at most one solution in 
.
5. A radially symmetric solution to Laplace’s equation Δu = 0 in 
3 is a
solution of the form

where u depends only on the distance from the origin. Find all radially
symmetric solutions in 
3.
6. Prove that if the Dirichlet problem
has a nontrivial solution, then the constant λ must be positive.
7. Let f be a smooth vector field on 
3 with the property that
Prove that 
.
8. (Calculus of variations) Problems in the calculus of variations
(Chapter 4) can be generalized to multiple integral problems. Consider
the problem of minimizing the functional
over all u  C2(Ω) with 
, where f is a given
function on the boundary; Ω is a bounded well-behaved region in 
n.
a) Show that the first variation is
where 
, and where h  C2(Ω) with h(x) = 0, x 
 ∂Ω.
b) Show that a necessary condition for u to minimize J is that u must
satisfy the Euler equation
c) If u is not fixed on the boundary ∂Ω, find the natural boundary
condition.
9. Find the Euler equation for the following functionals:
a) J(u) = 

b) J(u) = 
, where u = u(x, y), dx = dxdy.
c) J(u) = 
 where u = u(x, t),
and c and m are constants. (Hint: Treat time t as an additional
independent variable and work in 
n+1.)
10. The biomass density u (mass per unit volume) of zooplankton in a
very deep lake varies as a function of depth x and time t. Zooplankton
diffuse vertically with diffusion constant D, and buoyancy effects cause
them to migrate toward the surface at a constant speed of ag, where g is
the acceleration due to gravity and a is a positive constant. At any time,
in any vertical tube of unit cross-sectional area, the total biomass of
zooplankton is a constant U.
a) From first principles derive a partial differential equation model
for the biomass density of zooplankton. (Take x = 0 at the surface.)
b) Find the steady-state biomass density as a function of depth.
(Formulate any reasonable boundary conditions, or other auxiliary
conditions, that are needed to solve this problem.)
11. Consider the initial boundary value problem
Use an energy method to show that the solution must be identically zero.
12. Verify the formula (3.6) for the gradient in polar coordinates. Derive
the formula for the divergence in polar coordinates.

6.4 Eigenfunction Expansions
In Chapter 5 we noted the importance of the eigenvalue problem for
transformations on 
n (matrices), for Sturm–Liouville operators, and for
integral operators. The same theme carries over to partial differential
operators. Basically, these problems have the form
(4.1) 
(4.2) 
where L is a linear partial differential operator and B is a linear operator on
the boundary. Specification of the operator includes both L and B.
If there is a value of λ for which (4.1)–(4.2) has a nontrivial solution u(x),
then λ is called an eigenvalue and u(x) is a corresponding eigenfunction.
Any constant multiple of an eigenfunction is also an eigenfunction with
respect to the same eigenvalue. The set of all eigenfunctions form an natural
orthogonal basis for the function spaces involved in solving boundary value
problems.

6.4.1 Spectrum of the Laplacian
Consider
(4.3) 
(4.4) 
To find the spectrum (eigenvalues) we use the method of separation of
variables. It is a widely used method for solving linear boundary value
problems on bounded domains with boundaries along the coordinate
directions. Here the method is illustrated on the Laplacian operator, and in
the next section we show how it equally applies to evolution problems. The
negative sign on the Laplacian will give positive eigenvalues. As an aside,
the spectrum of an operator can actually contain values other than
eigenvalues. There is a part of the spectrum, particularly for operators on
infinite spatial domains, called the continuous spectrum. Therefore, in a
broader context, we should refer to the spectrum for the Laplacian operator
above as the discrete spectrum.
Example 6.26
Take 
. Then the partial differential equation is -(uxx
+ uyy) = λu for u = u(x, y). The Dirichlet boundary conditions become u(0, y)
= u(π, y) = 0 for 0 ≤ y ≤ π, and u(x, 0) = u(x, π) = 0 for 0 ≤ x ≤ π. We assume
a separable solution of the form u(x, y) = X(x)Y(y) for some functions X and
Y to be determined. Substituting we get
which can be rewritten as
with a function of x on one side and a function of y on the other. Now comes
a crucial observation. A function of x can equal a function of y for all x and y
only if both are equal to a constant. That is,
for some constant μ, called the separation constant. Therefore the partial
differential equation separates into two ordinary differential equations for

the two spatial variables:
Next we substitute the assumed form of u into the boundary conditions to
obtain X(0) = X(π) = 0, and Y(0) = Y(π) = 0. Consequently we have obtained
two boundary value problems of Sturm–Liouville type,
The first problem was solved in Chapter 5 and we have eigenpairs
Then the Y problem becomes
This problem is again of Sturm-Liouville type and will have nontrivial
solutions Yk(y) = sin ky when λ−n2 = k2, for k = 1, 2, 3,… Therefore, double
indexing λ, we get eigenvalues and eigenfunctions for the negative
Laplacian with Dirichlet boundary conditions as
Observe that there are infinitely many positive, real eigenvalues, whose limit
is infinity, and the corresponding eigenfunctions are orthogonal, that is,
This example illustrates what to expect from the Dirichlet problem
(4.3)–(4.4). In fact, we have, in general, the following properties.
1. The eigenvalues are real.
2. There are infinitely many eigenvalues that can be ordered as 0 < λ1 ≤ λ2 ≤
λ3 ≤ ··· with λn → +∞ as n → ∞.
3. Eigenfunctions corresponding to distinct eigenvalues are orthogonal in the
inner product (u, v) = ƒΩ u(x)v(x)dx.
4. The set the eigenfunctions un(x) is complete in the sense that any square-
integrable function f(x) on Ω can be uniquely represented in its generalized
Fourier series

where the cn are the Fourier coefficients, and the norm is ||un|| = √(un, un).
Convergence of the series is in the L2(Ω) sense, meaning
The results are exactly the same when the Dirichlet boundary condition (4.4) is
replaced by a Neumann boundary condition 
 = 0, with the exception that λ = 0
is also an eigenvalue, with eigenfunction u0(x) = constant. When a Robin
boundary condition 
 is imposed, again there is a zero
eigenvalue with constant eigenfunction provided a(x) ≥ 0. If a(x) fails to be
nonnegative, then there may also be negative eigenvalues.
Remark 6.27
The previous results extend to the eigenvalue problem
Here, w = w(x) > 0, p = p(x) > 0, q = q(x), p, q and w are continuous on , and
p has continuous first partial derivatives on Ω. The boundary conditions may be
Dirichlet (u = 0 on ∂Ω) Neumann 
, or Robin 
, with a(x) ≥ 0). In this case the eigenfuctions are
orthogonal un(x) with respect to the inner product
and 
. The Fourier series takes the form
where convergence is
Just as for one-dimensional Sturm–Liouville problems and for integral
equations, the completeness of the set of eigenfunctions allows us to solve the
nonhomogeneous problem.

Theorem 6.28
(Fredholm alternative) Consider the boundary value problem
with homogeneous Dirichlet, Neumann, or Robin boundary conditions, where
the coefficient functions satisfy the conditions in Remark 6.22, and f is a given
function. Then,
(a) If μ is not an eigenvalue of the corresponding homogeneous problem (f =
0), then there is a unique solution for all functions f with ƒΩ f(x)dx < ∞.
(b) If μ, is an eigenvalue of the homogenous problem, then there is no
solution or infinitely many solutions, depending upon the function f.
The proof of this theorem is straightforward and follows exactly the format of
the proofs in Chapter 5, namely, to expand u and f in eigenfunction expansions
and solve for the coefficients of u.

6.4.2 Evolution Problems
The method of separation of variables is, in general, a way of constructing
solutions to partial differential equations in the form of an eigenfuction
expansion.
Let u = u(x, t) satisfy the initial boundary value problem
on a well-behaved bounded domain Ω. The strategy is simple. We seek functions
of the form u(x, t) = F(x)T(t) which satisfy the partial differential equation and
the Dirichlet boundary condition, but not necessarily the initial condition. We
find that there are many such solutions, and because the problem is linear, any
linear combination of them will satisfy the equation and boundary condition. We
then form the linear combination and select the constants so that the sum also
satisfies the initial condition.
To this end substitute u(x, t) = F(x)T(t) into the partial differential equation to
obtain
which we write as
for some λ. The crucial part of the argument is to note that λ is a constant
because it cannot be both a function of only t and only x. When this occurs, we
say the differential equation is separable, and λ is called the separation constant.
Consequently, we have
(4.5) 
The partial differential equation is separated into a spatial part and a temporal
part. The sign we put on λ does not matter because it all comes out correctly in
the end. But, note that the choice of a negative sign gives the standard negative
Laplacian examined previously and makes the temporal part decay, which is
expected from a diffusion process. Next, the boundary condition implies u(x, t) =
F(x)T(t) = 0 for x  ∂Ω, or

(4.6) 
(A choice of T(t) = 0 would give the uninteresting trivial solution.)
The first equation in (4.5) along with the Dirichlet boundary condition (4.6) is
the eigenvalue problem for the negative Laplacian that we studied in the
previous section. The eigen-pairs are λn, Fn(x), n = 1.2, 3,…. The eigenvalues
are positive and the eigenfunctions are orthogonal. In the context of an evolution
problem, the spatial eigenfunctions are called the normal modes. With these
eigenvalues, 
the 
temporal 
equation 
 
has 
solutions 
. 
Therefore 
we 
have 
constructed 
solutions 
, that satisfy the partial differential
equation and the Dirichlet boundary condition. Next we form the linear
combination
The initial condition now forces
which is the generalized Fourier series for f. The coefficients must be the
Fourier coefficients
Recall that 
Therefore we have derived a formal solution to the initial boundary value
problem in the form of an infinite series. The validity of such a series
representation must be proved by checking that it does indeed satisfy the
problem. This requires substitution into the partial differential equation and
boundary conditions, so conditions that guarantee term-by-term differentiation
must be verified.
Example 6.29
In one spatial dimension, consider the initial boundary value problem for the
heat equation:
(4.7) 

(4.8) 
(4.9) 
This models heat flow in a bar of length l with the ends held at constant zero
temperature. The function f defines the initial temperature distribution.
Substituting u(x, t) = F(x)T(t) into the partial differential equation and boundary
conditions leads to the equation T′(t) = -λkT(t), and the eigenvalue problem
(4.10) 
which is the Sturm–Liouville problem discussed in Chapter 5. The eigenvalues
and eigenfunctions are
The solution to the time equation is 
. We form the series
where the an are to be determined. But the initial condition implies
which is the generalized Fourier series for f. The an are the Fourier coefficients
We have 
. Therefore the solution to (4.7)–(4.9)
is given by the infinite series
By rearranging the terms and formally switching the order of summation and
integration, we can write the solution in a particularly nice form as
where

This last example shows how to proceed when there is one spatial variable. In
higher dimensions the eigenvalue problem will be higher-dimensional, and it can
be solved by separating the spatial variables.
Remark 6.30
The eigenfunction expansion method performs equally well on any evolution
equation of the form
with initial condition u(x, 0) = f(x), x  Ω. Here, p = p(x) > 0, q = q(x), p, q are
continuous on , and p has continuous first partial derivatives on Ω. All of these
equations are separable. The boundary conditions may be Dirichlet (u = 0 on
∂Ω), Neumann 
, or Robin 
, with a ≥
0). The domain Ω must be bounded, and the boundary conditions have to be
given on x = constant planes. In polar, cylindrical, and spherical coordinates the
boundary conditions must be given on constant coordinate curves and surfaces.
The associated eigenvalue problem will have the form
with either Dirichlet, Neumann, or Robin boundary conditions.
Remark 6.31
The eigenfunction method is also applicable to equations of the form
with the same caveats and limitations as in the last Remark. These are wave
equations and have second-order time derivatives. When variables are separated,
the temporal equation will be second-order, and in this case two initial
conditions, u(x, 0) = f(x) and ut(x, 0) = g(x), x  Ω, are required. Wave equations
are discussed in the next chapter.
Nonhomogenous problems. Generally, a partial differential equation with a
source term,
can be solved by assuming a solution of the form

where the Fn(x) are the eigenfunctions of the nonhomogeneous spatial problem.
Upon substitution into the nonhomogeneous equation, the unknown coefficients
gn (t) can be determined by solving the resulting ordinary differential equations
for gn, subject to the initial condition.
When problems have both nonhomogeneous boundary conditions and a source
term, the strategy is to first homogenize the boundary conditions, and then
homogenize the PDE.
EXERCISES
1. Use the eigenfunction expansion method to solve the following problems:
a)
b)
c)
2. Transform the problem
into one with homogeneous boundary conditions. (Hint: Let u(x, y) = v(x, y)
+ A(x), where A is chosen to satisfy the boundary conditions.)
3. Transform the problem with a source term,

into a nonhomogeneous problem. Solve the problem when f(x) = 1.
4. Solve the problem
5. Solve the problem
6. Organisms of density u(x, t) are distributed in a patch of length l. They
diffuse with diffusion constant D, and their growth rate is ru. At the ends of
the patch a zero density is maintained, and the initial distribution is u(x, 0) =
f(x). Because there is competition between growth in the interior of the patch
and escape from the boundaries, it is interesting to know whether the
population increases or collapses. Show that the condition on the patch size,
l 
, ensures death of the population.
7. Consider Laplace’s equation on the unit circle with given boundary
condition:
a) Assuming u = R(r)Y(θ), along with the implicit periodic boundary
conditions u(r, 0) = u(r, 2π), uθ(r, 0) = uθ(r, 2π), use separation of
variables to find an infinite series representation of the solution.
b) Show that the solution can be written in integral for as
This representation is Poisson’s integral formula.
8. Consider Laplace’s equation on a unit sphere.

a) Assume a solution of the form u(r, θ, ϕ) = Sn(ϕ)rn, n = 0, 1, 2,…, and
show that Sn(ϕ), the spherical harmonics, satisfies the equation
b) Change the independent variable to x = cos ϕ with Pn(x) = Sn(ϕ), and
show
This is Legendre’s differential equation.
c) Assume a power series solution of Legendre’s equation of the form
and show that for each fixed n,
d) Show that for each fixed n, there is a polynomial solution. These are
called the Legendre polynomials. Up to a constant multiple, find the first
four Legendre polynomials P0(x),… P3(x). [Note: It can be shown that the
Legendre polynomials are orthogonal on −1 < x < 1.]
9. Consider the partial differential operator
where p = p(x) > 0, q = q(x), p and q are continuous on 
, and p has
continuous first partial derivatives on .
a) Prove the integration by parts formula
b) Consider the eigenvalue problem Lu = λu, x  Ω with a Dirichlet
boundary condition u = 0, x  ∂Ω. Prove that the eigenvalues are positive
and 
that 
distinct 
eigenvalues 
have 
corresponding 
orthogonal
eigenfunctions.
10. Give a statement and proof of the Fredholm alternative theorem for the
problem
with a homogeneous Dirichlet boundary condition.

6.5 Integral Transforms
The eigenfunction expansion method is, for the most part, applicable to
problems on bounded spatial domains. Transform methods, on the other hand,
are usually applied to problems on infinite or semi-infinite spatial domains. In
this section we introduce two fundamental integral transforms, the Laplace
transform and the Fourier transform. Basically, the idea is to transform a partial
differential equation into an ordinary differential equation in a transformed
domain, solve the ordinary differential equation, and then return to the original
domain by an inverse transform.

6.5.1 Laplace Transforms
Laplace transforms are introduced in elementary differential equations courses as
a technique for solving linear ordinary differential equations with constant
coefficients. They are particularly useful for nonhomogeneous problems where
the source term is piecewise continuous or is an impulse function (a delta
function). We assume the reader is familiar with these elementary methods (see
any sophomore-level ODE book), and we show that they easily extend to partial
differential equations.
First, we review the basic notions for functions of a single variable. If u = u(t)
is a piecewise continuous function on t ≥ 0 that does not grow too fast,4, then the
Laplace transform of u is defined by
(5.1) 
In shorthand, we write 
 The Laplace transform is an example of an
integral transform; it takes a given function u(t) in the time domain and maps it
to a new function U(s) in the so-called transform domain. U and s are called the
transform 
variables. 
The 
Laplace 
transform 
is 
linear 
in 
that 
, where c1 and c2 are constants. If the transform
U(s) is known, then u(t) is called the inverse transform of U(s) and we write 
, or just u = 
 Pairs of Laplace transforms and their
inverses have been tabulated in extensive tables and in computer algebra
programs; Table 6.1 gives a brief list.
Table 6.1 Laplace Transforms

The importance of the Laplace transform, like other transforms, is that it
changes derivative operations in the time domain to multiplication operations in
the transform domain. In fact, we have the important operational formulas
(5.2) 
(5.3) 
Formulae (5.2) and (5.3) are readily proved using the definition (5.1) and
integration by parts.
The strategy for solving differential equations is simple. Taking the Laplace

transform of an ordinary differential equation for u(t) results in an algebraic
equation for U(s) in the transformed domain. Solve the algebraic equation for
U(s) and then recover u(t) by inversion.
Determining u(t) from knowledge of its transform U(s) would take us into the
realm of complex contour integration (which is not a prerequisite for this book).
However, we can indicate the general formula for the inverse transform. The
inversion formula is
The integral is a complex contour integral taken over the infinite vertical line,
called a Bromwich path, in the complex plane from a − i∞ to a + i∞. The
number a is any real number for which the resulting Bromwich path lies to the
right of any singularities (poles, essential singular points, or branch points and
cuts) of the function U(s). Calculating inverse transforms using the Bromwich
integral usually involves a difficult contour integration in the complex plane and
using the residue theorem. In this text we only use a table or a computer algebra
system.
One of the most useful tools is the convolution theorem. Often, solving a
differential equation results in having to invert the product of two transforms in
the transform domain. The convolution theorem tells what the inverse
transformation is.
Theorem 6.32
(Convolution theorem) Let u and v be piecewise continuous on t ≥ 0 and of
exponential order. Then
where
is the convolution of u and v, and 
 Furthermore,
Whereas the Laplace transform is additive, it is not multiplicative. The
convolution theorem tells what to take the transform of in order to get a product
of Laplace transforms, namely the convolution. The convolution theorem is easy
to prove using the definition of the transform and interchanging the order of

integration; it is proved in most elementary texts (e.g., Logan 2010).
Remark 6.33
We leave it to an exercise to show that convolution is commutative, that is,
Example 6.34
Solve the initial value problem
Taking the transform of both sides we get
where 
. Applying the initial conditions and then solving for U gives
To invert, we note the right side is the product of two transforms and we can
apply the convolution theorem. From the table,
and 
 Therefore
The same transform strategy applies to partial differential equations where the
unknown is a function of two variables, for example, u = u(x, t). Now we
transform on t, as before, with the variable x being a parameter unaffected by the
transform. In particular, we define the Laplace transform of u(x, t) by
Then time derivatives transform as in (5.2) and (5.3); for example,
On the other hand, spatial derivatives are left unaffected, for example,

and 
. Therefore, taking Laplace transform of a partial
differential equation in x and t reduces it to an ordinary differential equation in x
with s as a parameter; all the t derivatives are turned into multiplication in the
transform domain.
Example 6.35
Let u = u(x, t) denote the concentration of a chemical contaminant, and let x > 0
be a semi-infinite region that initially contains no contaminant. For times t > 0
we impose a constant, unit concentration on the boundary x = 0, and we ask how
the contaminant diffuses into the region. Assuming a unit diffusion constant (the
problem can be rescaled to make the diffusion constant unity), the mathematical
model is
Taking Laplace transforms of both sides of the equation yields
This is an ordinary differential equation with x as the independent variable, and
the solution is
Because solutions are bounded we set b(s) = 0. Then
Next we take Laplace transforms of the boundary condition to get U(0, s) = 1/s,
where we used 
 Therefore a(s) = 1/s and the solution in the
transform domain is
Consulting Table 6.1, we find that the solution is
where erf is the error function. Figure 6.5 shows several time snapshots of the
concentration of the contaminant as it diffuses into the medium.
Figure 6.5 Concentration profiles u = u(x, t) for different times t.

The Laplace transform of a distribution can be defined as well, and we may
formally transform delta functions and thus solve equations with point source
functions. See Table 6.1 for the relevant entries. The theoretical basis for these
calculations is contained in Section 6.7.2.
Example 6.36
(Transform of the delta function) Here we give an intuitive calculation based
on approximating a delta distribution δa (t) by the limit of a sequence of unit
pulses
as ε → 0. (H is the Heaviside function.) On the left, for ease of writing, we
suppress the dependence on a. This is a sequence of rectangular, unit pulses of
width 2ε and height ε that get narrower and taller as ε → 0, yet all have area 1.
In the limit it approaches a unit source at t = a, or a delta ‘function’. That is,
intuitively,
We calculate the Laplace transform of fε(t) and take the limit.

In the limit as ε → 0 we get
leading us to conclude 
.
EXERCISES
1. Find the Laplace transform of 
 (Hint: make the substitution
st = r2 in the integral.)
2. The gamma function is defined by
a) Show 
b) Show 
3. Show that u * v = v * u.
4. Solve the following initial value problems.
a) u’ + au = f(t), u(0) = u0, where a is constant.
b) u” − k2u = f(t), u(0) = 0, u’(0) = 1.
c) u′ + 3u = δ1(t) + H4(t), u(0) = 1.
5. If f(t) is periodic of period p for t ≥ 0, i.e., f(t + P) = f(t) for all t, show that
6. Solve the integral equation
7. Show that the transform of tn f(t) is (−1)nU(n) (s), where n is a positive
integer.

8. Use a transform method to solve the diffusion problem
9. A toxic chemical diffuses into a semi-infinite domain x ≥ 0 from its
boundary x = 0, where the concentration is maintained at g(t). The model is
Determine the concentration u = u(x, t) and write the solution in the form of
u(x, t) = ƒt0 K(x, t − τ)g(τ)dτ, identifying the kernel K.
10. The small, transverse deflections from equilibrium of an elastic string
under the influence of gravity satisfy the forced wave equation
where c2 is a constant and g is the acceleration due to gravity; u(x, t) is the
actual deflection at location x at time t. (Wave equations are derived in
Chapter 7.) At t = 0 a semi-infinite string (x ≥ 0), supported underneath, lies
motionless along the x axis. Suddenly the support is removed and the string
falls under the force of gravity with the deflection at x = 0 held fixed at the
origin; the initial velocity ut(x, 0) of the string is zero. Determine the
displacement of the string and sketch several time snapshots of the solution.
11. Solve utt = c2uxx on t > 0, x > 0, subject to u(x, 0) = ut(x, 0) = 0 and
boundary condition u(0, t) = g(t).
12. Solve utt = c2uxx on t > 0, x  (0, 1), subject to boundary conditions u(0,
t) = u(1, t) = 0 and initial conditions u(x, 0) = sin πx, ut(x, 0) = − sin πx.

6.5.2 Fourier Transforms
It is impossible to overestimate the important role that Fourier analysis played in
the evolution of mathematical analysis over the last two centuries. Much of this
development was motivated by theoretical issues associated with problems in
engineering and the sciences. Now, Fourier analysis is a monument of applied
mathematics, forming a base of signal processing, imaging, probability theory,
and differential equations, only to mention a few such areas.
There are many ways to introduce the Fourier transform. Many texts show that
it is the limit of a complex Fourier series as the period of the function
approaches infinity. Here we examine its origin from a PDE viewpoint. In
Section 7.2 we show that the Cauchy problem for a linear, homogeneous,
constant coefficient PDE may admit a solution u(x, t) that is the superposition of
plane waves; that is,
where ω = ω(ξ) is the dispersion relation, and the coefficient function, the
amplitude c(ξ), is to be determined. [Note that we used ξ in lieu of k as the wave
number.] If u(x, 0) = f(x), we find
(5.4) 
This looks very much like a continuous version of the complex Fourier series
We know that the cξ are the Fourier coefficients of f given by
Therefore, we suspect in the continuous case that
(5.5) 
Compare the last four formulas and observe the strong similarity! The formulas
(5.4) and (5.5) are basically the Fourier transform and the inverse Fourier
transform, respectively, with a little rearrangement of variables.

From a PDE viewpoint, it turns out that the Fourier transform is an integral
operator with properties similar to the Laplace transform in that derivatives are
turned into multiplication operations in the transform domain. Thus the Fourier
transform, like the Laplace transform, is useful as a computational tool in
solving differential equations. The Fourier transform of a function in one
dimension u = u(x), x  , is defined by the equation
The variable ξ is called the frequency (or wave number) variable. There is one
important remark about notation. There is no standard convention on how to
define the Fourier transform; some put a factor of 
 in front of
the integral, and some have a negative power in the exponential or even a factor
of 2π. Physicists and engineers often use k, ω, or p (meaning wave number,
frequency, or momentum) in place of ξ. Therefore one needs to be aware of these
differences when consulting other sources because the formulas change
depending upon the convention.
Another important, even crucial, issue is to decide what set of functions on
which to define the transform. Certainly, if u is integrable on 
, that is, 
, then 
, and
 exists. But, as the example below shows, if u is integrable then 
 is not
necessarily integrable; this causes problems, therefore, with inversion of the
transform. Consequently, in the theory of Fourier transforms one often takes the
domain to be a much smaller class of functions, for example, the square-
integrable functions L2( ), or the Schwartz class of functions S. The Schwartz
class consists of very smooth functions that decay, along with all their
derivatives, very rapidly at infinity. Specifically, u  S if u  C∞( ) and u and all
its derivatives u(k) have the property lim|x|→∞ xpu(k)(x) = 0, for any positive
integer p. Thus, Schwartz class functions decay faster at infinity than any
algebraic polynomial. This assumption makes the theory go through in a highly
aesthetic way (see, for example, Strichartz 1994).
Example 6.37
Compute the Fourier transform of the characteristic function

We have
Notice that u has its support, or nonzero values, in a bounded interval, and it is
integrable. Its Fourier transform is in C∞( ), yet it is not absolutely integrable.
Remark 6.38
In general, one can show that if u is absolutely integrable, then (i) 
 is
continuous and bounded, (ii) 
 = 0, and (iii) if u  S, then   S.
Our goal in this text is not a thorough analysis of transforms; rather, we want
to study the mechanics and applications of Fourier transforms. Our strategy is to
perform the calculations formally, making what smoothness assumptions that are
required to do the calculations. Once a result, say, a solution formula, is
obtained, we could then make assumptions that are needed to validate it. For
example, we may require a high degree of smoothness and rapid decay at infinity
to apply the transform method and invert it, but at the end we may find that the
solution is valid under much less strenuous conditions.
A basic property of the one-dimensional Fourier transform is
(5.6) 
confirming our comment that derivatives are transformed to multiplication by a
factor of (−iξ)k. This operational formula is easily proved using integration by
parts (like for the Laplace transform), assuming u and its derivatives are
continuous and integrable.
For functions of two variables, say u = u(x, t), the variable t acts as a
parameter and we define the Fourier transform by
Then, under Fourier transformation, x derivatives turn into multiplication and t
derivatives remain unaffected; for example,
Solving a differential equation for u first involves transforming the problem

into the transform domain and then solving for . Then one is faced with the
inversion problem, or the problem of determining the u for which 
 u = . One
of the nice properties of the Fourier transform is the simple form of the
inversion formula, or inverse transform:
(5.7) 
This result is the content of the Fourier integral theorem. For example, if u  S,
then   S, and conversely. Under the weaker condition that both u and  are
integrable, then (5.7) holds at all points where u is continuous.
Some Fourier transforms can be calculated directly, as in the preceding
example; many others require complex contour integration. A table of Fourier
transforms appears at the end of this section (Table 6.2). In the next example we
calculate the transform of Gaussian function u(x) = e−ax2, a > 0, using a
differential equation technique.
Example 6.39
(The Gaussian) We want to calculate  where
Differentiating with respect to ξ and then integrating by parts gives
Therefore we have a differential equation 
 for . Separating
variables and integrating gives the general solution
and the constant C can be determined by noticing
Consequently,

(5.8) 
So, the Fourier transform of a Gaussian (a normal probability distribution)
function is a Gaussian; conversely, the inverse transform of a Gaussian is a
Gaussian. Observe that a Gaussian with large spread (variance) gets transformed
to a Gaussian with a narrow spread, and conversely.
Similar to Laplace transforms, a convolution relation holds for Fourier
transforms. If u and v are absolutely integrable, then we define the convolution
of u and v by
Then we have the following theorem.
Theorem 6.40
(Convolution theorem) If u and v are in , then u * v   and
Then
This formula, which can also be stated under less strenuous conditions, asserts
that the inverse transform of a product is a convolution. As with Laplace
transforms, this is a useful relationship in solving differential equations because
we frequently end up with a product of transforms in the frequency domain.
Proof
The convolution theorem follows from formally interchanging the order of
integration in the following string of equalities:

Example 6.41
Consider the ordinary differential equation
Assume that u and its derivatives, and f, are sufficiently smooth and decay
rapidly at infinity. Proceeding formally, we take the transform of both sides to
obtain
Hence
In the transform domain the solution is a product of transforms, and so we apply
the convolution theorem. From Table 6.2
Table 6.2 Fourier Transforms

Therefore
We can show, in fact, that this is a solution if f is continuous and integrable.
Example 6.42
Use Fourier transforms to solve the pure initial value problem for the diffusion
equation:
(5.9) 
We assume the functions u and f are in . Taking Fourier transforms of the
equation gives
which is an ordinary differential equation in t for (ξ, t), with ξ as a parameter.

Its solution is
The initial condition gives 
 and so 
. Therefore
Replacing a by 1/4kt in formula (5.8) gives
By the convolution theorem we have
(5.10) 
This solution was derived under the assumption that u, f  S. But, now that we
have it, we can show that it is a solution under milder restrictions on f. For
example, one can prove that (5.10) is a solution to (5.9) if f is a continuous,
bounded function on 
. If f is only piecewise continuous, then u remains a
solution for t > 0, but at point of discontinuity of f, say x0, we have lim
.
Example 6.43
Next we consider the problem of finding an electrical potential u(x, y) in the
upper-half plane caused by a given potential on the lower edge y = 0. Therefore,
consider the boundary value problem
We append the condition that the solution u stay bounded as y → ∞. This
example is similar to the last example. Taking the transform (on x, with y as a
parameter) of the equation we obtain
which has general solution
The first term will grow exponentially if ξ < 0, and the second term will grow if
ξ > 0. To maintain boundedness for all ξ we can take

Applying the Fourier transform to the boundary condition yields 
.
Therefore the solution in the transform domain is
By the convolution theorem,
As in the case of Laplace transforms, the Fourier transform can be extended to
distributions; a few examples are given in Table 6.2. In Section 6.7 we define the
Fourier transform of a distribution.
We end this section with some brief comments on eigenvalue problems on
infinite domains. For example, consider the eigenvalue problem
On bounded domains there are accompanying boundary conditions (Dirichlet,
Neumann, Robin) on u. Now we must decide what kind of boundary conditions
to impose at infinity. For example, do we assume u is square-integrable,
bounded, or goes to zero as |x| → ∞? A one-dimensional problem reveals the
issues. Consider
The general solution is: u(x) = ax + b if 
if λ < 0, and 
. None of these solutions
is square-integrable on  or goes to zero at x = ±∞; so in these cases there would
be no eigenvalues. However, if we impose a boundedness condition on all of ,
then any λ ≥ 0 gives a nontrivial solution u(x, λ). In this case we say λ belongs to
the continuous spectrum of the operator 
, and the associated
eigenfunctions are 
. These are sometimes given the
unfortunate misnomers improper eigenvalues and improper eigenfunctions.
Later, in a quantum mechanical context, we see that these functions can be
interpreted as traveling wave packets.
We can write this set of eigenfunctions as e−ikx, where −∞ < k < ∞. Then, if f is
a given function, we can think of representing it as an as eigenfunction
expansion, but this time not as a sum (as for the case of discrete eigenvalues),
but as an integral

But this means that the continuum c(k) of Fourier coefficients is given by the
Fourier transform of f. In a distributional sense, the eigenfunctions e−ikx are
orthogonal. Therefore, the entire theory of eigenfunction expansions seems to
remain valid for operators with continuous spectrum. Indeed, this is true and
there is a close connection to eigenfunction expansions and transform theory.
These ideas have their origin in quantum theory. The eigenvalue problem for
the Schrödinger operator
where V is the potential function, can have both eigenvalues (with square-
integrable eigenfunctions, called bound states) and continuous spectrum (with
bounded eigenfunctions, called unbound states). The eigenfunction expansion
then involves both Fourier series (sums) and Fourier integrals. These topics are
beyond our scope and we refer the reader to Keener (2000) or Stakgold (1998).
EXERCISES
1. Show that the inverse Fourier transform of e−a|ξ|, a > 0, is
2. Verify the following properties of the Fourier transform:
a) 
b) 
c) 
3. Find the Fourier transform of the following functions:
a) u(x) = H(x)e−ax, where H is the heaviside function.
b) u(x) = xe−ax2.
c) u(x) = f(x) cos ax, where f is given.
4. Give an argument similar to that in Example 6.36 to find the Fourier
transform of the delta distribution δa(x).
5. Show that the solution of the Cauchy problem
where δ(x) is a point source at the origin is the fundamental solution to the
diffusion equation,

6. What is the solution to the diffusion equation when, at t = 0, there two
point sources, one at x = −4 and the other at x = 5, of magnitudes 3 units and
1 unit, respectively? Choose a value of the diffusion constant D and plot
several solution profiles showing how the concentration spreads.
7. If 
 find 
8. Compute u * u where u(x) = e−|x|, and then find the Fourier transform of
the function f(x) such that 
.
9. If 
 find 
(f(2x + 1)).
10. Use Fourier transforms to find the solution to the initial value problem
for the advection–diffusion equation
11. Solve the Cauchy problem for the nonhomogeneous heat equation:
12. The Fourier transform and its inverse in 
n are given by
a) 
Show 
that 
the 
Fourier 
transform 
of 
the 
Laplacian 
is 
.
b) Find the Fourier transform of the n-dimensional Gaussian u(x) = e
−a|x|2.
c) Solve the Cauchy problem for the diffusion equation in 
n.
13. If u and v are absolutely integrable, show that
Hint: the given conditions allow interchange of the order of integration.
14. Prove the Plancherel relation

or, 
. Hint: set 
 in the previous problem. (Recall that
||u|| is the L2 norm.)
15. Use the Plancherel relation to evaluate the integral
16. Find a formula for the solution to the free Schrödinger equation
17. (Uncertainty principle) In quantum mechanics, the square of the wave
function, | (x)|2 is probability density for the location of a particle; that is,
Pr(X  I) = ƒI | (x)|2dx, where X is a random variable for the position of the
particle, and I is an interval. The quantity ||x ||2 therefore measures the
spread of the density. The spread of the momentum of a particle is 
.
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle states that
(5.11) 
which is to say that both the position and momentum of a particle cannot be
measured simultaneously as close as desired. Prove (5.11) using the
Cauchy–Schwartz inequality and Plancherel’s formula and the following
steps:
The first equality follows from integration by parts and the fact that || ||2 = 1.
18. Solve the initial boundary value problem:
by extending f to the entire real line as an odd function and then using
Fourier transforms.

19. Solve the following initial value problem for the heat equation.
where u0 is a constant. Write your solution in terms of the erf function. For
large times t, show that u decays like 
, or more specifically, 
20. Show that the solution to Laplace’s equation in the upper half-plane with
a Neumann boundary condition,
is given by
Hint: let v(x, y) = uy(x, y).
21. Use Plancherel’s formula to show
22. Solve the boundary value problem
with each of the two boundary conditions: (a) u(x, 0) = H(x), x  
, and (b)
u(x, 0) = 
, x  .
23. Solve the integral equation

6.6 Stability of Solutions
6.6.1 Reaction–Diffusion Equations
We already noted the broad occurrence of diffusion problems in biological
systems. In this section we investigate another aspect of such problems, namely
the persistence of equilibrium states in systems governed by reaction—
diffusion systems. At issue is the stability of those states: if a system is in an
equilibrium state and it is slightly perturbed, does the system return to that state,
or does it evolve to a completely different state?
Underpinned by the seminal work of Alan Turing5 in 1952 on the chemical
basis of morphogenesis, it has been shown in extensive research that diffusion-
induced instabilities can give rise to spatial patterns in all sorts of biological
systems. Reaction-diffusion models have been used to explain the evolution of
form and structure in developmental biology (morphogenesis), tumor growth,
ecological spatial patterns, aggregation in slime molds, patterns on animal coats,
and many other observed processes in molecular and cellular biology.
In this section we introduce the basic idea of stability in reaction–diffusion
models and we observe that such systems can have instabilities that lead to
density variations and patterns.
A similar theory of local stability of equilibrium solutions can be developed
for partial differential equations. In the interval 0 < x < L consider the reaction–
diffusion equation
(6.1) 
with no-flux boundary conditions ux(0, t) = ux(π, t) = 0. Let u(x, t) = ue be a
constant equilibrium solution (so that f(ue) = 0). To fix the idea let a = f′(ue) > 0.
Note that the equilibrium solution satisfies the partial differential equation and
the boundary conditions. Next, let U(x, t) be a small perturbation from the
equilibrium solution, or u(x, t) = ue + U(x, t). The perturbation equation is
determined by substituting this expression into (6.1) and the boundary
conditions:
To linearize this equation we expand the right side in a Taylor series and discard

the nonlinear terms:
Then we obtain the linearized perturbation equation
(6.2) 
subject to boundary conditions
(6.3) 
This problem, which is on a bounded interval, can be solved by separation of
variables. We assume U = g(x)h(t) and then substitute into (6.2) and boundary
conditions (6.3) to obtain
or
Then h = Ceλt and
This equation cannot have nontrivial exponential solutions that satisfy the
boundary conditions; therefore a − λ ≥ 0. In the case λ = a we obtain a constant
solution, and in the case a − λ > 0 we obtain
Applying g′(0) = 0 forces A = 0; then g′(L) = 0 implies
or
Therefore, incorporating the case λ = a, we obtain eigenvalues
(6.4) 
The modal solutions are therefore

(6.5) 
What conclusions can we draw from this calculation? Because the general
solution U(x, t) to the boundary value problem (6.2)–(6.3) is a linear
combination of the modal solutions (6.5),
it will decay if all of the modes decay, and it will grow if one of the modes
grows. The constants cn are determined by the initial perturbation. The spatial
part of the modal solutions, or the cosine, remains bounded. The amplitude
factor eλnt, and therefore the eigenvalues λn, will determine growth or decay. Let
us examine the modes. In the case n = 0 the eigenvalue is λn = a and the modal
solution is c0eat, which grows exponentially. In fact, any mode satisfying a 
 is unstable. Therefore, instabilities are likely to occur for modes of low
frequency (n small), or in systems of large size L or low diffusion properties D.
Oppositely, small systems with large diffusion constants are stabilizing, as are
the high–frequency modes and geometrically small regions. In the most general
case the initial perturbation will nearly always contain all modes and the steady
state will be locally unstable.
Above we examined the stability of a constant solution, but the idea applies to
nonconstant equilibrium solutions as well.

6.6.2 Pattern Formation
The mechanism causing instabilities in the preceding problem causes patterns to
form. We apply this idea to a problem in cell aggregation. A slime mold
population is a collection of unicellular amoeboid cells that feed on bacteria in
the soil. When the food supply is plentiful, the bacteria are generally distributed
uniformly throughout the soil. But, as the food supply becomes depleted and
starvation begins, the amoeba start to secrete a chemical (cyclic AMP) that acts
as an attractant to the other amoeba and aggregation sites form. The rest of the
story is even more interesting as the aggregation sites evolve into slugs that
ultimately develop into sporangiophores consisting of a stalk and head
containing new spores. The spores are released and the process begins anew. We
are interested here in only the first part of this complicated problem, the onset of
aggregation. We work in one spatial dimension and imagine the amoeba are
distributed throughout a tube of length L.
Let a = a(x, t) and c = c(x, t) denote the density and concentration of the
cellular amoeba and cAMP, respectively. The fundamental conservation laws are
(see Section 6.2)
where J(a) and J(c) are the fluxes of the amoeba and the chemical, respectively.
There are no source terms in the amoeba equation because we will not consider
birth and death processes on the time scale of the analysis. The source term in
the chemical equation consists of two parts: production of the chemical by the
amoeba and degradation of the chemical in the soil. We assume the chemical is
produced by the amoeba at a rate proportional to the density of the amoeba, and
the chemical degrades at a rate proportional to its concentration; that is,
The motion of the chemical is caused by diffusion only, and we assume Fick’s
law:
where δ is the diffusion constant. The amoeba are also assumed to randomly
diffuse via Fick’s law, but there is another flux source for the amoeba, namely
attraction to the chemical. We assume this attraction is up the chemical gradient,
toward high concentrations of c. Additionally, the rate of diffusion should
depend on the amoeba population because that will increase the magnitude of the

chemical concentration released. This type of flow, induced by chemical
gradients, is called chemotaxis. Therefore we assume
where μ is the amoeba motility and v is the strength of the chemotaxis, both
assumed to be positive constants. Note that the random flux, having the form of
Fick’s law, has a negative sign because flow is “down the gradient” (from high to
low densities), and the chemotatic flux has a positive sign because that term
induces flow “up the chemical gradient” (from low to high concentrations).
Putting all these equations all together gives a system of reaction–diffusion
equations,
(6.6) 
Both a and c satisfy no-flux boundary conditions (i.e., ax = cx = 0 at x = 0, L,),
which means there is no escape from the medium.
Notice that there will be an equilibrium solution 
 to (6.6)
provided
That is, the production of the chemical equals its degradation. This equilibrium
state represents the spatially uniform state in the soil before aggregation begins.
To determine the local stability of this uniform state we let
where u and v are small perturbations. Substituting these quantities into (6.6)
gives, after simplification, the perturbation equations
These equations are nonlinear because of the uvx term in the amoeba equation. If
we discard the nonlinear terms on the assumption that the product of small terms
is even smaller, then we obtain the linearized perturbation equations
(6.7) 
Easily one can see that the perturbations satisfy Neumann, no-flux boundary
conditions.
Motivated by our knowledge of the form of solutions to linear equations, we
assume there are modal solutions of the form
(6.8) 
where r and σ are to be determined, and c1 and c2 are some constants. Notice the

form of these assumed solutions. The spatial part is bounded and periodic with
wave number, or frequency, r, and have wavelength 2π/r. The temporal part is
exponential with growth factor σ, which may be a real or complex number. If σ
is negative or has negative real part, then the perturbation will decay and the
equilibrium state will return (the uniform state is stable); if σ is positive or has
positive real part, then the perturbations will grow and the equilibrium will be
unstable. Let us ask why solutions of (6.7) should be of this form (6.8) without
going through the entire separation of variables argument. Equations (6.7) are
linear with constant coefficients, and both equations contain both unknowns u
and v and their derivatives. If we are to have a solution, then all the terms must
match up in one way or another in order to cancel. So both u and v must
essentially have the same form. Because there is a first derivative in t, the time
factor must be exponential so it will cancel, and the spatial part must be a sine or
a cosine because of the appearance of a second spatial derivative. We anticipate
the cosine function because of the no-flux boundary conditions, as in Chapter 5.
If we substitute (6.8) into (6.7) we obtain the two algebraic equations
which relate all the parameters. We may regard these as two linear,
homogeneous equations for the constants c1 and c2. If we want a nontrivial
solution for c1 and c2, then matrix theory dictates that the determinant of the
coefficient matrix must be zero. That is,
which is an equation relating the temporal growth factor σ, the wave number r,
and the other constants in the problem. Expanded out, this equation is a
quadratic in σ,
where
The roots of the quadratic are
Clearly one of the roots (taking the minus sign) is always negative or has
negative real part. The other root can have positive or negative real part,
depending upon the value of the discriminant γ2
1 − 4γ2. We are interested in
determining if there are parameter choices that lead to an instability; so we ask

when σ positive. Hence, γ2 must be negative, or
If this inequality holds, there is an unstable mode and perturbations will grow.
We analyze this further.
The number r is the wave number of the perturbations. Applying the no-flux
boundary conditions forces
For each value of n we obtain a wave number r = rn and a corresponding growth
factor σn. The nth mode will therefore grow and lead to local instability when
(6.9) 
We can now ask what factors destabilize the uniform, equilibrium state in the
amoeba–cAMP system and therefore promote aggregation. That is, when is (6.9)
likely to hold? We can list the factors that may make the left side of the
inequality (6.9) smaller than the right side: low motility μ of the bacteria; low
degradation rate k or large production rate f of cAMP; large chemotactic strength
v; large dimensions L of the medium; a small value of n (thus, low wave number,
or long wavelength, perturbations are less stabilizing than short wavelength, or
high wave number, perturbations); decreasing the diffusion constant of the
cAMP. Figure 6.6 shows time snapshots of the amoeba density for the mode n =
2 when it is unstable. The regions where the amplitude is high correspond to
higher concentrations of amoeba, or regions of aggregation.
Figure 6.6 Plot showing the growing amoeba, density at time t when the uniform
state is unstable to local perturbations in the mode n = 2. This instability gives
rise to the aggregation sites in the regions where the solution has greater
amplitude.

EXERCISES
1. Consider the problem for Fisher’s equation with Dirichlet boundary
conditions:
a) Show that 
 is an equilibrium solution.
b) Define perturbations U(x, t) by the equation u = ue(x) + U(x, t) and
find the linearized perturbation equation and boundary conditions for U(x,
t).
c) Assume a solution to the linearized equation of the form U = eσt g(x)
and show that g must satisfy
(6.10) 
d) Show that if (6.10) has a nontrivial solution, then σ < 0, thereby
showing local stability of the steady solution. (Hint: Consider two cases,
when g is positive and when g is negative on the interval and then
examine the signs of g” and the other terms in (6.10) at a maximum or
minimum point.)

2. (Turing system). Consider the system of reaction-diffusion equations on
the spatial domain 0 < x < L given by
with no-flux boundary conditions ux = vx = 0 at x = 0, L. Let 
be an equilibrium solution and define small perturbations U and V from
equilibrium given by
a) Show that U and V satisfy no-flux boundary conditions and the
linearized perturbation equations
(6.11) 
(6.12) 
b) Introduce matrix notation
and show that (6.11)–(6.12) can be written as
(6.13) 
c) Assume modal solutions to (6.13) of the form
and show that for a nontrivial solution we must have
(6.14) 
(When expanded, this equation is a quadratic equation for the growth factor
σn of the nth mode. The roots σn depend upon the diffusion constants α, β,
the equilibrium solution 
, the size of the medium L, and the wavelength
πL/n of the perturbation. If one can find values of the parameters that make
one of the roots positive or have positive real part, then there is an unstable
mode.)
3. Apply the method of Exercise 2 to examine the stability of the steady state
of the Turing system
under no-flux boundary conditions. Specifically, find the condition (6.14)
and determine values of D for which various modes (n) are unstable.

6.7 Distributions
6.7.1 Elliptic Problems
The notions of Green’s functions and distributions introduced in Chapter 5 carry
over in a straightforward manner to several variables and to partial differential
equations. We briefly state some of the main ideas. Let Ω be an open set in 
n
(for definiteness the reader may take n = 2 or n = 3). We denote by D(Ω) 
C∞0(Ω) the set of functions defined on Ω that have continuous derivatives of all
orders and that vanish outside a closed, bounded subset of Ω. The set D(Ω) is
called the set of test functions on Ω. Then, a distribution u on D(Ω) is a
continuous linear functional on D(Ω), and we denote the value, or action, of the
distribution u by (u, ϕ), where ϕ ε D (Ω). The set of all distributions defined on
D(Ω) is denoted by D’(Ω). Every function u that is locally integrable on Ω,
namely ƒK|u(x)| dx < ∞ for all closed bounded subsets K of Ω, generates a
distribution via the formula
(7.1) 
The Dirac (delta) distribution with pole at ξ  Rn is defined by
(7.2) 
As in the one-dimensional case we often denote a locally integrable function and
its associated distribution by the same symbol. Even if a distribution u is not
generated by a locally integrable function as in (7.1), we often write it as u(x)
even though it is not a pointwise function of x; and we write its action on ϕ
symbolically in the integral form (7.1), even though the integral is not defined.
Thus, for example, we write δξ(x) or δ(x − ξ) for the delta distribution, and we
define its action (7.2) symbolically as
The multiplication of a distribution 
 function a is
defined by 
; moreover, the partial derivative of a
distribution u is defined by

Second-order derivatives are defined by
All of these definitions for general distributions are motivated, as in the one-
dimensional case, by the action of locally integrable functions. Higher-order
distributional derivatives can be defined as well. Thus it makes sense to regard a
linear, second-order partial differential operator L with C∞-coefficients as a
distribution in D’(Ω). If f is a distribution, then the differential equation
(7.3) 
can be regarded as an equation in distributions, and any distribution u that
satisfies (7.3) is called a distribution solution. Thus, u is a distribution solution
to (7.3) if, and only if,
(7.4) 
In particular, if f = δ(x − ξ) is the delta distribution, then u is called a
fundamental solution associated with the operator L. The formal adjoint
operator associated with L is denoted by L* and is defined by the relation
(7.5) 
Therefore, u is a distribution solution of (7.3) if, and only if,
(7.6) 
and u is a fundamental solution (with pole at ξ) associated with the operator L if,
and only if,
If u and f are locally integrable functions on Ω that satisfy (7.5), then we say u is
a weak solution to (7.3). Thus, u is a weak solution to (7.3) if, and only if,
A solution to (7.3) that is twice continuously differentiable (we are restricting the
discussion to second-order PDEs) on Ω, is called a classical, or genuine,
solution.
So, there are three levels of solutions: classical, weak, and distribution.
Classical solutions are functions that have sufficiently many derivatives and
satisfy the PDE (7.3) pointwise on the domain of interest. Weak solutions of

(7.3), where f is locally integrable, are locally integrable functions that satisfy
(7.5). Distribution solutions of (7.3) may not be functions or even generated by
functions. Classical solutions are weak solutions, and weak solutions are
distribution solutions, but the converses are not true.
Example 6.44
Show that the function
(7.7) 
is a distributional solution of the equation
where Δ = ∂2/∂x2 + ∂2/∂y2 is the two-dimensional Laplacian, and δ(x, y) is the
Dirac distribution with pole at (0, 0). Thus we have to show that 
. To this end, using polar
coordinates, we have
The integral of the last term is zero by the θ periodicity of ϕ and its θ derivatives.
So we need to calculate the other two terms. Integrating by parts gives
and integrating by parts twice gives
Putting these results together gives

Therefore, the function defined by (7.7), which is called the logarithmic
potential, is a fundamental solution associated with the two-dimensional
Laplacian. Note that it is not correct to say (7.7) is a genuine solution or a weak
solution to Laplace’s equation Δu = 0 in 
2. Observe that the Laplacian operator
is invariant under a translation of coordinates, and so a fundamental solution
associated with the Laplacian with pole at (ξ, η) is
(7.8) 
Example 6.45
A fundamental solution associated with the Laplacian in 
3 is the function g(x, y,
z) = 1/4πr, where 
. This means Δg = δ(x, y, z) in the sense
of distributions. Again, the distribution g can be translated to any point (ξ η ζ) to
obtain a fundamental solution with pole (ξ, η, ζ). In three dimensions g is called
the Newtonian potential. We remark that the fundamental solutions associated
with the Laplacian are radial solutions in that they depend only on the distance
from the pole.
The Green’s function associated with a partial differential operator, such as the
Laplacian, is a fundamental solution that also satisfies the homogeneous
boundary conditions. As such, the Green’s function is the equilibrium response
of the physical system under investigation caused by a unit point source.
Mathematically, the Green’s function is the kernel of the integral operator that
represents the inverse of the partial differential operator. There is no single,
universal method to construct Green’s function. On finite domains one may use
separation of variables, and on infinite domains one may try transform methods.
Often geometric or physical arguments are helpful.
Example 6.46

Find the Green’s function associated with the Laplacian operator on the two-
dimensional domain −∞ < x < ∞, y > 0 with a Dirichlet boundary condition on y
= 0. This means that we seek a distributional solution G = G(x, y; ξ, η) to the
problem
(7.9) 
(7.10) 
Physically, G could represent the potential in the half-plane y > 0 of an static
electric field generated by a unit point positive charge at (ξ, η), with the
condition that the potential vanish along y = 0. We shall construct the Green’s
function G by the so-called method of images, or reflection principle. We know
that the fundamental solution g from equation (7.8) in Example 6.44 satisfies the
equation Δg = δ(x, y; ξ, η) for a positive charge at (ξ, η), but it does not satisfy
the boundary condition. To compensate we locate an “image” charge of opposite
sign at (ξ, -η), the reflection of the point (ξ, η) through the y axis. The potential
due to that charge would be 
. Now take 
, or
(7.11) 
Clearly G satisfies the homogeneous boundary condition (7.10). Moreover, 
 in the upper half-plane y
> 0. Here we used the fact that 
 = 0 in the upper half-plane; its pole is in the
lower half-plane, and everywhere but at its pole it satisfies Laplace’s equation.
Knowing Green’s function allows us to solve the nonhomogeneous problem
(7.12) 
(7.13) 
The Green’s function G given by (7.11) is the response of the system for a unit
point source (say a unit charge) at (ξ, η). Therefore, to find the response to a
problem with a continuum of sources (a charge density) of magnitude ρ we can
superimpose all the point source responses over all ξ and η to obtain
(7.14) 
One can show that (7.14) is the solution to (7.12)–(7.13) under reasonable
conditions on ρ (see, e.g., McOwen (2003)).

6.7.2 Fourier Transforms of
Distributions
In problems involving point sources we are faced with a Dirac distribution in the
partial differential equation. If we want transform methods to apply, then we
must make sense of the transform of a distribution. A formal calculation gives
the correct answer. For example, consider taking the Fourier transform of the
delta distribution δ(x − a) with pole at x = a; we have
Thus
Many readers will be satisfied with this formal calculation. However, to take
some of the mystery out of it we give a cursory explanation of its underpinnings.
Suppose u is a distribution in D’( ) that is generated by a locally integrable
function u, and assume that the Fourier transform  is also locally integrable.
(Here we are using the convention of denoting a function and its associated
distribution by the same symbol.) Then, for any ϕ ε D( ) we have
This seems correct, but it would require that both (ϕ and its Fourier transform 
to be test functions in D( ). If both are test functions, then one can prove that ϕ
must be identically zero. Therefore we cannot define 
 on the set of test
functions D( ). The way out of this problem is to consider distributions on a
larger class of test functions, namely the Schwartz class 
; Schwartz class
functions contain the C∞ functions with compact support. A tempered
distribution is a continuous linear functional on . With this approach, it is
possible to define the Fourier transform of a tempered distribution u to be the
tempered distribution,  whose action on  is given by

Example 6.47
(Delta distribution) Thus, for example, the Fourier transform of the Dirac
distribution is defined by
Therefore,
for all ϕ  . We conclude that, in the sense of tempered distributions,
In particular, if a = 0, then we have
Example 6.48
In this example we use the definition of the transform and the result on
transforms of derivatives, 
, to show
We let the notation work for us.

6.7.3 Diffusion Problems
Now let us consider problems involving time. We examine the heat operator in
one spatial dimension and time defined by
Based on our discussion of elliptic problems, we say that u is a fundamental
solution associated with L if u is a distributional solution of
(7.15) 
where the right side is interpreted as a unit heat source applied at x = ξ and at the
instant of time t = τ. Here, the domain Ω is a space–time domain consisting of
coordinates (x, t) ε 
2. To find the fundamental solution we take the source to be
at ξ = 0 and τ = 0. We can then examine the initial value problem
(7.16) 
(7.17) 
(If we want to think about this carefully, we can regard (7.16) as a one-parameter
family of equations for u(·, t) in D’( ) for each value of the parameter t > 0, and
(7.17) as an equation in D’( )). Now let us solve (7.16)–(7.17) using Fourier
transforms, assuming that the distributions are tempered. Taking the transform of
(7.16) gives, using ζ for the transform variable,
Solving this ordinary differential equation for  yields
where c(ζ) is arbitrary. The Fourier transform of the initial condition (7.17) gives
(ζ, 0) = 1, and therefore c(ζ) = 1. Consequently
So the Fourier transform of the solution is a Gaussian function. We know that the
inverse transform is also a Gaussian and is in fact given by
This is the solution to the initial value problem (7.16)–(7.17). Finally, translating
the source to x = ζ, t = τ and multiplying by a Heaviside function to turn on the
solution at t = τ, we obtain

(7.18) 
which is the fundamental solution associated with the heat operator. One can
verify that (7.18) is a distributional solution to (7.15).
To understand the fundamental solution of the heat equation, let us fix τ = 0
and consider
(7.19) 
We observe that
Therefore, for large times the fundamental solution goes to zero for all x. As t →
0+, however, the solution develops an infinite spike at x = ξ while tending to zero
for x ≠ ξ. So, physically, we interpret the fundamental solution K(x − ξ, t) as the
temperature distribution in an infinite bar initially at zero degrees with an
instantaneous unit heat source applied at x = ξ and t = 0. It is a unit heat source
because, as one can check,
That is, the area under the temperature profile curve, which is proportional to the
energy, is unity. Stated differently, the function K(x − ξ, t) is the temperature
effect at (x, t) caused by a unit heat source applied initially at x = ξ. Figure 6.7
shows time snapshots of the function K for different values of t. The
fundamental solution (7.19) associated with the heat operator is useful in
constructing solutions to a variety of initial boundary value problems involving
the heat equation.
Figure 6.7 Temperature profiles for different times t caused by a unit energy
source at x = ξ = 0 and t = 0.

Example 6.49
Consider the pure initial value problem for the heat equation
(7.20) 
By our previous discussion K(x − ξ, t) is the heat response of the system when a
unit point source is applied at x = ξ and τ = 0. Thus, to solve (7.20) we
superimpose these solutions for point sources of magnitude f(ξ) for all ξ  
.
Therefore the solution to (7.20) is
Example 6.50
Consider the nonhomogeneous problem
(7.21) 
The solution for a point source at (ξ, τ) is K(x − ξ, t − τ). To find the solution for
distributed sources F(x, t) we superimpose to obtain

which is the solution to (7.21).
EXERCISES
1. Is the function ex2 locally integrable on ? Does it generate a distribution
in D’( )? Does it generate a tempered distribution?
2. Show that for any locally integrable function f on  the function u(x, y) =
f(x − y) is a weak solution to the equation ux + uy = 0 on 
2.
3. In the quarter plane in 
2 find the Green’s function associated with the
boundary value problem
(Hint: Put image charges in the other quadrants.)
4. In the upper half plane in 
2, use an image charge find Green’s function
for the Neumann problem
5. At t = 0 and at a point in a homogeneous medium an amount of heat
energy E is released and allowed to diffuse outward. Deduce that the
temperature u(r, t) at time t and distance r from the release point satisfies the
initial boundary value problem
where k is the diffusivity of the medium and c is its heat capacity. Use

dimensional analysis and the Pi theorem to show that
for some function U. Determine U to conclude that
6. Using the definition of Fourier transform, verify that 
(1) = 2πδ0.
7. In 
2 consider the operator
Find the adjoint operator L*.

REFERENCES AND NOTES
There is a large number of excellent elementary textbooks introducing partial
differential equations, too numerous to mention. The list below is a small
selection that this author often finds useful. Strauss (1991), Farlow (1993), and
Logan (2004) give entry-level introductions. Strauss’ text, as well as Zauderer
(1989), have thorough treatments of eigenvalue problems. At the next level,
Evans (1998) and McOwen (2003) give excellent introductions to the theory.
Texts that contain biological applications are Britton (2003), Edelstein-Keshet
(1988), Grindrod (1991), and Kot (2001). Nonlinear equations are discussed in
Logan (2008), which is an elementary treatment, and in the classic treatise by
Whitham (1974), which emphasizes hyperbolic problems. Excellent, elementary
treatments of Fourier transforms and distributions can be found in Strichartz
(1994). Both Keener (2000) and Stakgold (1998) are advanced texts on applied
mathematics that contain theoretical treatments of Green’s functions and
eigenvalue problems.
Britton, N. 2003. Essential Mathematical Biology, Springer-Verlag, New York.
Edelstein-Keshet, L. 1988. Mathematical Models in Biology, reprinted by Soc.
Industr. Appl. Math., Philadelphia.
Evans, L. 1998. Partial Differential Equations, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence.
Farlow, S. 1993. Partial Differential Equations for Scientists and Engineers,
Dover Publications, New York.
Grindrod, P. 1991. Patterns and Waves, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Keener, J. 2000. Principles of Applied Mathematics (revised edition), West-view
Press (Perseus Book Group), Cambridge, MA.
Kot, M. 2001. Elements of Mathematical Ecology, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Logan, J. D. 2008. An Introduction to Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations,
Wiley-Interscience, New York.
Logan, J. D. 2004. Applied Partial Differential Equations, 2nd ed., Springer-
Verlag, New York.
McOwen, R. C. 2003. Partial Differential Equations, 2nd ed., Pearson
Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ.

Stakgold, I. 1998. Green’s Functions and Boundary Value Problems, 2nd ed.,
Wiley-Interscience, New York.
Strauss, W. 1991. Partial Differential Equations, John Wiley and Sons, New
York.
Strichartz, R. 1994. A Guide to Distribution Theory and Fourier Transforms,
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Whitham, G. B. 1974. Linear and Nonlinear Waves, Wiley-Interscience, New
York.
Zauderer, E. 1989. Partial Differential Equations of Applied Mathematics, 2nd
ed., Wiley-Interscience, New York.
1 R. A. Fisher (1890–1962), who made significant contributions to statistics
and to evolutionary biology and genetics, formulated the equation in 1937 as a
model for the spread of an advantageous gene throughout a population.
2 Jacques Hadamard (1865–1963) was a French mathematician who
contributed to analysis, number theory, and partial differential equations.
3 S. Poisson (1781–1840), a French mathematician and scientist, made great
contributions to physics, mathematics, and probability. He ranks as one of the
most prolific and gifted scientists of all time.
4 For example, take u to be of exponential order i.e., |u(t)| ≤ c exp(at) for t
sufficiently large, where a, c > 0.
5 A. Turing was a British mathematician who was instrumental in breaking the
German codes during World War II.

Chapter 7
Wave Phenomena
Two of the fundamental processes in nature are diffusion and wave propagation.
In the last chapter we studied the equation of heat conduction, a parabolic partial
differential equation that is the prototype of equations governing linear diffusion
processes. In the present chapter we investigate wave phenomena and obtain
equations that govern the propagation of waves first in simple model settings.
The evolution equations governing such phenomena are hyperbolic and are
fundamentally different from their parabolic counterparts in diffusion and from
elliptic equations that govern equilibrium states.

7.1 Waves
A wave is defined as an identifiable signal or disturbance in a medium that is
propagated in time, carrying energy with it. A few familiar examples are
electromagnetic waves, waves on the surface of water, sound waves, and stress
waves in solids, as occur in earthquakes. Material or matter is not necessarily
convected with the wave; it is the disturbance, which carries energy, that is
propagated. In this section we investigate several model equations that occur in
wave phenomena and point out basic features that are encountered in the study
of the propagation of waves.
One simple mathematical model of a wave is the function
(1.1) 
which represents an undistorted right-traveling wave moving at constant
velocity c. The coordinate x represents position, t time, and u the strength of the
disturbance. At t = 0 the wave profile is u = f(x) and at t > 0 units of time the
disturbance has moved to the right ct units of length (see Fig. 7.1). Of particular
importance is that the wave profile described by (1.1) moves without distortion.
Not all waves have this property; it is characteristic of linear waves, or wave
profiles that are solutions to linear partial differential equations. On the other
hand, waves that distort, and possibly break, are characteristic of nonlinear
processes. To find a model that has (1.1) as the solution we compute ut and ux to
get
Figure 7.1 Right–traveling wave moving at speed c.

Hence
(1.2) 
Equation (1.2) is a first-order linear partial differential equation that, in the sense
just described, is the simplest wave equation. It is called the advection equation
and its general solution is (1.1), where f is an arbitrary differentiable function. As
we noted in Section 6.2, the advection equation describes how a quantity is
carried along with the bulk motion of a medium. Similarly, a traveling wave of
the form u = f(x + ct) is a left–traveling wave and is a solution of the partial
differential equation ut − cux − 0.
Other waves of interest in many physical problems are periodic, or sinusoidal
waves. These traveling waves are represented by expressions of the form
(1.3) 
(see Fig. 7.2). The positive number A is the amplitude, k is the wave number
(the number of oscillations in 2π units of space, observed at a fixed time), and ω
the angular frequency (the number of oscillations in 2π units of time, observed
at a fixed location x). The number λ = 2π/k is the wavelength and P = 2π/ω is
the time period. The wavelength measures the distance between successive
crests and the time period is the smallest time for an observer located at a fixed
position x to see a repeat pattern. If we write (1.3) as
Figure 7.2 Plane wave.

then we note that (1.3) represents a traveling wave moving to the right with
velocity c = ω/k. This number is called the phase velocity, and it is the speed
one would have to move to remain at the same point on the traveling wave. For
calculations, the complex exponential form
(1.4) 
is often used rather than (1.3). These waves are called plane waves.
Computations involving differentiations are easier with (1.4) and afterward,
making use of Euler’s formula exp(iθ) = cos θ + i sin θ, the real or imaginary
part may be taken to recover real solutions. Again, waves of the type (1.3) [or
(1.4)] are characteristic of linear processes and linear equations.
Not every wave propagates so that its profile remains unchanged or
undistorted; a surface wave on the ocean is an obvious example. Less familiar
perhaps, but just as common, are strong stress or pressure waves that propagate
in solids or gases. To fix the idea and to indicate how nonlinearity affects the
shape of a wave, let us consider a strong pressure wave propagating in air,
caused, for example, by an explosion. (This is not the case of acoustics, where
sound waves propagate at relatively small pressure changes.) The distortion of a
wave profile results from the property of most materials to transmit signals at a
speed that increases with increasing pressure. Therefore a strong pressure wave
that is propagating in a medium will gradually distort and steepen until it
propagates as an idealized discontinuous disturbance, or shock wave. This is
what also occurs in sonic booms. Figure 7.3 shows various snapshots of a stress
wave propagating into a material. The wave steepens as time increases because
signals or disturbances travel faster when the pressure is higher. Thus the point A
moves to the right faster than the point B. The shock that forms in pressure is
accompanied by discontinuous jumps in the other parameters, such as density,
particle velocity, temperature, energy, and entropy.
Figure 7.3 Distortion of a wave into a shock.

Physically, a shock wave is not a strict discontinuity but rather an extremely
thin region where the change in the state is steep. The width of the shock is
small, usually of the order of a few mean free paths, or average distance to a
collision, of the molecules. In a shock there are two competing effects that cause
this thinness, the nonlinearity of the material that is causing the shock to form,
and the dissipative effects (e.g., viscosity) that are tending to smear the wave out.
Usually these two effects just cancel and the front assumes a shape that does not
change in time. The same mechanism that causes pressure waves to steepen into
shocks, that is, an increase in signal transmission speed at higher pressures,
causes release waves or rarefaction waves to form that lower the pressure.
Figure 7.4 shows a spreading rarefaction. Again, point A at higher pressure
moves to the right faster than point B, thereby flattening the wave. So far we
have mentioned two types of waves, those that propagate undistorted at constant
velocity and those that distort because the speed of propagation depends on the
amplitude of the wave. There is a third interesting phenomenon that is also
relevant, namely that of dispersion. In this case the speed of propagation
depends on the wavelength of the particular wave. So, for example, longer
waves can travel faster than shorter ones. Thus an observer of a wave at fixed
location x0 may see a different temporal wave pattern from another observer at
fixed location x1. Dispersive wave propagation arises from both linear and
nonlinear models.
Figure 7.4 A rarefaction wave.

The behavior of linear partial differential equations with constant coefficients
can be characterized by the plane wave solutions they admit. When we substitute
a plane wave form (1.4) into such an equation, we obtain a relation between the
frequency and the wave number,
This equation is called the dispersion relation. We say the equation is diffusive
if ω(k) is complex, and dispersive if ω(k) is real and ω(k)/k is independent of k;
if ω(k) is real and ω(k)/k depends on k, then we say the equation is hyperbolic.
Example 7.1
The reader should check that the advection–diffusion equation ut + γux = Duxx
has complex dispersion relation ω = γk − iDk2. Therefore the advection-diffusion
equation is diffusive. Plane wave solutions are given by
The factor exp(ik(x − γt)) represents a periodic, right-traveling wave with wave
number k, and the factor exp(−Dk2t) represents a decaying amplitude.
Qualitatively, two conclusions can be drawn:
(i) For waves of constant wavelength (k constant) the attenuation of the
wave increases with increasing D; hence D is a measurement of diffusion.
(ii) For constant γ the attenuation increases as k increases; hence smaller
wavelengths attenuate faster than longer wavelengths.
From this example the reader should note that the diffusion equation (γ = 0)
has plane wave solutions 
, which are not traveling waves,
but stationary waves that decay.

Example 7.2
Consider the partial differential equation
which arises in studying the transverse vibrations of a beam. Substituting (1.4)
into this equation gives the dispersion relation
which is real, and ω(k)/k is not constant. Hence the beam equation is dispersive
and the phase velocity is ±√γk, which depends on the wave number. Therefore
shorter wavelength vibrations travel faster.
Generally, in the dispersive case the plane wave solution takes the form of a
right-traveling wave,
The wave speed ω(k)/k, or phase velocity, is dependent upon the wave number k.
Therefore, wave packets of different wavelength will propagate at different
speeds, causing a signal to disperse. Common examples of dispersive waves are
water waves, vibrations in solids, and electromagnetic waves in dielectrics.
We may think of plane wave solutions of the form ei(kx-ω(k)t) as being a one-
parameter family of solutions, with k  . If we superimpose them over all wave
numbers, we obtain
Under reasonable conditions we expect this to be a solution of the differential
equation under investigation. If
is an initial condition, then
which is the Fourier transform of the unknown coefficient function a(k).
Therefore
and we have obtained a formal solution to a Cauchy problem for the partial
differential equation having the form

So, again, Fourier analysis is at the heart of the problem. In principle, this
integral could be calculated to find the solution.

7.1.1 The Advection Equation
We showed that the simplest wave equation, the advection equation,
(1.5) 
has general solution
(1.6) 
which is a right-traveling wave propagating at constant velocity c, where f is an
arbitrary function. If we impose the initial condition
(1.7) 
then it follows that f(x) = ϕ(x), and so the solution to the initial value problem
(1.5) and (1.7) is
(1.8) 
The straight lines x − ct = constant, which are called characteristic curves (or,
characteristics), play a special role in this problem. We interpret characteristics
as lines in space-time along which signals are carried (see Fig. 7.5), here the
signal being a constant value of the initial data. Furthermore, on these
characteristics, the partial differential equation (1.5) reduces to the ordinary
differential equation du/dt = 0. That is to say, if C is a typical characteristic x = ct
+ k for some constant k, then the directional derivative of u along that curve is
Figure 7.5 The solution surface to ut + cux = 0, c > 0, and the characteristic
curves in the xt-plane. The solution is constant on a characteristic curve and the
curve carries that constant value at t = 0 into t > 0.

which is the left side of (1.5) evaluated along C. Notice that the family of
characteristic curves x − ct = k propagates at speed c, which is the reciprocal of
their slope in the xt coordinate system.
Now let us complicate the partial differential equation (1.5) by replacing the
constant c by a function of the independent variables t and x and consider the
initial value problem
(1.9) 
where c(x, t) is a given function. Let C be the family of curves defined by the
differential equation
(1.10) 
Then along a member of C
Hence u is constant on each member of C. The curves C defined by (1.10) are
the characteristic curves. Notice that they propagate at a speed c(x, t), which
depends on both time and the position in the medium.
Example 7.3
Consider the initial value problem
The characteristic curves are defined as solutions of the differential equation
dx/dt = 2t. We obtain the family of parabolas
where k is a constant. Because u is constant on these characteristic curves, we
can easily find a solution to the initial value problem. Let (x, t) be an arbitrary
point where we want to obtain the solution. The characteristic curve through (x,
t) passes through the x axis at (ξ, 0), and it has equation x = t2 + ξ (see Fig. 7.6).
Since u is constant on this curve

Figure 7.6 Characteristic x = t2 + ξ.
which is the unique solution to the initial value problem. The speed of the signal
at (x, t) is 2t, which is dependent upon t. The wave speeds up as time increases,
but it retains its initial shape.
The preceding equation is defined on an infinite spatial domain −∞ < x < ∞.
Now, suppose there are boundaries in the problem. To illustrate the basic points
it is sufficient to study the simple advection equation
with c > 0. Assume an initial condition
On the unbounded interval (−∞, ∞) the solution is a unidirectional right-
traveling wave u = f(x − ct). On a bounded interval what kinds of boundary
conditions can be imposed at x = 0 and x − 1? See Fig. 7.7. Because u is given by
the initial condition f(x) along the initial line t = 0, 0 < x < 1, data cannot be
prescribed arbitrarily on the segment A along the boundary x = 1. This is because
the characteristics x − ct = constant are moving to the right and they carry the
initial data to the segment A. Boundary data can be imposed along the line x = 0,
since that data is carried along the forward-going characteristics to the segment
B along x = 1. Then boundary conditions along B cannot be prescribed
arbitrarily. Thus, it is clear that the problem
Figure 7.7 Characteristic diagram.

is properly posed. There are no backward-going characteristics in this problem,
so there are no left-traveling waves. Thus waves are not reflected from the
boundary x = 1. To find the solution to this initial boundary value problem we
must separate the domain into two portions, 0 < x < ct and x > ct. The solution in
x > ct is determined by the initial data, whereas the solution in 0 < x < ct is
determined by the boundary data. These two regions are separated by the
characteristic x = ct; we refer to the region x > ct as the region of spacetime
ahead of this limiting characteristic, and the region 0 < x < ct as the region
behind the limiting characteristic.
In summary, care must be taken to properly formulate and solve boundary
value problems for one-dimensional, unidirectional wave equations. The
situation is much different for second-order hyperbolic partial differential
equations like utt − c2uxx = 0. In this case both forward- and backward-going
characteristics exist, and so left-traveling waves are also possible, as well as a
mechanism for reflections from boundaries. This seems plausible because we
can factor the differential operator into a product of two advection-like
operators, 
 one right-moving and one
left-moving.
Example 7.4
(Characteristic coordinates) This example presents an alternate method for
solving advection equations

Actually, it is the same thing as before, but with a different interpretation and
strategy. When we find the characteristic curves ξ(x, t) = ξ = const. by solving
the characteristic equation dx/dt = c(x, t), we can define a transformation of
spacetime (x, t) → (ξ, τ) by
The ξ, τ are called characteristic coordinates, and they are coordinates that ride
with the wave, or moving coordinates. If we transform u to U via U(ξ, τ) = u(x,
t), then the chain rule gives
The PDE becomes, upon substitution,
But, 
differentiating 
ξ(x, 
t) 
= 
const. 
with 
respect 
to 
t 
gives 
 = 0. So the PDE reduces to simply Uτ = 0,
independent of ξ. This is plausible because ‘ξ is riding on the wave.’ Hence, U(ξ,
τ) = F(ξ), where F is an arbitrary function. This means u(x, t) = F(ξ(x, t) is the
general solution to the original problem. The basic idea is that under a change to
characteristic coordinates the advection operator transforms to
Example 7.5
Use the method of the last example to solve a problem with a source,
The characteristics are x − t2 = const., so the characteristic coordinates are 
. Then U(ξ, τ) satisfies Uτ = −3U, which gives
Then the general solution is
Example 7.6
(Linear systems) We can treat linear systems of advection equations in a similar
fashion as linear systems of ordinary differential equations. Let u(x, t) = [u1(x, t),
…, un(x, t)]T be a vector of n unknowns and consider the system of n equations

where A is a real n × n matrix with real, distinct eigenvalues. Then, A is
diagonalizable, meaning there is an invertible matrix P such that P−1 AP = D,
where D is a diagonal matrix with the eigenvalues on the diagonal; the columns
of P are the eigenvectors. Note that the system is coupled, with each equation
containing possibly all the uk(x, t). If we introduce a new dependent variable v
defined by
then the system becomes
Thus,
Therefore the transformation to a new variable v decoupled the system. The kth
equation in this system is
which has general solution vk(x, t) = ϕk(x − λkt), a traveling wave moving at
speed λk of the kth eigenvalue. Here, v is an arbitrary function. The solution to
the original system is then u = P−1v. Initial conditions determine the arbitrary
functions v. We leave examples for the Exercises.
EXERCISES
1. For the following equations find the dispersion relation and phase
velocity. Classify as diffusive, dispersive, or hyperbolic.
a) ut + cux + kuxxx = 0.
b) utt − c2uxx = 0.
c) utt + uxx = 0. (Note that this is an elliptic equation.)
2. Verify that the equation ut+c(x, t)ux = 0 has a solution u(x, t) = f(a(x, t)) for
an arbitrary differentiable function f, where a(x, t) = constant are the integral
curves of dx/dt = c(x, t).
3. Solve the following initial value problems on t > 0, x  
. Sketch the
characteristic curves and several time snapshots of the wave in each case.
a) ut + 3ux = 0, u(x, 0) = 
.

b) ut + xux = 0, u(x, 0) = exp(−x).
c) ut − x2tux = 0, u(x, 0) = x + 1.
4. On the domain 0 < x < 1, t > 0, consider the problem
with c > 0. Find a formula for the solution, and sketch a graph of u(1, t) for t
> 0 when c = 2.
5. Solve the boundary value problem
in the region x > 0, t > 0, x < t2.
6. Solve the Cauchy problem
7. Solve the Cauchy problem
where the data is given along t = 1.
8. Sometimes data is given along a curve in the xt plane. Solve the problem
9. Find the solution and sketch a characteristic diagram
10. Solve the linear system
subject to the initial conditions u1(x, 0) = f(x), u2(x, 0) = g(x), in the region x 
 , t > 0.
11. Consider the the linearized Korteweg–de Vries equation
a) Find the dispersion relation and determine how the phase velocity

depends on the wave number.
b) By superimposing the plane wave solutions, find an integral
representation for the solution to the Cauchy problem on 
. Write your
answer in terms of the Airy function
c) Take the initial condition to be f(x) = e−x2 and use a computer algebra
system to plot solution profiles when t = 0.5 and t = 1.

7.2 Nonlinear Waves
7.2.1 Nonlinear Advection
In the last section we examined the two simple model wave equations, ut+cux =
0 and ut + c(x, t)ux = 0, that are both first-order and linear. Now we study the
same type of equation when a nonlinear advection term is introduced. The
resulting equation is often called the kinematic wave equation. In particular we
consider
(2.1) 
(2.2) 
where c’(u) > 0, with initial condition Using the guidance of the earlier examples
we define the characteristic curves by the differential equation
(2.3) 
Then along a particular characteristic curve x = x(t) we have
Therefore u is constant along the characteristics, and the characteristics are
straight lines since
In the nonlinear case, however, the speed of the characteristics as defined by
(2.3) depends on the value u of the solution at a given point. To find the equation
of the characteristic C through (x, t) we note that its speed is
(see Fig. 7.8). This results from applying (2.3) at (ξ, 0). Hence, after integrating,
Figure 7.8 A characteristic diagram showing characteristics, or signals, moving
at different speeds; each characteristic carries a constant value of u.

(2.4) 
gives the equation of the desired characteristic C. Equation (2.4) defines ξ = ξ(x,
t) implicitly as a function of x and t, and the solution u(x, t) of the initial value
problem (2.1) and (2.2) is given by
(2.5) 
where ξ is defined by (2.4).
In summary, for the nonlinear equation (2.1):
1. Every characteristic is a straight line.
2. The solution is constant on each such line.
3. The speed of each charactistic is equal to the value of u(x, t) on it.
4. The speed c(u) is the speed that signals, or waves, are propagated in the
system.
Example 7.7
Consider the initial value problem
The initial curve is sketched in Fig. 7.9. Since c(u) = u the characteristics are
straight lines emanating from (ξ, 0) with speed c(ϕ(ξ)) = ϕ(ξ). These are plotted
in Fig. 7.10. For x < 0 the lines have speed 2; for x > 1 the lines have speed 1; for
0 ≤ x ≤ 1 the lines have speed 2 − x and these all intersect at (2, 1). Immediately
one observes that a solution cannot exist for t > 1, since the characteristics cross

beyond that time and they carry different constant values of u. Figure 7.11 shows
several wave profiles that indicate the steepening that is occurring. At t = 1
breaking of the wave occurs, which is the first instant when the solution becomes
multiple valued. To find the solution for t < 1 we first note that u(x, t) = 2 for x <
2t and u(x, t) = 1 for x > t + 1. For 2t < x < t + 1 equation (2.4) becomes
Figure 7.9 Initial wave profile.
Figure 7.10 Characteristic diagram showing colliding characteristics.
Figure 7.11 Solution surface with time profiles.

which gives
Equation (2.5) then yields
This explicit form of the solution also indicates the difficulty at the breaking
time t = 1.
In general the initial value problem (2.1)–(2.2) may have a solution only up to
a finite time tb, which is called the breaking time. Let us assume in addition to
c’(u) > 0 that the initial wave profile satisfies the conditions
At the time when breaking occurs the gradient ux will become infinite. To
compute ux we differentiate (2.4) implicitly with respect to x to obtain
Then from (2.5)
The gradient catastrophe will occur at the minimum value of t, which makes the
denominator zero. Hence

In Example 7.7 we have c(u) = u and ϕ(ξ) = 2 − ξ. Hence ϕ’(ξ)c’(ϕ(ξ)) = (−1)(1)
= −1 and tb = 1 is the time when breaking occurs.
In summary we have observed that the nonlinear partial differential equation
propagates the initial wave profile at a speed c(u), which depends on the value of
the solution u at a given point. Since c’(u) > 0, large values of u are propagated
faster than small values and distortion of the wave profile occurs. This is
consistent with our earlier remarks of a physical nature, namely that wave
distortion and shocks develop in materials because of the property of the
medium to transmit signals more rapidly at higher levels of stress or pressure.
Mathematically, distortion and the development of shocks or discontinuous
solutions are distinctively nonlinear phenomena caused by the term c(u)ux in the
last equation.
Example 7.8
(Implicit solution) We have shown that when the advection speed is constant,
that is, we have
the general solution is given explicitly by u = F(x − ct), where F is arbitrary.
Could such a simple form of the solution occur for the nonlinear equation
The answer is yes, and an implicit, general solution to this equation is easily
shown to be
when it exists. (Use the chain rule and substitute into the equation.) The function
F is determined, for example, by an initial condition. For example, consider PDE
The general solution is given implicitly by u = F(x − u2t), which is easily
verified. If u(x, 0) = x, then F(x) = x and u = x − u2t. Solving for u gives

where we have taken the positive square root to meet the initial condition. The
solution is valid for t < −1/4x. (See Exercise 5.)
Example 7.9
(Traffic flow) Everyone who drives has experienced traffic issues, such as jams,
poorly timed traffic lights, high road density, etc. In this abbreviated example we
suggest how some of these issues can be understood with a simple model. Traffic
moving in a single direction x with car density ρ(x, t), given in cars per
kilometer, can be modeled by a conservation law
where v = v(x, t) is the local car speed (kilometers per hour), and ρv is the the
flux, in cars per hour. Importantly, we are making a continuum assumption about
cars, surely a questionable one. As always, we need a constitutive assumption to
close the system. By experience, the speed of traffic surely depends on traffic
density, or, v = F(ρ). The simplest model is to assume that the flux ρv is zero
when ρ is zero, and is jammed (no flux) when the density is some maximum
value ρJ. Therefore, we take
where vM is the maximum velocity of cars. Note that this flux curve is a
parabola, concave down. The conservation law can then be written, after
rescaling,
This equation has the same form as the kinematic wave equation and can be
expanded to
so c(u) = vM(1 − 2u) is the speed that traffic waves move in the system. It is
different from the speed of cars! Because c’(u) < 0, signals are propagated
backward into the traffic flow.

EXERCISES
1. Consider the Cauchy problem
Find the characteristics, and find a formula that determines the solution u =
u(x, t) implicitly as a function of x and t. Does a smooth solution exist for all
t > 0?
2. Consider the initial value problem
Sketch the characteristic diagram. At what time tb does the wave break? Find
a formula for the solution.
3. Consider the initial value problem
Sketch the characteristic diagram and find the point (xb, tb) in space-time
where the wave breaks.
4. Consider the Cauchy problem
Show that if the functions c(u) and f(x) are both nonincreasing or both
nondecreasing, then no shocks develop for t ≥ 0.
5. Consider the problem
Derive the solution
When do shocks develop? Verify that limt→0+ u(x, t) = x.

6. Consider the signaling problem
where c and g are given functions and u0 is a positive constant. If c’(u) > 0,
under what conditions on the signal g will no shocks form? Determine the
solution in this case in the domain x > 0, t > 0.
7. In the traffic flow model in Example 7.9, explain what occurs if the initial
car density has each of the following shapes: (a) a density bump in the traffic
having the shape of a bell-shaped curve; (b) a density dip in the traffic
having the shape of an inverted bell-shaped curve; (c) a density that is
jammed for x < 0, with no cars ahead for x > 0 (a stop light); (d) a density
that is shaped like a curve π/2 + arctan x where the traffic ahead has
increasing density.
In each case, sketch a qualitative characteristic diagram and sketch several
density profiles. On the characteristic diagram sketch a sample car path.
8. The height h = h(x, t) of a flood wave can be modeled by
where v, the average stream velocity, is v = a√h, a > 0 (Chezy’s law). Show
that flood waves propagate 1.5 times faster than the average stream velocity.

7.2.2 Traveling Wave Solutions
One approach to analysis of partial differential equations is to examine model
equations to gain a sense of the role played by various terms in the equation and
how those terms relate to fundamental physical processes. In the preceding
paragraphs we observed that the advection equation
(2.6) 
propagates an initial disturbance or signal at velocity c, while maintaining the
precise form of the signal. On the other hand, the nonlinear equation
(2.7) 
propagates signals that distort the signal profile; that is, the nonlinear advection
term uux causes a shocking up or rarefaction effect. We know from Chapter 6
that the diffusion equation
(2.8) 
which contains a diffusion term Duxx, causes spreading of a density profile.
Insights can be gained about the nature of the various terms in an evolution
equation by attempting to find either traveling wave solutions
(2.9) 
or plane wave solutions
(2.10) 
The latter is applicable to linear equations with constant coefficients, whereas
traveling wave may be characteristic of linear or nonlinear processes.
In general, traveling wave solutions have no conditions at the boundaries
(plus or minus infinity). However, there are often boundary conditions. Traveling
wave solutions that approach constant states at ±∞ are called wave front
solutions. They correspond to a traveling wave moving into and from a constant
state. If these two states are equal, then we say the wave front is a pulse.
Example 7.10
(Burgers’ equation) Consider the nonlinear equation
(2.11) 
which is known as Burgers’ equation. The term uux will have a shocking up
effect that will cause waves to break, and the term Duxx is a diffusion term, like

the one occurring in the diffusion equation (2.8). We attempt to find a traveling
wave solution of (2.11) of the form
(2.12) 
where the wave profile U and the wave speed c are to be determined.
Substituting (2.12) into (2.11) gives
where
We interpret s as a moving coordinate. Noting that 
 and
performing an integration gives
where B is a constant of integration. Hence
(2.13) 
where
We assume c2 > −2B, and so f2 > f1. Separating variables in (2.13) and
integrating again gives
Solving for U yields
(2.14) 
where
For large positive s we have U(s) → f1, and for large negative s we have U(s) →
f2. It is easy to see that U’(s) < 0 for all s and that U(0) = (f1 + f2). The graph of
U is shown in Fig. 7.12 for different values of D. The weaker the diffusive effect
(small D), the sharper the gradient in U. The traveling wave solution to (2.11) is
Figure 7.12 Traveling wave front solutions to Burgers’ equation.

where the speed is determined from the definition of f1 and f2 to be
Graphically, the traveling wave solution is the profile U(s) in Fig. 7.12 moving
to the right at speed c. The solution of Burgers’ equation, because it resembles
the actual profile of a shock wave, is called the shock structure solution; it joins
the asymptotic states f1 and f2. Without the Duxx term the solutions of (2.11)
would shock up and tend to break. The presence of the diffusion term prevents
this breaking effect by countering the nonlinearity. The result is competition and
balance between the nonlinear advection term uux and the diffusion term −Duxx,
much the same as occurs in a real shock wave in the narrow region where the
gradient is steep. In this shock wave context the −Duxx term could also be
interpreted as a viscosity term, as will become clear in the final chapter.
Example 7.11
(Korteweg–de Vries equation) A perturbation analysis of the equations that
govern long waves in shallow water leads to another fundamental equation of
applied mathematics, the Korteweg–de Vries equation (KdV equation for short)
(2.15) 
This equation is a model equation for a nonlinear dispersive process. The uux
term causes a shocking-up effect. In Burgers’ equation this effect was balanced
by a diffusion term −Duxx, creating a shock structure solution. Now we replace
this term by kuxxx, which is interpreted as a dispersion term (plane wave
solutions of the linear equation ut + kuxxx = 0 are dispersive). The KdV equation
and modifications of it arise in many physical contexts (see C. S. Gardner et al.,

SIAM Review, Vol. 18, p. 412 (1976)). We follow the same reasoning as in
Burgers’ equation. That is, we assume a solution of the form
(2.16) 
where the waveform U and the wave speed c are to be determined. Substituting
(2.16) into (2.15) gives
which when integrated gives
Multiplying by U’ and integrating again yields
One can then write
(2.17) 
Since ϕ(U) is a cubic polynomial, there are five possibilities:
(i) ϕ has one real root α.
(ii) ϕ has three distinct real roots γ < β < α.
(iii) ϕ has three real roots satisfying γ = β < α.
(iv) ϕ has three real roots satisfying γ < α = β.
(v) ϕ has a triple root γ.
Clearly, if α is a real root of ϕ, then U = α is a constant solution. We seek real,
nonconstant, bounded solutions that will exist only when ϕ(U) ≥ 0. On
examining the direction field it is easy to see that only unbounded solutions of
(2.17) exist for cases (i) and (iv). We leave case (v) and case (ii) to the reader.
Case (ii) leads to cnoidal waves. We examine case (iii) in which a class of
solutions known as solitons arise. In this case (2.17) becomes
(2.18) 
Letting U = γ + (α − γ)sech2ω and noting dU = −2(α − γ)sech2ω tanh ω dw, it
follows that

Integrating gives
and therefore a solution to (2.18) is given by
(2.19) 
Clearly U(s) → γ as s → ±∞. A graph of the waveform U is shown in Fig. 7.13.
It is instructive to write the roots α and γ in terms of the original parameters. To
this end
Figure 7.13 Soliton solution to the KdV equation.

Thus the wave speed c is given by
and we can write the solution as
Let us note several features of this wave front solution, or pulse. The velocity
relative to the asymptotic state at ±∞ is proportional to the amplitude α. The
width of the wave, defined by 
, increases as k increases; that is, the
wave disperses. Finally, the amplitude a is independent of the asymptotic state at
±∞. Such a waveform is known as a soliton, and many important equations of
mathematical physics have soliton-like solutions (for example, the Boussinesq
equation, the Sine-Gordon equation, the Born–Infeld equation, and nonlinear
Schrödinger-type equations). In applications, the value of such solutions is that if
a pulse or signal travels as a soliton, then the information contained in the pulse
can be carried over long distances with no distortion or loss of intensity.
Solitons, or solitary waves, have been observed in canals and waterways.
Reaction–advection–diffusion equations of the form
form an important class of equations that often admit traveling wave solutions. If
we assume u = U(z), z = x − ct, then
For wave front solutions we require F(u±, 0) = 0, where u± are the constant states
at ±∞. This equation is often examined in the UV phase plane (see Chapter 2),
where V = U’. Then
Showing the existence of traveling wave solutions then amounts to showing
there is an orbit connecting the critical points (u−, 0) and (u+, 0).

7.2.3 Conservation Laws
We observed how nonlinear advection can cause solutions to ‘shock up’ and
cease to exist as a smooth solution. In this section we discover what happens
after the gradient catastrophe occurs.
The first-order partial differential equation
(2.20) 
which represents a local conservation law, was derived under the conditions of
smoothness of the density and flux. If there are discontinuities, we must take the
integral form of the conservation law,
(2.21) 
which holds in all cases.
Example 7.12
The model nonlinear equation
can be written in conservation form as
where the flux is J(u) = u2. The integral form of this law is
In general we can write (2.20) in the form
(2.22) 
where c(u) = J’(u). We noted earlier that the initial value problem associated
with (2.20) does not always have a solution for all t > 0. We showed that u is
constant on the characteristic curves defined by dx/dt = c(u), and the initial
condition
is propagated along straight lines with speed c(u). If c’(u) > 0 and f’(x) < 0, then
the characteristics issuing from two points ξ1 and ξ2 on the x axis with ξ1 < ξ2
have speeds c(f(ξ1)) and c(f(ξ2)), respectively. It follows that c(f(ξ1)) > c(f(ξ2)),

and therefore the characteristics must intersect (see Fig. 7.14). Because u is
constant on characteristics, the solution is meaningless at the value of t where the
intersection occurs. The first such t, denoted earlier by tb, is the breaking time. A
smooth solution exists only up to time tb; beyond tb something else must be tried.
The key to continuing the solution for t > tb is to take a hint from the propagation
of stress waves in a real physical continuum. There, under certain conditions, a
smooth wave profile evolves into a shock wave. Hence, it is reasonable to expect
that a discontinuous solution may exist and propagate for t > tb. This
discontinuous solution cannot satisfy the differential form (2.22) of the
conservation law, but the integral form (2.21) remains valid. Therefore, we turn
to a study of the simplest kinds of such solutions in an effort to obtain a
condition that must hold at a discontinuity. Let J = J(u) be continuously
differentiable, and let x = s(t) be a smooth curve in space-time across which u is
discontinuous. Suppose u is smooth on each side of the curve (see Fig. 7.15).
Next, select a and b such that the curve x = s(t) intersects a ≤ x ≤ b at time t and
let u0 and u1 denote the right and left limits of u at s(t), respectively. That is,
Figure 7.14 Characteristics determined by the initial condition.
Figure 7.15 Shock path in space–time.

From the conservation law (2.21) and Leibniz’ rule for differentiating integrals,
Because ut is bounded in each of the intervals [a, s(t)] and [s(t), b] separately,
both integrals tend to zero in the limit as a → s(t)− and b → s(t)+. Therefore
(2.23) 
Equation (2.23) is a jump condition, often called the Rankine–Hugoniot
condition, that relates the values of u and the flux in front of and behind the
discontinuity to the speed ds/dt of the discontinuity. Thus the integral form of the
conservation law provides a restriction on possible jumps across a simple
discontinuity. A conventional notation for (2.23) is
where [··] indicates the jump in a quantity across the discontinuity.
Example 7.13
Consider the Cauchy problem

The characteristic diagram is shown in Fig. 7.16. Lines emanating from the x
axis have speed c(f(x)) = f(x). It is clear from the geometry that tb = 1 and that a
single valued solution exists for t < 1. For t > 1 we fit a shock or discontinuity
beginning at (1,1), separating the state u1 = 1 on the left from the state u0 = 0 on
the right. Thus [u] = 1 − 0 = 1 and 
. Therefore the
discontinuity must have speed 
. The resulting characteristic
diagram is shown in Fig. 7.17. Therefore we have obtained a solution for all t >
0 satisfying the conservation law.
Figure 7.16 Characteristic diagram. Colliding characteristics indicate formation
of a gradient catastrophe when the smooth solution ceases to exist.
Figure 7.17 Characteristic diagram showing the formation of the shock and its
path.

EXERCISES
1. Consider the problem
In what sense are u1(x, t) = 1 − H(t − 2x) and u2(x, t) = 1 − H(t − x) both
solutions to the problem? Which one is the appropriate solution? (H is the
Heaviside function.)
2. Consider the equation ut + c(u)ux = 0, x  , t > 0, with initial data u(x, 0)
= u1 for x < 0, and u(x, 0) = u0 for x ≥ 0, with c’(u) > 0.
a) Find a nonsmooth solution in the case u0 > u1.
b) Find a discontinuous (shock) solution in the case u0 < u1.
c) Discuss (a) and (b) in the context of shock waves and rarefaction
waves.
3. In the traveling wave solution to Burgers’ equation, the shock thickness is
defined by (f2 − f1)/ max |U’(s)|. Give a geometric interpretation of this
condition, and show that the shock thickness is given by 8D/(f2 − f1).
4. Find all wave front solutions of the reaction–advection equation
5. Consider the nonlinear advection–diffusion equation

a) What is the speed c of right-traveling wave front solutions u = U(z), z
= x − ct, that satisfy the conditions U(−∞) = 1, U(∞) = 0?
b) Determine explicitly the right-traveling wave front in (a) that satisfies
the condition U(0) = .
6. Show that Burgers’ equation ut + uux = Duxx can be reduced to the
diffusion equation via the transformation u = −2Dϕx/ϕ (this is the Cole–
Hopf transformation). If the initial condition u(x, 0) = f(x) is imposed, derive
the solution
where

7.3 Quasi-linear Equations
A quasi-linear partial differential equation is an equation that is linear in its
derivatives. Many of the equations that occur in applications (for example, the
nonlinear equations of fluid mechanics that we will develop in a subsequent
section) are quasi-linear. In this section we focus on the initial value problem for
first-order equations and introduce the idea of the general solution. Finally, as an
application, we introduce age-structured models in population dynamics.
In this section we study the Cauchy problem for the quasi-linear equation
(3.1) 
where the initial condition has the form
(3.2) 
Motivated by our earlier approach, we define a family of curves by the
differential equation
(3.3) 
On these curves u is no longer constant, but rather
(3.4) 
The pair of differential equations (3.3)–(3.4) is called the characteristic system
associated with (3.1). The initial data can be represented
(3.5) 
where ξ is a parameter representing an arbitrary value on the x axis. We may
interpret equations (3.3)–(3.4) as a system of two nonautonomous equations for
x = x(t) and u = u(t) (the values of x and u along the characteristic curves), with
initial values given in (3.5). The general solution of (3.3)–(3.4) involves two
arbitrary constants and has the form
The initial data imply ξ = F(0, c1, c2), ϕ(ξ) = G(0, c1, c2), which gives the
constants in terms of ξ, or c1 = c1(ξ), c2 = c2(ξ). Therefore, x and u are given as
functions of t and their initial values,
(3.6) 

In principle, the first of these equations can be solved to obtain ξ = ξ(x, t), which
can then be substituted into the second equation to obtain an explicit
representation u = u(x, t) to the solution to (3.1)–(3.2).
Example 7.14
Solve the IVP
The characteristic system is
and the initial condition gives
The general solution of the characteristic system is
Applying the initial data gives ξ = −c1 + c2 and 
 = c1. Therefore
Therefore ξ = ξ(x, t) = 2x/(1 + e−1), and so
We have carried out this solution process formally. In most problems it will not
be possible to solve the characteristic system or the resulting algebraic equations
that determine the constants c1 = c1 (ξ), c2 = c2 (ξ) as functions of ξ. As a
consequence, we often have to be satisfied with the parametric representation
(3.6). In practice, numerical methods are usually applied to (3.3)–(3.4) to
advance the initial conditions forward in time.
In some contexts the general solution of the quasi-linear equation (3.1) is
needed, in terms of a single, arbitrary function. To determine the general solution
we proceed with some general definitions and observations. An expression (x,
t, u) is called a first integral of the characteristic system (3.3)–(3.4) if (x, t, u)
= k (constant), on solutions to (3.3)–(3.4). That is, (X(t), t, U(t)) = k for all t in
some interval I, if x = X(t), u = U(t), t  I, is a solution to (3.3)–(3.4). Taking the

total derivative of this last equation with respect to t and using the chain rule
gives
(3.7) 
where each of the terms in this equation are evaluated at (X(t), t, U(t)).
Furthermore, if (x, t, u) is a first integral of the characteristic system, then the
equation (x, t, u) = k defines, implicitly, a surface u = u(x, t), on some domain
D in the xt plane, provided 
u ≠ 0. Thus
Using the chain rule, we can calculate the partial derivatives of u as
or
Each term on the right is evaluated at (x, t, u(x, t)). Observe also that the curve
(X(t), t, U(t)) lies on this surface because (X(t), t, U(t)) = k.
We claim that this surface u = u(x, t) is a solution to the partial differential
equation (3.1). To prove this, fix an arbitrary point (ξ, τ) in D. Then
(3.8) 
where c and all the terms on the right side are evaluated at (ξ, τ, ω), where ω =
u(ξ, τ). But a solution curve (X(t), t, U(t)) lies on the surface and passes through
the point (ξ τ ω) at t = τ. That is, (ξ, τ, ω) = (X(τ), τ, U (τ)). Therefore, the right
side of (3.8) may be evaluated at (X(τ), τ, U (τ)).
In general, we expect to find two independent first integrals to the
characteristic system, (t, x, u) and χ(t, x, u). The general solution of (3.1) is
then
(3.9) 
where H is an arbitrary function. We can formally solve for one of the variables
and write this as (t, x, u) = G(χ(t, x, u)), where G is an arbitrary function. We
leave it as an exercise using the chain rule to show that if (t, x, u) and χ(t, x, u)
are first integrals of the characteristic system, then (3.9) defines, implicitly, a
solution u = u(x, t) to (3.1) for any function H, provided H
u + Hχχu ≠ 0.
Example 7.15

Consider the equation
The characteristic system is
The first equation gives first integral  = x − t2 = c1. Then the second equation
becomes
Separating 
variables 
and 
integrating 
gives 
another 
first 
integral 
. Therefore, the general solution is
where H is an arbitrary function. This expression defines implicit solutions. It
can also be written
where G is an arbitrary function. This quadratic in u can be solved to determine
explicit solutions.

7.3.1 Age-Structured Populations
Elementary population models in biology lump the total population at time t into
a single number p(t), regardless of the age of the individuals. We have studied
these models, e.g., the Malthus law and the logistics law, in earlier chapters.
However, because individuals may differ in their vital statistics (birth- and
deathrates, fertility), in some demographic models it is necessary to superimpose
an age distribution at each time. These models are called age-structured
models.
We consider a population of females whose age structure at time t = 0 is f(a).
That is, f(a) da is approximately the initial number of females between age a and
a + da. Females are usually used in demographic models because they have a
definite beginning and end to their reproductive capacity. And, for simplicity, we
impose the age range to be 0 ≤ a < ∞, even though the age at death is finite.
Given the mortality and fecundity rates of females, the goal is to determine the
age structure, or population density, u(a, t) at time t, where u(a, t) da is
approximately the number of females between age a and a + da at time t. The
total number of females at time t is
We can derive a partial differential equation for the density by accounting for
the change in population over a small time dt, where members leave the
population only because of death. In the time interval from t to t+dt all females
of age a become females of age a + da. The number of females at time t between
age a and a + da is u(a, t) da, and the number between a + da and a + 2da at
time t + dt is u(a + da, t + dt) da. The difference between these two populations
is the number that die during the time interval. If λ represents the mortality rate,
or the fraction that die per unit time, then the number that die from time t to t +
dt is λ[u(a, t) da] dt. The mortality rate λ could depend upon age a, time t, age
density u, or even the total population N(t). Consequently, to leading order we
have
By Taylor’s expansion, u(a + da, t + dt) = u(a, t) + ut(a, t) dt + ua(a, t) da + ···.
Therefore ut(a, t) dt + ua(a, t) da = -λu(a, t) dt + ···. Dividing by dt, using da =
dt, and taking the limit as dt → 0 gives

(3.10) 
which is the McKendrick–Von Foerster equation. The initial condition is
(3.11) 
Figure 7.18 Graphical representation of an age-structured model showing age
profiles at time t = 0 (f(a)) and at time t (u(a, t)). The boundary condition u(0, t)
represents the number of newborns.
The boundary condition at age a = 0 is not as simple as it may first appear
because u(0, t) = B(t), the number of newborns at time t, is not known a priori.
Rather, it depends upon the fertility and ages of the reproducing females at time
t. To formulate the boundary condition let b(a, t) denote the average number of
offspring per female of age a at time t. We call b the fecundity rate or maternity
function. We expect b to be zero up until the age of maturity and zero after
menopause. The total number of offspring produced by females in the age
interval a to a + da is b(a, t)u(a, t) da. Thus the total number of offspring B(t)
produced at time t is
(3.12) 
Therefore the boundary condition at a = 0 depends upon the solution to the
differential equation. Such boundary conditions are called nonlocal because they
involve an integration of the unknown in the problem. The initial boundary value
problem (3.10)–(3.12) is an example of an age-structured model. These nonlocal,
nonlinear models can be complex, and thus it is common to make assumptions
that lead to simplification and the possibility of a tractable problem. For
example, we assume the mortality rate λ is constant, and the fecundity rate b is

dependent only upon age. Then we obtain the simplified the McKendrick–Von
Foerster model
The characteristic system for the partial differential equation is
It is easy to find the first integrals a − t = c1 and ueλt = c2. Therefore the general
solution to the pde is
where g is an arbitrary function. In the domain a > t the solution is determined
by the initial condition at t = 0. Therefore g(a) = f(a) and we obtain
In the domain 0 < a < t the solution is determined by the boundary condition.
From the general solution we have
which determines the arbitrary function, g(t) = B(−t)e−λt. Therefore
Hence, we will have determined the solution once the function B is found.
To determine B we use the nonlocal boundary condition to obtain
This equation is a nonhomogeneous Volterra integral equation for B and it can be
written in the form
(3.13) 

where 
. Equation (3.13) is called the
renewal equation. In summary, the solution to McKendrick-Von Foerster model
has been reduced to the solution of an integral equation.
We show how an asymptotic solution for large times can be obtained. For large
t the nonhomogeneous term F(t) vanishes because the fecundity b is zero at
some finite age. Thus, the renewal equation can be approximated by
Note that we can replace the upper limit by infinity since the fecundity rate
vanishes at a finite age. Let us assume an exponential solution of the form B(t) =
U0ert, where r is an unknown growth rate. Substituting gives
(3.14) 
This is the Euler–Lotka equation, and it determines the growth rate r. The
population density in this asymptotic case is
The decaying function U(a) = e−(r+λ)a is called the stable age structure.
More extensive material on age structured problems can be found in Brauer
and Castillo-Chavez (2001) and Kot (2001). Age-structured problems are a
special case of more general physiological structured problems where the age
variable a can be replaced by length, size, weight, development, and so on.
EXERCISES
1. Insofar as possible, solve the following pure initial value problems:
a) ut + ux = −2tu, u(x, 0) = ϕ(x).
b) ut + ux = g(x, t), u(x, 0) = ϕ(x).
c) ut + xux = et, u(x, 0) = ϕ(x).
2. Use characteristics to find the general solution to the following equations:
a) ut + ux = −u2.
b) t2ut + x2ux = 2xt.
c) uut = x − t.
d) tut + xux = xt(1 + u2).

e) tut + uux = x.
f) u(ut − ux) = x − t.
g) uut + xux = t.
3. Consider the initial value problem
Find the time tb that a gradient catastrophe occurs and beyond which there is
no continuously differentiable solution.
4. Consider the initial value problem
Derive the solution u(x, t) = (1 + αt)−1.
5. Consider the initial value problem
where k > 0. Determine the values of k for which the solution blows up.
6. Consider the initial value problem for the damped advection equation,
where α > 0. Show that the solution is given implicitly by
Determine a condition on ϕ that guarantees no shocks will form. If a shock
does form, show that the breaking time is greater than that for the undamped
equation when α = 0.
7. Consider
For what values of k does breaking occur?
8. Solve the signaling problem

9. Consider an age-structured female population where u = u(a, t) is the age
density of females at age a at time t and where no individual survives
beyond age δ. The model is
Find the solution on the given domain subject to the initial and boundary
conditions
where f and B are given functions.
10. Consider a population of female organisms whose mortality rate is λu,
with λ constant, and whose fecundity is given by b(a) = ae−γa. From the
Euler–Lotka equation determine the growth rate r of the stable age
structured.population.
11. Consider the age-structured model
where the mortality and fecundity rates depend upon the total population
N(t), with b′(N) ≤ 0, λ’(N) ≥ 0.
a) Show that N’(t) = (b(N) − λ(N))N.
b) Assuming the differential equation in part (a) has a nonzero
equilibrium N*, show that there is an equilibrium population density u =
U(a) given by
12. In the McKendrick–Von Foerster model assume the mortality rate λ and
the fecundity rate b are constant.
a) Show that B’ = (b − λ)B.
b) Find B(t) and the population density u(a, t).
c) What is the size N(t) of the population at time t?

7.4 The Wave Equation
The science of acoustics is the study of sound propagation in solids, fluids, and
gases. The fundamental equation is the wave equation that was obtained as an
approximation for small-amplitude signals.

7.4.1 The Acoustic Approximation
As before, we imagine a gas flowing in a tube of constant cross-sectional area A
in such a way that the physical parameters are constant in any cross section. We
fix two cross sections x = a and x = b. The principle of mass conservation states
simply that mass is neither created nor destroyed. Therefore, the rate of change
of mass inside the interval a ≤ x ≤ b equals the mass flux in at x = a less the mass
flux out at x = b. In symbols
(4.1) 
where ρ(x, t) is the density and v(x, t) is the velocity. The quantity Aρ(x, t)v(x, t)
gives the amount of fluid that crosses the location x per unit time and is therefore
the mass flux. Equation (4.1) can be written
Because the interval a ≤ x ≤ b is arbitrary it follows that
(4.2) 
which is the continuity equation, or the partial differential equation expressing
conservation of mass.
Momentum balance requires that the rate of change of momentum inside [a, b]
must equal the transport of momentum carried into and out of the region at x = a
and x = b plus the momentum created inside [a, b] by the force (pressure times
area) p acting at a and b. This is, of course, motivated by Newton’s second law
of motion, which states that the rate of change of momentum is the force, or d/dt
(mv) = F. In mathematical terms,
(4.3) 
The term Aρ(x, t)v2(x, t) is the momentum times the velocity at x and is therefore
the momentum flux at x. Bringing the time derivative into the integral and using
the fundamental theorem of calculus turns (4.3) into

The arbitrariness of the interval a ≤ x ≤ b forces
(4.4) 
which is a partial differential equation expressing conservation of momentum.
Both (4.2) and (4.4) are of the form
and are in conservation form.
In the simplest gas dynamical calculations equations (4.2) and (4.4) may be
supplemented by the barotropic equation of state
(4.5) 
which gives pressure as a function of density only. It is convenient to introduce
the local sound speed c defined by
(4.6) 
Then (4.2) and (4.4) may be written
(4.7) 
(4.8) 
where we have used px = c2ρx and pt = c2ρt to rewrite (4.2), and we have used
(4.2) to replace the quantity ρt in (4.4), thereby giving (4.8). Equations (4.7) and
(4.8) along with (4.5) provide a starting point for the study of flow of a gas
(Chapter 8).
The equations governing the adiabatic flow of a gas are nonlinear and cannot
be solved in general. Rather, only special cases can be resolved. The simplest
case, that of acoustics, arises when the deviations from a constant equilibrium
state v = 0, ρ = ρ0, and p = p0 are assumed to be small. Therefore we consider the
isentropic equations
(4.9) 
(4.10) 
with the barotropic equation of state
It is common in acoustics to introduce the condensation δ defined by

which is the relative change in density from the constant state ρ0. We assume
that v, δ, and all their derivatives are small compared to unity. Then the equation
of state can be expanded in a Taylor series as
Whence
and therefore (4.9) and (4.10) become
Discarding products of small terms gives a set of linearized equations for the
small deviations δ and v, namely
(4.11) 
These equations are known as the acoustic approximation. Eliminating v from
(4.11) gives
(4.12) 
where
(4.13) 
Equation (4.12) is a second-order linear partial differential equation known as
the wave equation. The quantity c in (4.13) is the propagation speed of acoustic
waves. For an ideal gas p = F(ρ) = kργ, and therefore
is the speed that small-amplitude signals are propagated in an ideal gas. By
eliminating δ from equations (4.11) we note that the small velocity amplitude v
satisfies the wave equation as well.
At this point it is worthwhile to test the acoustic approximation to determine
its range of validity. Let U and Γ denote scales for the velocity v and
condensation δ, respectively. From Chapter 1 we know that such scales can be
defined as the maximum value of the quantity, for example, U = max|v| and Γ =
max |δ|. If L and τ denote length and time scales for the problem, then the
balance of the terms in (4.11) requires

Thus
In the approximation we assumed that the convective term vvx was small
compared to vt. Consequently, for acoustics
or
(4.14) 
That is, the acoustic approximation can be justified when the maximum particle
velocity is small compared to the speed c that sound waves travel in the medium.
The ratio U/c is called the Mach number M and therefore acoustics are valid
when M 
 1. For phenomena involving ordinary audible sounds the
approximation is highly satisfactory, but for flows resulting from the presence of
high-speed aircraft the full nonlinear equations (4.9) and (4.10) would be
required for an accurate description. In the theory of nonlinear acoustics a few,
but not all, of the nonlinear terms are retained in the perturbation equations.
Example 7.16
(Vibrations of a guitar string) In this example we take an aside to mention the
most common application of the wave equation, namely, the vibrations and
sounds produced by plucking a guitar string. A detailed derivation of the
governing equation, which is a simple application of Newton’s second law, can
be found in any elementary partial differential equations text (e.g., see Logan,
2006, Strauss 1992.). We envision a tightly stretched, perfectly elastic string
attached at two ends, x = 0 and x = L. This is the undisturbed equilibrium
configuration. The wave equation is a model that governs the vertical
displacements u = u(x, t) from equilibrium of the string in a plane at each
location x in [0, L] and for each t > 0. The excitation of the string is induced by
initial conditions that specify the initial displacement u(x, 0) and the initial
velocity ut(x, 0). For example, the string could be plucked. The equation of
motion plainly states that, locally, the mass times the acceleration is the vertical
force. Symbolically,
or

Here, ρ is the linear density (mass per length) of the string, and T is the constant
tension in the string; c(x) is the wave speed, or the speed of propagation on the
string. Like acoustics, the wave equation governs small vibrations from
equilibrium. Terms representing body forces (like gravity) or damping forces can
be added to the right side of the equation.

7.4.2 Solutions to the Wave Equation
The one-dimensional wave equation
(4.15) 
arises naturally in acoustics and it describes how small amplitude waves (density
and particle velocity) propagate. There are many other physical situations
modeled by this important equation, for example, electromagnetism, wave on
taut strings (guitar strings), and vibrations in elastic media. From earlier remarks
we note that the wave equation is hyperbolic. It is easy to see (Exercise 2) that
the general solution of the wave equation is given by
(4.16) 
where f and g are arbitrary functions; hence solutions are the superposition of
right- and left-traveling waves moving at speed c. The functions f and g are
determined by the initial and boundary data, although it is difficult to do this in
specific cases.
The Cauchy problem for the wave equation is
(4.17) 
where F and G are given functions, and it can be solved exactly by
D’Alembert’s solution.
Theorem 7.17
In (4.17) let F  C2( ) and G  C1( ). Then the solution of (4.17) is given by
(4.18) 
Proof
The derivation of (4.18) follows directly by applying the initial conditions to
determine the arbitrary functions f and g in (4.16). We have
(4.19) 
(4.20) 
Dividing (4.20) by c and integrating yields

(4.21) 
where A is a constant of integration. Adding and subtracting (4.19) and (4.21)
yield the two equations
from which (4.18) follows. Since F  C2 and G  C, it follows that u  C2 and
satisfies the wave equation. The solution can be verified using Leibniz’ rule.
Much insight can be gained by examining a simple problem. Therefore let us
consider the initial value problem
By (4.18) the solution is
To fix the idea, suppose F(x) is the initial signal shown in Fig. 7.19. At time t >
0 we note that u is the average of F(x − ct) and F(x + ct), which is just the
average of the two signals resulting from shifting F(x) to the right ct units and to
the left ct units. A sequence of time snapshots at t1 < t2 < t3 in Fig. 7.20 shows
how the two signals F(x − ct) and F(x + ct) are averaged to produce u. The initial
signal splits into two signals moving in opposite directions, each at speed c. The
left-moving signal travels along the characteristics x + ct = constant, and the
right-moving signal travels along the characteristics x − ct = constant. Therefore,
there are two families of characteristic lines along which disturbances propagate.
If the initial data F and G in (4.17) are supported in an interval I on the x axis
(i.e., F and G are zero outside I), then the region R of the xt plane that is affected
by the disturbances within I is called the region of influence of I (see Fig. 7.21).
This region has as its lateral boundaries the two characteristics x + ct = constant
and x − ct = constant emanating from the left and right endpoints of I,
respectively. A signal in I can never affect the solution outside R; or stated
differently, if the initial data are supported in I, then the solution is supported in
R. These statements follow directly from (4.18).
Figure 7.19 Initial signal, a triangular wave.

Figure 7.20 Time snapshots showing u(x, t) (solid) as the average of two profiles
F(x + ct) and F(x − ct) (dashed).
Figure 7.21 Region of influence R of an interval I.
We also pose the question of determining which initial values affect the value
of u at a given point (x0, t0). From D’Alembert’s solution,
Because of the integrated term, u will depend only on the values in the interval I:

[x0 − ct0, x0 + ct0]. This interval, called the interval of dependence, is found by
tracing the characteristics x − ct = x0 − ct0 and x + ct = x0 + ct0 back to the initial
t = 0 line (Fig. 7.22).
Figure 7.22 Domain D and its interval of dependence J.
When boundary conditions are present the situation is more complicated
because waves are reflected from the boundaries. For example, consider the
mixed initial boundary value problem
where F  C2[0, l], G  C1[0, l], and a, b  C2[0, ∞). If u(x, t) is a class C2
solution on t ≥ 0 and 0 ≤ x ≤ l, then necessarily the compatibility conditions F(0)
= a(0), F(l) = b(0), G(0) = a′(0), g(l) = b(0), a”(0) = c2F”(0), and b”(0) = c2F(l)
must hold at the corners x = 0, x = l, and t = 0. This problem can be transformed
into one with homogeneous boundary conditions, which can be solved by
eigenfunction expansions.
A geometric construction of the solution based on the following theorem gives
insight into the nature of the solution to the wave equation.
Theorem 7.18
Let u(x, t) be of class C3 for t > 0 and x  . Then u satisfies the wave equation
(4.15) if, and only if, u satisfies the difference equation
(4.22) 

for all h, k > 0.
Proof
Necessity follows easily from the fact that the general solution of the wave
equation is given by (4.16) and both the forward- and backward-going waves f(x
+ ct) and g(x − ct) satisfy the difference equation. Conversely, if u satisfies the
difference equation, then set h = 0, add −2u(x, t) to both sides and then divide by
c2k2 to get
(4.23) 
By Taylor’s theorem
Substituting these quantities into (4.23) gives
Taking k → 0 shows that u satisfies (4.15) and completes the proof.
Geometrically, the points A: (x−ck, t−h), B: (x+ch, t+k), C: (x+ck, t+h), and D:
(x − ch, t − k) are the vertices of a characteristic parallelogram ABCD formed
by two pairs of characteristics, one forward-going pair and one backward-going
pair. Then (4.22) may be written
This equation can be used to geometrically construct a solution to the initial
boundary value problem as follows. We divide the region 0 < x < l, t > 0 into
regions I, II, III…, as shown in Fig. 7.23, by drawing in the characteristics
emanating from the lower corners (0, 0) and (l, 0) and continually reflecting
them from the boundaries. The solution in region I is completely determined by
D’Alembert’s formula. To find the solution at a point R in region II we sketch
the characteristic parallelogram PQRS and use Theorem × to find u(R) =
u(S)+u(Q)−u(P). The quantity u(S) is determined by the boundary condition at x
= 0, and u(P) and u(Q) are known from the solution in region I. A similar
argument can be made for points in region III. To determine the solution at a
point M in region IV we complete the characteristic parallelogram KLMN as

shown in the diagram and use Theorem 7.11 to conclude u(M) = u(L) + u(N) −
u(K). Again the three quantities on the right are known and we can proceed to
the next step and obtain u in the entire region t > 0, 0 < x < l.
Figure 7.23 Geometrical construction of the solution to the wave equation.

7.4.3 Scattering and Inverse Problems
By a scattering problem we mean the following. Consider a situation where an
object, called a scatterer, lies in some medium. An incoming incident wave
impinges on the scatterer and produces a reflected wave and a transmitted
wave (Fig. 7.24). The direct scattering problem is to determine the reflected
and transmitted waves (amplitude, wave number, frequency, etc.) if the
properties of the incident wave and the scatterer are known. The inverse
scattering problem is to determine the properties of the scatterer, given the
incident, reflected, and possibly the transmitted waves. Inverse scattering
problems arise in a number of physical situations. For example, in radar or sonar
theory a known incident wave and observed reflected wave are used to detect the
properties or presence of aircraft or submarine objects. In tomography, X-rays
and sound waves are used to determine the presence or properties of tumors by
detecting density variations; in this case the incident, reflected, and transmitted
waves are all known. In geologic exploration, explosions may be set off on the
earth’s surface producing waves that, when reflected from underground layers,
may indicate the presence of oil or other structures of geologic interest. In
nondestructive testing, analysis of reflected and transmitted waves can indicate
flaws in a material, for example, the nose cone of a shuttle craft. Inverse
scattering theory is an active area of applied mathematics research. In the
succeeding paragraphs we set up and solve a simple inverse problem involving
the wave equation. We assume that an infinite bar −∞ < x < ∞ is composed of
two homogeneous materials separated by an interface at x = 0. One material in
region I (x < 0) has constant density ρ1 and stiffness (Young’s modulus) y1 and
the other in region II (x > 0) has constant density ρ2 and stiffness y2. The sound
velocities in region I and region II are c1 and c2, respectively. Recall that c2 = y/
ρ. The inverse scattering problem can be stated as follows: Suppose an observer
at x = −∞ sends out an incident right-traveling wave exp(i(x − c1t)) of unit
amplitude and unit wave number. When the wave impinges on the interface a
wave is reflected back into region I and another wave is transmitted into region
II (see Fig. 7.25). If the material properties ρ1 and y1 of region I are known, is it
possible to determine the properties of ρ2 and y2 of region II by measuring the
amplitude and wave number of the reflected wave? We answer this question in
the context of small displacement theory where the displacements u1 and u2 in

region I and region II, respectively, satisfy the one-dimensional wave equation
Figure 7.24 Object scattering an incident wave.
Figure 7.25 The interface between two materials scattering an incident wave.
(4.24) 
At the interface x = 0 the displacements must be continuous, since we assume
that the regions do not separate. Therefore
(4.25) 
Here u1(0−, t) denotes the limit of u1(x, t) as x → 0− and u2(0+, t) denotes the
limit of u2(x, t) as x → 0+. Further, we require that the force across the interface
be continuous or
(4.26) 
Equations (4.25) and (4.26) are called the interface conditions. We seek u1 and
u2 satisfying (4.24) subject to (4.25) and (4.26). A reasonable attempt at a
solution is to take u1 to be the incident wave superimposed with the reflected
wave and u2 to be the transmitted wave. Hence we try a solution of the form

The quantities A and α denote the amplitude and wave number of the reflected
wave moving at speed c1 in region I to the left, and B and β denote the amplitude
and wave number of the transmitted wave moving at speed c2 in region II to the
right. Clearly u1 and u2 satisfy the wave equation with c21 = y1/ρ1 and c22 = y2/
ρ2, respectively. The inverse scattering problem can now be stated in analytic
terms as follows: Given A, α, ρ1, and y1, can ρ2 and y2 be determined?
The interface conditions (4.25) and (4.26) will yield relations among the
constants. Condition (4.25) implies
which, in turn, gives
(4.27) 
Therefore
An application of (4.26) forces
(4.28) 
A close examination of (4.27) and (4.28) yields the information we seek.
Knowledge of A, y1, and c1 permits the calculation of the ratio 
.
Consequently both y2 and ρ2 cannot be calculated, only their product. If,
however, there is means to measure the speed c2 of the transmitted wave or
determine its wave number β, then the material properties of region II can be
found.
The direct scattering problem has a simple solution. If all of the material
parameters ρ1, y1, ρ2, and y2 are known, relations (4.27) and (4.28) uniquely
determine the reflected and transmitted waves.

7.4.4 The Schrödinger Equation
In Chapter 3 we introduced the Schrödinger equation, one of the fundamental
equations of modern physics. Chapter 5 gave a glimpse of eigenvalue problems
associated with the Schrödinger equation, in particular, determining the discrete
spectrum (eigenvalues) and eigenfunctions (bound states) for a potential well.
Now we have the machinery to discuss some additional mathematical problems
arising from quantum mechanics. Our scope is limited; we do not go into the
philosophy of quantum mechanics, about which much has been written, and we
do not delve into detailed applications and interpretations in atomic physics;
these issues are beyond our scope. This section is written for the general applied
mathematics reader. There are myriad outstanding texts at all levels that can be
consulted for additional understanding. For example, the elementary text by
Griffiths (2005) is highly readable; Messiah (1958) has a more advanced
perspective.
One problem was mentioned with only a cursory explanation: the continuous
spectrum. In this section we discuss the meaning in more detail and relate it to
scattering phenomena, which we examined in the last section.
We work in one dimension and remind the reader that the fundamental
equation of quantum mechanics is the time-dependent Schrödinger equation
where  = (x, t) is the wave function and V = V(x) is the potential energy. This
is a second-order linear PDE that appears, if it does not contain the complex
constant i, to be diffusion-like. For the special case of constant V the dispersion
relation is
which is real; therefore Schrödinger equations are dispersive; we expect wave
speeds to depend on wave numbers. Wave numbers, or spatial frequencies, are
related to energy levels. A simple separation of variables method, assuming (x,
t) = g(t)y(x), leads to solutions of the form
where y = y(x) is the solution to the time-dependent Schrödinger equation

which is a Sturm–Liouville differential equation for the steady-state wave
function y(x); the separation constant E is the energy.
There are two interpretations of the wave function . The first is the statistical
interpretation. If Xt is a random variable, or random process, for the location of
the particle at time t, then the square of the wave function 
*  = | |2 is the
probability distribution1 for Xt, meaning
In particular,
This condition, that the particle is located somewhere, is a normalization
condition on wave functions y(x), which are solutions to the singular Sturm–
Liouville problem
The discrete spectrum, or set of eigenvalues, determines the allowed energies E.
For notational simplicity in the sequel, this model can be written as
where
It is important to notice that if λ > U(x), then we expect oscillatory solutions; if λ
< U(x) we expect exponential solutions. The first corresponds to a classical
particle with energy higher than the potential energy; the second is classically
not possible.
Example 7.19

(Particle in a box) The simplest case is a free particle (no force and zero
potential) of mass m trapped in a finite box 0 < x < a with infinite potential at x =
0, a. Therefore the probability of the particle being at x = 0 or x = a is zero, and
inside the box we have
This is a regular Sturm-Liouville problem we have solved many times. There are
infinitely many positive eigenvalues (energies)
with corresponding normalized wave functions (bound states)
(4.29) 
This example well illustrates the common statistical interpretation. The particle
can exist with only certain discrete energies En in bound states yn. The lowest
state corresponding to n = 1 is called the ground state, and the states for which n
> 1 are excited states. With this interpretation, we can answer the question of
the nature of the wave function—it resides in a Hilbert space, L2(0, a). The
probability density functions
determine the probability of finding the particle in the nth state. Because the
wave functions form an orthonormal basis for the Hilbert space, any time-
dependent wave function (x, t) can be written as a linear combination of the
basis functions, or
If (x, 0) = f(x) is the wave function at time t = 0, then
and cn are Fourier coefficients, or the orthogonal projections of f on the nth
eigenspace generated by yn(x); that is, cn = 
 sin (λnx) dx. Thus, the
wave function 
(x, t), or the wave function-squared, defines how the initial
probability density |f(x)|2 for position evolves over time.

Let’s briefly review one aspect of the dynamics of a classical particle.
Newton’s second law for a particle of mass m in a conservative force field
having potential V = V(x) leads easily, as we have seen in Chapter 1, to the
conservation law
where E is the energy. Thus, the particle can only exist in the region where E ≥
V(x). Classically, the region E < V(x) is forbidden. The contrast with a quantum
mechanical particle is both revolutionary and exciting.
With all this in mind, we now we take up the concept of the continuous
spectrum for the Schrödinger equation. This leads to the second interpretation of
the wave function. As preparation, we look at the discrete spectrum for an
infinite potential well.
Example 7.20
(Infinite potential well—discrete spectrum) Assume the potential is given by a
delta distribution with pole at zero, V(x) = −qδ(x). Thus there is an infinitely
deep potential well at x = 0. We have V(x) = 0 for x ≠ 0, and using the notation in
(4.29), the Schrödinger equation becomes
(4.30) 
We impose the condition y  L2( ), which implies
This is a distributional differential equation and therefore we use the same
method as we used in Chapter 5 for constructing a Green’s function. There are
two cases, λ < 0 and λ > 0. To examine the negative energy case we set λ = −k2.
Then, if x ≠ 0 we have y” − k2y = 0, x  . Bounded solutions y are given in x <
0 and x > 0 by
Continuity at x = 0 gives A = B. These two decaying solutions connect at the
origin with a discontinuity in their first derivatives. To derive the condition we
integrate (4.30) over an interval (−η, η) about the origin and then take the limit
as η → 0. We obtain

By continuity of y the last integral will be zero; the second integral can be
calculated by the sifting property of the delta distribution, and the first integral
can be found by the fundamental theorem of calculus. We obtain
Therefore, 
, which gives a single eigenvalue, or energy level,
We can easily find A by normalization. Here again we get a discrete spectrum,
the surprise being that there is only one eigenvalue and one bound state.
Example 7.21
(Potential well—continuous spectrum) We continue with the preceding
example, but now assume λ = k2 > 0. With the same notation, we obtain
For x ≠ 0 we obtain y″ + k2y = 0, which has sines and cosines as independent
solutions. This signals trouble for eigenvalues and bound states, as well as the
statistical interpretation of eigenfunctions. If these are the solutions, there can be
no way to normalize the wave functions. We can give up now, or we could
proceed. Let’s proceed and write the solution in complex exponential form as
The solutions are oscillatory and there are no boundary conditions to force any
of the constants to be zero. Going ahead, let’s apply continuity at x = 0, giving
Now a jump condition. As in the preceding example we integrate the
distributional equation over an interval (−η, η) and take the limit as η → 0. We
obtain
Therefore
The result is two equations for the four unknown coefficients and the number k,
which is a possible eigenvalue. In summary, we arrived at results that seem to
lead nowhere.
Let us step back and ask what we have in terms of scattering theory. From this
perspective, the spatial solution yL(x), for example, in x > 0, arises from

separating variables and leads to the time-dependent solution
This expression is the sum of a right-traveling wave and a left-traveling wave;
so, as in scattering, we can think of Aeikx as an incident right traveling wave and
Be−ikx as a reflected wave. Similar comments apply to the solution for x > 0.
Thus, we can regard the solution as a scattering experiment where a ‘stream’ of
particles coming in from the left (−∞) is scattered by the presence of the
potential well into a reflected wave and a transmitted wave. This means there is
no incoming wave from the right (+∞) and we can set D = 0. It makes sense
therefore to set A − 1 (fix the amplitude of the incoming wave), and so the
preceding relations yield
It follows that
Our calculation is valid for each value of k > 0. For each k the wave function is
(see Fig. 7.26)
Figure 7.26 Schematic of a scattering solution showing an incoming incident
wave and the transmitted and reflected waves from an infinite potential well at
the origin.

The spectrum, λ = k2, is continuous, and the wave functions do not represent
bound states, but rather scattering states. At this point the whole concept of the
actual states of real particles and their probability densities is now in question.
Example 7.22
(Reflection-transmission coefficients) There is an interesting addendum to the
result of the last example. If we define
then it is easily to show that  + 
 = 1, and so  and 
 represent probabilities.
These are the reflection and transmission probabilities. A unit amplitude
incoming wave has a probability 
 of being reflected and a probability 
 of
being transmitted. Note that the probability of transmission, or penetration,
increases with energy E (k), and reflection decreases with the energy of the
wave.
We have considered two interpretations of the wave functions: the statistical
interpretation and the scattering interpretation. In the latter case we make a
further intuitive argument for a particle interpretation in spite of the non-
normalizable wave functions and the lack of bound states. We noted earlier that a
particle is not localized in space. One way to think about it is in terms of a wave
packet, which is a superposition of a group of closely packed plane waves, or
scattering solutions, that have nearly the same frequency (energy). In such a
case, the wave packet can be written as
where A(k) represents a narrow envelop of amplitudes depending also on the
frequencies, and c(k) is the phase velocity. With further analysis (see the
references), it can be shown that this entire wave packet travels at a group
velocity that is twice the phase velocity, which is consistent with the classical
particle speed.
In the exercises below we use the notation given in (4.29).
EXERCISES

1. Maxwell’s equations for a nonconducting medium with permeability μ
and permittivity ε are
where B is the magnetic induction and E is the electric field. Show that the
components of B and E satisfy the three-dimensional wave equation utt −
c2(uxx + uyy + uzz) = 0 with propagation speed c = (εμ)−1/2, where u = u(t, x,
y, z).
2. Show that the transformation
transforms the wave equation (4.15) into the partial differential equation
As a consequence, show that the general solution to (4.15) is given by
(4.16).
3. Solve
4. Solve
5. Let v  C2 satisfy the boundary value problem
a) Prove that v = 0 by introducing the energy integral
and showing that E(t)  0 for all t ≥ 0.
b) Prove that solutions to the boundary value problem

are unique.
6. Let u = u(x, y) be a solution to the boundary value problem in the unit
square Ω = {(x, y): 0 < x, y < 1}:
Show that f must satisfy the relation f(O) + f(P) = f(Q) + f(R), where O = (0,
0), P = (1, 1), Q = (1, 0), and R = (0, 1). Discuss well-posedness for this
hyperbolic equation.
7. Use Fourier transforms to find the solution to
where G vanishes outside some closed, bounded interval.
8. Consider the boundary value problem
Transform this problem to one with a nonhomogeneous partial differential
equation and homogeneous boundary conditions.
9. Consider the nonhomogeneous problem
By integrating over the characteristic triangle T bounded by characteristics
emanating backward from the point (x0, t0) to the x axis, show that
10. Consider a bar with constant stiffness y0 and density ρ0 occupying the
region x ≤ 0. An incident small displacement wave exp(i(x − c0t)) impinges
on x = 0 from x = −∞.
a) Find the reflected wave if the end at x = 0 is fixed.
b) Find the reflected wave if the end at x = 0 is free.

c) Find the reflected wave if a mass M is attached to the end at x = 0.
(Hint: Show that the boundary condition is Mutt + y0ux = 0.)
11. Find the solution to the outgoing signaling problem
(Hint: There are no boundaries to the right, so attempt a right-traveling wave
solution.)
12. A bar of constant cross-sectional area is composed of two materials. For
−∞ < x < 0 and 1 < x < ∞ the material parameters are y0 and ρ0 and for 0 < x
< 1 the parameters are y1 and ρ1. An incident displacement wave exp(i(x −
c0t)) impinges on the system from −∞. Assuming the linearized theory and
the fact that displacements are continuous across the discontinuities, what
are the frequency and wave number of the transmitted wave in the region x >
1?
13. In three dimensions the wave equation is
where Δ is the Laplacian. For waves with spherical symmetry u = u(r, t) and
Δu = urr + (2/r)ur. By introducing the variable U = ru, show that the general
solution for the spherically symmetric wave equation is
14. Show that u(x, t) = f(x − ct) is a weak solution to the wave equation utt −
c2uxx = 0, (x, t)  
2, for any locally integrable function f on .
15. Use D’Alembert’s formula to formally derive the solution to
in the form
where H is the Heaviside function. Comment on the physical meaning.
16. Find an integral representation for the solution to the initial boundary
value problem for u = u(x, y, t):

17. Show that the nonlinear wave equation
has solutions of the form u(x, t) = F(θ), where θ = kx − ωt, ω2 > k2, and
where F is a periodic function. (Hint: Transform to the FF’-phase plane.)
Show that the period is given by
where a is a constant characterizing an orbit.
18. For a particle in a box (Example 7.19) find the expected value and
variance of the position when the particle is in the nth bound state. Plot the
density |yn(x)|2 for the first two states n = 1, 2.
19. (Potential barrier) An incoming, right-traveling wave from −∞
encounters, with positive energy E, encounters an infinite potential hill given
by a delta function U(x) = qδ(x). (a) Find the reflected and transmitted wave
scattered by the potential, and compute the reflection and transmission
coefficients. (b) What is the probability of penetration of the barrier? [This
quantum scattering phenomenon is called tunneling, which cannot occur for
a classical particle with energy less than the maximum potential of the hill,
and its application to the electromagnetic properties of materials is far-
reaching.]
20. Consider a step potential U(x) = q > 0 for x > 0 and U(x) = 0 for x < 0.
For positive energies, do you expect the system to have bound states and a
discrete spectrum? For energies between 0 and q, find the scattering solution
for the Schrödinger equation. What is the continuous spectrum? What is the
probability that an incoming wave from −∞ penetrates the barrier?
21. On the region x ≥ 0 a potential function is given by U(x) = 0 for 0 < x ≤
1, and U(x) = q > 0 for x > 1. At x = 0 the potential is infinite, giving the
boundary condition y(0) = 0.

a) Find the discrete spectrum and bound states. [Obtain an equation
giving the eigenvalues and show them graphically.] How many
eigenvalues are there?
b) Find the scattering states for an incoming wave from +∞.
22. (Finite potential well) Consider a finite potential well U(x) = −q for −1 <
x <1 and U(x) = 0 otherwise. Find the discrete spectrum and even (y(−x) =
y(x)) bound states.

REFERENCES AND NOTES
Most books on partial differential equations discuss wave phenomena. The texts
listed below are only a small, specialized sample. Whitham (1974) and Logan
(2008) contain a large amount of material on linear and nonlinear waves. Brauer
and Castillo-Chavez (2001), Murray (2001), and Kot (2001) discuss age
structure and partial differential equations. A very readable treatment of quantum
mechanics is in Griffiths (2005); Messiah (1958) is a more advanced work.
Strauss (1992) is an overall outstanding textbook on partial differential
equations, and in particular, wave phenomena. [See Logan (2000) for a review of
several books on partial differential equations.]
Brauer F. & Castillo-Chavez, C. 2001. Mathematical Models in Population
Biology and Epidemiology, Springer-Verlag, New York.
Griffiths, D. J. 2005. Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, Pearson Prentice-
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Kot, M. 2001. Elements of Mathematical Ecology, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Logan, J. D. 2000. Featured review: PDE Books: Present and Future, SIAM
Review 42(3), 515–522.
Logan, J. D. 2006. Applied Partial Differential Equations, 2nd ed., Springer-
Verlag, NY.
Logan, J. D. 2008. An Introduction to Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations,
2nd ed., Wiley-Interscience, New York.
Messiah, A. 1958. Quantum Mechanics, Vol. I, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Murray, J. D. 2001. Mathematical Biology, Vol 1, Springer–Verlag, New York.
Strauss, W. A. 1992. Partial Differential Equations, John Wiley & Sons, New
York.
Whitham, G. B. 1974. Linear and Nonlinear Waves, Wiley-Interscience, New
York.
1 In this section we use * to denote the complex conjugate of .

Chapter 8
Mathematical Models of Continua
Continuum mechanics (fluid dynamics, elasticity, gasdynamics, etc.) is the study
of motion, kinematics, and dynamics of continuous systems of particles such as
fluids, solids, and gases. Out of these subjects evolve some of the most important
partial differential equations of mathematical physics and engineering and some
of the most important techniques for solving applied problems. For example, the
origins of singular perturbation theory lie in the study of the flow of air around a
wing or airfoil, and many of the problems of bifurcation theory have their
beginnings in fluid mechanics. More than any other area of engineering or
physics, continuum mechanics remains a paradigm for the development of
techniques and examples in applied mathematics.
The field equations, or governing equations, of continuum mechanics are a set
nonlinear partial differential equations for unknown quantities such as density,
pressure, displacement, particle velocity, and so on, which describe the state of
the continuum at any instant. They arise, as in the case of the heat conduction
equation from (a) conservation laws such as conservation of mass, momentum,
and energy and (b) assumptions regarding the makeup of the continuum, called
constitutive relations or equations of state. In certain cases, say, when the
amplitude of waves is small, the equations reduce to some of the simpler
equations of applied mathematics, like the one-dimensional wave equation.
The equations are developed from the concept that the material under
investigation is a continuum; that is, it exhibits no structure however finely it is
divided. This development gives rise to a model in which the fluid parameters
are defined at all points as continuous functions of space and time. The
molecular aggregation of matter is completely extraneous to the continuum
model. The model may be expected to be invalid when the size of the continuum
region of interest is the same order as the characteristic dimension of the
molecular structure. For gases this dimension is on the order of 10−7 meters,
which is the mean free path, and for liquids it is on the order of 10−10 meters,

which is a few intermolecular spacings. Thus the continuum model is violated
only in extreme cases.
In many ways, as we will see, describing the motion of solids requires a
different strategy from that in fluids and gases. For example, we often work with
displacement in solids, but velocity in fluids and gases. Moreover, models of the
forces and stresses in solids lead to complicated constitutive equations that take
the subject to a higher level and into subjects such as elasticity, viscoelastic
materials, material with memory, and so on. Our main focus in this text is the
kinematics and dynamics of gases and fluids. Finally, continuum mechanics,
perhaps more than other areas of applied mathematics, requires a good
knowledge of several areas of physics, particularly mechanics and
thermodynamics. And, the properties of materials and their behavior, now coined
material science, spans into electrodynamics, quantum and atomic physics, and
other areas of modern physics.

8.1 Kinematics and Mass
Conservation
8.1.1 Description of Flow
The continuum assumption. The underlying physical model to which we apply
the general ideas is a one-dimensional continuum that can be thought of as a
solid cylindrical tube, or a cylinder through which a fluid is flowing. The fluid
may be a liquid or gas and the lateral wall of the pipe is assumed to have no
effect on the flow parameters. Throughout the motion we assume each cross-
section remains planar and moves longitudinally down the cylinder with no
variation of any of the flow parameters in any cross section. It is this assumption,
that the only variation is longitudinal, that gives the description a one-
dimensional character. The situation is the same as in the one-dimensional
models studied in Chapters 6 and 7.
To understand how physical quantities are defined we consider a thought
experiment to observe how the density of a fluid is related to its molecular
structure. At time t we consider a disk D of fluid of width α centered at x0 and
having cross-sectional area A. See Fig. 8.1. The average density of the fluid in D
is ρα = Mα/αA, where Mα is the mass of fluid in D. To define the density ρ(x0, t)
we examine what happens as α approaches zero. The graph in Fig. 8.2 records
the results of the experiment. In region II, because there are many particles
(molecules) inside D, one would expect that the average density ρα would vary
very little. If, however, α were on the order of molecular distances, say α = 10−9
meters, there may be only a few molecules in D and we might expect large
fluctuations in ρα even for small changes in α. Such rapid fluctuations are
depicted in region I. It seems unreasonable, therefore, to define ρ(x0, t) as the
limiting value of ρα as α → 0. Rather, ρ(x0, t) should be defined as
Figure 8.1 A fluid disk D with width α, centered at x0.

Figure 8.2 Plot of the average density ρα vs. the disk of width α (meters).
where α* is the value of α where density nonuniformities begin to occur; here,
for example, α* = 10−9 meters. In a similar fashion other physical quantities can
be considered as point functions in continuously distributed matter without
regard to its molecular or atomistic structure. This continuum assumption is
often phrased as follows—the fluid is composed of small regions or fluid
elements that can be idealized as points at which the flow variables become
continuous functions of position and time, but they are not so small that
discernable fluctuations of these quantities exist within the element.
Kinematics of motion. We now discuss the kinematics of fluid motion, meaning
how motion is described. Dynamics, or the cause of motion, comes later. In a
one-dimensional moving fluid or solid there are two coordinate systems used to
keep track of the motion. For example, suppose water is flowing in a stream and
one wishes to measure the temperature. One can stand on the bank at a fixed
location x, measured from some reference position x = 0, and insert a
thermometer, thereby measuring the temperature θ(x, t) as a function of time and
the fixed position x. The coordinate x is called a spatial (laboratory) or Eulerian
coordinate. On the other hand, one can measure the temperature from a boat
riding with the flow. In this case, at time t = 0 each particle (section) is labeled
with a particle label h, and each particle always retains its label as it moves
downstream. The result of the measurement is the temperature Θ(h, t) as a

function of time t and the Lagrangian or material coordinate h. The variable x
is a fixed spatial coordinate, and the representation of the field functions or
physical variables (temperature, density, pressure, etc.) as functions of t and x
gives a Eulerian description of the flow. A representation in terms of t and the
material variable h gives a Lagrangian description of the flow. For physical
variables we reserve lowercase letters for Eulerian quantities and capital letters
for Lagrangian quantities. Thus, f(x, t) denotes the measurement of a physical
quantity in Eulerian coordinates, and F(h, t) denotes the corresponding
description in terms of Lagrangian coordinates.
Now let I be an interval along the axis of the cylinder where the fluid begins
its motion. At time t = 0 we label all of the particles.1 with a Lagrangian
coordinate h such that
where x is a fixed Eulerian coordinate in I. By a fluid motion or flow, we mean
a twice continuously differentiable mapping ϕ I × [0, t1] →  defined by
(1.1) 
which is invertible for each t  [0, t1]. Rather than write ϕ in (1.1), we use the
symbol x and write
(1.2) 
The convention of using x to denote both a spatial coordinate and a function is
common and often preferred over (1.1). In words, (1.2) gives the position x at
time t of the particle, or cross section, labeled h. For a fixed h = h0 the curve
defines the particle path of the particle labeled h0.
The invertibility assumption on ϕ guarantees that (1.2) can be solved for h to
obtain
(1.3) 
This equation determines the particle, or cross section, at position x at time t.
Since (1.2) and (1.3) are inverses,
(1.4) 
and
(1.5) 
Consequently, if f(x, t) is a physical quantity in Eulerian form, then
(1.6) 

gives the Lagrangian description. Conversely, if F(h, t) is a Lagrangian quantity,
then
(1.7) 
gives its description in Eulerian form. The duality principle expressed by (1.6)
and (1.7) is physically meaningful; for example, (1.7) states that the Eulerian
measurement f made by an individual at x at time t coincides with the
measurement F made by one moving on the particle h, at the instant t, when h is
at x.
The chain rule shows that the derivatives are related by
(1.8) 
and
(1.9) 
where fx(x(h, t), t) means fx(x, t) evaluated at x = x(h, t), for example. Good
notation in fluid dynamics is essential. Here we have indicated explicitly the
points at which the derivatives are evaluated. Shortcuts can sometimes lead to
confusing and little understood expressions and equations, and writing out the
general formulas in detail at least once can dismiss much of the confusion.
We are now prepared to introduce displacement, velocity, and acceleration, the
key kinematical descriptors in classical mechanics. If x = h at t = 0, the
displacement U = U(h, t) of the section h is defined by
That is, displacement is where it is now minus where it was at t = 0. This is a
Lagrangian definition. The Eulerian form of displacement can be found by
substituting h = h(x, t):
As in classical mechanics we define the velocity of a particle or cross section h
as the time rate of change of its position, or
which is the same as V(h, t) = Ut(h, t). The Eulerian form of the velocity is
defined by
which gives the velocity of the cross section now at location x. The acceleration
of the cross section labeled h is
Therefore, the acceleration of the cross section now at location x is given in

Eulerian form by
(1.10) 
From (1.9) it follows that
The time rate of change of a physical quantity following a cross section or
particle h that is now located at x, such as occurs on the right side of (1.10), is
called the material derivative of that quantity. Precisely, the material derivative
of f(x, t) is defined by
(1.11) 
where on the right we have explicitly noted that the derivative is taken before the
evaluation at h(x, t) is made. The quantity Df/Dt is interpreted as the time
derivative of F following the cross section h, frozen at the instant h is located at
x. From (1.9) it easily follows that
(1.12) 
Therefore, in Eulerian coordinates, the acceleration can be written
Another kinematic relation that plays an important role in the derivation of the
governing equations is the time rate of change of the Jacobian of the mapping ϕ
defining the flow. The Jacobian is defined by
Hence
or
(1.13) 
Equation (1.13) is the Euler expansion formula. To obtain its Eulerian form, we
let h = h(x, t), so
where j(x, t) = J(h(x, t), t).
Example 8.1

At t = 0 let 0 ≤ h ≤ 1 and define a fluid motion x(h, t) = (1 + t2)h. The inverse is
h(x, t) = x/(1 + t2). The displacements are
Where are the cross sections when t = 2? Clearly, 0 ≤ x ≤ 5. The velocities are
If θ(x, t) = xt3 is the laboratory temperature measured at time t, then the
Lagrangian temperature, riding along on section h, is
The Eulerian acceleration can be computed, for example, by the material
derivative, that is,
Of course, the latter could be computed easier using A(h, t) = Vt(h, t) = 2h, so
that
Finally, the particle paths are the family of parabolas x = (1 + t2)h in the tx plane,
where h is a parameter with 0 ≤ h ≤ 1.
Remark 8.2
Finally, for reference we record a few more kinematical relationships that are
useful in the sequel. Let f(x, t) be a Eulerian measurement with corresponding
Lagrangian measurement F(h, t). Then
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
The proofs of these identities can be carried out by the chain rule and are left as

exercises.

8.1.2 Mass Conservation
The field equations that govern the motion of a one-dimensional continuous
medium express conservation of mass, momentum, and energy, and they are
universal in that they are valid for any medium. In this section we derive the first
of these, mass conservation.
The derivation is based on a Lagrangian approach. First, we find the analytic
implications of the fact that the mass in an arbitrary material portion of the
cylinder at t = 0 does not change as that portion of material moves in time. At
time t = 0 we consider an arbitrary portion of fluid between x = a and x = b (see
Fig. 8.3), and after time t we suppose that this portion of fluid has moved to the
region between x = a(t) = x(a, t) and x = b(t) = x(b, t). If ρ(x, t) denotes the
density of the fluid, then the amount of fluid between a(t) and b(t) is
Figure 8.3 A material quantity of fluid at t = 0 and at t > 0.
Mass conservation requires
(1.14) 
Using Leibniz’s formula for differentiating integrals with variable limits, we
could proceed directly and compute the left side of (1.14) to get a local form of
the law; but we save this as an exercise. We prefer instead a method that easily
generalizes to higher dimensions and is more in the spirit of techniques in fluid
dynamics. We change variables in (1.14) according to x = x(h, t). Then dx = J(h,
t) dh, and (1.14) becomes
(1.15) 

where R(h, t) (read as an uppercase ρ) is the Lagrangian density defined by R(h,
t) = ρ(x(h, t), t). Note that (1.14) has been changed to an integral with constant
limits so that the derivative may be brought directly under the integral because R
and J are continuously differentiable. Consequently,
where we used the Euler expansion formula (1.13). Because a and b are arbitrary
and J is nonzero, we conclude that
(1.16) 
from which we get
or
(1.17) 
This is the conservation of mass law in Lagrangian form. The Eulerian form
can be obtained directly from (1.16) by substituting h = h(x, t). We get
(1.18) 
or
(1.19) 
Equation (1.18), or (1.19), is known as the continuity equation, and it is one of
the fundamental equations of one-dimensional flow. It is a first-order nonlinear
partial differential equation in terms of the density ρ and velocity v. The
corresponding Lagrangian form (1.17) is an equation involving the density R and
displacement U. (Note V = Vt.) To close the system we need an additional
equation, and that comes from momentum balance. We record the main result:
Remark 8.3
We can easily derive an alternate form of mass conservation in material
coordinates by writing (1.17) in the form

and integrating to get
Special types of flows can be identified with corresponding simplifying
assumptions.
Definition 8.4
A fluid motion is said to be incompressible if
A fluid motion is steady if ρ and v are independent of t.
If the flow is incompressible, then it easily follows that vx = 0, or Vh = 0. For
steady flows, (ρv)x = 0, or Vh = 0.
EXERCISES
1. A one-dimensional flow is defined by
a) Sketch the particle paths on xt and ht diagrams.
b) Find V(h, t) and v(x, t).
c) Verify the Eulerian expansion formula.
d) Verify that Dv/Dt = vt + vvx.
e) If the density is R(h, t) = h2, find the density that an observer would
measure at x = 1.
2. Repeat (a) through (e) for a fluid motion defined by
.
3. Repeat (a) through (e) for a fluid motion defined by 
.
4. Use the chain rule to verify (1.8) and (1.9).
5. Show that 
.
6. For a valid flow, state why ux < 1 and Uh > −1.
7. Show that the material derivative operator D/Dt is additive and satisfies
the product rule. Show that
8. The reciprocal W of the Lagrangian density R is called the specific
volume, or volume per mass. If at time t = 0 the density is a constant, R(h, 0)

= ρ0, prove that conservation of mass and momentum can be expressed as
9. Show that the Jacobian J(h, t) is given by
and therefore measures the ratio of the initial density to the density at time t.
Interpret the meaning of the Jacobian when it is written in terms of the
specific volume,
10. Derive the continuity equation (1.19) directly by calculating
using Leibniz’ formula.
11. Prove that
for any sufficiently smooth function g, where a(t) ≤ x ≤ b(t) is a material
region.
12. Write the differential equation Ft + F2Fh = 0, where F = F(h, t), in
Eulerian form.

8.2 Momentum and Energy
8.2.1 Momentum Conservation
In classical mechanics, a particle of mass m having velocity v has linear
momentum mv. Newton’s second law asserts that the time rate of change of
momentum of the particle is equal to the net external force acting upon it. To
generalize this law to one-dimensional continuous media we assume the balance
of linear momentum principle, which states that the time rate of change of linear
momentum of any portion of the fluid equals the sum of the external forces
acting upon it. The linear momentum at time t of material in the material region
a(t) ≤ x ≤ b(t) is defined by
where i is the unit vector in the positive x direction, v(x, t) is the velocity, and A
is the cross-sectional area.
The precise characterization of the forces acting on a material region in a
continuous medium was the result of ideas evolving from works of Newton,
Euler, and Cauchy. Basically, there are two types of forces that act on the
material region, body forces and surface forces. Body forces are forces such as
gravity, or an electric or magnetic field. Such a force is assumed to act on each
cross section of the region and it is represented by
The units of f are force per unit mass, and the total body force acting on the
region a(t) ≤ x ≤ b(t) is therefore
Surface forces are forces like pressure that act across sections in the fluid
medium. More specifically, consider a cross section at time t located at x. By
σ(x, t, i) we denote the force per unit area on the material on the negative (left)
side of the cross section due to the material on the positive (right) side of the
section. Similarly σ(x, t, −i) denotes the force per unit area exerted on the
material on the right side of the section by the material on the left side of the

section. By convention, the third argument in σ, here either i or −i, is a vector
that points outward and normal from the surface on which the force is acting.
The vectors σ(x, t, i) and σ(x, t, −i) are called surface tractions or stress vectors.
Figure 8.4 depicts a geometric description of these notions. Before a cross
section is indicated, no stress is defined; however, once a cross section x is
indicated, the forces Aσ(x, t, i) and Aσ(x, t, −i), which are exerted on the shaded
and unshaded portions, respectively, are defined. In anticipation of what we
prove later, we have drawn these forces opposite and equal in Fig. 8.4. At
present it is not known in which direction these point. And we emphasize that
the third argument in σ, either i or −i, does not define the direction of the stress
but serves only to indicate the orientation, or normal direction, of the surface of
the section. We can now write a quantitative description of the balance of the
linear momentum principle for a material region a(t) ≤ x ≤ b(t),
Figure 8.4 Stress vectors.
(2.1) 
In words, the time rate of change of momentum of the material region [a(t),
b(t)] equals the total body force plus the surface forces on [a(t), b(t)]. A
schematic of the forces is shown in Fig. 8.5. To put (2.1) in a more workable
form we calculate the left side in a similar manner as was done for the integral
form of the conservation of mass equation in the preceding section. Changing
variables to the Lagrangian coordinate h and using the Euler expansion formula
gives

Figure 8.5 Forces on a fluid element.
From the mass conservation equation (1.18) it follows that
Hence,
(2.2) 
and (2.1) can be written
(2.3) 
This equation can be further simplified using the following result, which is the
continuum mechanical version of the action–reaction principle expressed in
Newton’s third law.
Theorem 8.5
The balance of linear momentum principle expressed by (2.3) implies
(2.4) 
for any cross section x.
Proof
Let x0 be arbitrary with a(t) < x0 < b(t). Applying (2.3) to the region between a(t)
and x0 and to the region between x0 and b(t), we get

and
Adding these two equations and then subtracting (2.3) from the result gives
which, because of the arbitrariness of x0, proves (2.4).
This result permits us to define the scalar stress component σ(x, t) by the
equation
Therefore (2.3) becomes
Because the interval [a(t), b(t)] is arbitrary, we have
(2.5) 
which is the Eulerian form expressing balance of linear momentum.
It is straightforward to write the momentum equation in Lagrangian
coordinates. We use T(h, t) to denote the Lagrangian stress; so, T(h, t) = σ(x(h, t),
t). With appropriate evaluation of the terms, equation (2.5) is clearly
or
Now we use mass conservation in the form (8.3) to get
(2.6) 
In summary, the momentum equations are:
Conservation of mass and momentum are valid in a general sense, but they do

not account for the differences in materials, e.g., gases, fluids, solids, etc. And,
as yet, they are under-determined with more variables than equations. This
brings us to a discussion of constitutive relations, or equations that specify the
stresses in a material.
Example 8.6
(Barotropic gas) A familiar and simple form of the equations can be written if
we take the stress to be σ(x, t) = −p(x, t), where p is the pressure. Then the
momentum equation (2.5) with no body forces becomes
(2.7) 
If we further impose that the pressure is a function of density alone, p = F(ρ), the
mass and momentum equations become
which are the the equations for barotropic flow. Upon linearization about a
uniform state, these equations lead to the acoustical equations, and ultimately the
wave equation.

8.2.2 Stress Waves in Solids
The general conservation laws for mass and momentum in continuous media
also hold for solid mechanics. Our physical model is a solid cylindrical bar
where we seek to describe longitudinal vibrations, that is, the motion of the
planar cross sections of the bar. Because we want to keep track of the
displacements of these sections, we write the governing equations in Lagrangian
form with displacement as a dependent quantitiy, or
(2.8) 
(2.9) 
To close the system we need a constitutive relation for the stress T(h, t) in terms
of the remaining dependent variables. Unfortunately, this greatly depends on the
type of material we are considering, e.g., a metal, a crystal lattice, an elastomer
with interwoven polymer chains, a viscoelastic material, and so on. The internal
forces differ tremendously in these materials.
Here we focus on elastic materials and attempt to formulate a constitutive
assumption relating the distortion (compression or elongation) the bar undergoes
subject to an applied stress. To define the distortion we consider at time t = 0 a
small portion of the bar between h and h + Δh0 At time t > 0 this material is
located between x(h, t) and x(h + Δh, t). The distortion is the fractional change
given by
We define the strain E to be the lowest-order approximation of the distortion,
that is,
If U(h, t) denotes the displacement of a cross section h at time t, then x(h, t) = h
+ U(h, t) and
(2.10) 

The constitutive relation is an equation that gives the Lagrangian stress T(h, t)
as a definite function of the strain E(h, t). Quite generally, the graph may look
like the stress-strain curve T = g(E) shown in Fig. 8.6. If, however, only small
strains are of interest, then the stress-strain curve can be approximated by a
straight line by a linear equation
Figure 8.6 Stress T vs. strain E. The strain is E = Uh and Y is Young’s modulus.
(2.11) 
The constant proportionality factor Y is called Young’s modulus2 or the
stiffness, and the linear stress–strain relation (2.11) is called Hooke’s law,3. We
are assuming that Y does not depend on time t; time-dependent materials are said
to have memory. With this assumption, the momentum equation (2.9) becomes
(2.12) 
which is a one-dimensional wave equation for the displacement U. Once this
equation is solved for U, then the mass balance equation (2.8) gives the density
R(h, t).
Generally, a rod of finite extent, 0 ≤ h ≤ l, is subject to boundary conditions at
its ends h = 0, h = l. For definiteness we focus on the end h = l. Clearly if the end
is held fixed, then
If the end is free, or no force acts on the face at h = l, then T(l, t) = 0 or Y(l)E(l,
t)>= 0, or
Other conditions are possible. For example, if the left end is fixed, for example,
attached to a rigid wall, and the right end is attached to a Hookean spring that is

attached to a wall, having spring constant k, then the boundary conditions are
where A is the area of the face, and k is given in force per length.
Remark 8.7
(Units) From a practical viewpoint, we note that Young’s modulus is given in
GPa (giga Pascals), an mks unit for stress. A Pascal is one Newton per meter-
squared, and the prefix giga means 109. So, Young’s modulus is large. For
example, common materials are diamond (1000 GPa), stainless steel (200 GPa),
and rubber (0.007 GPa).
Example 8.8
(Elongation of an elastic cord) Consider a long, thin elastic cord (say, a bungee
cord) that has natural length L0, constant modulus Y, and constant density R0.
Then the cord is hung vertically and stretches under the force of gravity g. How
much does it stretch? We wait until the system is in steady state, so the
governing equation is
Using T = 0 at h = L0 after integration gives
Finally, substituting T = YUh and then integrating again gives
Setting h = L0 gives the final hanging length
Eulerian formulation. In Eulerian coordinates, the constitutive assumption
becomes
(2.13) 
where σ(x, t) = T(h(x, t), t), y(x, t) = Y(h(x, t)), and ε(x, t) = E(h(x, t),t). Using the
relation

where u is the Eulerian displacement, Hooke’s law (2.13) can be written
(2.14) 
Then, σ can be eliminated from the momentum equation (2.8) to obtain
(2.15) 
In summary, this momentum equation (2.15) and the mass conservation equation
(2.16) 
give two equations for the three unknowns v, u, and ρ. The third equation is the
defining relationship between u and v,
(2.17) 
The Eulerian equations (2.15), (2.16), and (2.17) are nonlinear equations, and
the constitutive equation (2.14) is nonlinear as well. This is in stark contrast to
the Lagrangian equations. Thus, linearity in one formulation does not imply
linearity in the other.
Further, equations (2.15), (2.16), and (2.17) cannot be resolved analytically.
However, as was the case in the acoustic approximation, we can obtain a
linearized theory for small displacements u. To this end, consider a bar with
initial density ρ0(x) and stiffness (Young’s modulus) y0(x). For a small
displacement theory assume u and its derivatives are small compared to unity.
From (2.17),
and
Let 
 denote a small deviation from the initial density ρ0(x); that is,
Then, using the mean value theorem,
where 0 < ť < t and x <  < x − u. Hence the deviation  is small provided that u
and t are small and that the derivatives Rh and Rt are bounded. A similar

calculation shows that if y(x, t) = y0(x) + (x, t), then the deviation  satisfies the
equality | (x, t)| = |Yh( )u|, and therefore 
 is small if u is small and Yh is
bounded.
With this information, the momentum equation can be written (taking f = 0)
Retaining the lowest-order terms gives the linearized, small displacement
equation
(2.18) 
Subject to the assumptions in the last paragraph we may expect (2.18) to
govern small longitudinal vibrations of a bar of density ρ0(x) and stiffness y0(x).
Notice that the unknown density dropped out of (2.15) and could be replaced by
the initial density ρ0(x). Therefore (2.18) is one equation in the single unknown
u; the conservation of mass equation is then a consistency relation.
If ρ0(x) = ρ0 and y0(x) = y0, where ρ0 and y0 are constants, then (2.18) reduces
to the classical wave equation
If the extent of the rod is 0 ≤ x ≤ l, then the wave equation is accompanied by
boundary conditions. For a fixed endpoint, say at x = l, then
If the end is free (no stress), then
A properly posed problem for determining the small displacements u(x, t) of a
bar of length l with stiffness y0(x) and density ρ0(x) consists of the partial
differential equation (2.18) along with boundary conditions at x = 0 and x = l,
and with initial conditions of the form
where u0(x) and v0(x) are the given initial displacement and velocity,
respectively.
EXERCISES

1. Derive the conservation of mass and momentum equations for one-
dimensional flow in a cylinder of variable (Lagrangian) cross-sectional area
A(h, t). Assume A(h, t) = A(h, 0) for all t > 0. Specifically, show
where a(x, t) = A(h(x, t),0).
2. A rubber cord of natural length 15 meters is hung vertically from a bridge.
Its density is 1200 kg per cubic meter, and its modulus is 0.007 GPa. What is
it hanging length?
3. A time-periodic solution of the wave equation
of the form
subject to boundary conditions at x = 0 and x = l, is called a standing wave.
The set of values ω and the corresponding spatial distributions ω(x) are
called the fundamental frequencies and normal modes of vibration,
respectively. Determine the fundamental frequencies and normal modes for
the following wave equations.
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 

8.2.3 Thermodynamics and Energy
Conservation
The Euler equations of motion for a one-dimensional continuum with no body
forces are
(2.19) 
(2.20) 
This is a pair of first-order nonlinear partial differential equations for the three
unknowns ρ, v, and p. Intuition tells us that a third equation is needed. Further
reflection dictates that particular physical properties of the medium must play a
role, and such properties are not included in (2.19)–(2.20), which are completely
general and hold for any continuum. Equations that specify properties of the
medium are known as equations of state or constitutive relations. Such
equations give relations between observable effects and the internal constitution
of the material, and they are generally expressible in terms of thermodynamic
variables such as density, pressure, energy, entropy, temperature, and so on.
Example 8.9
(Barotropic gas) In Example 8.6 we introduced a simple barotropic equation of
state where the pressure depends only upon the density, or
(2.21) 
where F is a given differentiable function and F′(ρ) > 0. For example, the
barotropic equation of state
is a law used for many gases, called γ-law gases (e.g., air is a gamma law gas).
Implicit in (2.21) is the assumption that other thermodynamic variables, e.g.,
temperature, are not involved. The barotropic gas describes only certain classes
of flows.
Therefore, in contrast to (2.21), it is more often the case that the equation of
state introduces yet another unknown variable in the problem, such as the
temperature. If that is the case, then still another equation is required. Such an
equation must come from energy conservation. For general fluid motions a
complete set of field equations usually consists of conservation equations for

mass, momentum, and energy, as well as one or more constitutive relations. A
discussion of energy conservation naturally entails development of some basic
concepts in equilibrium thermodynamics.
Classic thermodynamics deals with relations between equilibrium states of
uniform matter and the laws that govern changes in those states. It is implicit
that the changes occur through a sequence of uniform equilibrium states, and the
usual results of equilibrium thermodynamics apply. (It is possible to imagine
processes that take place so rapidly that local fluid elements are incapable of
establishing instantaneous equilibrium. Such processes belong to the study of
nonequilibrium fluid dynamics.) Each thermodynamic quantity, such as
temperature, pressure, and so on, is assumed to be a function of position and
time, and thermodynamical relations are assumed to hold locally. To illustrate
this principle, consider a hypothetical gas in a container and let P, R, and Θ
denote its pressure, density, and temperature, respectively. It is observed
experimentally that the ratio of pressure to density is proportional to the
temperature, or
(2.22) 
where 
 is the constant of proportionality, characteristic of the gas. Equation
(2.22) is a Lagrangian statement because it holds for a material volume of gas.
The assumption of local thermodynamic equilibrium allows us to assume that
where p, ρ, and the temperature θ are the local Eulerian quantities that are
functions of x and t.
Example 8.10
(Ideal gas) Under normal conditions most gases obey the ideal gas law
(2.23) 
(2.24) 
where p is pressure, ρ is density, θ is temperature, and e is the internal energy per
unit mass (or specific internal energy). The constant cv is the specific heat at
constant volume and 
. is the gas constant for the particular gas. A gas
satisfying (2.23) and (2.24) is called an ideal gas and many compressible fluids
of practical interest can be treated approximately as ideal gases. Hence (2.23)
and (2.24) describe a wide range of phenomena in fluid dynamics. These

equations coupled with (2.19) and (2.20) give only four equations for the five
unknowns p, v, ρ, θ, and e, so it is again evident that another equation is
required.
A common statement of the first law of thermodynamics is that energy is
conserved if heat is taken into account. Thus, the first law of thermodynamics
provides a concise statement of energy conservation. It comes from considering
the consequences of adding a small amount of heat to a unit mass of a material
substance in a way that equilibrium conditions are established at each step. Some
of the energy will go into the work pd(1/ρ) done in expanding the specific
volume 1/ρ by d(1/ρ), and the remainder will go into increasing the specific
internal energy e by de. The precise relationship is
(2.25) 
where the differential form q is the heat added. For an equilibrium process
equation (2.25) is the first law of thermodynamics. In general, q is not an exact
differential, that is, there does not exist a state function Q for which q = dQ. If q
= 0, then the process is called adiabatic.
Example 8.11
(Equations of state) For an ideal gas described by equations (2.23) and (2.24),
we have
(2.26) 
From (2.26) we notice that θ−1 is an integrating factor for the differential form q.
Therefore
where
(2.27) 
is the entropy. Consequently, for an ideal gas the first law (2.25) takes the form
(2.28) 
Equation (2.27) may also be written in terms of the pressure as
(2.29) 
where

and k is a constant. Combining (2.23) and (2.24) gives yet another form of the
equation of state, namely
(2.30) 
Finally, in some contexts, particularly in studying chemical reactions, it is useful
to introduce the enthalpy h defined by h = e + p/ρ. For an ideal gas h = cpθ,
where cp =  + cv is the specific heat at constant pressure. Hence γ = cp/cv is the
ratio of specific heats. For air, γ = 1.4, and for a monatomic gas, 
.
Generally, γ > 1.
Example 8.12
Other equations of state have been proposed to include various effects. The Abel
or Clausius equation of state,
introduces a constant covolume α to account for the size of the molecules. The
van der Waals equation of state
contains the term βρ2 to further account for intermolecular forces. The Tait
equation
where  and B are constants, has been used to model the behavior of liquids at
high pressures.
We now formulate a partial differential equation governing the flow of energy
in a system. The approach is consistent with the earlier development of balance
laws in integral form. Let [a(t), b(t)] be a one-dimensional material region with
cross-sectional area A. We define the kinetic energy of the fluid in the region by
and the internal energy in the region by

By the general conservation of energy principle the time rate of change of the
total energy equals the rate that the forces do work on the region plus the rate
that heat flows into the region. There are two forces, the body force f(x, t) acting
at each cross section of the region, and the stress σ(x, t) acting at the two ends.
Since force times velocity equals the rate work is done, the total rate that work
is done on the region is
The rate that heat flows into the region is AJ(a(t), t) − AJ(b(t), t), where J(x, t)
is the heat flux in energy units per unit area per time. Therefore, we postulate the
balance of energy law
or
Assuming sufficient smoothness of the state variables and using the arbitrariness
of the interval [a(t), b(t)], we have the following Eulerian differential form of the
conservation of energy law:
(2.31) 
Equation (2.31) can be recast into various forms. First, multiplication of the
momentum balance equation (2.5) by v gives
Subtracting this from (2.31) gives an equation for the rate of change of internal
energy
(2.32) 
An alternate approach to energy conservation comes from an examination of
the first law of thermodynamics (2.25). The second law of thermodynamics

states that the differential form q in general has integrating factor θ−1 and θ−1q =
ds, where s is the entropy and θ is the absolute temperature. Thus
This combined form of the first and second laws of thermodynamics can be
reformulated as a partial differential equation. Because it refers to a given
material region, we postulate
(2.33) 
which is another local form of the conservation of energy principle. Noting that
Dρ−1/Dt = -(1/ρ2)Dρ/Dt = -(1/ρ)vx and putting σ = −p, equation (2.33) may be
subtracted from (2.32) to obtain
which relates the entropy change to the heat flux. If we assume the constitutive
relation J = −Kθx, which is Fourier’s law, then the energy equation (2.33) can be
expressed as
(2.34) 
Example 8.13
(Adiabatic flow) In adiabatic flow θDs/Dt = 0, and the energy equation (2.33)
becomes
(2.35) 
Equations (2.19), (2.20), and (2.35), along with a thermal equation of state p =
p(ρ, θ) and a caloric equation of state e = e(ρ, θ), give a set of five equations for
the unknowns ρ, v, p, e, and θ.
Example 8.14
(Ideal gas) For adiabatic flow of an ideal gas, expression (2.30) for the energy
can be substituted into (2.35) to obtain
(2.36) 
Equations (2.19), (2.20), and (2.36) give three equations for ρ, v, and p. Because

Ds/Dt = 0, the entropy is constant for a given fluid particle (cross section); in
Lagrangian form S = S(h). In this case the equations governing adiabatic flow
are often written
along with the equation of state (2.29), giving p = p(s, ρ). If the entropy is
constant initially, that is, S(h, 0) = s0 for all h, then s(x, t) = S0 for all x and t, and
the resulting adiabatic flow is called isentropic. This case reduces to barotropic
flow as discussed earlier.
In general, for nonadiabatic flow involving heat conduction, equations (2.19),
(2.20), and (2.34), along with thermal and caloric equations of state give five
equations for ρ, v, p, e, and θ. If there is no motion (v = 0) and s = cv ln θ+ const.,
then (2.34) reduces to the classic diffusion equation
EXERCISES
1. By introducing the enthalpy h = e + p/ρ into the energy equation De/Dt+
pD(ρ−1)/Dt = 0, show that for steady flow
Prove that
2. Derive (2.29) and (2.33).
3. Show that the equations governing the one-dimensional, time-dependent
flow of a compressible fluid under constant pressure are
Subject to initial conditions v(x, 0) = f(x), ρ(x, 0) = g(x), and e(x, 0) = h(x),
where f, g, and h are given smooth functions with nonnegative derivatives,
derive the solution v = f(x − vt) and
Here, e is measured in energy per unit volume.

8.3 Gas Dynamics
8.3.1 Riemann’s Method
Heretofore there has been little discussion of how fluid motion begins. It is
common in gas dynamics, or compressible fluid dynamics, to imagine the flow
being induced by the motion of a piston inside the cylindrical pipe. Such a
device is not as unrealistic as it may first appear. The piston may represent the
fluid on one side of the valve after it is opened or it may represent a detonator in
an explosion process; while in aerodynamics it may represent a blunt object
moving into a gas.
Accordingly, we set up and solve a simple problem using Riemann’s method,
which is used in more general problems in gas dynamics. We consider a gas in a
tube initially in the constant state
(3.1) 
with equation of state
(3.2) 
To initiate the motion a piston located initially at x = 0 is withdrawn slowly
according to
(3.3) 
where X is given function (see Fig. 8.7). The problem is to determine v, p, c, and
ρ for all t > 0 and X(t) < x < ∞. We may regard this as a boundary value problem
where initial conditions are given along the positive x axis and v is given by the
piston velocity along the piston path (see Fig. 8.8). The method of solution is
motivated by the study of the simple nonlinear model equation ut + c(u)ux = 0
from Chapter 7. There we were able to define a family of curves called
characteristics along which signals propagated and along which the partial
differential equation reduced to an ordinary differential equation. In the case of
this model equation du/dt = 0 along dx/dt = c(u). We follow a similar strategy for
the nonlinear acoustic equations in Chapter 7, equations (4.7) and (4.8), and
attempt to find characteristic curves along which the partial differential
equations reduce to simpler equations. To this end we multiply (4.7) by c and
then add and subtract it from (4.8) to obtain

Figure 8.7 Piston problem. A receding, decelerating piston
Figure 8.8 Space-time diagram of the piston problem.
(3.4) 
(3.5) 
Hence, along the families of curves C+ and C− defined by
(3.6) 
(3.7) 
we have
(3.8) 
(3.9) 
Equations (3.8) and (3.9) may be rewritten as
Integrating gives
(3.10) 

(3.11) 
The left sides of (3.10) and (3.11) are called the Riemann invariants; they are
quantities that are constant along the characteristic curves C+ and C− defined by
(3.6) and (3.7). If the equation of state is defined by (3.2), then
and
Therefore, the Riemann invariants are
(3.12) 
(3.13) 
We have enough information from the Riemann invariants to determine the
solution of the piston withdrawal problem. First consider the C− characteristics.
Since c = c0 when v = 0 the characteristics that begin on the x axis leave with
speed −c0 and the constant in (3.13) has valued 2c0/(γ − 1). Hence on the C−
characteristics
(3.14) 
Since the last equation must hold along every C− characteristic it must hold
everywhere and therefore r- is constant in the entire region t > 0, X(t) < x < ∞.
The C− characteristics must end on the piston path, since their speed vp − cp at
the piston is more negative than the speed vp of the piston (see Fig. 8.9). It is
easy to see that the C+ characteristics are straight lines. Adding and subtracting
(3.14) and (3.12) shows
Figure 8.9 C+ and C− characteristics. The C+ characteristics are slowly fanning
out.

We have used the fact that (3.14) holds everywhere. The speed v + c of a C+
characteristic is therefore constant and thus the characteristic is a straight line.
The C+ characteristics emanating from the x axis have speed c0 (since v = 0 on
the x axis) and carry the constant state v = 0, c = c0, p = p0, ρ = ρ0 into the region
x > c0t. This is just the uniform state ahead of the signal x = c0t beginning at the
origin traveling at speed c0 into the constant state. This signal indicates the initial
motion of the piston.
A C+ characteristic beginning on the piston at (T (τ), τ) and passing through (x,
t) has equation
(3.15) 
The speed v + c can be calculated as follows. Clearly v = X’(t), which is the
velocity of the piston. From (3.14)
and hence
Thus
(3.16) 
is the equation of the desired C+ characteristic (see Fig. 8.10). The fact that v, c,
p, and ρ are constant on the C+ characteristics gives the solution

Figure 8.10 Positive characteristic carrying information from the piston path.
where τ is given implicitly by (3.16). Obviously
The quantities p and ρ may be calculated from the equation of state and the
definition of c2. Qualitatively we think of C− characteristics as carrying the
values
from the constant state back into the flow. The C+ characteristics carry
information from the piston forward into the flow. Whenever one of the Riemann
invariants is constant throughout the flow, we say that the solution in the
nonuniform region is a simple wave. It can be shown that a simple wave
solution always exists adjacent to a uniform state provided that the solution
remains smooth. A complete analysis is given in Courant and Friedrichs (1948).
In the piston withdrawal problem previously discussed we assumed that the
piston path x = X(t) satisfied the conditions X’(t) < 0 and X″(t) < 0, which means
the piston is always accelerating backward. If there is ever an instant of time
when the piston slows down, that is, X″(t) > 0, then a smooth solution cannot
exist for all t > 0, for two distinct C+ characteristics emanating from the piston
will cross. Suppose, for example, that τ1 and τ2 are two values of t in a time
interval where X″(t) > 0. The speed of characteristics leaving the piston is
If τ1 < τ2, then X′ (τ1) < X′ (τ2) and it follows that v + c at τ1 is smaller than v + c

at τ2. Therefore the characteristic emanating from (X (τ2), τ2) is faster than the
characteristic emanating from (X (τ1), τ1). Thus the two characteristics must
cross (see Fig. 8.11).
Figure 8.11 Colliding positive characteristics.
Example 8.15
Beginning at time t = 0 a piston located at x − 0 moves forward into a gas under
uniform conditions with equation of state given by (3.2). Its path is given by X(t)
= at2, a > 0. We determine the first instant of time that two characteristics cross
and the wave breaks. For this problem the preceding analysis remains valid and
the C+ characteristics emanating from the piston have equation (3.16) or
or
(3.17) 
Along such a characteristic v is constant and hence
where τ = τ(x, t) is to be determined from (3.17). To solve (3.17) for τ requires
by the implicit function theorem that Fτ(x, t, τ) ≠ 0. Since Fτ = 2γaτ + (c0 − (γ +
1)at), the first instant of time t that (3.17) cannot be solved for τ is
That is, the breaking time tb will occur along the first characteristic (indexed by
τ) where Fτ = 0. The characteristic diagram is shown in Fig. 8.12 in the special
case a = c0 = 1 and γ = 3.

Figure 8.12 The positive characteristics emanating from the piston path and
forming an envelope. The characteristics intersect in the region between the
envelope and the curve x = c0t. The shock begins at time tb

8.3.2 Rankine–Hugoniot Conditions
As we observed earlier smooth solutions break down when characteristics
intersect, since constant values are carried along the characteristics. The solution
that develops is a discontinuous one and it propagates as a shock wave. We now
determine what conditions hold across such a discontinuity. We proceed as in
Section 8.1 where conservation laws are discussed.
The integral form of the conservation of mass law, namely
(3.18) 
holds in all cases, even when the functions ρ and v are not smooth. In Chapter 7
we derived the jump condition across a shock, which we briefly review. Let x =
s(t) be a smooth curve in space–time that intersects the interval a ≤ x ≤ b at time
t, and suppose v, ρ, and p suffer simple discontinuities along the curve.
Otherwise v, ρ, and p are assumed to be C1 functions with finite limits on each
side of x = s(t). Then, by Leibniz’ rule,
Both integrals on the right side approach zero as a → s(t)− and b → s(t)+ and
therefore from (3.18) it follows that
(3.19) 
If the values (one-sided limits) of ρ and v on the right and left sides of x = s(t)
are denoted by the subscripts zero and one, respectively, for example,
then (3.19) can be written
(3.20) 
In a similar fashion the condition

(3.21) 
can be obtained from the integral form of the conservation of momentum law.
The two conditions (3.20) and (3.21) are known as the Rankine–Hugoniot
jump conditions; they relate the values ρ0, v0, p0 ahead of the discontinuity to
the speed s′ of the discontinuity and to the values ρ1, v1, and p1 behind it. If the
state ahead is at rest, that is, v0 = 0, then the conditions become
(3.22) 
(3.23) 
Supplemented with the equation of state
(3.24) 
the equations can be regarded as three equations in the four unknowns ρ1, v1, P1,
and s’. If any one of these quantities is known, the remaining three may be
determined.
It is helpful to picture the information contained in (3.22)–(3.24) on a pρ
diagram as shown in Fig. 8.13. The solid curve is the graph of the equation of
state p = f(ρ). It is known as the Hugoniot curve; and all states, both initial and
final, must lie on this curve. The straight line connecting the state ahead (ρ0, P0)
to the state behind (ρ1, p1) is the Rayleigh line. If (3.23) is rewritten using
equation (3.22) as
Figure 8.13 The Hugoniot diagram.
then it is clear that the slope of the Rayleigh line is given by

These ideas extend beyond this simple case to more general problems in
gasdynamics (see Courant and Friedrichs (1948)).
EXERCISES
1. Derive the jump condition (3.21).
2. Discuss the piston withdrawal problem when the piston path is given by x
= −V0t, where V0 is a positive constant. Assume an equation of state p = kργ
with uniform conditions v = 0, p = p0, ρ = ρ0, c = c0 ahead of the piston at t =
0.
3. At t = 0 the gas in a tube x ≥ 0 is at rest. For t > 0 a piston initially located
at x = 0 moves according to the law x = X(t), where X(t) is small. Show that
in the acoustic approximation the motion induced in the gas is
and find the corresponding density variation.
4. A sphere of initial radius r0 pulsates according to r(t) = r0 + A sin ωt. In
the linearized theory find the motion of the gas outside the sphere.

8.4 Fluid Motions in 3
In the early sections the equations governing fluid motion were developed in one
spatial dimension. This limitation is severe, however, because most interesting
fluid phenomena occur in higher dimensions. In this section we derive the field
equations for fluid dynamics in three dimensions, with the two-dimensional case
being an obvious corollary. Our use of vector notation makes this higher
dimensional case appear very clean compared to the detail written out earlier in
the one-dimensional case; moreover, much of the road work has been done and
the key ideas have been presented. The result is a section that may appear more
like a formal mathematical treatment, rather than a physical one.

8.4.1 Kinematics
Let Ω0 be an arbitrary closed bounded set in 
3. We imagine that Ω0 is a region
occupied by a fluid at time t = 0. By a fluid motion we mean a mapping ϕt: Ω0
→ Ωt defined for all t in an interval I containing the origin, which maps the
region Ω0 into Ωt = ϕt(Ω0), the latter being the region occupied by the same fluid
at time t (see Fig. 8.14). We assume that ϕt is represented by the formula
Figure 8.14 Fluid motion.
(4.1) 
where h = (h1, h2, h3) is in Ω0 and x = (x1, x2, x3) = (x, y, z), with
Thus h is a Lagrangian coordinate or particle label given to each fluid particle at
t = 0, and x is the Eulerian coordinate representing the laboratory position of the
particle h at time t. We further assume that the function x(h, t) is twice
continuously differentiable on its domain Ω0 × I and that for each t  I the
mapping ϕt has a unique inverse defined by
Hence
By convention, functions of h and t that represent the results of Lagrangian
measurements will be denoted by capital letters, and functions of x and t that
represent the results of a fixed laboratory measurement will be denoted by
lowercase letters. The measurements are connected by the formulas

In the sequel we often use the notation F|x and f|h to denote the right sides of
these equations, respectively.
For a given fluid motion (4.1), the fluid velocity is defined by
Then
V(h, t) = V1(h, t), V2(h, t), V3(h, t)  is the actual velocity vector of the fluid
particle h at time t, whereas v(x, t) = v1(x, t), v2(x, t), v3(x, t)  is the velocity
vector measured by a fixed observer at location x. If h0 is a fixed point in Ω0,
then the curve x = x(h0, t), t  I, is called the particle path of the particle h0. The
following theorem states that knowledge of the Eulerian velocity field v(x, t) is
equivalent to knowledge of all the particle paths.
Theorem 8.16
If the velocity vector field v(x, t) is known, then all of the particle paths can be
determined, and conversely.
Proof
First we prove the converse. If each particle path is given, then the function x =
x(h, t) is known for all h  Ω0. Consequently, h = h(x, t) can be determined and
v can be calculated from
Now assume v(x, t) is given. Then
or
(4.2) 
where explicit dependence on h has been dropped. Equation (4.2) is a first-order
system of differential equations for x. Its solution subject to the initial condition
gives the particle paths x = x(h, t).

It is interesting to contrast the particle paths with the so-called streamlines of
the flow. The latter are integral curves of the vector field v(x, t0) frozen at some
fixed but arbitrary instant t0 of time. Thus the streamlines are found by solving
the system
(4.3) 
where x = x(s) and s is a parameter along the curves. If v is independent of t,
then the flow is called steady and the streamlines coincide with the particle
paths. In a time-dependent flow they need not coincide.
Example 8.17
Consider the fluid motion
Then
Inverting the motion,
Therefore
and thus the motion is not steady. The streamlines at time t0 are given by
solutions to (4.3), or
Hence
where c1, c2, and c3 are constants.
As in the one-dimensional case we define the material derivative by
where f and F are the Eulerian and Lagrangian representations of a given
measurement, respectively. A straightforward calculation using the chain rule
shows that

Evaluating at h = h(x, t) gives
(4.4) 
If f = f1, f2, f3  is a vector function, then componentwise,
and we write
Here v · ∇ is a special notation for the operator 
.
The material derivative Df/Dt at (x, t) is a measure of the time rate of change of
the quantity F moving with the particle h frozen at the instant the particle is at x.
Another kinematical result is the three-dimensional analog of the Euler
expansion theorem. It gives the time rate of change of the Jacobian
of the transformation ϕt. We record this as a theorem.
Theorem 8.18
In Lagrangian and Eulerian form, respectively,
where j(x, t) = J(h(x, t), t).
Details of the proof, based on the formula for differentiating a determinant, are
left as an exercise. The reader will be asked to show the result for two
dimensions.
In the one-dimensional case the derivation of many of the results depends on

knowing the time derivative of an integral over the moving material region. For
three dimensions we state this as a fundamental theorem.
Theorem 8.19
(The convection theorem) Let g = g(x, t) be a continuously differentiable
function. Then
(4.5) 
Proof
The region of integration Ωt of the integral on the left side of (4.5) depends on t,
and therefore the time derivative cannot be brought under the integral sign
directly. A change of variables in the integral from Eulerian coordinates x to
Lagrangian coordinates h will transform the integral to one over the fixed, time-
independent volume Ω0. The derivative may then be brought under the integral
sign and the calculation can proceed. Letting x = x(h, t), we have
Here we have used the familiar formula for changing variables in a multiple
integral where the Jacobian enters as a factor in the new volume element. Then,
also using Theorem 8.10,
where in the last step we transformed back to Eulerian coordinates and used
(4.4).
The following important corollary follows immediately.
Corollary 8.20
(Reynold’s transport theorem) We have

(4.6) 
where n is the outer unit normal to the surface ∂Ωt.
Proof
The integrand on the right side of (4.5) is
Thus
An application of the divergence theorem yields
and the corollary follows.
The interpretation is straightforward. Prom calculus we recall that the integral
ƒ∂Ωt gv · n dA represents the flux of the vector field gv through the surface ∂Ωt.
Hence (4.6) states that the time rate of change of the quantity 
, where both
the integrand and the region of integration depend on t, equals the integral,
frozen in time, of the change in g plus the flux or convection of g through the
boundary ∂Ωt. Equation (4.6) is the three-dimensional version of Leibniz’
formula.
Mass Conservation. With all this machinery, it is a simple matter to obtain a
mathematical expression of mass conservation. We take it as a physical axiom
that a given material volume of fluid has the same mass as it evolves in time.
Symbolically
where ρ(x, t) is the Eulerian density. Thus
and Theorem 8.11 gives, upon taking g = ρ,
(4.7) 

because the volume Ωt is arbitrary. The first-order nonlinear partial differential
equation (4.7) is the continuity equation, and it is a mathematical expression for
conservation of mass.
An important class of fluid motions are those in which a material region
maintains the same volume. Thus we say a fluid motion ϕt: Ω0 → Ωt is
incompressible if
As earlier, we denote the Lagrangian density by R(h, t) = ρ(x(h, t), t).
Theorem 8.21
The following are equivalent:
(i) ϕt is incompressible,
(ii) Δ · v = 0,
(iii) Rt = 0,
(iv) Dρ/Dt = 0.
Proof
The proof is straightforward. By definition, (iii) and (iv) are equivalent, while
(ii) and (iv) are equivalent by conservation of mass (4.7). Finally (i) and (ii) are
equivalent by setting g = 1 in the convection theorem.

8.4.2 Dynamics
The nature of the forces on a fluid element was presented in Section 8.1 for one-
dimensional flows. The idea in three dimensions is again to generalize Newton’s
second law, which states for a particle of mass m that dp/dt = F, or the time rate
of change of momentum is the total force. For a material region Ωt of fluid we
define the momentum by
The forces on the fluid region are of two types, body forces, which act at each
point of the region, and surface forces or tractions, which act on the boundary of
the region. Body forces will be denoted by f(x, t), which represents the force per
unit mass acting at the point x at time t. Thus the total body force on the region
Ωt is
At each point x on the boundary ∂Ωt of the given region Ωt we assume that there
exists a vector σ(x, t; n) called the stress vector, which represents the force per
unit area acting at x at time t on the surface ∂Ωt by the material exterior to Ωt.
We note that the stress at x depends on the orientation of the surface through x.
Simply put, different surfaces will have different stresses (see Fig. 8.15). The
dependence of σ upon the orientation of the surface is denoted by the argument n
in σ(x, t; n), where n is the outward unit normal to the surface. We think of n as
pointing toward the material that is causing the stress. Therefore the total surface
force or traction on the region Ωt is given by
Figure 8.15 Diagram showing the dependence of the stress vector σ on the unit
normal n. At x, the material on the right is exerting a force on the material to the
left; the stress vector σ(x, t; n) indicates the direction of the force.

We now postulate the balance of momentum principle, also called Cauchy’s
stress principle, which states that for all material regions Ωt
(4.8) 
In words, the time rate of change of momentum equals the total force. Because
we may write (4.8) as
(4.9) 
At a given point x in a fluid on a surface, defined by the orientation n, the
stress on the fluid exterior to Ωt caused by the fluid interior to Ωt is equal and
opposite to the stress on the interior caused by the fluid exterior to Ωt. More
precisely, see the following theorem.
Theorem 8.22
(Action–reaction) The stress vector satisfies the condition
(4.10) 
Proof
Let Ωt be a material region and divide it into two regions Ω1
t and Ω2
t by a

surface S that passes through an arbitrary point x in Ωt (refer to Fig. 8.16).
Applying (4.9) to Ω1t and Ω2t, we obtain
Figure 8.16 Action-reaction principle.
(4.11) 
(4.12) 
Subtracting (4.9) from the sum of (4.11) and (4.12) gives
where n is the outward unit normal to Ω1
t. The integral mean value theorem
implies
(4.13) 
where z is some point on S and n1 is the outward unit normal to Ω1t at z. Taking
the limit as the volume of Ωt goes to zero in such a way that the area of S goes to
zero and x remains on S we get z → x and n1 → n, and so (4.13) implies the
result.
As it turns out, the stress vector σ(x, t; n) depends in a very special way on the
unit normal n. The next theorem is one of the fundamental results in fluid
mechanics.
Theorem 8.23
(Cauchy theorem) Let σi(x, t; n), i = 1, 2, 3, denote the three components of the
stress vector σ(x, t; n), and let n = (n1, n2, n3). Then there exists a matrix

function σji(x, t) such that
(4.14) 
In fact
(4.15) 
where ej, j = 1, 2, 3, denote the unit vectors in the direction of the coordinate
axes x1, x2, and x3, respectively.
Proof
Let t be a fixed instant of time and let Ωt be a tetrahedron at x as shown in Fig.
8.17 with the three faces S1, S2, and S3 parallel to the coordinate planes and the
face S is the oblique face. Using the integral mean value theorem, we have
Figure 8.17 Proof of Cauchy’s theorem.
where zi is a point on Si and z is a point on S. Here A denotes the area function
and n is the outer normal to S. Because
(we have defined l to be √A(S)), it follows that

where Theorem 8.22 has been applied. Taking the limit as l → 0 gives
We now show that
(4.16) 
To this end, it follows from (4.9) that
where the last inequality results from the boundedness of the integrand. Dividing
by l2 and taking the limit as l → 0 proves (4.16). Consequently
(4.17) 
or in component form
Defining the σji
by gives the final result.
The nine quantities σji are the components of the stress tensor. By definition,
σji is the ith component of the stress vector on the face whose normal is ej. For
example, σ21, σ22, and σ23 are shown in Fig. 8.18. Equation (4.17) shows that
σ(x, t; n) can be resolved into a linear combination of σ(x, t; e1), σ(x, t; e2), and
σ(x, t, e3), that is, into three stresses that are the stresses on the coordinate planes
at x. These stresses are shown in Fig. 8.19. The components of the three vectors
shown are the σji.
Figure 8.18 The stress vector σ(x, t, e2) and its three stress components.

Figure 8.19 Stress tensor components.
With the aid of Theorem 8.23 a vector partial differential equation can be
formulated that expresses the momentum balance law (4.9). This calculation is
facilitated by adopting a notational convention that saves in writing summation
signs in complicated expressions. This practice is called the summation
convention and it assumes that a sum is taken over any repeated index in a given
term. Thus
and
The range of the summation index (or indices) is determined from context. For
example (4.14) may be written σi = σjinj with a sum over j = 1 to j = 3 assumed
on the right side. Any index not summed in a given expression is called a free
index. Free indices vary over their appropriate ranges; for example, in (4.14) the
index i is free and ranges over i = 1, 2, 3. In (4.15) both i and j are free with i, j =
1, 2, 3. In terms of this convention the divergence theorem may be expressed

(4.18) 
where f = (f1, f2, f3) and n = (n1, n2, n3). On both sides of the equation i is
assumed to be summed from i = 1 to i = 3.
In component form (4.9) is
(4.19) 
But the right side is
where we have used (4.14) and (4.18). Then (4.19) becomes
Because of the arbitrariness of the region of integration
(4.20) 
Equations (4.20) are the Cauchy equations or equations of motion, and they
represent balance of linear momentum. Along with the continuity equation (4.7)
we have four equations for ρ, the three components vi of the velocity, and the
nine components σji of the stress tensor. What remains, which is the most
difficult issue of all, is specification of the stress tensor.
There is a common way to write the Cauchy stress principle in terms of a fixed
laboratory volume Ω1. It is expressed by the following theorem.
Theorem 8.24
Cauchy’s stress principle (4.8) is equivalent to
(4.21) 
where Ω1 is any fixed region in 
3.
Proof
Using Corollary 8.12 with g  ρvi gives

Therefore
Now let Ω1 be the volume that coincides with Ωt at t = t1. Then
Applying (4.9) gives (4.21).
Example 8.25
(Force on an object) As an application of (4.21) we compute the force on a
stationary object in a steady fluid flow. Suppose S1 is the boundary of the object
and let S be an imaginary surface that contains the object (see Fig. 8.20).
Assume the flow is steady and that there is no body force (f = 0). Letting Ω1 be
the region in between S and S1 and applying the vector form of (4.21) gives
Figure 8.20 Flow around an obstacle with boundary S1. S is the boundary of any
region containing the obstacle.
or
where the fact that v · n = 0 on S1 has been used. But the force F on the obstacle
is

This is a useful result since it permits the calculation of F at a control surface at
a distance from the obstacle; it may be virtually impossible to obtain the stresses
on the surface of the obstacle itself.

8.4.3 Energy and Constitutive Theory
The four equations, mass and momentum conservation exhibited in (4.7) and
(4.20), clearly do not represent a complete determined system for all of the
unknowns. At this point in the one-dimensional case we introduced an equation
of state or constitutive relation. In the present case specification of the stress
tensor σij is required to close the system.
For a fluid (gas or liquid) in a motionless state it is clear that the stress vector σ
at a point on a surface in the fluid is always normal to the surface, that is, it is in
the direction of the unit normal n (or −n). This is not true for solids, since they
can sustain complicated shear or tangential stresses and not undergo motion.
This normality property extends to fluids in uniform motion where the velocity
field is constant over some time interval.
Example 8.26
(Inviscid fluid) One of the simplest classes of general nonuniform fluid motions
is that class of motions termed inviscid where the normality assumption holds,
namely
(4.22) 
Hence, for inviscid flow the stress across a surface is proportional to the normal
vector where the proportionality factor p is the pressure. The concept of an
inviscid fluid is highly useful in technology, since many real fluids are actually
modeled by (4.22) and the calculations are far simpler using (4.22) than for more
complicated constitutive relations. From (4.22) it is easy to calculate the
components σij of the stress tensor. We have
(4.23) 
where δij is the Kronecker delta symbol defined by δij = 1 if i = j and δij = 0 if i ≠
j. Finally, if we denote the stress matrix T = z(σij), then (4.22) can be written
simply as
where I is the identity matrix.
From this last example, it follows that

we may write the Cauchy equations (4.20) as
or in vector form as
(4.24) 
Equation (4.24) is called the Euler equation. Equations (4.7) and (4.24)
represent four equations for the five unknowns ρ, v, and p. Supplemented by
equations of state and an energy conservation equation, a complete set of
equations can be found. For inviscid fluids the discussion now follows the one-
dimensional analysis presented in Section 8.2.
Example 8.27
(Ideal fluid) An ideal fluid is an inviscid fluid undergoing an incompressible
motion, and much of the literature in fluid mechanics deals with ideal fluids. The
ideal fluid equations consist of the Euler equations (4.24) and ∇ · v = 0.
Equation (4.23) suggests that in the most general case the stress tensor takes
the form
(4.25) 
where p is identified with the thermodynamic pressure and τij define the
components of the oblique, or non-normal, stresses across a fluid surface. These
oblique stress are partly caused by viscous forces where adjacent fluid elements
undergo shear stresses across surfaces separating them. The τij define the
components of the viscous stress tensor. . As one may imagine, it is a difficult
task to specify how these components relate to the other flow variables.
Energy balance. As in the one-dimensional case, we postulate a balance of
energy law:
(4.26) 
where Ωt is an arbitrary material region with exterior unit normal n and q
represents the heat flux density. In words, the time rate of change of the kinetic
plus internal energy in Ωt equals the rate work is done by the body forces f, plus
the rate work is done by the surface stresses σ, plus the rate heat flows into the
region. A differential form of the energy balance law can be easily obtained by

appealing to the arbitrariness of Ωt after an application of the divergence
theorem and Cauchy’s theorem. We record the result, leaving the standard
argument for the reader.
Theorem 8.28
If the functions are sufficiently smooth, equation (4.26) implies
(4.27) 
Theorem 8.29
The change in internal energy is given by
(4.28) 
Proof
Multiplying the momentum balance law (4.20) by vi and summing over i = 1, 2,
3 gives
Subtracting from (4.27) yields (4.28) and hence the result.
From the combined form of the first and second laws of thermodynamics,
(4.29) 
we can obtain an expression for how the entropy of a fluid particle changes.
Combining (4.28) and (4.29) and using Dρ−1/Dt = -ρ−2Dρ/Dt = ρ−1 ∇. v, we get
the following theorem.
Theorem 8.30
The energy balance equation is equivalent to
(4.30) 
We can interpret the preceding energy equation as follows. The left side is the
heat added; the term -∇ · q on the right represents the heat flux into the system,

and 
therefore 
the 
sum 
of 
the 
other 
two 
terms, 
 must represent the heat generated due to
work done by the forces to deform the system. The function 
 is called the
dissipation function, and, more precisely, it is the rate per unit volume at which
mechanical energy is dissipated into heat.
With this notation, the energy equation (4.30) may be written
(4.31) 
We 
can 
obtain 
some 
important 
conclusions 
from 
these 
results.
Thermodynamics also requires that the entropy increase equal or exceed the heat
added divided by the absolute temperature. Thus we postulate the inequality
The differential form of this axiom is called the Clausius–Duhem inequality:
(4.32) 
Equations (4.31) and (4.32) may be combined to get
(4.33) 
Sufficient conditions for (4.33) are
That is, (i) deformation does not convert heat into mechanical energy, and (ii)
heat flows against the temperature gradient.
Viscous stress. To proceed further, some assumption is required regarding the
form of the viscous stress tensor τij. A Newtonian fluid is one in which there is a
linear dependence of τij on the rate of deformation
That is,
where the coefficients Cijrs may depend on the local thermodynamic states θ and
ρ. Arguments of symmetry and invariance of the stress tensor under translations
and rotations lead to (see, e.g., Segel and Handelman (1977) for an enlightening
treatment)
where μ and λ are coefficients of viscosity. Generally μ and λ may depend on

temperature or density, but here we assume they are constant. The previous
assumption forces the stress tensor to have the form
and therefore the momentum law (4.20) becomes
(4.34) 
for i = 1, 2, 3.
In the incompressible case where
(4.34) reduces in vector form to
(4.35) 
which are the Navier–Stokes equations. These last two equations are among the
most studied equations in fluid mechanics, and still many unanswered questions
regarding them are yet to be proved. Exact solutions of (4.35) in special cases
are given in the exercises.
Finally, for viscous flows it is generally assumed that the fluid adheres to a
rigid boundary. This leads to the adherence boundary condition
where xb is a point on a rigid boundary and v(xb) is the known velocity of the
boundary.
EXERCISES
1. Prove the Euler expansion when n = 2. Hint: Recall the rule for
differentiating a determinant:
2. Let R(h, t) be the Lagrangian density. Show that
3. Derive the Lagrangian form of the mass conservation law
4. Prove that if mass conservation holds, then

for any continuously differentiable function g. Show that the scalar function
g can be replaced by a vector function g.
5. If σ(x, t; n) = −p(x, t)n, prove that 
.
6. A two-dimensional fluid motion is given by
a) Find V and v.
b) Find the streamlines and show they coincide with the particle paths.
c) If ρ(x, t) = x1x2, show that the motion is incompressible.
7. The Eulerian velocity of a two-dimensional fluid flow is
Find the streamlines passing through the fixed point (a0, b0) and find the
particle path of the particle (h1, h2) = (a0, b0). Does the particle path ever
coincide with a streamline at any time t0?
8. A steady flow in two dimensions is defined by
Find the particle paths. Compute the acceleration measured by an observer
located at the fixed point (3, 4).
9. A flow is called potential on a region D if there exists a continuously
differentiable function ϕ(t, x) on D for which v = ∇ ϕ, and a flow is called
irrotational on D if ∇ × v = 0.
a) Prove that a potential flow is irrotational.
b) Show that an irrotational flow is not always potential by considering
c) Show that if D is simply connected then irrotational flows are
potential.
10. a) Show that
b) Prove Bernoulli’s theorem: For a potential flow of an inviscid fluid,
suppose there exists a function (t, x) for which f = -∇. Then for any
path C connecting two points a in b in a region where v = ∇ϕ,

(Hint: Integrate the equation of motion and use (a).)
11. In a region D where a flow is steady, irrotational, and incompressible
with constant density ρ, prove that
where 
.
12. For a fluid motion with σij = σji prove that
where K(Ωt)   ƒΩt ρv · v dx is the kinetic energy of Ωt. This result is the
energy transport theorem.
13. For an ideal fluid prove that K(Ω) = constant, where Ω is a fixed region
in 
3 and v is parallel to ∂Ω (see Exercise 12).
14. The alternating symbol εijk is defined by
A permutation (ijk) is an even (odd) permutation of (123) if it takes an even
(odd) number of switches of adjacent elements to get it to the form (123).
For example,
so (321) is an odd permutation of (123). Show that if a = a1, a2, a3  and b = 
b1, b2, b3 , then the kth component of the cross product a × b is given by
15. (Conservation of Angular Momentum) A particle of mass m moving in
 with velocity vector v has linear momentum p = mv and angular
momentum about the origin 0 given by L = x × p, where x is its position
vector. If F is a force on the particle, then F = dp/dt by Newton’s second law.
Show that N = dL/dt, where N = x × F is the torque (or moment of force)
about 0. For a continuum argue that one should postulate

(4.36) 
where Ωt is any material region. Write (4.36) in component form using the
alternating symbol εijk. Note that (4.36) does not account for any internal
angular momentum of the fluid particles that would occur in a fluid where
the particles are rotating rods; such fluids are called polar.
16. Prove that (4.36) of Exercise 15 is equivalent to the symmetry of the
stress tensor σij (i.e., σij = σji). Hint:
Use the equation of motion and
followed by an application of the divergence theorem. This theorem shows
that balance of angular momentum is equivalent to symmetry of the stress
tensor. Thus, of the nine components of σij only six are independent.
17. Let Γ ⊆ Ω0 be a simple closed curve and let Γt = ϕt(Γ), where ϕt is an
isentropic fluid motion. The circulation about Γt is defined by the line
integral CΓt = ƒΓt v · dl. Prove Kelvin’s theorem, which asserts that CΓt is a
constant in time.
18. The vorticity ω of a flow is defined by ω = ∇ × v. Determine the
vorticity of the following flows and sketch the streamlines in each case.
a) v = v0 exp(−x22)j.
b) v = v0 exp(−x2
2)j.
c) v = ω0(−x2i + x1j).
19. If ρ is constant and f = ∇ for some , prove that (4.35) implies the
vorticity equation
20. Consider an incompressible viscous flow of constant density ρ0 under
the influence of no body forces governed by the Navier–Stokes equation
(4.35).
a) If l, v/l2, U, and ρ0vU/l, where v  μ/ρ0 are length, time, velocity, and

pressure scales, show that in dimensionless form the governing equations
can be written
where Re  Ul/v is a constant called the Reynolds number. The constant v
is the kinematic viscosity.
b) For flows with small Reynolds number, that is, Re 
 1, show that
(Hint: ∇ × (∇ × v) = ∇(∇ · v) − ∇v.)
21. (Plane Couette flow) An incompressible viscous fluid of constant
density under no body forces is confined to lie between two infinite flat
plates at z = 0 and z = d in 
3. The lower plate z = 0 is stationary and the
upper plate z = d is moved at constant velocity U in the x direction. That is,
if v = (u, v, w), the boundary conditions v = 0 on z = 0 and v = U, 0, 0  on z =
d. Write out the governing equations and show that the velocity field and
pressure are given by
Show that the stress on the lower plate is μU/d.
22. (Plane Poiseuille flow) An incompressible viscous fluid of constant
density under no body forces is confined to lie between two stationary
infinite planes z = −d and z = d. A flow is forced by a constant pressure
gradient ∇p = −C, 0, 0 , C > 0. Show that the fluid velocity is given by
What is the pressure? Show that the mass flow per unit width in the x
direction is given by 2Cd3/3μ.
23. (Poiseuille flow in a pipe) Consider a cylindrical pipe of length L and
radius R where an incompressible, viscous fluid is flowing (e.g., blood flow
in an artery). In cylindrical coordinates (r, θ, z), denote the velocity field by
v = vr, vθ, vz . Then assume boundary conditions p = p0 at z = 0, p = PL at z
= L, and v = 0 on r = R, and vr = vθ = 0 at z = 0, L.
a) Write out the governing partial differential equations in cylindrical
form. (You may have to look up forms for the divergence and gradient
operations in cylindrical coordinates.) Physically, justify the boundary

conditions.
b) Assuming a solution of the form vz = vz(r, z), p = p(r, z), with vθ = vr =
0, show that the pressure is linear along the length of the tube and
c) Show that the velocity profile in the tube has the shape of a paraboloid.

REFERENCES AND NOTES
Continuum mechanics has long been a central part of applied mathematics, and
it is an entity within itself. If fact, not many years ago continuum mechanics was
considered an area of applied mathematics as much as engineering is today. The
literature is enormous. As such, it is not possible to reference a large selection of
texts or articles. We mention a few elementary introductions that relate to our
material and to various extensions.
A concise, readable, elementary introduction is Chorin and Marsden (1993). A
thorough and outstanding presentation is given in Segel and Handelman (1987).
Classic texts for gas dynamics and shock waves include Courant and Friedrichs
(1948) and Whitham (1974). Holmes (2009), very similar to Segel and
Handelman and earlier editions of the present text, has a very readable
introduction to constitutive relations in solid mechanics. Hydrogeological
systems are discussed in de Marsily (1986); see also Logan (2001) for emphasis
on contaminant transport and for additional references.
Chorin, A. J. & Marsden, J. 1993. A Mathematical Introduction to Fluid
Mechanics, 3rd ed., Springer-Verlag, New York.
Courant, R. & K. O. Friedrichs, K. O. 1948. Supersonic Flow and Shock Waves,
Wiley-Interscience, New York (reprinted by Springer-Verlag, New York, 1976).
Holmes, M. 2009. Introduction to the Foundations of Applied Mathematics,
Springer-Verlag, New York.
Logan, J. D. 2001. Transport Modeling in Hydrogeochemical Systems, Springer-
Verlag, New York.
de Marsily, G. 1986. Quantitative Hydrogeology, Academic Press, Inc., San
Diego.
Segel, L. A. & Handelman, G. H. 1977. Mathematics Applied to Continuum
Mechanics, Macmillan, New York (reprinted by Dover Publications, New York
1987).
Whitham, G. B., 1974. Linear and Nonlinear Waves, Wiley-Interscience, New
York.
1 In a one-dimensional continuum the word particle is synonymous with cross
section, and we use the terms interchangeably.

2 Thomas Young (1733–1829) was an English medical doctor and scientist.
3 Robert Hooke (1635–1703), FRS, was an English natural philosopher,
architect, polyscientist, and mathematician who, in his time, was considered
one of the premier English scientists.

Chapter 9
Discrete Models
From elementary courses we know that differential equations are often
approximated by discrete, or, finite difference formulas; for example, the Euler
and the Runge–Kutta numerical algorithms lead to difference equations. But, as
well, discrete equations arise naturally without a continuous counterpart. The
recent emphasis on quantitative methods in the biological sciences has brought
discrete models to the forefront, not only in classical areas like population
dynamics and epidemiology, but in newer applications in genomics arising from
the accumulation of DNA sequence data, bioinformatics, and other phylogenetic
processes. The digital revolution in electrical engineering has made discrete
models and discrete transforms central in the development of advanced
technological devices. Digital signal processing is a major area of study. Discrete
models are conceptually simpler than their differential equation counterparts.
However, discrete models are less amenable to analytic solution techniques and
their dynamics can be more complicated, often exhibiting cycling and chaotic
behavior.
Another important endeavor is to understand how stochasticity, or randomness,
enters and affects various systems. For example, there is always stochasticity in
the environment that affects populations, noise in electrical circuits and devices
that affect their responses, and random forces on structures that affect their
vibrations. We consider some aspects of randomness in this chapter as well.

9.1 One-Dimensional Models
9.1.1 Linear and Nonlinear Models
In differential equations the time t runs continuously, and so differential
equations are often referred to as continuous time models. However, some
processes are better formulated as discrete time models where time ticks off in
discrete units t = 0, 1, 2, 3,… (say, in days, months, or years, etc.). For example,
if the money in a savings account is compounded monthly, then we need only
compute the principal each month. In a fisheries model, the number of fish may
be estimated once a year. Or, a wildlife conservationist may census a deer
population in the spring and fall to estimate their numbers and make decisions
on allowable harvesting rates. Data is usually collected at discrete times. In
electrical engineering, continuous data can be generated graphically on an
oscilloscope, but digital data is equally common and is collected, for example, in
a sampling process, in discrete time steps.
In a discrete time model the state function is a sequence xt, i.e., x0, x1, x2, x3,
…, rather than a continuous function. The subscripts denote the time; e.g., in a
weekly census of mosquitos grown in a laboratory, x5 would denote the number
of mosquitos at the fifth week. We graph the states, or sequence, xt as a set of
points (t, xt) in a tx plane, often connecting them by straight line segments.
A one-stage, or first-order, discrete time model, the analog of a first-order
differential equation, is an equation of the form
(1.1) 
where f is a given function. Such equations are called difference equations or
recursion relations. Knowledge of the initial state x0 allows us to compute the
subsequent states recursively, in terms of the previously computed states. Thus,
(1.1) is a deterministic update rule that tells us how to compute the next value in
terms of the previous one. A sequence xt that satisfies the model is a solution to
the equation.
If f(t, xt) = atxt + bt, where at and bt are given, fixed sequences, then the model
is linear; otherwise, (1.1) is nonlinear. In the sequel we mostly examine the
autonomous equation

(1.2) 
where the right side does not depend explicitly on t. Discrete models are also
defined in terms of changes Δxt = xt+1 − xt of the state xt. Thus,
defines a discrete model, where g is the given change. Finally, some models are
also defined in terms of the relative change, or per capita change, Δxt/xt. Thus,
where h is the given per capita change. Any form can be obtained easily from
another by simple algebra.
A second-order, discrete time model has the form
Now a state depends upon two preceding states, and both x0 and x1 are required
to start the process.
Difference equations are recursion formulas, and programs for computing the
values xt are easily composed on computer algebra systems and graphing
calculators.
Example 9.1
The simplest discrete model, the growth-decay process, is linear and has the
form
(1.3) 
For example, if xt is the principal at month t in a savings account that earns 0.3%
per month, then the principal at the (t+1)st month is xt+1 = xt+0.003xt. We can
perform successive iterations to obtain
and so on. By induction, the solution to (1.3) is
If r > 0 then xt grows geometrically and we have a growth model. If −1 < r < 0,
then 1 + r is a proper fraction and xt goes to zero geometrically; this is a decay
model. If −2 < r < −1, then the factor 1 + r is negative and the solution xt will

oscillate between negative and positive values as it converges to zero. Finally, if
r < −2 the solution oscillates without bound. It is also easily checked by direct
substitution that the sequence
is a solution to the equation for any value of C:
If x0 is fixed, then C = x0. Discrete growth-decay models are commonplace in
finance, in ecology, and in other areas. For example, in ecology we often write
the model (1.3) as
Then we can recognize r as the constant per capita growth rate. For populations
in general, the constant r is given by r = b − d + i − , where b, d, i, and  are the
birth, death, immigration, and emigration rates, respectively. When r > 0 the
model (1.3) is called the Malthus model of population growth.
Example 9.2
The last example showed that the difference equation xt+1 = λxt has general
solution xt = Cλt, where C is any constant. Let us modify the equation and
consider the linear model
(1.4) 
where p is a constant. We can consider this model to be, say, the monthly growth
of principal xt in a bank account where r (λ = 1+r) is the monthly interest rate
and p is a constant monthly addition to the account. In an ecological setting, λ
may be the growth rate of a population and p a constant recruitment rate. We can
solve this equation by recursion to find a formula for xt. If x0 is the initial value,
then iteration yields
By the formula for the sum of a geometric sequence,

and consequently
(1.5) 
which is the solution to (1.4).
Example 9.3
(Logistic model) In the Malthus model of population growth,
the population xt grows unboundedly if the per capita growth rate r, or the
change in population per individual, is positive. Such a prediction cannot be
accurate over a long time. If, for example, r = b − d, where b is the per capita
birth rate and d is the per capita death rate, then
We might expect that for early times, when the population is small, there are
ample environmental resources to support a high birth rate, with the death rate
being small. But for later times, as the population grows, there is a higher death
rate as individuals compete for space and food (intraspecific competition). Thus,
we should argue for a decreasing per capita growth rate r as the population
increases. The simplest such assumption is to take a linearly decreasing per
capita rate, that is, r(1 − xt/K), where K is the carrying capacity, or the
population where the growth rate is zero. See Fig. 9.1. Then
Figure 9.1 Per capita growth rate for the logistic model.

(1.6) 
In the standard form
(1.7) 
which is nonlinear. The discrete logistics model, quadratic in the population, is
the simplest nonlinear model that we can develop. It is tempting to identify b = r
as a constant birth rate and 
 as the death rate depending upon the
population. But an alternative is to take 
 and 
, with both
depending upon population. A plot of the population is shown in Fig. 9.2 with r
= 0.5, K = 100, and x0 = 20. It shows a steady increase up to the carrying
capacity, where it levels off. The accompanying MATLAB m-file, or script,
produces the sequence in Fig. 9.2 for t = 1,…, 20. In the next section we observe
that this is not the whole story; different values of the parameters can lead to
interesting, unusual, and complex behavior.
Figure 9.2 Logistic population growth.

Example 9.4
(The Ricker model). The Ricker model is a nonlinear, discrete time ecological
model for the yearly population xt of a fish stock where adult fish cannibalize the
young. The dynamical equation is
where b > 1 and c is positive. In a heuristic manner, one can think of the model
in the following way. In year t there are xt adult fish, and they would normally
give rise to bxt adult fish the next year, where b is the number of fish produced
per adult. However, if adults eat the younger fish, only a fraction of those will
survive to the next year to be adults. We assume the probability of a fish
surviving cannibalism is e−cxt, which decreases as the number of adults increases.
Thus, bxte−cxt is the number of adults the next year. One cannot solve this model
to obtain a formula for the fish stock xt, so we must be satisfied to plot its
solution using iteration, as was done for the logistic model in the last example.

9.1.2 Equilibria, Stability, and Chaos
An important question for discrete models, as it is for continuous models, is
whether the state of the system approaches an equilibrium as time gets large (i.e.,
as t approaches infinity). Equilibrium solutions are constant solutions, or
constant sequences. We say xt = x* is an equilibrium solution of xt+1 = f(xt) if
(1.8) 
Equivalently, x* is a value that makes the change Δxt zero. Graphically, we can
find equilibria x* as the intersection points of the graph of y = f(x) and y = x in an
xy plane. See Fig. 9.3.
Figure 9.3 Graphical method for finding equilibrium as the intersection points of
the graphs of y = x and y = f(x).
Example 9.5
(Logistic model) Setting Δxt = 0 in the logistics model gives rx* (1 − x*/K) = 0
or, x* = 0 and x* = K. These two equilibria represent extinction and the
population carrying capacity, respectively. Graphically, we can plot y = x vs. y −
f(x) = x (1 + r − r/K x); the equilibria are at the intersections points of the two
curves. See Fig. 9.4.
Figure 9.4 Graphical method for finding equilibrium 0 and K for the logistics
model.

Example 9.6
(Ricker model) An equilibrium state for the Ricker model must satisfy
or
Therefore one equilibrium state is x* − 0, which corresponds to extinction.
Setting the other factor equal to zero gives
or
If b > 1 we obtain a positive, viable equilibrium population.
If there is an equilibrium solution x* to a discrete model (1.8), we always ask
about its permanence, or stability. For example, suppose the system is in
equilibrium and we perturb it by a small amount (natural perturbations are
present in all physical and biological systems). Does the system return to that
state or does it do something else (e.g., go to another equilibrium state, or blow
up)? We say an equilibrium state is locally asymptotically stable if small
perturbations decay and the system returns to the equilibrium state. If small
perturbations of the equilibrium do not cause the system to deviate too far from
the equilibrium, we say the equilibrium is stable. If a perturbation grows, then
we say the equilibrium state is unstable. In the next paragraph we use a familiar
argument to determine the stability of an equilibrium population.
Let x* be an equilibrium state for (1.8), and assume y0 represents a small
deviation from x* at t = 0. Then this perturbation will be propagated in time,
having value yt at time t. Does yt decay, or does it grow? The dynamics of the

state x* + yt (the equilibrium state plus the deviation) must still satisfy the
dynamical equation. Substituting xt = x* + yt into (1.8) gives
We can simplify this equation using the assumption that the deviations yt are
small. We can expand the right side in a Taylor series centered about the value x*
to obtain
Because the deviations are small we can discard the higher powers of yt and
retain only the linear term. Moreover, x* = f(x*) because x* is an equilibrium.
Therefore, small perturbations are governed by the linearized perturbation
equation, or linearization
This difference equation is the growth-decay model (note that f’(x*) is a
constant). For conciseness, let λ = f’(x*). Then the difference equation has
solution
If |λ| < 1 then the perturbations yt decay to zero and x* is locally asymptotically
stable; if |λ| > 1 then the perturbations yt grow and x* is unstable. If λ = 1, then
the linearization gives no information about stability and further calculations are
required, for example, examining the higher order-terms in the series above. The
stability indicator λ is called the eigenvalue. Therefore, if the absolute value of
the slope of the tangent line to f(x) at the intersection with y = x is less than 1,
then the equilibrium is asymptotically stable; if the absolute value of the slope is
greater than 1, the equilibrium is unstable. In other words, we get stability if f is
not too steep at the intersection point.
Example 9.7
(Chaotic behavior) Consider the Ricker model
where c > 0 and b > 1. Let us check the equilibrium
for stability. Here f(x) = bxe−cx and we must calculate the eigenvalue, or the
derivative of f evaluated at equilibrium. To this end f’(x) = (−cx + 1)be−cx;

evaluating at x* gives
We get asymptotic stability when
or
If b < e2, then the perturbations decay and the equilibrium is asymptotically
stable. Let us follow up on this by performing some simulations with different
values of b and observe the effect. Fix c = 0.001. Figure 9.5 shows the results for
b = 6.5, 9, 13, 18. The equilibrium is at x* = 1000 ln b. For b = 6.5, within the
stability range, the solution does indeed represent an asymptotically stable,
decaying oscillation. For b = 9, however, a periodic, 2-cycle appears, alternating
between high and low population values. When b is increased further, there is
some value of b where suddenly the 2-cycle bifurcates into a 4-cycle. The plot
shows the periodic 4-cycle when b = 13. This period doubling continues as b
increases further, giving 8-cycles, 16-cycles, and so on. It can be shown that
these cycles are stable limit cycles. But there is a critical value of b where the
patterns disappear, and there are seemingly random fluctuations in the
population (b = 18 shows this case). When b exceeds this critical value these
non-periodic fluctuations become highly sensitive to initial conditions, a
behavior known as chaos. The frames in Fig. 9.6 show the solution for
conditions x0 = 99 and x0 = 101 with b = 18. We observe much different
solutions. In the chaotic regime, the solution is deterministic (rather than
stochastic), but highly unstable with respect to initial data.
Figure 9.5 Population dynamics for the Ricker model for c = 0.001 and b = 6.5,
9, 13, 18, showing a decaying oscillation, 2-cycle, 4-cycle, and chaos, as b
increases.

Figure 9.6 Plots of discrete solutions of the Ricker equation in the case the
initial populations (x0 = 99, x0 = 100) are close, in the chaos regime.
Chaotic behavior is common in discrete models, even in one dimension. Such
behavior does not occur in autonomous differential equations until dimension 3.
Next we illustrate a graphical procedure to determine the stability of an
equilibrium solution of xt+1 = f(xt). The discussion refers to Figs. 9.7 and 9.8. We
first sketch the curves y = x and y = f(x) on a set of axes, as in Fig. 9.4. We then
mark the beginning value x0 on the x axis. To find x1 we move vertically to the

graph of f(x), because x1 = f(x0), and mark x1 on the y axis. To find x2 we reflect
x1 back to the x axis through the line y = x. Now we have x1 on the x axis. We
repeat the process by moving vertically to the curve f(x), which gives x2. We
reflect it back to the × axis, and so on. This sequence of moves is accomplished
by starting at x0, going vertically to f(x), going horizontally to the diagonal,
vertically to the curve, horizontally to the diagonal, alternating back and forth.
The plot of these vertical and horizontal moves that give the segments between
the curve f(x) and the diagonal is called the cobweb diagram. If the equilibrium
is asymptotically stable, the cobweb will converge to the equilibrium represented
by the intersection point. If the equilibrium is unstable, the cobweb will diverge
from the intersection point. Figure 9.8 shows a divergent cobweb.
Figure 9.7 Cobweb diagram for a stable equilibrium.
Figure 9.8 Cobweb diagram for an unstable equilibrium.
EXERCISES

1. Solve the following linear difference equations and plot their solutions:
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
2. If you borrow $15,000 to purchase a new car at a monthly rate of 0.9%
and you pay off your loan in 4 years, what is your monthly payment?
3. Use iteration to show that the solution to the difference equation xt+1 = λxt
+ pt can be written
4. The next three exercises investigate second-order, linear, discrete models,
which are analogs of the differential equation u″ = pu’ − qu. Consider a
model of the form
Assume that the solution sequence takes the form xt = rt for some r to be
determined. Show that r satisfies the quadratic equation (called the
characteristic equation)
In the case that there are two distinct real roots r1 and r2 we have two
distinct solutions rt1 and rt2. Show that for any two constants A and B, the
discrete function xt = Art
1 + Brt
2 is a solution to the difference equation. This
expression is called the general solution, and all solutions have this form.
Use this method to find the general solution of
Find a specific solution that satisfies the conditions x0 = 1 and x1 = 5.
5. Referring to Exercise 4, show that if the characteristic equation has two
equal real roots (r = r1 = r2), then xn = rn and xn = nrn are both solutions to
the equation. Thus, the general solution is xt = Art + Btrt = rt(A + Bt), where
A and B are arbitrary constants. Find the general solution of the discrete
model
Find a specific solution that satisfies the conditions x0 = 1 and x1 = 0.

6. Investigate the case when the roots of the characteristic equation in
Exercise 4 are complex conjugates, that is, r = a ± bi. Find two real
solutions. Follow these steps. (i) Use the exponential representation of a
complex number, a + bi = ρeiθ, to write
(ii) Show that the real and imaginary parts of this complex solution are
real solutions. (iii) What is the general solution? Then solve the following
equation:
Find and plot the solution if the initial states are x0 = 1 and x1 = .
7. Find the general solution of the Beverton–Holt model equation
by making the substitution 
.
8. Draw the cobweb diagram for the model
when x0 = 0.5.
9. A density-limited population model is
where a, b, and c are positive.
a) Use scaling to reduce the number of parameters in the model to two.
b) Using the scaled equation, find the equilibria and determine conditions
for stability for each.
c) Plot, in two-dimensional parameter space, the region of stability in the
case there is a positive equilibrium.
10. The Gilpin–Ayala population model is given by
where r, K, and θ are positive constants. (a) Find the equilibria. (b) Find a
formula for the per capita population growth. (c) Write the model in the
form Pt+1 = f(Pt) and determine the stability of the equilibria. (d) Sketch the
region in the rθ plane that gives values for which the nonzero equilibrium is
stable.

9.2 Systems of Difference Equations
9.2.1 Linear Models
A linear model is a system of difference equations of the form
(2.1) 
where xt is an n-vector of quantities at time t and A is a constant n × n matrix.
Such models arise naturally in Markov1 processes (discussed below), where A is
a Markov matrix with nonnegative entries and whose columns sum to 1. Linear
models occurs in other areas, for example, for stage-structured models in biology
where A is a Leslie matrix, or a population projection, matrix. By iteration, if x0
is an initial vector, then
(2.2) 
is the solution to (2.1). We can get a more usable representation of the solution in
terms of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of A. Suppose that A has n distinct,
real eigenvalues λk with associated independent eigenvectors vk, k = 1, 2,…, n.
Then the eigenvectors form a basis for 
n and we can express the initial vector
where the ck are the coordinates of x0 in the basis of eigenvectors. Then, using
linearity,
(2.3) 
which is the solution.
We recall that we can find the power At by diagonalizing the matrix A. Let D
be the diagonal matrix with the eigenvalues on the diagonal, and let Q be the
matrix whose columns are the associated eigenvectors. Then, from linear
algebra, Q−1 AQ = D (we say the matrix Q diagonalizes A). Thus A = QDQ−1 and
At = (QDQ−1)t = QDtQ−1, where Dt is a diagonal matrix with the entries λt
i on
the diagonal. This leads to an alternate solution form
An important case occurs when there is a positive, real dominant eigenvalue,
say λ1. This means λ1 > |λ2| ≥ |λ3| ≥ ··· ≥ |λn|. Then

(2.4) 
We have |λi/λ1| < 1 for i = 2, 3,…, n, and therefore all the terms in parentheses
decay to zero as t → ∞. Consequently, for large t the solution to the linear model
behaves approximately as
Asymptotically, if λ1 > 0, the solution exhibits geometric growth or decay,
depending upon the magnitude of λ1. For some matrices A, to be defined later,
there is a dominant eigenvalue and its associated eigenvector v1 is positive,
having positive entries. In this case, the dominant eigenvalue λ1 is called the
growth rate and the vector v1 is the longtime structure of the solution. In the
context of population models, v1, appropriately normalized, is the stable age
structure.
If some of the eigenvalues of A are complex, but the set of eigenvalues is still
distinct, the argument above can be repeated. Using Euler’s formula, eiθ = cos θ
+ i sin θ, every complex term in solution (2.3) can be written in terms of real and
imaginary parts, each of which is a real solution. For example, if v = u + iw and
λ = α + iβ = reiθ is a complex eigenpair, where r is the modulus of λ and θ is its
argument, then
The real and imaginary parts of this vector are two linearly independent, real
solutions. The complex conjugate eigenpair v = u−iw and λ = α − iβ gives the
same two independent solutions. In summary, the two complex terms in (2.3)
associated with complex conjugate eigenpairs may be replaced by the two real,
independent vector solutions. Therefore, we may always write the solution as a
real solution. Complex eigenvalues clearly lead to oscillations in the system. The
analysis of the case of a repeated eigenvalue of A is left to the Exercises.
An equilibrium solution x* of (2.1) satisfies
Clearly, x* = 0 is always an equilibrium solution; there are nontrivial equilibria
if, and only if, λ = 1 is an eigenvalue of A. Notice that (2.4) also implies that the

solution to the linear model (2.1) satisfies the condition xt → 0 if, and only if, all
the eigenvalues have modulus less than one, or |λi| < 1. In this case we say x = 0
is an asymptotically stable equilibrium. If there is an eigenvalue with |λ| > 1,
then the equilibrium x = 0 is unstable.
In Chapters 1 and 2, where we discussed continuous population models, we
had in mind tracking one or more species and we lumped all the individuals of a
given species into a single quantity, without regard to development stage, size,
age, or any other structured quantity. However, some animals, such as insects,
have well-defined life stages, such as egg–larva–pupa–adult. Still other species’
populations can be divided into juveniles and adults. We want to develop
dynamics of how that animal might go through its life stages, keeping track of
the population of each stage.
Before working through an example, we remark that many population models
in ecology track only the females of the species. They are the important ones that
give birth; males may sire many offspring from many females. Sorry, men!
Example 9.8
(Leslie model) Consider a hypothetical animal that has two life stages, juvenile
and adult. At time t (say, given in weeks) we let Jt denote the number of
juveniles and At denote the number of adults. Over each time step of one week
we assume that new juveniles are born, some die, and some graduate to
adulthood. For adults, some die and some are recruited from the graduating
juvenile stage. In symbols, for the juvenile population we may write
(2.5) 
In words, the number of juveniles at the next week (Jt+1) equals the number at
the last week (Jt), minus the number that died (mJt), minus the number that
became adults (gJt), plus the number of births (fAt). The constant m is the weekly
juvenile mortality rate, g the weekly graduation rate, and f the average, weekly
fecundity (fertility) of adults. Because adults reproduce, we assume the number
of juveniles produced each week is proportional to the number of adults present.
For example, if each adult on the average gives rise to three juveniles each week,
then f = 3. Then, 100 adults would give rise to 300 juveniles per week. In the
same way, for the adult population,
(2.6) 
where μ is the adult weekly mortality rate. The last term represents those

juveniles that became adults. Equations (2.5)–(2.6) represent a system of two
coupled, first-order difference equations. They provide a way to take information
from time t and project it forward to the next time t + 1. Therefore, if we know
the initial numbers in each stage, we can recursively calculate the population
numbers for all times t. The stage-based population model in the last example
can be formulated in matrix form as
and can be formulated in vector notation as
(2.7) 
where
The matrix P is called the population projection matrix, or Leslie matrix2
(after P. H. Leslie, a biologist who developed the ideas in the 1940s).
Often we express the model in terms of survivorships, rather than mortality
rates. The fraction s that survive in a given stage is
Then, in our model for juveniles and adults, sJ = 1 − m − g and sA − 1 − μ,
because no adults graduate to the next class. So the Leslie matrix is
By iteration we see immediately that the solution to (2.7) is
where x0 is a vector containing the initial stage populations.
Example 9.9
In the preceding example let us choose g = m = 0.5, f = 2, and μ = 0.9. Then the
model is
The eigenpairs are

The general solution is
The dominant eigenvalue is λ1 = 1.051 and the first term produces growth of
about 5%. The second term will give a decaying oscillation. This is our
observation in Fig. 9.9. Over a long time, the juvenile-adult population will
approach a stable age structure defined by the eigenvector (0.885, 0.465)T,
which, when normalized to make the sum of the entries one, gives (0.656,
0.344)T. Therefore, in the long run, 65.6% of the population will be juveniles,
and 34.4% of the population will be adults. In yet different words, there will be
about 1.9 juveniles for every adult.
Figure 9.9 Population of adults (solid) and juveniles (dashed).
Doing calculations by hand to get plots is tedious, so we use software. A
MATLAB script produces the time series plots shown in Fig. 9.9.
function stagepopulation
clear
m=0.5; g=0.5; f=2; mu=0.9; timesteps=35;
J=80; Jhistory=J; A=30; Ahistory=A;
for t=1:timesteps;
x=(1-m-g)*J+f*A;
y=g*J+(1-mu)*A;

J-x; A=y;
Ahistory=[Ahistory J];
Jhistory=[Jhistory A];
end
time=0:timesteps;
plot(time,Jhistory), hold on
plot(time,Ahistory), hold off
To get a phase plane plot of Jt vs. At, just replace the plot commands in the
script above by ‘plot(Jhistory, Ahistory).’
In general, xt may be an n-vector whose entries represent the populations of
each of n stages at time t. If n = 4, for example, xt = (x1t, x2t, x3t, x4t)T, and the
Leslie matrix (generally, we use the letter A) has the form
(2.8) 
where fi is the fecundity of the ith stage, si is survival rate (one minus the
mortality rate minus the graduation rate) of the ith stage, and gi is the fraction of
the ith stage that passes to the jth stage during the fixed time step. The Leslie
diagram in Fig. 9.10 shows pictorially how the rates and the stages are
connected. In still a more general case, the entries in the Leslie matrix may
depend upon t, or they may depend upon the populations themselves, making the
model nonlinear. Nonlinear models are discussed later.
Figure 9.10 Leslie diagram.
When there is a positive, dominant eigenvalue, say λ1, of the Leslie matrix A,

we have xt ~ c1v1λt1 for large t. Therefore λ1 is the long-term growth rate and
c1v1 represents the stable stage structure. Because c1 is a constant, we can just
use v1 to determine the proportion, or percentage, of each stage to the whole
population. For example, if v1 = (1, 2, 3)T is an eigenvector associated with a
dominant eigenvalue, then the vector (
)T shows the fraction of each stage in
the stable age structure.
Finally, we ask when is there a dominant eigenvalue for a given model and a
corresponding positive eigenvector. A simple version of the Perron–Frobenius
theorem, can be stated as follows.
Theorem 9.10
(Perron–Frobenius) If A is a non-negative matrix, i.e., its entries are non-
negative, and if for some positive integer k the matrix Ak has all positive entries,
then A has a simple, positive dominant eigenvalue with a positive eigenvector.
There are other results that guarantee the same conclusion under less strenuous
hypotheses. (See Caswell 2001.)
One interesting issue in a stage-structured population model is to determine
which values in the Leslie matrix, which represent fecundities, graduation, and
survivorship probabilities, most affect the dominant eigenvalue λ, which is the
long-term growth rate. This is particularly important in making management
decisions about ecosystems. We can measure the sensitivity of λ to changes in an
entry aij by calculating the derivative ∂λ/∂aij. (Note that the dominant eigenvalue
is a function of the entries in A.) The matrix of these values,
is called the sensitivity matrix.
Example 9.11
For a 2 × 2 matrix
with non-negative entries the dominant eigenvalue is easily found from the roots
of the characteristic equation,

Then the sensitivity matrix is
For example, consider the two-stage (juveniles and adults) model
with matrix
The value 1.7 is the fecundity of adults, and 0.1 is their survival rate; 0.6 is the
fraction of juveniles that survive and pass to the adult stage. The dominant
eigenvalue is λ = 1.06, which means that the long-time growth rate of the
population is 6% per season. The sensitivity matrix is
Therefore, we see that the 2,1 entry, the survivorship of juveniles affects the.
dominant eigenvalue most. We can estimate the change Δλ in the long-term
growth rate when the survivorship is changed by Δc with the linear
approximation
Now we proceed in general. Consider the n-dimensional model
with λ, v the dominant eigenpair. Then
We know that λ is also an eigenvalue of AT having some eigenvector w.
Therefore ATw = λw, or, taking the transpose,
Therefore w is a left eigenvector of A.
To calculate the change in the dominant eigenvalue with respect to the change
of an entry in the matrix, we change the ij-entry of A by a small amount Δaij,
while holding the remaining entries fixed. Let ΔA be the matrix with Δaij in the
ij-position and zeros elsewhere. Then the perturbed matrix A + ΔA has dominant
eigenvalue λ + Δλ and eigenvector v + Δv, or

Multiplying out and discarding the higher-order terms gives, to leading order,
Multiplying by wT on the left gives
or
In the limit we have
(2.9) 
which is a simple representation of the sensitivity matrix. As a final note, it is
always possible to normalize v and w so that wTv = 1.
MATLAB is useful to calculate the sensitivity matrix S. The following
command line statements calculate S for the model in the last example.
A=[0 1.7; 0.6 0.1]
[V,D]=eig(A)
v=V(:,2)
[W,d]=eig(A’)
w=W(:,2)
S=(1/(w’*v))*(w*v’)
Unfortunately, the sensitivity matrix may give information that is hard to
interpret when entries in A have large differences. For example, fecundities are
usually high compared to survivorships. This fact may confound the calculation.
Therefore asking how the dominant eigenvalue changes with respect to a unit
change in an entry is not always practical, and it is better to compute the relative
changes, or the elasticity. We define the elasticity matrix E by
In MATLAB this is simply E = A.*S/max(eig(A)). When an entry of E is large,
we say the entry is elastic, and when it is small, we say it is inelastic. These
terms are familiar terms in economics with regard to the elasticity of demand for
a product with respect to price changes; there,

where the demand D is a function of price p.
For reference or study, the definitive book by Caswell (2001) has a thorough
discussion of matrix models in the biological sciences.
EXERCISES
1. Find the solution to the discrete model
if X0 = 6 and Y0 = 0.
2. For each of the following Leslie matrices find the dominant eigenvalue (if
any), the corresponding eigenvector, and the stable age structure. Interpret
each entry in context of a three-stage population model.
3. Describe the dynamics of the linear model
where a, b, and f are positive constants. Discuss the two cases abf > 1 and
abf < 1.
4. Consider the linear model
where s, b, c > 0 and 0 < a < 1.
a) Determine conditions (if any) for which there are infinitely many
equilibria.
b) In the case where there is a single equilibrium, determine conditions

on the parameters that ensure all solutions converge to zero as t → ∞.
5. For many bird species the fecundity and survivorship of adults is
independent of the age of the adult bird. So, we can think of the population
as composed of two classes, juveniles and adults.
a) Set up a general Leslie model to describe the dynamics of the female
bird population, assuming juveniles do not reproduce and that the
juvenile stage lasts only one year. Adult females may live more than one
year.
b) Find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the Leslie matrix for this
model.
c) Identify the growth rate and dominant eigenvalue, and determine the
long time fraction of the total population that are juveniles. Examine all
cases.
6. A population is divided into three age classes, ages 0, 1, and 2. During
each time period 20% of the females of age 0 and 70% of the females of age
1 survive until the end of the following breeding season. Females of age 1
have an average fecundity of 3.2 offspring per female and the average
fecundity of age 2 females is 1.7. No female lives beyond three years.
a) Set up the Leslie matrix.
b) If initially the population consists of 2000 females of age 0, 800
females of age 1, and 200 females of age 2, find the age distribution after
three years.
c) Determine the asymptotic behavior of the population.
7. Show that if λ = 0 is an eigenvalue of a matrix A, then A−1 does not exist.
8. Consider a linear model xt+1 = Axt. Under what condition(s) on A does the
system have a single equilibrium?
9. Consider the stage-structured model
a) Find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors, and identify the growth rate and
stable age structure.
b) Generate the sensitivity matrix S and determine which entry in A most
strongly affects the growth rate.
c) Compute the elasticity matrix E. Do the entries of E change your

conclusion in part (b)?
10. A three-stage model of coyote populations (pups, yearlings, and adults)
has a Leslie matrix given by
Repeat parts (a) and (b) of Exercise 10.
11. A female population with three stages, juveniles J, youth Y, and adults A,
have the following vital statistics. In a time step (one season), no animal
remains in the same stage; but, on the average, during each time step 50% of
the juveniles become youth, and 60% of the youth survive to become adults.
On the average, each youth produces 0.8 offspring (juveniles) per time step,
and each adult produces 2.2 offspring per time step. Juveniles do not
reproduce.
a) Draw a Leslie diagram with arrows indicating how the stages interact.
b) Write down the discrete model and identify the population projection
matrix L.
c) If J0 = 25, Y0 = 50, and A0 = 25, draw plots (on the same set of axes) of
the populations of each stage for the first 30 seasons.
d) What is the the growth rate of the total population? Over a long time,
what percentage of the population is in each stage? Explain your
observations in part (c) based on the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the
population projection matrix L. What are the absolute values of the
eigenvalues?
e) Under the same initial conditions, plot the natural logarithms of the
populations versus time? Explain the difference observed from part (d).
f) Compute the sensitivity matrix S.
g) The dominant eigenvalue is most sensitive to a change in what nonzero
entry in L?
h) Compute the elasticity of the dominant eigenvalue to adult fecundity.
Interpret your result in words.
i) If measures are taken to increase the survivorship of youths by 10%,
what would be the approximate population growth rate?
j) How much would the fecundity of adults have to decrease to drive the
population to extinction?

9.2.2 Nonlinear Interactions
Next we set up and analyze two-dimensional nonlinear discrete systems
(2.10) 
(2.11) 
where f and g are given functions, and t = 0, 1, 2,…. As in the case of differential
equations, we can visualize a solution geometrically as time series, where the
sequences xt and yt are plotted against t, or as a sequence of points (xt, yt) in the
xy plane, or phase plane. We often connect the points of the sequence to make
the plots continuous.
The importance of equilibria again arises in understanding the behavior of
nonlinear systems. An equilibrium solution is a constant solution xt = x*, yt = y*.
It plots as a single point, sometimes called a critical point, in the phase plane; as
in the case of differential equations, the behavior of the system is determined by
its local behavior near the critical points. Therefore, stability, or permanence of
an equilibrium, becomes an issue.
An equilibrium solution satisfies the equations
To analyze the orbital behavior near the equilibrium we consider small
perturbations ut and vt from x* and y*, respectively, or
Substituting into the system (2.10)–(2.11) and linearizing leads, in the usual way,
to the linearized perturbation equations
(2.12) 
where ut = (ut, vt)T and J = J(x*, y*) is the Jacobian matrix (or the community
matrix in ecology),
(2.13) 
Let λ1 and λ2 denote the eigenvalues of J. From the section on linear systems, we
have the following stability result:
(a). If |λ1| < 1 and |λ2| < 1, then the perturbations decay and (x*, y*) is
locally asymptotically stable.
(b). If either |λ1| > 1 or |λ2| > 1, then some of the perturbations will grow and

(x*, y*) is unstable.
This result translates into the following general condition for asymptotic
stability in terms of the characteristic equation
for the Jacobian matrix. Necessary and sufficient conditions for local asymptotic
stability, |λ1| < 1 and |λ2| < 1, are
(2.14) 
Conditions (2.14) are called the Jury conditions. A proof is requested in the
Exercises.
To plot orbits in the phase plane it is useful to find the nullclines where xt or yt
does not change. Therefore the nullclines are defined by Δxt = 0, Δyt = 0, or the
loci
respectively. The x- and y-nullclines intersect at the critical points. The behavior
of the orbits near the critical points is similar to that encountered in differential
equations: nodal structure, saddle structure, and rotational structure (spirals and
ellipses).
Example 9.12
(Nicholson–Bailey model) Many insect predators are parasitoids. A parasitoid
finds prey, called hosts, and lays its eggs inside or on the victim. The eggs hatch
into larvae, which then consume the host. The host then dies and the larvae
metamorphose and emerge as adults. The population dynamics is based upon the
probability of the host avoiding detection and has the general form
where xt is the host population and yt is the predator population; F is the
escapement function, or probability of avoiding detection in one season, r is the
geometric growth factor, and c is the number of new parasitoids per host
discovered. Think of F as the fraction of hosts that survive to the next time step.
The dynamics is discrete because both host and parasitoid usually have life
cycles synchronized with seasons. The model was developed in the 1930s by A.
J. Nicholson and V. A. Bailey, and it is fundamental in population ecology
because of its historical importance, in spite of some difficulties with its
predictions. There are various forms for the escapement function F. The usual

model is to base it upon a Poisson random variable (see Section 9.3). A
discrete random variable X is Poisson distributed if
where λ is a positive constant. A Poisson distribution describes the occurrence of
discrete, random events, such as encounters between a predator and its prey, and
X is the probability of k encounters in a given time period, say over the lifespan
of the prey. The constant λ is the average number of encounters during the
period. In terms of hosts and parasitoids, the average encounter rate for a given
host should be proportional to the number of predators searching, or λ = ayt,
during that period. So, the probability of no encounters is the zeroth-order term
(k = 0), or
Therefore
(2.15) 
(2.16) 
The equilibria are found from the equations
which give two equilibria
Note that r > 1 must be an implicit assumption to the model. To determine
stability we must compute the Jacobian matrix (2.13). This tedious calculation is
left to the reader. We obtain
At extinction,
which has eigenvalues r > 1 and 0. Hence, the extinct population is unstable. The
nonzero equilibrium has Jacobian matrix
To determine stability we apply the Jury conditions (2.14). The trace and

determinant are
We show that det J > 1, and so the equilibrium is unstable. Equivalently, we
show g(r) = r − 1 − r ln r < 0 for r > 1. But g(1) = 0 and g′(r) = − ln r < 0.
Therefore we must have g(r) < 0.
The results of the Nicholson-Bailey model are ecologically perplexing. There
are no stable equilibria, yet in nature hosts and parasitoids endure, co-evolving
together. Does this mean it is an invalid model? To get a sense of the dynamics
we simulate the solution with x0 = 10, y0 = 10, taking a = 1, c = 1, and r = 2. Fig.
9.11 shows the unstable oscillations that result. If time is continued, the
oscillations continue and become greater. There have been explanations that
attempt to resolve this issue, but more to the point, the Nicholson-Bailey model
has become the basis of many other models with modifications that attempt to
stabilize the dynamics.
Figure 9.11 Simulations of the Nicholson–Bailey model. The dashed curve is the
parasitoid abundance and the solid curve is the host abundance.
Example 9.13
(Beddington model) In the Beddington model,

the growth rate r is replaced by a saturating density dependent rate eb(1−xt/K).
This model has a positive stable equilibrium for a large set of parameter values.
Texts in mathematical ecology investigate some of these models in detail. The
monograph by Hassell (1978), and many of his papers, offer deep insights into
these and other arthropod predator–prey systems.
Example 9.14
(Clumped prey) Instead of searching among randomly distributed hosts, as
described by the Poisson distribution, parasitoids may search using a more
clumped prey model described by the negative binomial distribution, with
escapement function
where k is a clumping parameter. As k → +∞, this distribution approaches the
Poisson distribution. Analysis of this model is requested in the exercises.
Example 9.15
(Epidemics) Earlier we investigated a continuous SIR model of the course of an
infection. Actually, because health data is collected on a discrete scale, e.g.,
weekly, it reasonable to develop a discrete model. Consider a disease in a
population of fixed size N, and let St, It, and Rt be the susceptible, infective, and
removed classes at week t, respectively. To review, susceptibles are those who
can catch the disease but are currently not infected, infectives are those who are
infected with the disease and are contagious, and removed individuals have
either recovered permanently, are naturally immune, or have died. Clearly N = St
+ It + Rt. With homogeneous population mixing, the dynamics is given by
(2.17) 
where the individuals in a given class at week t + 1 equals the number at week t,
plus or minus those added or subtracted during that week. The constant α is the
transmission coefficient and γ is the removal rate. This model is the discrete

SIR model. To interpret the constants we argue as follows. If S0 and I0 are the
number susceptible and infected initially, then αS0I0 measures the number that
become infected at the outset; thus αS0 is the number that become infected by a
contact with a single infected individual during the initial week. Therefore, α
represents the probability that one susceptible person becomes infected. Looked
at in a different way, α−1 is the average time that it takes for an individual to get
infected. The removal rate can be interpreted similarly; γ−1 is the average
duration of an individual’s infectious period. To understand how the disease
progresses we observe that
Because ΔSt < 0, we know St is always decreasing. Therefore, if S0 < γ/α then St
< γ/α for all t, and the disease decreases. On the other hand, if S0 > γ/α then the
disease increases in the population and an epidemic occurs. If we define R = α/γ
S0, then an epidemic occurs if R > 1. Epidemiologists refer to R as the basic
reproduction number of the infection. Notice that the epidemic peaks when St
= γ/α, where ΔIt changes sign. Simulations of the SIR equations (2.17) are
investigated in the Exercises. Both time series plots and orbits in the SI phase
plane illustrate the dynamics. Fig. 9.12 shows a typical orbit in the phase plane
when there is an epidemic. The initial point is on the line S0 + I0 = N, and the
orbit increases up to a maximum, which lies on the vertical line St = γ/α. Then
the disease dies out, leaving a number S* of infectives who never get the disease.
Figure 9.12 Orbit in the discrete SIR model. One infective is introduced into a
susceptible population of 500. There is an epidemic with R0 = 2.5 and about 50
individuals do not get the disease.

The Exercises show the variety and scope of discrete, nonlinear problems in
biology and other areas of science. An unsurpassed, elementary treatment of
discrete models is contained in Allman and Rhodes (2000).
EXERCISES
1. Consider the linear model
(a) Find the equilibria. (b) Draw the nullclines and the arrows indicating the
direction of the “flow” on the nullclines and in the regions bounded by the
nullclines. (c) On the line Qt = Pt in the phase plane, draw arrows indicating
changes in P and Q. (d) Do the equilibria appear stable or unstable, or can
you tell? (e) Construct a rough phase plane diagram indicating solution
paths. (f) Find the equations of these curves by finding the solution Pt and Qt
in terms of t. (Hint: Reduce the system to a single, second-order equation.)
2. Prove that the quadratic equation λ2 − pλ + q = 0 has roots satisfying |λ| <
1 if, and only if,
Here, p = tr J and q = det J. The condition is called the Jury condition.
Hint: treat the real case and complex case separately; in the complex case
write the roots in complex exponential form, λ = ρ exp(±iθ).
3. Consider the following model connecting the cinnabar moth and ragweed.
The life cycle of the moth is as follows. It lives one year, lays it eggs on the
plant, and then dies. The eggs hatch the next spring. The number of eggs laid
is proportional to the plant biomass in the preceding year, or
The plant biomass the next year depends upon the biomass in the current
year and the number of eggs according to

a) Explain why this last equation is a reasonable model (plot biomass vs
eggs and biomass vs biomass).
b) What are the dimensions of k, c, and a?
c) Rewrite the model equations in terms of the scaled variables Xt = Bt/k
and Yt = Et/ka. Call b = ac. What are the dimensions of Xt, Yt, and b?
d) Find the equilibrium and determine a condition on b for which the
equilibrium is stable.
e) If the system is perturbed from equilibrium, describe how it returns to
equilibrium in the stable case. That is, do the perturbations oscillate,
decay, or other?
4. Explain and analyze the nonlinear model
with respect to equilibria and their stability. All the parameters are positive.
5. Consider a nonlinear fisheries model
where a, m, b, β > 0, and xt and yt are juveniles and adults, respectively.
a) Find the equilibria (use the notation R = am (1 + 3b/2)). Find a
condition on R that guarantees a nontrivial equilibrium lies in the first
quadrant.
b) For a positive equilibrium, determine conditions on R, a, and b under
which the equilibrium is asymptotically stable.
c) For a fixed a, plot the stability region in the b, ln R parameter plane
and identify the stability boundary that separates stability from instability.
6. Analyze the Nicholson–Bailey model if the escapement function is
7. Suppose one infected individual is introduced into a population of 500
susceptible individuals. The likelihood that an individual becomes infected
is 0.1%, and an infective is contagious for an average of 10 days.
a) Compute the basic reproduction number of the disease and determine
if an epidemic occurs.

b) Plot the time series St, It, and Rt over a 60-day period. At what time
does the disease reach a maximum? Over a long time, how many do not
get the disease?
c) Plot the orbit in an SI phase plane.
8. Modify a nonfatal SIR disease model to include vital dynamics. That is,
assume susceptibles are born at a constant rate m, and at the same time
individuals in each class die at a per capita rate m. Assume the population is
constant. Working in the SI phase plane, investigate the model thoroughly,
finding equilibria (if any) and their stability, and sketching the orbits.
Explain the long-term dynamics of the disease.
9. A nonlinear juvenile-adult model where the fecundity depends upon the
adult population is given by
Here, b, c > 0 and 0 < τ, σ < 1. Find the equilibria and examine their
stability.

9.3 Stochastic Models
Many dynamical processes are not deterministic, but rather contain elements of
uncertainty. This is particularly the case in the life sciences, especially in
ecology, which provide a context for the discussion in much of this section. We
show how randomness arises and how it can be introduced into discrete
dynamical models.
It is assumed the reader has studied elementary probability. Some of the
concepts and definitions are presented in the first subsection, and the notation is
established.

9.3.1 Elementary Probability
A random variable (often denoted RV) is a variable whose numerical value (a
real number) is determined by the outcome of a random experiment, and it is
characterized by a rule that dictates what the probabilities of various outcomes
are. The outcome may be the number in a population, the charge on a capacitor,
the length of a random phone call, the total time it takes to log onto the Internet,
the IQ of an individual, the time it takes a forager to find a food item, and so on.
Typically we use capital letters to denote random variables and lowercase letters
to denote real variables or specific values of random variables. To know the
random variable X means to know the probability that X takes a value less than
or equal to a number b, or symbolically,
There are basically two types of random variables, discrete and continuous. A
discrete RV takes on discrete values, either finitely or infinity many, and a
continuous RV takes on a continuum of values, in an interval.
Continuous RVs. A continuous random variable X is characterized by its
probability density function (pdf) denoted by fX(x). Pdfs are also called
probability distributions. We assume the pdf exists for all real x. The subscript X
on f reminds us that it is associated with the random variable X. The pdf has the
properties:
1. fX(x) ≥ 0 for all x.
2. ƒ∞
-∞ fX (x) dx = 1.
3. Pr(X ≤ x) = ƒx
-∞ fX(y)dy.
Condition (1) says that the pdf is nonnegative; condition (2) requires that the
total area under the graph of the pdf is unity, and condition (3) dictates the value
of the probability of X taking a value smaller than x. The values of the random
variable itself are usually not of interest. It is the density function that contains
all the information about the random variable X and allows us to compute
probabilities. The pdf need not be a continuous function. If there is no confusion
about what the random variable is, we drop the subscript on fX(x) and just write
f(x). The following are important continuous distributions. (Other distributions
are introduced in the Exercises.) As an exercise, the reader should plot the pdf in
each case.

Example 9.16
The most common, and most important, pdf is the normal density
(3.1) 
Its graph is the standard bell-shaped curve. The number μ is the average, or
mean, of the density, and σ is the standard variation, which measures the width
of the curve at its inflection points, and hence the spread of the distribution (see
below). If a random variable X has the normal density we say that X is normally
distributed and we write X ~ N(μ, σ). The distribution N(0, 1) is called the
standard normal.
Example 9.17
The uniform probability density on an interval [c, d] is the step function
The uniform density models situations where all values in an interval are equally
probable.
Example 9.18
The exponential probability density with parameter λ is defined by
The exponential distribution models, for example, the length X of a phone call,
or the time X of survival of a cancer patient after treatment.
The function FX(x), which measures the probability of X taking on a value less
than x, is called the cumulative distribution function (cdf); this should not be
confused with the probability distribution, or pdf. Thus
The cdf has the properties
and
The cdf is continuous from the right. That is, for each real number a,

If the pdf fX(x) is continuous at x, then the fundamental theorem of calculus
guarantees that
Therefore, the pdf is the derivative of the cdf and the cdf is the integral of the
pdf. Note that
or
This equation explains what the pdf fX(x) actually is—it is the probability per
unit length, and hence the name “probability density.” The probability of the
random variable taking a value between x and x + h is approximately the area
under the density curve between x and x + h. Also observe that
In summary, the probability law characterizing a random variable can be defined
by the pdf or the cdf; both carry all the probabilistic and statistical information
about X.
Usually we are uninterested in the entire distribution. For example, when
shopping for a new car we do not necessarily want to see the entire set of gas
mileage data for all cars of the type we wish to buy; we are content to know the
average gas mileage. Or, we may want to know the average height of a person in
a population, or the average IQ of an entering class of students. A measure of the
average, or central tendency, of a random variable X is its mean, or expected
value,
The expected value is the coarsest probabilistic information about X. Other
common measures of the central tendency are the mode and the median. A
measure of how the possible values of the random variable X are spread about its
mean is called the variance, which is defined by

The standard deviation σ is the square root of the variance, or
Example 9.19
The normal distribution X ~ N(μ, σ) has expected value E(X) = μ and Var(X) =
σ2. Expected values and variances for other random variables are contained in
the Exercises.
If X is a random variable then we can form combinations of X to create new
random variables. That is, we can define Y = g(X), where g is a given real-valued
function. This equation defines a transformation of a random variable. Let us
assume that g is a strictly increasing function whose first derivative is continuous
on all of the real line, and let us denote the inverse g−1 of g by ϕ. That is, g−1 = ϕ
Thus y = g(x) if, and only if, x = ϕ(y), or g(ϕ(y)) = y and ϕ(g(x)) = x. We can
determine the pdf for Y in terms of the pdf for X by calculating
In this last integral we can perform a change variables via x = ϕ(y), dx = ϕ(y) dy.
Then
By definition of the probability law, therefore, the pdf for Y is
(3.2) 
If the function g is not strictly increasing, then the density can be found by
breaking up the problem into intervals over which g is monotone increasing or
monotone decreasing. As an aside, we recall from calculus that the relationship
between the derivatives of ϕ and g is ϕ’(y) = 1/g’(x).
There is an interesting corollary of this result. Nearly the same calculation can
be performed to obtain
In terms of integrals,

In words, “probability is conserved” by a strictly increasing, continuously
differentiable transformation of the random variable.
Next we inquire about the expected value of Y = g(X). We have
where we have used (3.2) and the fact that g and ϕ are inverses. Using these
facts, we can easily show
(3.3) 
and
(3.4) 
This latter equation is commonly used instead of the integral formula to calculate
the variance.
One of the key results in probability theory is the central limit theorem. The
statement uses the notion of independent random variables, which are defined
later. Intuitively, two RVs are independent if the values of one does not depend
on values of the other.
Theorem 9.20
(Central Limit Theorem) If Y1, Y2, Y3, ldots is a sequence of independent and
identically distributed random variables with finite mean μ and variance σ2, then
the limiting distribution of the random variable
is the standard normal distribution N(0, 1).
Discrete RVs. The preceding definitions and results go over to discrete random
variables in an obvious way. Let X be a discrete RV that assumes the values x1,
x2,…, xk,…. The analog of the pdf is the discrete probability mass function

which defines the probabilities of X taking the various values. Clearly ∑k pk = 1.
The expected value of X is the weighted average
and more generally,
The variance is
and relations (3.3) and (3.4) still hold. Sometimes the coefficient of variation
CV, defined by CV = σ/μ, is used as measure of variation; for example, CV =
0.40 carries the rough interpretation that on average X varies 40% from its mean
value. Some important discrete random variables are presented below, and the
reader should plot the pmf in each case for several values of the parameters.
Example 9.21
Some experiments have only two outcomes, success S and failure F. If N
independent trials of a given experiment are performed, we can let the random
variable X be the number of successes. If Pr(S) = p and Pr(F) = 1 − p, then the
probability mass function is
which is the probability of obtaining k successes in the N trials. This pmf is the
binomial distribution. We write X ~ bin(N, p) to say X is binomial distributed.
Example 9.22
Again consider successive independent trials where an event A occurs with
probability p. Let X be the number of trials until A occurs the first time. Then
is called the geometric distribution with parameter p. There is an important
generalization of the geometric random variable. Again in the binomial setting,
let X be the number of trials required until the rth success occurs. Then

is the negative binomial distribution.
The negative binomial distribution is an important, frequently used model for
spatial distributions (e.g., of plants or animals) which have a clumped character.
This is in contrast to the Poisson distribution, discussed next, which models
completely random distributions.
Example 9.23
The Poisson distribution with parameter λ > 0 is
The Poisson RV models the probability of unpredictable, rare events over a short
time scale, where λ is the average occurrence of the event.
Finally, we review some ideas in conditional probability. If A and B are two
events with Pr B > 0, then the probability that A occurs, given that B has
occurred, is
A key result, the total probability theorem, is used in the sequel. It states that
if A is composed of mutually disjoint events A1,…, An, that is, A = ∪nk=1Ak with
Ai ∩ Aj ≠ ϕ, then
Finally, we say any set of events A1,…, An is independent if
for all sequences of integers i1 < i2 < ··· < ik, k = 2, 3,…. A set of events is
dependent if they are not independent.

9.3.2 Stochastic Processes
A stochastic process (abbreviated SP) is an indexed family of random variables
Xt (or X(t)), where t belongs to some index set T. That is, for each assigned t  T,
the quantity Xt is a random variable. Usually the index set is the time interval T =
[0, ∞) or the discrete set of integers T = {0, 1, 2, 3,…}. When the latter is the
index set, the SP is often called a random sequence. When the index set is the
finite set T = {1, 2, 3,…, n}, then the SP is a random vector. There are actually
four types of real, stochastic processes Xt that can be considered. Two
characterizations are based on whether the index set is discrete or is continuous
(an interval), and two more are defined by whether Xt itself takes on discrete
values or a continuum of values. As an example of a discrete process, let Xt
denote the result of a roll of a single die at times t  T = {0, 1, 2, 3,…}. At each
instant of time t, Xt is a random variable that takes on one of the values
1,2,3,4,5,6, each with equal probability (one-sixth). A typical realization of the
process is 1, 1, 3, 6, 1, 4, 5, 2, 5,…. In this case of a die, the Xt are statistically
independent, which is generally not the case for stochastic processes. In fact,
statistical dependence is usually what makes stochastic processes interesting and
stochastic processes are frequently characterized by their memory; that is, they
are defined by how a random variable Xt depends on earlier random variables Xs,
s < t. An example of a continuous SP is a Poisson process. For this process T =
[0, ∞) and Xt is discrete; Xt counts the number of times a certain event occurs
from time t = 0 to time t. The event could be an accident at an intersection, the
number of customers arriving at a bank, the number of breakdowns of machines
in a plant, or discoveries of prey items by a predator.
Generally, to define a SP we must specify the index set T, the space where the
Xt lie, and relations between the Xt for different t (for example, joint
distributions, correlations, or other dependencies). In fact, the probability law for
a SP is a specification of all the joint distributions; but simplifications are often
introduced to make the process tractable. The types of SPs studied most often in
applied probability theory include Markov processes, Poisson processes,
Gaussian processes, Wiener processes, and martingales—all of these are defined
by certain dependencies, or memory. Therefore, definitions of these processes
depend on the notion of conditional probability.

Because a stochastic process Xt is defined as a random variable for each
assigned time t, there is a probability density function f(x, t) for Xt. Observe that
the density has both spatial and temporal dependence. From the density function
we can calculate the expected value and variance at each time t via
and
Similar definitions hold for discrete random variables.
EXERCISES
1. Calculate the mean, standard deviation, and cumulative distribution
function of a uniform random variable X with density 
.
2. Verify that the standard deviation of a normal random variable with
density N(0, σ) is, in fact, σ.
3. Show that the expected value of the exponential distribution with
parameter λ is E(X) = 1/λ, and the variance is Var(X) = 1/λ2. Show that the
cumulative distribution function is
4. If X is a continuous RV, find the pdf of the random variable Y = X2. (Hint:
Start with Pr(Y ≤ y).)
5. The famous Scottish physicist J. C. Maxwell showed that molecular
collisions in a gas result in a speed distribution where the fraction of
molecules in the speed range [v, v + dv] is given by the Maxwell–
Boltzmann distribution
where n is the total number of particles, m is the molecular mass of each
particle, T is the temperature, and k is Boltzmann’s constant (k = 1.38 ×
10−23 joules/deg K). Sketch a generic graph of the distribution and
compute the average speed of a molecule in a gas.
6. Verify formulas (3.3) and (3.4), and show that

7. If X ~ N(μ, σ), show that 
. The RV Z is called the z–
score.
8. Find the mean and variance of a Poisson random variable.
9. A Cauchy random variable has density defined by
Compute the cumulative distribution function and draw a graph. What is
E(X) and Var(X)? What is unusual about your answer?
10. On the average there are about 15 cyclones formed off the U.S. Pacific
coast each year. In a given year, what is the probability of there being at
most 6 cyclones?
11. A random variable X is gamma distributed with parameters a and λ if
its pdf is
and f(x) = 0 for x < 0, where
is the gamma function. Sketch the pdf for a = 3.5 and λ = 2.
12. Let X be a normal random variable with mean μ and variance σ2. The
random variable Y defined by Y = eX is said to be a log-normal random
variable. Show that the pdf of Y is given by
and plot the pdf for various values of σ. What is the mean and variance of Y?
(The log-normal density is often associated with phenomena that involve
multiplicative effects of a large number of independent random events.)
13. Let X ~ N(0, 1). Find the pdf of the random variable X2. (This pdf is
called the chi-squared distribution.)
14. Let X be a discrete RV with Pr(X = xj) = pj, j = 0, 1, 2,…. The
probability generating function is defined by
a) Show that E(X) = G′(1) and Var(X) − G“(1) + G′(1) − G′(1)2.

b) Use the probability generating function to find the mean and variance
of a binomial random variable X ~ bin(N, p).
15. The probability generating function for a continuous RV X is defined
by
a) Show that E(X) = G′(1) and Var(X) = G“(1) + G′(1) − G“(1)2.
b) Use the probability generating function to find the mean and variance
of an exponential distribution X with parameter λ.
16. Let X be a discrete RV with Pr(X = xj) = pj, j = 0, 1, 2,…. The moment
generating function is defined by
a) Show that E(X) = M’(0) and Var(X) = M”(0) − M′(0)2.
b) Use the moment generating function to find the mean and variance of a
binomial random variable X ~ bin(N, p).
17. The moment generating function for a continuous RV X is defined by
a) Show that E(X) = M’(0) and Var(X) = M”(0) − M′(0)2.
b) Use the moment generating function to find the mean and variance of
an exponential distribution X with parameter λ.
18. Let X be a continuous RV. Prove Chebyshev’s inequality:
where μ and σ are the mean and standard variation, and k > 0.
19. Let X be a continuous RV with mean μ and standard variation σ. If g is a
sufficiently smooth function, show that Var(g(X)) 
.
20. If X is geometrically distributed, show that E(X) = 1/p and Var(X) =
1−p/p2.
21. Show that if X is Poisson distributed with parameter λ, then E(X) = λ and
Var(X) = λ.
22. Consider a set of N objects of which r of them are of a special type.
Choosing n objects, without replacement, show that the probability of

getting exactly k of the special objects is
This distribution is called the hypergeometric distribution. Show that 
.

9.3.3 Environmental and Demographic
Models
There are myriad reasons for random variations in population growth and death
rates. Ecologists often categorize these random effects as environmental
stochasticity and demographic stochasticity. The former includes random
weather patterns and other external sources where all individuals are affected
equally and there is no individual variation; the latter involves natural variability
in behavior, growth, vital rates, and other genetic factors that occur in all
populations, even though the environment may be constant. Demographic
stochasticity is commonly modeled by a Gaussian (normal) process, but
environmental variations can take many forms. For example, an environment
may suddenly have a catastrophic event, such a flood, or a bonanza year where
the conditions for reproduction are unusually high.
In engineering one can identify similar processes, those that have external
noise, akin to environmental stochasticity, and those that have internal or system
noise, which is like demographic stochasticity.
There are multiple approaches to creating stochastic discrete models. One is to
add, in one way or another, stochasticity to a known deterministic model.
Another is to construct probabilistic modela directly. In the sequel we illustrate
some of these constructions.
Example 9.24
To fix the idea of environmental stochasticity and adding stochasticity to a
known deterministic model, consider the Ricker population model
where b is the average yearly birthrate. Suppose, on the average, once every 25
years there is a weather event that lowers the birth rate that year by 30%. We
create a fixed, uniformly distributed random process Zt having range [0, 1]. At
each time step we modify the birthrate according to the rule: if Zt < 0.04 then
adjust the birthrate to 0.7b; else make no adjustment. In this manner, the birthrate
becomes a random variable Bt and we can write the dynamics as
(3.5) 

where Xt, the population, is now a random process. It is interesting to simulate
this process and the Exercises will guide the reader through this activity.
A word about notation—on the right side of (3.5) we mean the specific value
Xt = xt of the random variable, or population, calculated at the time step t; some
authors prefer to write the stochastic model (3.5) as Xt+1 = Btxte−cxt.
To model demographic changes we might assume the birthrate is normally
distributed. This assumption follows from the observation that birthrates do not
vary much from the average, with large deviations rare. Then we have
where for each time t we choose the birthrate from the distribution Gt ~ N(b, σ),
a normal distribution with mean b and standard deviation σ (or variance σ2).
Computer algebra systems, as well as calculators, have commands that generate
different types of random variables. (For example, in MATLAB, rand generates
a uniform random variable on [0, 1], and randn generates a normal random
variable N(0, 1).)
Generally, a discrete model has the form
(3.6) 
where r is a parameter. (The analysis can clearly be extended to vector functions
and sets of parameters.) In the two examples above, stochasticity was added to
the model by redefining the parameter r to be random process Rt, giving a
stochastic process Xt satisfying
The values of Rt are usually chosen from a fixed distribution with mean μ and
variance σ2. For example, we may choose Rt = μ + σWt, where Wt ~ N(0, 1).
Alternately, the values of Rt may be chosen themselves to satisfy a linear
autoregressive process, for example, Rt = aRt−1 + b + Wt, where Wt ~ N(0, 1),
and a and b are fixed constants. How stochasticity is put into a model depends
upon what one seeks and is therefore strictly an issue of modeling. Different
stochastic mechanisms produce different patterns of variability.
In some models stochasticity may enter only through the initial condition.
These situations are modeled by the process
where C is a fixed random variable. The solution to this random equation can be
obtained by solving the deterministic problem, if possible; in this case, the

random initial condition is evolved deterministically. The solution has the form
which is a transformation of a random variable C (treating t and r as parameters)
and therefore the statistical properties of Xt can, in principle, be determined
exactly. Simulations, or realizations of these processes, are smooth curves with
random initial conditions.
Later in this chapter we examine stochastic models that are obtained directly
from probability considerations.
Example 9.25
Consider the random difference equation
where a is a positive constant and X0 is a random variable. Treating the equation
deterministically, we obtain
Then
For example, if 0 < a < 1, then the expected value of Xt goes to zero as t → ∞,
and the variance goes to zero as well; this means the spread of the distribution
gets narrower and narrower. In fact, we can determine the pdf for Xt as follows.
Letting fX0 (x) denote the pdf of X0, we have
Therefore the pdf of the process is
For a specific case let X0 be uniformly distributed on the interval [0, b]. That is,
Then

which is uniform. As an exercise, the reader should plot this density for t = 1,2,3
for a > 1 and 0 < a < 1. This method is successful because this simple discrete
model can be solved exactly.
EXERCISES
1. A deterministic model for the yearly population of Florida sandhill cranes
is
where b = 0.5 is the birthrate and d = 0.1 is the deathrate. Initially the
population is 100. (Adapted from Mooney and Swift, 1999.)
a) Find a formula for the population after t years and plot the population
for the first 5 years.
b) On average, a flood occurs once every 25 years, lowering the birthrate
40% and raising the deathrate 25%. Set up a stochastic model and
perform 20 simulations over a 5-year period. Plot the simulations on the
same set of axes and compare to the exact solution. Draw a frequency
histogram for the number of ending populations for the ranges (bins)
200–250, 250–300, and so on, continuing in steps of 50.
c) Assume the birthrates and deathrates are normal random variables,
N(0.5, 0.03) and N(0.1, 0.08), respectively. Perform 20 simulations of the
population over a 5-year period and plot them on the same set of axes. On
a separate plot, for each year draw side-by-side box plots indicating the
population quartiles. Would you say the population in year 5 is normally
distributed?
2. A “patch” has area a, perimeter s, and a strip (band) of width w inside the
boundary of a from which animals disperse. Only those in the strip disperse.
Let ut be the number of animals in a at any time t. The per capita growth
rate of all the animals in a is r. The rate that animals disperse from the strip
is proportional to the fraction of the animals the strip, with proportionality
constant , which is the emigration rate for those in the strip.
a) Argue that the dynamics is ruled by
b) Determine conditions on the parameters r, w, s, , and a under which

the population is growing.
c) Why do you expect s = k√a for some constant k? Write down the
model in the case that the region is a circle.
d) Suppose at each time step the emigration rate is chosen from a normal
distribution with mean 0.35 and standard deviation 0.5. With a growth
rate of 1.06 in a circle of radius 100 m, with width w = 10 m, simulate the
dynamics of the process. Take u0 = 100. Sketch three simulations
(realizations) on the same set of axes. Does the population grow or
become extinct?
e) In a given time step, suppose the animals disperse with  = 0.25 or  =
0.45, each with equal probability. Simulate the dynamics of the process
and sketch three realizations.
3. Consider the population growth law xt+1 = rtxt, where the growth rate rt is
a fixed positive sequence and x0 is given.
a) Let xT be the population at time T. Which quantity is a better measure
of an average growth rate over the time interval t = 0 to t = T, the
arithmetic mean 
, or the geometric mean rG
= (r0r1 ··· rT−1)1/T?
b) Consider the stochastic model process Xt+1 = RtXt, where Rt = 0.86 or
Rt = 1.16, each with probability one-half. Does the population eventually
grow, die out, or remain the same? If X0 = 100 is fixed, what is the
expected value of the population after 500 generations? Run some
simulations to confirm your answer.
4. A stochastic model is defined by
where the initial population X0 = x0 is fixed, and the growth rate Rt at each
time is chosen from a fixed distribution with mean μ and variance σ2. Use
the central limit theorem to prove that Xt approaches a log-normal random
variable for large t. What is the mean and variance of Xt for large t?
5. Suppose you are playing a casino game where on each play you win or
lose one dollar with equal probability. Beginning with $100, plot several
realizations of a process where you play 200 times. Perform the same task if
the casino has the probability 0.52 of winning. In the latter case, perform
several simulations and estimate the average length of a game.

6. In a generation, suppose each animal in a population produces two
offspring with probability , one offspring with probability , and no
offspring with probability . Assume an animal itself does not survive over
the generation. Illustrate five realizations of the population history over 200
generations when the initial population is 8, 16, 32, 64, and 128. Do your
results say anything about extinction of populations?
7. Suppose μ is the probability that each individual in a population will die
during a given year. If Xt is the population at year t, then the probability
there will be n individuals alive the next year can be modeled by a binomial
random variable,
In other words, the population at the next time step is the probability of
having n successes out of xt trials, where 1 − μ is the probability of success
(living).
a) At time t = 0 assume a population has 50 individuals, each having
mortality probability μ = 0.7. Use a computer algebra system to perform
10 simulations of the population dynamics over 7 years and plot the
results.
b) For the general model, find the expected value E(Xt+1) and the
variance Var (Xt+1).
8. Consider a random process Xt governed by the discrete model
where X0 is a random variable with density fX0(x). Find a formula for the
density f(x, t) of Xt.
9. Experimental data for the yearly population of Serengeti wildebeest can
be fit by the Beverton–Holt model
where K is the carrying capacity, r is a growth factor, and h is the annual
harvesting rate. The carrying capacity is a function of rainfall and is modeled
by K = 20748R, where R is the annual rainfall. Actual measured rainfalls
over a 25-year period are given in the vector

Using X0 = 250,000 and r = 1.1323, simulate the population dynamics over
50 years for different harvesting rates, h = 0.05, 0.075, 0.1, 0.125, 0.15, and
each year randomly draw the annual rainfall from the vector R. Run enough
simulations to make some conclusions about how the fraction of populations
that collapsed depends upon the harvesting rate. Assume the threshold value
of 150,000 wildebeest as representing a collapsed herd. (What has been
described is a bootstrap method where simulations are run by randomizing a
single data set.)
10. Develop a demographic stochastic model based upon the discrete model
Take c = 1 and b = 6. With x0 = 200, run simulations of the model with noise
Et ~ N(0, σ) for several different values of σ, and comment upon the results.

9.4 Probability-Based Models
9.4.1 Markov Processes
Stochastic processes Xt are characterized by the dependencies among the random
variables X0, X1, X2,…. A Markov process is a special stochastic where only the
current value of the random variable is relevant for future predictions. The past
history, or how the present emerged from the past, is irrelevant. Many processes
in economics, biology, games of chance, engineering, and other areas are of this
type—for example, stock prices, a board position in the game of monopoly, the
population of a plant species, and so on.
We illustrate the Markov model by considering a specific problem in
phylogenetics.
We may recall from elementary biology that the double helix DNA molecule is
the genetic material that contains information on coding for and synthesizing
proteins. DNA is constructed from four bases, the purines A and G, and the
pyrimidines C and T. In the DNA molecule, across the rungs of the double helix
molecular ladder, A and T are paired and G and C are paired. Therefore, to
represent a DNA molecule mathematically all we need consider is a single
sequence, e.g., ATCCGTAGATGG, along one side of the ladder. As time evolves,
DNA must be copied from generation to generation. During this process there
are natural mutations, and our goal is to set up a simple model for determining
how these mutations evolve to change an ancestral DNA sequence. Such models
are important, for example, in determining phylogenetic distances between
different species and to understand the evolution of the genome in organisms,
both plant and animal. Phylogentics helps identify related species and to
construct evolutionary trees; understanding how viruses evolve, for example,
aids in developing strategies for disease prevention and treatment.
The simplest mutations in copying a DNA sequence are called base
substitutions—a base at a given location is simply replaced by another one at
that same location over one generation. There are other types of mutations, but
they are not considered in our introductory discussion. If a purine is replaced by
a purine or a pyrimidine with a pyrimidine, then the substitution is a transition;
if the base class is interchanged, then the substitution is a transversion.

To fix the idea, consider mutations of a sequence over three generations:
The changes are highlighted. Comparing the first two generations, in the fifth
position there is a transition and in the ninth position there is a transversion.
Consider an arbitrary sequence. We let PA, PG, PC, and PT denote the
probabilities that A, G, C, and T appear in at a given location. In the sequence
So, for example, PA = 3/12. Next we fix an arbitrary location at some generation
t. During the next generation, t + 1, the base at that location may stay the same,
or it may mutate to another base. We let the sixteen numbers P(X|Y), where X
and Y represent the four bases, denote the conditional probabilities that the
location has base X at time t + 1, given that it was at Y at time t. We can arrange
these numbers in a transition matrix
(4.1) 
Notice the order of the entries. Columns and rows are labeled in the order A, G,
C, T, and the column denotes the state of the ancestral base, and the row is the
state of the descendent base. In the transition matrix M, the entries are
nonnegative and the columns sum to one because one of the transitions must
occur. Such a matrix is called a Markov matrix. We assume that, over many
generations of equal time steps, the same transition matrix characterizes the
transitions at each time step. Now, if pt = (PA, PG, PC, PT)T denotes the
probability vector at time t, the model
(4.2) 
t = 0, 1, 2,…, is an example of a discrete Markov process. It dictates how the
probabilities of bases occurring in a generation change over time. Therefore, if
p0 is given, then pt can be calculated by iteration.
We recognize (4.2) as a linear, Leslie-type model that we examined in an
earlier section. The solution is
where the entries in the power matrix Mt denote the probabilities of being in a

given state (base) after t time steps, given the initial state. For example, for the
transition matrix (4.1) for a DNA sequence, the 4, 2 element in Mt would be the
probability that the base is T after t time steps, given that it was G at time t = 0.
In general, a discrete Markov process, or Markov chain, can be defined as
follows. Consider a sequence of random variables X0, X1, X2,…, where each
random variable is defined on a finite or countably infinite state space, which we
denote by S = {0, 1, 2, 3,…}. The stochastic process Xt is Markov, if for any t =
0, 1, 2, 3,…, it has the property
In other words, the future behavior depends only upon the present state and not
on the previous history. The transition matrix M for the process is the matrix
whose entries are mij = Pr(Xt+1 = i|Xt = j). Thus, mij is the probability of moving
from state j at time t to state i at time t + 1. Notice that M may be an infinite
matrix if the state space is infinite. Clearly, by definition, the entries in each
column of M are nonnegative and sum to one. We sometimes graphically show
the states and elements of the transition matrix on a Leslie type diagram, as in
Fig. 9.10. The entries of Mt are denoted by m(t)ij and represent the probabilities
of moving from the jth state to the ith state in t time steps. A vector p with
nonnegative entries that sum to one is called a probability vector. There are
many examples of Markov processes in all areas of science, engineering, and
economics.
Example 9.26
(Jukes–Cantor model) In the Jukes–Cantor model of base substitution,
where 1 − a is the probability that there is no change in a base, while a/3 is the
probability of change to any other base. The number a is called the mutation rate
per generation, or the number of substitutions per site per time step; values of a
range from 10−9 for some plants, 10−8 for mammals, to 10−2 for viruses, which
mutate quickly. We are assuming a is a small constant and does not depend upon
time or upon location in the sequence.
It is straightforward to verify that λ = 1 is an eigenvalue of M with eigenvector

(1, 1, 1, 1)T, and λ = 1 − a is an eigenvalue of multiplicity 3 with independent
eigenvectors (1, 1, −1, −1)T, (1, −1, 1, −1)T, (1, −1, −1, 1)T. Then, if Q is the
matrix whose columns are the eigenvectors, then Q diagonalizes M, which
means M = QDQ−1, where D is the diagonal matrix
Therefore
These matrices can be multiplied out to obtain Mt. One can check that the
diagonal entries of Mt are 
, and the off-diagonal entries
are all given by 
. Therefore q(t) is the expected fraction of sites
in the sequence that are observed to remain unchanged after t time steps. It
follows that 1 − q(t) is the fraction of sites expected to differ from the original
ancestral sequence after t time steps.
It is not hard to prove the following important theorem (a proof for a two-
dimensional matrix is requested in Exercise 1).
Theorem 9.27
Let M = (mij) be an n × n Markov matrix having nonnegative entries mij and
column sums equal to one. Then λ = 1 is an eigenvalue of M and the
corresponding eigenvectors have nonnegative entries; the remaining eigenvalues
λi satisfy |λi| ≤ 1. Moreover, if the entries of M are strictly positive, then λ = 1 is
a dominant eigenvalue with a single eigenvector.
If the state space is finite, then over a long time the system may approach a
stationary probability distribution defined by a probability vector p that is an
eigenvector of λ = 1. That is, Mp = p. Depending upon the geometric
multiplicity of λ = 1, the stationary distribution may or may not be unique. A
stationary distribution p is said to be limiting if Mtp0 → p for every initial
probability vector p0. There are general conditions on a Markov matrix that

guarantee a unique limiting stationary distribution (e.g., see Allen, 2003).
There are many interesting questions about processes that satisfy the Markov
conditions. For example: Which states can lead to some other state? Are there
states that are visited infinitely often, or are there states in which the process
becomes trapped? Are there states where the process will always end up? Figure
9.14 shows a Leslie-type diagram for a six-state system, and it illustrates
different types of states. The mutually communicating states {5, 6} and the state
{4} are trapping states, and regardless of the initial probability vector, the
process eventually will migrate to one of these states. States {1}, {2}, and {3}
are transient. Note that 1 communicates with 2, but 2 does not communicate with
1. There is a technical language that precisely characterizes the states of a
process, and we refer to Allen (2003) for a full discussion. Other questions
regarding the probabilities and expected times for moving from one state to
another are discussed in the next section.
Figure 9.13 Six-state process showing the transition probabilities.
Figure 9.14 Graph for a random walk with absorbing end states.

EXERCISES
1. Let M be a 2 × 2 transition matrix for a two-state Markov process. Prove
Theorem 9.27 in this special case.
2. For the Markov matrix
with p, q > 0, find the unique stationary probability distribution. Find a 3 × 3
Markov matrix with a non-unique stationary probability distribution.
3. Find the transition matrix for the process shown in Fig. 9.14.
4. A regional rent-a-car company has offices located in Lincoln, Omaha, and
ten other small cities. Their records show that each week, 55% of the cars
rented in Lincoln are returned to Lincoln, 35% are returned to Omaha, and
the remaining cars are returned elsewhere. Of those rented in Omaha, 75%
are returned to Omaha, 5% to Lincoln, and 20% elsewhere. Of the cars
rented in the ten other cities, 25% are returned Omaha and 5% to Lincoln.
Draw a Leslie-type diagram illustrating the states and the transition
probabilities. Over the long run, if conditions remain the same, what
percentage of the cars in their fleet will end up in Lincoln?
5. Consider the matrix
Show that there is a stationary probability distribution, but it is not limiting.
6. At each discrete instant of time, measured in minutes, a molecule is either
inside a cell membrane, or outside. If it is inside the cell, it has probability
0.2 of passing outside, and if it is outside it has probability 0.1 of entering
the cell.
a) If it is inside the cell initially, what is the probability that the molecule
is inside the cell at time t? Over the long run, what is the probability that
it is inside the cell?
b) If there are 100 molecules inside the cell initially, what is the
probability that there are exactly 80 of the molecules remaining in the cell
after 1 minute? What is the probability that there are 10 or fewer
molecules in the cell after 20 minutes? If Nt is the RV representing the
number of molecules in the cell at time t, plot the probability mass

function for N20.
7. In a small ecosystem there are two food patches X and Y, and foraging
animals move week to week, from patch to patch, with the following
probabilities: P(X, X) = 0.6, P(X, Y) = 0.7, P(Y, X) = 0.4, P(Y, Y) = 0.3.
Write down the transition matrix.
a) What is the limiting distribution of animals in the two patches?
b) If an animal is in patch X at time t = 5 weeks, what is the probability
that it is in patch Y at t = 10 weeks?
8. In the Jukes–Cantor model of base substitution a given base changed to
another base with equal probability. A generalization of this model is the
two-parameter Kimura model where it is assumed that transitions and
transversions have different probabilities, b and c, respectively.
a) Write down the Markov matrix M for the Kimura model.
b) Find a limiting stationary distribution.

9.4.2 Random Walks
A random walk is a special type of Markov process where the transitions can
only occur between adjacent states. We begin the discussion with a classic
example where there are N + 1 states {0, 1, 2,…, N}, and if the system is in state
j, then it moves to j + 1 with probability p and to j − 1 with probability q = 1 − p.
Figuratively, we think of an individual walking on a lattice of points, which are
the states. At each instant the individual tosses a loaded coin with Pr(heads) = p
and Pr(tails) = 1 − p. If heads comes up he moves to the right, and if tails shows
he moves to the left—thus the terminology random walk. We assume the
boundary states 0 and N are absorbing, that is, m00 = mNN = 1. In other words, if
the individual reaches one of these states, then he can never get out. A boundary
state that is not absorbing is called a reflecting boundary. Fig. 9.14 shows the
graph. With a little imagination the reader can understand why random walks
arise in many areas, including gambling (the states represent a player’s fortune
and p is the probability of winning on a given play), diffusion (the states are
geometrical positions and a particle or an animal moves to the left or right with
given probabilities), or population models (the states are population levels and
there are probabilities of births and deaths in any time period).
We address only one important question in the context of a particle executing a
random walk. If a particle is located at position j at time, then what is the
probability it will reach position 0 before it reaches N? Let
for 1 ≤ j ≤ N − 1. To obtain an analytic expression for this probability, we argue
as follows. Beginning at j, there are two ways to proceed. In the first step the
particle can jump to j + 1 with probability p and then have probability uj+1 of
reaching 0 before N; or, it can jump to j − 1 with probability q and then have
probability uj−1 of reaching 0 before N. According to the law of total probability,
(4.3) 
Also, at the boundaries,
(4.4) 
Equation (4.3) is a second-order difference equation that can be solved by
techniques introduced Section 9.1. Solutions have the form uj = rj. Substituting

into (4.3) we obtain the characteristic equation
In the case p ≠ q the roots are r = 1, r = q/p, and in the case p = q = , the roots
are 1, 1. Therefore, the general solution to (4.3) is
(4.5) 
(4.6) 
The arbitrary constants may be found from the boundary conditions (4.4). We
obtain
By exactly the same argument we can calculate the probability
The boundary conditions are now v0 = 0, vN = 1. We get
Clearly we have uj + vj = 1. Therefore, the probability that the particle hits a
boundary is 1.
We may not be surprised by the last conclusion. But we can ask what is the
expected time to hit a boundary. Let Tj be the RV
Further, let τj = E(Tj). Then
The reasoning underlying this difference relation is if the particle begins at j, it

may move to j + 1 or j − 1 with probability p and q, respectively. If it moves to j
+ 1 the expected time it hits a boundary is 1 + τj+1, counting the jump just taken.
If it moves to j − 1 the expected time is 1 + τj−1. Therefore, rearranging,
(4.7) 
which is a second-order nonhomogeneous difference equation. The boundary
conditions are τ0 = τN = 0. The homogeneous equation is the same as (4.3), and
we get the same solution (4.5)–(4.6). To find a particular solution we use the
method of undetermined coefficients, as in differential equations, and we find
particular solutions j/q−p and −j2 in the cases p ≠ q and p = q, respectively. In
summary, forming the general solution of (4.7) (composed of the sum of the
solution to the homogeneous equation and a particular solution) and evaluating
the constants using the boundary conditions, we find the expected time for
absorption at a boundary is
where j is the initial position. The exercises request calculations and plots of
these times.
Next we describe a combinatorial approach to a random walk problem.
Consider a migrating animal, or perhaps a dispersing plant species, that moves in
a linear habitat such as a river, or along the bank of a river. As before we zone
the habitat into a lattice of sites …, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2,…. For this example we
assume the habitat is long and has no boundaries. The animal’s location at time t
(t = 0, 1, 2, 3,…) is the random variable Xt. Starting at X0 = 0, at each time step
the animal moves to the right with probability p or to the left with probability q =
1 − p. We are interested in calculating the probability mass function, or
distribution, of Xt. In other words, what is the probability of the animal being at
location k after t time steps? A specific example will lead us to the correct
reasoning.
Example 9.28
Consider the probability of being at location k = 2 after t = 10 time steps. To
accomplish this, the animal must move to the right r = 6 steps and to the left l =

4 steps. A possible path is RLRRLRLLRR. The probability that this single path
will occur is clearly p6q4. How many such paths can be formed with r = 6 and l =
4? It is clearly 
 = 210 paths. Therefore the probability of
arriving at k = 2 after 10 steps is 
.
We can argue in general that if there are t steps terminating at k, then t = r + l,
k = r − l, and
This holds for t ≥ |k|. If t < |k|, then it is impossible to reach k and Pr(Xt = k) = 0.
In summary, we have shown that Xt is binomially distributed.
Example 9.29
Assuming p = q = , after 2n time steps what is the probability that the animal
will be back at the origin? We have
With some work we can calculate the right side, but if n is large it will be
cumbersome. Fortunately, there is an elegant approximation for n! for large n,
and it works well even for n values as low as 6. Stirling’s approximation is
Using this formula, we find
For large t, there is a relationship between the binomial distribution and the
normal distribution. Although it is out of our scope to prove it, we present the
key result. If t is large and neither p nor q are too close to zero, the binomial X ~
bin(t, p) can be closely approximated with the standardized normal random
variable given by
The approximation is good if tp and tq are greater than 5. In symbols,
This approximation enables us to easily calculate probabilities that an animal

executing a random walk on the integers will lie in some given interval after
many steps.
EXERCISES
1. Consider the random walk on the lattice {0, 1, 2, …, 100}. If p = 0.45,
find the expected time τj for absorption at a boundary, j = 0, 1, 2,…, 100.
Plot τj vs. j.
2. A gambler is playing a casino game, and on each play he wins $1 with
probability p = 0.46, and he loses $1 with probability q = 0.54. He starts
with $50 and decides to play the game until he goes broke, or until he wins
$100. What is the probability of going broke before winning $100? How
long should he expect to play? What if the odds are even?
3. Referring to Exercise 2, when p = 0.46, simulate three games and plot
realizations on the same set of axes.
4. Compute both 6! and 10! exactly and by Stirling’s approximation.
5. An animal, starting at the origin, is executing a random walk on the
integers with p = 0.6. After 40 steps what is the probability Pr(X40 ≤ 10)? If
p = 0.5, show that after a million steps the animal will almost certainly lie
within 4000 units of the origin. If p = 0.5, what is the probability that its
position after 50 time steps lies in the interval 5 ≤ k ≤ 10?
6. Write a computer program that simulates a random walk on the integers,
with X0 = 0 and p = 0.5. Sketch three realizations on the same set of axes.

9.4.3 The Poisson Process
Consider a stochastic process taking place in continuous time in which events of
a certain type can occur at various instants. For example: phone calls arriving at
a relay station, discoveries of food items by a forager, alpha particles emitted
from a radioactive source, or customers arriving at bank. These processes can be
modeled by a Poisson process, defined by the conditions:
for small intervals of time dt. The parameter λ is the rate parameter of the
process. Now, let
and denote the distribution function by
We can calculate the probabilities recursively in the way we now describe.
We have
Therefore
Taking the limit as dt → 0 gives
with p0(0) = 1. Therefore the probability that no event occurs up to time t is an
exponentially decreasing function
We use this same method to compute p1(t). Observe

Therefore,
with p1(0) = 0.
This method can be extended indefinitely to the other distributions, and we can
obtain the system of differential equations
(4.8) 
with pn(0) = 0. These are called the Kolmogorov equations3 for the process.
They can be solved recursively to get
(4.9) 
for n = 0, 1, 2,…. From this it easily follows that
Beginning with p0(t), one can easily calculate the remaining distributions.
The probability distribution (4.9) is the Poisson distribution with parameter λt.
To simulate a Poisson process we need to know the inter-event period, or the
time between events. But this, too, is a random variable T. Without loss of
generality, we can assume that T is the waiting time from 0 to the first event. To
determine how T is distributed, we compute the cumulative distribution function
FT(t). We have
The pdf is the derivative, or
which is the exponential distribution. Therefore, the inter-event time is
exponentially distributed and
This means the average waiting time is 1/λ. An important assumption underlying
a Poisson process is that it is memoryless. That is, occurrence of an event at time
t = t0 has no influence on the future occurrence of events. Symbolically, Pr(T > t
+ t0|T > t0) = Pr(T > t), which is easily obtained from the definition of
conditional probability.

In applications to predation events in ecology, the Poisson model describes a
search for randomly distributed prey, where success does not deplete the number
of prey. This may not be valid in some situations, for example, when the prey are
clumped or depleted.
Now we return to the question of simulation of a Poisson process. The key
idea is to note that if T is Poisson distributed, then 
, where U is a
uniformly distributed random variable on [0, 1]. In MATLAB, for example, a
sequence of event times t(k) can be calculated recursively in a loop 
, where t(0) = 0.
Example 9.30
Assume a simple birth model where no individual dies, and each has probability
of giving birth in a small interval dt to a single offspring with probability bdt.
Then, if n is the population at time t, the population at time t + dt is about n +
bndt + o(dt), where bndt is the probability of n individuals giving birth to a
single individual (one event) in the interval dt. We can model the population
with a Poisson process with rate parameter λ = λn = bn, now depending on n.
The random variable Xt represents the number of individuals in the population at
time t. That is, pn(t) = Pr(Xt = n). The Kolmogorov equations (4.8) become
(4.10) 
It is shown in Exercise 2 that Xt is negatively binomial distributed.
In this chapter we only scratched the surface of a large body of theory and
applications of stochastic processes. In particular, we did not discuss continuous
random walks, where each time step is infinitesimally small. These processes,
called Wiener processes or Brownian motion, are the basis of diffusion theory
and play a large role in the development of stochastic differential equations. The
references at the end of the chapter may be consulted for readable treatments of
these important concepts.
EXERCISES
1. Show that if T is Poisson distributed with parameter λ, then 
,
where U is a uniformly distributed random variable on [0, 1]. Use a
computer algebra system to simulate a realization of a Poisson process with
λ = 1.

2. Suppose a population is of fixed size N at t = 0 and undergoes a pure birth
process with Kolmogorov equations (4.10).
a) Show, by direct substitution, that
satisfies the Kolmogorov equations.
b) Perform and sketch three simulations of the birth process when N = b
= 1 over the interval [0, 5]. (Use Exercise 1 with λ = bn.)
c) Plot the densities pn(t) for n = 0, 1, 2,… at times t = 0, 1, 2, 3. What
does the graph of pn(t) vs. t look like for a fixed n?
d) Show that the mean and variance of Xt are Nebt and Nebt(ebt −1),
respectively. (Hint: Refer to the negative binomial distribution.)

REFERENCES AND NOTES
Discrete models have come to play an increasingly important role in biological
dynamics, and there are many recent books with excellent chapters discussing
those models. Only a few are referenced here. These books include, from
elementary to advanced, Mooney and Swift (1999), Allman and Rhodes (2004),
Edelstein–Keshet (1988), Britton (2003), Kot(2001), and Mangel (2006). The
classical article by May (1976) is required reading. There is no word describing
these books other than outstanding. The text by Allen (2009) focuses on
stochastic aspects of discrete models, and Caswell (2001) is the standard
reference on matrix models. Of the many outstanding texts on probability and
random processes, the books by Grimmett and Welsh (1986) and Ross (2007) are
general accounts and are highly recommended. Regarding stochastic differential
equations and Brownian motion we refer to Soong (1973), Chapter 8 of Allen
(2007), Allen (2009), and the article by Higham (2001).
A direct continuation of the material in this text, particularly on stochastic
differential equations, can be found in the last chapter of Logan and Wolesensky
(2009).
Finally, with particular attention to elementary mathematical modeling in
biology, both discrete and continuous from biologist’s viewpoint, Otto and Day
(2007) is an excellent resource. There are many other sources on applications to
finance and engineering, for example, random vibrations, too numerous to cite.
Allen, E. 2007. Modeling with It  Stochastic Differential Equations, Springer-
Verlag, New York.
Allen, L. J. S. 2009. An Introduction to Stochastic Processes with Applications to
Biology, 2nd ed., Springer-Verlag, New York.
Allman, E. S. & Rhodes, J. A. 2004. Mathematical Models in Biology,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Britton, N. 2003. Essential Mathematical Biology, Springer-Verlag, New York.
Caswell, H. 2001. Matrix Population Models, 2nd ed., Sinauer Associates,
Sunderland, MA.
Edelstein-Keshet, L. 1988. Mathematical Models in Biology, McGraw-Hill, New
York (reprinted by SIAM, Philadelphia, 2003).
Grimmett, G. & Welsh, D. 1986. Probability: An Introduction, Oxford Science

Publications, Oxford.
Higham, D. J. 2001. An algorithmic introduction to numerical simulation of
stochastic differential equations, SIAM Review 43(3), 525–546.
Kot, M. 2001. Elements of Mathematical Ecology, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Logan, J. D. & Wolesensky, W. R. 2009. Methods of Mathematical Biology,
Wiley–Interscience, New York.
Mangel, M. 2006. The Theoretical Biologist’s Toolbox, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
May, R. M. 1976. Simple mathematical models with very complicated dynamics,
Nature 261, 459-467.
Mooney, D. & Swift, R. 1999. A Course in Mathematical Modeling,
Mathematical Association of America, Washington, DC.
Otto, S. P. & Day, T. 2007. A Biologist’s Guide to Mathematical Modeling in
Ecology and Evolution, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Ross, S. M. 2007. Introduction to Probability Models, 9th ed., Academic Press,
Boston.
Soong, T. T. 1973. Random Differential Equations in Science and Engineering,
Academic Press, New York.
1 A. Markov (1856–1922) was a Russian mathematician who made significant
contributions to analysis, number theory, approximation theory, and
probability.
2 Actually, the Leslie matrix was introduced to study age-structured models.
Later, L. P. Lefkovitch in 1965 generalized the models to stage-structured
population models. We use the term Leslie matrix for any population
projection matrix.
3 A. Kolmogorov (1903–1987) was instrumental in developing the modern,
axiomatic theory of probability.

Index
acoustics
action integral
adiabatic
adiabatic flow
adjoint of a matrix
adjoint operator
self-adjoint
admissible function
admissible variation
advection
advection equation
age-structured model
Airy function
Alternative theorem
alternative theorem
asymptotic approximation
asymptotic expansion
asymptotic sequence
asymptotic stability
attractor
autonomous equation
Banach space
barotropic flow
basic reproduction number
basin of attraction
beam equation
Beddington model
Bendixson–Dulac theorem
Bernoulli equation
Bernoulli’s theorem

Bessel’s inequality
best approximation
Beverton–Holt model
bifurcation diagram
bilinear expansion
binomial distribution
body force
boundary condition
Dirichlet
Neuman
Neumann
Robin
boundary condition, flux
boundary condition, insulated
boundary value problem
brachistochrone
budworm problem
Burgers’ equation
catenary
Cauchy equations
Cauchy problem
Cauchy sequence
Cauchy theorem
Cauchy–Euler equation
Cauchy–Schwartz inequality
central force field
central limit theorem
chaos
characteristics
chemical reactor
chemotaxis
Clausius–Duhem inequality
closed set
closure of a set

coefficient of variation
Cole–Hopf transformation
community matrix
complete orthonormal set
conditional probability
conservation form of a law
conservation law
higher dimensions
integral form
one dimension
conservation of angular momentum
conservation of energy
conservation of mass
conservation of momentum
conservative force
constitutive equations
constitutive relation
continuity equation
convection theorem
convergence
mean-square (L2)
pointwise
uniform
convergence for test functions
convolution
Couette flow
critical point
discrete models
cumulative distribution
cylindrical coordinates
D’Alembert’s solution
deformation, rate of
delta distribution
delta function

demography
difference equation
differential
diffusion
randomness
diffusion constant
diffusion equation
fundamental solution
diffusive equation
diffusivity
dimensionless quantity
Dirac distribution
Fourier transform
directional derivative
discrete nonlinear systems
dispersion
dispersion relation
dispersive wave equation
dissipation function
distance
distribution
continuous
derivative
Dirac
singular
tempered
divergence
Divergence theorem
dominant balancing
dominant eigenvalue
Duffing equation
eigenfunction
eigenvalue
discrete model

dominant
of a Sturm–Liouville problem
eigenvalue problem
albebraic
eigenvalues of an operator
eigenvector
left
elasticity
electrical units
energy argument
energy integral
energy spectrum
energy transport theorem
enthalpy
entropy
enzyme kinetics
epidemic model
epidemic model, discrete
equilibrium
hyperbolic
stable
unstable
equilibrium problem
equilibrium solution
erf function
erfc function
error
mean-square
pointwise
Euler equation
for a fluid
higher dimensions
Euler expansion formula
Euler expansion theorem

Euler–Lagrange equation
Euler–Lotka equation
Eulerian coordinate
evolution problem
expected value
exponential distribution
extremal
Fermat’s principle
Fick’s law
first integral
Fisher’s equation
fluid motion
one dimension
flux
Fokker–Planck equation
force
body
surface
force of infection
force on an obstacle
Fourier coefficients
Fourier cosine series
Fourier integral theorem
Fourier series
generalized
Fourier sine series
Fourier transform
convolution theorem
definition
inversion formula
of a Gaussian
several dimensions
Fourier’s law
Fredholm Alterative Theorem

Fredholm alternative
Fredholm equation
numerical solution
free endpoint problem
functional
fundamental frequency
G. I. Taylor
G teaux derivative
gamma distribution
gamma function
gauge function
geometric distribution
Gibbs’ phenomenon
global asymptotic stability
gradient
gradient system
Gram–Schmidt process
Green’s function
causal
eigenfunction expansion
Green’s identities
growth-decay equation
Hadamard’s example
Hamilton’s equations
Hamilton’s principle
Hamiltonian
Hamiltonian system
heat conduction equation
heat equation
Cauchy problem
fundamental solution
steady-state
uniqueness

heat equation (see also diffusion equation)
heat transfer
Hermite polynomials
Hermitian matrix
Hilbert space
Hilbert–Schmidt theorem
Holling functional response
Holling, C.
homogeneous
integral equation
Hooke’s law
Hopf bifurcation
Hugoniot curve
hyperbolic equation
ideal fluid
ideal gas
images
method of
incompressible
incompressible flow
independent events
initial layer
initial value problem
inner approximation
inner product
integration by parts
invasion of species
inventory control problem
inverse problem, in calculus of variations
invicid fluid
irrotational flow
isolated equilibrium
isoperimetric problem

Jacobian
Jacobian matrix
Jukes–Cantor model
Jury condition
Jury conditions
Kelvin’s theorem
kernel
separable
symmetric
Kimura model
Kirchhoff’s law
Kolmogorov equations
Korteweg–de Vries equation
Lagrange multiplier rule
Lagrange’s equations
Lagrangian
Lagrangian coordinate
also material coordinate
Laplace method
Laplace transform
applied to integral equations
convolution theorem
definition
inversion formula
table
Laplace’s equation
maximum principle
Laplacian
in curvilinear coordinates
law of mass action
least squares method
Lebesgue integral
Lefkovitch matrix

Legendre polynomials
Legendre’s differential equation
Leslie diagram
Leslie matrix
limit cycle
limit point
linear space
linearization
discrete models
local minimum
locally integrable
log-normal distribution
logistic equation
logistic model
logistics model
discrete
Lotka–Volterra model
MacArthur–Wilson model
Mach number
Malthus model
discrete
Markov process
matching condition
material derivative
mathematical model
maximum principle
Maxwell’s equations
McKendrick–Von Foerster equation
moment generating function
momentum
momentum flux
momentum of a fluid
momentum, canonical
multiplicity of an eigenvalue

natural boundary conditions
Navier–Stokes equations
negative binomial distribution
Neumann series
Newton’s law of cooling
Newton’s second law
Newtonian fluid
non-dimensionalization
norm
strong
weak
normal mode
normed linear space
nullclines
orbit
order relations
big O
little o
outer approximation
Parseval’s equality
partial differential equation
elliptic
hyperbolic
linear
nonlinear
parabolic
particle path
pattern formation
pendulum
periodic function
Perron–Frobenius theorem
perturbation
regular

singular
perturbation series
perturbed problem
phase line
phase plane
phase plane diagram
phase velocity
Pi theorem
Picard’s method
piecewise continuous
piecewise smooth
Plancherel relation
plane waves
Poincaré–Bendixson theorem
Poincaré–Lindstedt method
Poiseuille flow
Poisson distribution
Poisson process
Poisson’s equation
Poisson’s integral formula
population growth
potential
logarithmic
Newtonian
potential flow
potential, quantum mechanical
finite potential well
infinite potential well
particle in a box
potential barrier
step potential
pressure
probability density
probability generating function

probability mass function
projection matrix
pure time equation
quantum mechanics
reflection coefficient
scattering
transmission coefficient
wave packet
quasi-linear
random variable
discrete
random walk
Rankine–Hugoniot conditions
rarefaction waves
Rayleigh line
RCL circuits
reaction–diffusion equation
reaction-advection-diffusion equation
reaction-diffusion equation
renewal equation
repeller
Reynold’s number
Reynold’s transport theorem
Ricker model
Riemann invariants
Riemann’s method
scaling
scattering
schistosomiasis
Schrödinger equation
Schwartz class
secular term
self-adjoint matrix

sensitivity matrix
shock thickness
shock wave
similarity solution
SIR model
SIRmodel
soliton
solution
distribution
fundamental
genuine
weak
sound speed
spectrum
continuous
discrete
of an integral operator
of the Laplacian
spherical coordinates
stable
stable age structure
stable manifold
standard deviation
stationary
steady flow
Stirling’s approximation
stochastic process
stochasticity
demographic
environmental
strain
streamline
stress component
stress tensor

stress vector
stress-strain relation
Sturm–Liouville equation
Sturm–Liouville problem
summation convention
superposition principle
support of a function
symmetric boundary conditions
symmetric operator
test function
thermal conductivity
thermistors
thermodynamics
first law
second law
time scale
diffusion process
transcendentally small
transition matrix
transmission coefficient
traveling wave solutions
Trinity explosion
Turing system
Turing, A.
turning point
Uncertainty Principle
unique solutions
unit free law
unperturbed problem
unstable
equilibrium for discrete models
van der Waals equation
variance

variation
variation of a functional
variation of parameters
velocity
one-dimensional fluid
viscosity
viscous stress tensor
Volterra equation
von Bertalanffy growth model
vorticity equation
Watson’s lemma
wave equation
wave front solution
wave function
wave number
wavelength
weak derivative
well-posed problem
WKB method
Wronskian

