Keep the Future Human: Why
and How We Should Close the Gates
to AGI and Superintelligence, and
What We Should Build Instead
Anthony Aguirre
March 5, 2025
Contents
Executive summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
Introduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
Need-to-knows about AI neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
Key aspects of how modern general AI systems are made . .
13
What are AGI and superintelligence? . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
At the threshold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
The race for AGI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
What happens if we build AGI on our current path? . . . . .
26
How to not build AGI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
Engineering the future: What we should do instead . . . . .
47
The choice before us . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
Appendixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
2
Executive summary
Dramatic advances in artificial intelligence over the past decade (for
narrow-purpose AI) and the last several years (for general-purpose
AI) have transformed AI from a niche academic field to the core
business strategy of many of the world’s largest companies, with
hundreds of billions of dollars in annual investment in the techniques
and technologies for advancing AI’s capabilities.
We now come to a critical juncture. As the capabilities of new AI
systems begin to match and exceed those of humans across many
cognitive domains, humanity must decide: how far do we go, and in
what direction?
AI, like every technology, started with the goal of improving
things for its creator. But our current trajectory, and implicit choice,
is an unchecked race toward ever-more powerful systems, driven by
economic incentives of a few huge technology companies seeking
to automate large swathes of current economic activity and human
labor. If this race continues much longer, there is an inevitable win-
ner: AI itself – a faster, smarter, cheaper alternative to people in our
economy, our thinking, our decisions, and eventually in control of
our civilization.
But we can make another choice: via our governments, we can
take control of the AI development process to impose clear limits,
lines we won’t cross, and things we simply won’t do – as we have for
nuclear technologies, weapons of mass destruction, space weapons,
environmentally destructive processes, the bioengineering of humans,
and eugenics. Most importantly, we can ensure that AI remains a
tool to empower humans, rather than a new species that replaces and
eventually supplants us.
This essay argues that we should keep the future human by closing
the "gates" to smarter-than-human, autonomous, general-purpose AI
– sometimes called “AGI” – and especially to the highly-superhuman
version sometimes called “superintelligence.” Instead, we should fo-
cus on powerful, trustworthy AI tools that can empower individuals
and transformatively improve human societies’ abilities to do what
they do best. The structure of this argument follows in brief.
AI is different
AI systems are fundamentally different from other technologies.
While traditional software follows precise instructions, AI systems
learn how to achieve goals without being explicitly told how. This
makes them powerful: if we can cleanly define the goal or a metric of
success, in most cases an AI system can learn to achieve it. But it also

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
3
makes them inherently unpredictable: we cannot reliably determine
what actions they will take to achieve their objectives.
They are also largely unexplainable: although they are partly code,
they are mostly an enormous set of inscrutable numbers – neural
network "weights" – that cannot be parsed; we are not much better at
understanding their inner workings than at discerning thoughts by
peering inside a biological brain.
This core mode of training digital neural networks is rapidly in-
creasing in complexity. The most powerful AI systems are created
through massive computational experiments, using specialized hard-
ware to train neural networks on enormous datasets, which are then
augmented with software tools and superstructure.
This has led to the creation of very powerful tools for creating and
processing text and images, performing mathematical and scientific
reasoning, aggregating information, and interactively querying a vast
store of human knowledge.
Unfortunately, while development of more powerful, more trust-
worthy technological tools is what we should do, and what nearly
everybody wants and says they want, it is not the trajectory we are
actually on.
AGI and superintelligence
Since the dawn of the field, AI research has instead focused on a
different goal: Artificial General Intelligence. This focus has now
become the focus of the titanic companies leading AI development.
What is AGI? It is often vaguely defined as "human-level AI,"
but this is problematic: which humans, and at which capabilities
is it human level? And what about the super-human capabilities it
already has? A more useful way to understand AGI is through the
intersection of three key properties: high Autonomy (independence
of action), high Generality (broad scope and adaptability), and high
Intelligence (competence at cognitive tasks). Current AI systems
may be highly capable but narrow, or general but requiring constant
human oversight, or autonomous but limited in scope.
Full A-G-I would combine all three properties at levels matching
or exceeding top human capability. Critically, it is this combination
that makes humans so effective and so different from current soft-
ware; it is also what would enable people to be wholesale replaced by
digital systems.
While human intelligence is special, it is by no means a limit. Ar-
tificial "superintelligent" systems could operate hundreds of times
faster, parse vastly more data and hold enormous quantities "in
mind" at once, and form aggregates that are much larger and more

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
4
effective than collections of humans. They could supplant not indi-
viduals but companies, nations, or our civilization as a whole.
We are at the threshold
There is a strong scientific consensus that AGI is possible. AI already
surpasses human performance in many general tests of intellectual
capability, including recently high-level reasoning and problem solv-
ing. Lagging capabilities – such as continual learning, planning,
self-awareness, and originality – all exist at some level in present AI
systems, and known techniques exist that are likely to improve all of
them.
While until a few years ago many researchers saw AGI as decades
away, currently evidence for short timelines to AGI is strong:
• Empirically verified "scaling laws" connect computational input to
AI capability, and corporations are on-track to scale computational
input by orders of magnitude over the coming several years. The
human and fiscal resources dedicated to AI advancement now
equal those of a dozen Manhattan Projects and several Apollo
Projects.
• AI corporations and their leaders publicly and privately believe
that AGI (by some definition) is achievable within a few years.
These companies have information the public does not, including
some having the next generation of AI systems in-hand.
• Expert predictors with proven track-records assign 25% probability
to AGI (by some definition) arriving within 1-2 years, and 50% for
2-5 years (see Metaculus predictions for ’weak’ and ’full’ AGI).
• Autonomy (including long-range flexible planning) lags in AI
systems, but major companies are now focusing their vast re-
sources on developing autonomous AI systems and have infor-
mally named 2025 the "year of the agent."
• AI is contributing more and more to its own improvement. Once
AI systems are as competent as human AI researchers at doing
AI research, a critical threshold for fast progress to much more
powerful AI systems will be hit and likely lead to a runaway in AI
capability. (Arguably, that runaway has already begun.)
The idea that smarter-than-human AGI is decades away or more is
simply no longer tenable to the vast majority of experts in the field.
Disagreements now are about how many months or years it will take
if we stay on this course. The core question we face is: should we?

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
5
What is driving the race to AGI
The race toward AGI is being driven by multiple forces, each making
the situation more dangerous. Major technology companies see AGI
as the ultimate automation technology – not just augmenting human
workers but replacing them largely or entirely. For companies, the
prize is enormous: the opportunity to capture a significant fraction of
the world’s $100 trillion annual economic output by automating away
human labor costs.
Nations feel compelled to join this race, publicly citing economic
and scientific leadership, but privately viewing AGI as a potential
revolution in military affairs comparable to nuclear weapons. Fear
that rivals might gain a decisive strategic advantage creates a classic
arms race dynamic.
Those pursuing superintelligence often cite grand visions: curing
all diseases, reversing aging, achieving breakthroughs in energy and
space travel, or creating superhuman planning capabilities.
Less charitably, what drives the race is power. Each participant
– whether company or country – believes that intelligence equals
power, and that they will be the best steward of that power.
I argue that these motivations are real but fundamentally mis-
guided: AGI will absorb and seek power rather than grant it; AI-
created technologies will also be strongly double-edged, and where
beneficial can be created with AI tools and without AGI; and even
insofar as AGI and its outputs remain under control, these racing
dynamics – both corporate and geopolitical – make large-scale risks
to our society nearly inevitable unless decisively interrupted.
AGI and superintelligence pose a dramatic threat to civilization
Despite their allure, AGI and superintelligence pose dramatic threats
to civilization through multiple reinforcing pathways:
Power concentration: superhuman AI could disempower the vast
majority of humanity by absorbing huge swathes of social and eco-
nomic activity into AI systems run by a handful of giant companies
(which may in turn either be taken over by, or effectively take over,
governments.)
Massive disruption: bulk automation of most cognitive-based jobs,
replacement of our current epistemic systems, and rollout of vast
numbers of active nonhuman agents would upend most of our cur-
rent civilizational systems in a relatively short period of time.
Catastrophes: by proliferating the ability – potentially above human
level – to create new military and destructive technologies and de-
coupling it from the social and legal systems grounding responsibil-
ity, physical catastrophes from weapons of mass destruction become
dramatically more likely.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
6
Geopolitics and war: major world powers will not sit idly by if they
feel that a technology that could supply a "decisive strategic advan-
tage" is being developed by their adversaries.
Runaway and loss of control: Unless it is specifically prevented, su-
perhuman AI will have every incentive to further improve itself and
could far outstrip humans in speed, data processing, and sophistica-
tion of thinking. There is no meaningful way in which we can be in
control of such a system. Such AI will not grant power to humans;
we will grant power to it, or it will take it.
Many of these risks remain even if the technical "alignment" prob-
lem – ensuring that advanced AI reliably does what humans want it
to do – is solved. AI presents an enormous challenge in how it will
be managed, and very many aspects of this management become
incredibly difficult or intractable as human intelligence is breached.
Most fundamentally, the type of superhuman general-purpose
AI currently being pursued would, by its very nature, have goals,
agency, and capabilities exceeding our own. It would be inherently
uncontrollable – how can we control something that we can neither
understand nor predict? It would not be a technological tool for
human use, but a second species of intelligence on Earth alongside
ours. If allowed to progress further, it would constitute not just a
second species but a replacement species.
Perhaps it would treat us well, perhaps not. But the future would
belong to it, not us. The human era would be over.
This is not inevitable; humanity can, very concretely, decide not to build
our replacement.
The creation of superhuman AGI is far from inevitable. We can pre-
vent it through a coordinated set of governance measures:
First, we need robust accounting and oversight of AI computation
("compute"), which is a fundamental enabler of, and lever to govern,
large-scale AI systems. This in turn requires standardized measure-
ment and reporting of the total compute used in training AI models
and running them, and technical methods of tallying, certifying, and
verifying computation used.
Second, we should implement hard caps on AI computation, both
for training and for operation; these prevent AI both from being too
powerful and operating too quickly. These caps can be implemented
through both legal requirements and hardware-based security mea-
sures built into AI-specialized chips, analogous to security features
in modern phones. Because specialized AI hardware is made by only
a handful of companies, verification and enforcement are feasible
through the existing supply chain.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
7
Third, we need enhanced liability for the most dangerous AI sys-
tems. Those developing AI that combines high autonomy, broad gen-
erality, and superior intelligence should face strict liability for harms,
while safe harbors from this liability would encourage development
of more limited and controllable systems.
Fourth, we need tiered regulation based on risk levels. The most
capable and dangerous systems would require extensive safety and
controllability guarantees before development and deployment, while
less powerful or more specialized systems would face proportionate
oversight. This regulatory framework should eventually operate at
both national and international levels.
This approach – with detailed specification given in the full docu-
ment – is practical: while international coordination will be needed,
verification and enforcement can work through the small number of
companies controlling the specialized hardware supply chain. It is
also flexible: companies can still innovate and profit from AI develop-
ment, just with clear limits on the most dangerous systems.
Longer-term containment of AI power and risk would require
international agreements based on both self- and common-interest,
just as controlling nuclear weapon proliferation does now. But we
can start immediately with enhanced oversight and liability, while
building toward more comprehensive governance.
The key missing ingredient is political and social will to take
control of the AI development process. The source of that will, if it
comes in time, will be reality itself – that is, from widespread realiza-
tion of the real implications of what we are doing.
We can engineer Tool AI to empower humanity
Rather than pursuing uncontrollable AGI, we can develop powerful
"Tool AI" that enhances human capability while remaining under
meaningful human control. Tool AI systems can be extremely capable
while avoiding the dangerous triple-intersection of high autonomy,
broad generality, and superhuman intelligence, as long as we en-
gineer them to be controllable at a level commensurate with their
capability. They can also be combined into sophisticated systems that
maintain human oversight while delivering transformative benefits.
Tool AI can revolutionize medicine, accelerate scientific discov-
ery, enhance education, and improve democratic processes. When
properly governed, it can make human experts and institutions more
effective rather than replacing them. While such systems will still
be highly disruptive and require careful management, the risks they
pose are fundamentally different from AGI: they are risks we can
govern, like those of other powerful technologies, not existential

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
8
threats to human agency and civilization. And crucially, when wisely
developed, AI tools can help people govern powerful AI and manage
its effects.
This approach requires rethinking both how AI is developed and
how its benefits are distributed. New models of public and non-profit
AI development, robust regulatory frameworks, and mechanisms
to distribute economic benefits more broadly can help ensure AI
empowers humanity as a whole rather than concentrating power in
a few hands. AI itself can help build better social and governance
institutions, enabling new forms of coordination and discourse that
strengthen rather than undermine human society. National security
establishments can leverage their expertise to make AI tool systems
genuinely secure and trustworthy, and a true source of defense as
well as national power.
We may eventually choose to develop yet more powerful and more
sovereign systems that are less like tools and – we can hope – more
like wise and powerful benefactors. But we should do so only after
we have developed the scientific understanding and governance
capacity to do so safely. Such a momentous and irreversible decision
should be made deliberately by humanity as a whole, not by default
in a race between tech companies and nations.
In human hands
People want the good that comes from AI: useful tools that empower
them, supercharge economic opportunities and growth, and promise
breakthroughs in science, technology, and education. Why wouldn’t
they? But when asked, overwhelming majorities of the general pub-
lic want slower and more careful AI development, and do not want
smarter-than-human AI that will replace them in their jobs and else-
where, fill their culture and information commons with non-human
content, concentrate power in a tiny set of corporations, pose extreme
large-scale global risks, and eventually threaten to disempower or
replace their species. Why would they?
We can have one without the other. It starts by deciding that our
destiny is not in the supposed inevitability of some technology or
in the hands of a few CEOs in Silicon Valley, but in the rest of our
hands if we take hold of it. Let’s close the Gates, and keep the future
human.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
9
Introduction
We may be at the end of the human era.
Something has begun in the past ten years that is unique in the
history of our species. Its consequences will, to a great extent, deter-
mine the future of humanity. Starting around 2015, researchers have
succeeded in developing narrow artificial intelligence (AI) – systems
that can win at games like Go, recognize images and speech, and so
on, better than any human.1
1 This chart shows a set of tasks; many
similar curves could be added to this
graph. This rapid progress in narrow
AI has surprised even experts in the
field, with benchmarks being surpassed
years ahead of predictions.
This is amazing success, and it is yielding extremely useful sys-
tems and products that will empower humanity. But narrow artificial
intelligence has never been the true goal of the field. Rather, the aim
has been to create general purpose AI systems, particularly ones of-
ten called "artificial general intelligence" (AGI) or "superintelligence"
that are simultaneously as good or better than humans across nearly
all tasks, just as AI is now super-human at Go, chess, poker, drone
racing, etc. This is the stated goal of many major AI companies.2
2 Deepmind, OpenAI, Anthropic,
and X.ai were all founded with the
specific goal of developing AGI. For
instance, OpenAI’s charter explicitly
states its goal as developing "artificial
general intelligence that benefits all of
humanity," while DeepMind’s mission
is "to solve intelligence, and then use
that to solve everything else." Meta,
Microsoft, and others are now pursuing
substantially similar paths. Meta has
said that it plans to develop AGI and
release it openly.
These efforts are also succeeding. General-purpose AI systems like
ChatGPT, Gemini, Llama, Grok, Claude, and Deepseek, based on
massive computations and mountains of data, have reached parity
with typical humans across a wide variety of tasks, and even match
human experts in some domains. Now AI engineers at some of the
largest technology companies are racing to push these giant experi-
ments in machine intelligence to the next levels, at which they match
and then exceed the full range of human capabilities, expertise, and
autonomy.
This is imminent. Over the last ten years, expert estimates for how
long this will take – if we continue our present course – have fallen
from decades (or centuries) to single-digit years.
It is also of epochal importance, and transcendent risk. Proponents
of AGI see it as a positive transformation that will solve scientific
problems, cure disease, develop new technologies, and automate
drudgery. And AI could certainly help to achieve all of these things
– indeed it already is. But over the decades, many careful thinkers,
from Alan Turing to Stephen Hawking to the present-day Geoffrey
Hinton and Yoshua Bengio3 have issued a stark warning: building
3 Hinton and Bengio are two of the most
cited AI researchers, have both won
the AI field’s Nobel, the Turing Prize,
and Hinton has won a Nobel prize (in
physics) to boot.
truly smarter-than-human, general, autonomous AI will at minimum
completely and irrevocably upend society, and at maximum result in
human extinction.4
4 Building something of this risk,
under commercial incentives and
near-zero government oversight, is
utterly unprecedented. There isn’t even
controversy about the risk among those
building it! The leaders of Deepmind,
OpenAI, and Anthropic, among many
other experts, have all literally signed
a statement that advanced AI poses an
extinction risk to humanity. The alarm
bells could not be ringing any harder,
and one can only conclude that those
ignoring them simply are not taking
AGI and superintelligence seriously.
One goal of this essay is to help them
understand why they should.
Superintelligent AI is rapidly approaching on our current path,
but is far from inevitable. This essay is an extended argument as to
why and how we should close the Gates to this approaching inhuman
future, and what we should do instead.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
10
Need-to-knows about AI neural networks
To understand how the consequences of developing more powerful
AI will play out, it is essential to internalize some basics. This and
the next two sections develop these, covering in turn what modern AI
is, how it leverages massive computations, and the senses in which it
is rapidly growing in generality and capability.5
5 For a gentle but technical introduction
to machine learning and AI, particu-
larly language models, see this site.
For another modern primer on AI
extinction risks, see this piece. For a
comprehensive and authoritative sci-
entific analysis of the state of AI safety,
see the recent International AI Safety
Report.
There are many ways to define artificial intelligence, but for our
purposes the key property of AI is that while a standard computer
program is a list of instructions for how to perform a task, an AI
system is one that learns from data or experience to perform tasks
without being explicitly told how to do so.
Almost all salient modern AI is based on neural networks. These
are mathematical/computational structures, represented by a very
large (billions or trillions) set of numbers ("weights"), that perform
a training task well. These weights are crafted (or perhaps "grown"
or "found") by iteratively tweaking them so that the neural network
improves a numerical score (a.k.a. "loss") defined toward performing
well at one or more tasks.6 This process is known as training the
6 Training typically occurs by looking
for a local maximum of the score in a
high-dimensional space given by the
model weights. By checking how the
score changes as weights are tweaked,
the training algorithm identifies which
tweaks improve score the most, and
moves the weights in that direction.
neural network.7
7 For example, in an image recognition
problem, the neural network would
output probabilities for labels for the
image. A score would be related to
the probability the AI accords to the
correct answer. The training procedure
would then adjust weights so that next
time, the AI would output a higher
probability for the correct label for
that image. This is then repeated a
huge number of times. The same basic
procedure is used in training essentially
all modern neural networks, albeit with
more complex scoring mechanism.
There are many techniques for doing this training, but those de-
tails are much less relevant than the ways in which the scoring is
defined, and how those result in different tasks the neural network
performs well. A key difference has historically been drawn between
"narrow" and "general" AI.
Narrow AI is deliberately trained to do a particular task or small
set of tasks (such as recognizing images or playing chess); it requires
retraining for new tasks, and has a narrow scope of capability. We
have superhuman narrow AI, meaning that for nearly any discrete
well-defined task a person can do, we can probably construct a score
and then successfully train a narrow AI system to do it better than a
human could.
General-purpose AI (GPAI) systems can perform a wide range of
tasks, including many they were not explicitly trained for; they can
also learn new tasks as part of their operation. Current large "multi-
modal models"8 like ChatGPT exemplify this: trained on a very large
8 Most multimodal models use the
"transformer" architecture to process
and generate multiple types of data
(text, images, sound). These can all
decomposed into, and then treated on
the same footing, as different types
of "tokens." Multimodal models are
trained first to accurately predict
tokens within massive datasets, then
refined through reinforcement learning
to enhance capabilities and shape
behaviors.
corpus of text and images, they can engage in complex reasoning,
write code, analyze images, and assist with a vast array of intellec-
tual tasks. While still quite different from human intelligence in ways
we’ll see in depth below, their generality has caused a revolution in
AI.9
9 That language models are trained
to do one thing – predict words –
has caused some to call them narrow
AI. But this is misleading: because
predicting text well requires so many
different capabilities, this training
task leads to a surprisingly general
system. Also note that these systems
are extensively trained by reinforcement
learning, effectively representing
thousands of people giving the model
a reward signal when it does a good
job at any of the many things it does. It
then inherits significant generality from
the people giving this feedback.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
11
Unpredictability: a key feature of AI systems
A key difference between AI systems and conventional software is
in predictability. Standard software’s output can be unpredictable –
indeed sometimes that’s why we write software, to give us results
we could not have predicted. But conventional software rarely does
anything it was not programmed to do – its scope and behavior are
generally as designed. A top-tier chess program may make moves no
human could predict (or else they could beat that chess program!)
but it will not generally do anything but play chess.
Like conventional software, narrow AI has predictable scope and
behavior but can have unpredictable results. This is really just an-
other way to define narrow AI: as AI that is akin to conventional
software in its predictability and range of operation.
General-purpose AI is different: its scope (the domains over which
it applies), behavior (the sorts of things it does), and results (its actual
outputs) can all be unpredictable.10 GPT-4 was trained just to gener-
10 There are multiple ways in which
AI is unpredictable. One is that in the
general case one cannot predict what
an algorithm will do without actually
running it; there are theorems to this
effect. This can be true just because the
output of algorithms can be complex.
But it is particularly clear and relevant
in the case (such as in chess or Go)
where the prediction would imply a
capability (beating the AI) the would-
be predictor does not have. Second,
a given AI system will not always
produce the same output even given
the same input – its outputs contain
randomness; this also couples with
algorithmic unpredictability. Third,
unexpected and emergent capabilities
can arise from training, meaning even
the types of things an AI system can
and will do are unpredictable; This last
type is particularly important for safety
considerations.
ate text accurately, but developed many capabilities its trainers didn’t
predict or intend. This unpredictability stems from the complexity
of training: because the training data contains outputs from many
different tasks, the AI must effectively learn to perform these tasks to
predict well.
This unpredictability of general AI systems is quite fundamental.
Although in principle it is possible to carefully construct AI systems
that have guaranteed limits on their behavior (as mentioned later
in the essay), the way AI systems are created now they are unpre-
dictable in practice and even in principle.
Passive AI, agents, autonomous systems, and alignment
This unpredictability becomes particularly important when we con-
sider how AI systems are actually deployed and used to achieve
various goals.
Many AI systems are relatively passive in the sense that they pri-
marily provide information, and the user takes actions. Others, com-
monly termed agents, take actions themselves, with varying levels of
involvement from a user. Those that take actions with relatively less
external input or oversight may be termed more autonomous. This
forms a spectrum in terms of independence of action, from passive
tools to autonomous agents.11
11 See here for an in-depth review of
what is meant by an "autonomous
agent" (along with ethical arguments
against building them).
As for goals of AI systems, these may be directly tied to their
training objective (e.g. the goal of "winning" for a Go-playing system
is also explicitly what it was trained to do). Or they may not be:
ChatGPT’s training objective is in part to predict text, in part to be a
helpful assistant. But when doing a given task, its goal is supplied to

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
12
it by the user. Goals may also be created by an AI system itself, only
very indirectly related to its training objective.12
12 You may sometimes hear "AI can’t
have its own goals." This is absolute
nonsense. It is easy to generate exam-
ples where AI has or develops goals
that were never given to it and are
known only to itself. You don’t see this
much in current popular multimodal
models because it is trained out of
them; it could just as easily be trained
into them.
Goals are closely tied to the question of "alignment," that is the
question of whether AI systems will do what we want them to do. This
simple question hides an enormous level of subtlety.13 For now, note
13 There’s a large literature. On the
general problem see Christian’s The
Alignment Problem, and Russell’s
Human-Compatible. On a more tech-
nical side see e.g. this paper.
that "we" in this sentence might refer to many different people and
groups, leading to different types of alignment. For example, an AI
might be highly obedient (or "loyal") to its user – here "we" is "each
of us." Or it might be more sovereign, being primarily driven by its
own goals and constraints, but still acting broadly in the common
interest of human wellbeing – "we" is then "humanity" or "society."
In-between is a spectrum where an AI would be largely obedient, but
might refuse to take actions that harm others or society, violate the
law, etc.
These two axes – level of autonomy and type of alignment – are
not entirely independent. For example, a sovereign passive system,
while not quite self-contradictory, is a concept in tension, as is an
obedient autonomous agent.14 There’s a clear sense in which au-
14 We’ll later see that while such sys-
tems buck the trend, that actually
makes them very interesting and useful.
tonomy and sovereignty tend to go hand-in-hand. In a similar vein,
predictability tends to be higher in "passive" and "obedient" AI sys-
tems, whereas sovereign or autonomous ones will tend to be more
unpredictable. All of this will be crucial for understanding the ramifi-
cations of potential AGI and superintelligence.
Creating truly aligned AI, of whatever flavor, requires solving
three distinct challenges:
1. Understanding what "we" want – which is complex whether "we"
means a specific person or organization (loyalty) or humanity
broadly (sovereignty);
2. Building systems that regularly act in accordance with those
wants – essentially creating consistent positive behavior;
3. Most fundamentally, making systems that genuinely "care" about
those wants rather than merely acting as if they do.
The distinction between reliable behavior and genuine care is crucial.
Just as a human employee might follow orders perfectly while lack-
ing any real commitment to the organization’s mission, an AI system
might act aligned without truly valuing human preferences. We can
train AI systems to say and do things through feedback, and they can
learn to reason about what humans want. But making them genuinely
value human preferences is a far deeper challenge.15
15 This is not to say we require emotions
or sentience. Rather, it is enormously
difficult from the outside of a system to
know what its inner goals, preferences,
and values are. "Genuine" here would
mean that we have strong enough
reason to rely on it that in the case of
critical systems we can bet our lives on
it.
The profound difficulties in solving these alignment challenges,
and their implications for AI risk, will be explored further below. For
now, understand that alignment is not just a technical feature we tack

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
13
on to AI systems, but a fundamental aspect of their architecture that
shapes their relationship with humanity.
Key aspects of how modern general AI systems are made
To really understand a human you need to know something about bi-
ology, evolution, child-rearing, and more; to understand AI you also
need to know about how it is made. Over the past five years, AI sys-
tems have evolved tremendously both in capability and complexity.
A key enabling factor has been the availability of very large amounts
of computation (or colloquially "compute" when applied to AI).
The numbers are staggering. About 1025 −1026 "floating-point op-
erations" (FLOP)16 are used in the training of models like the GPT se-
16 1025 means 1 followed by 25 zeros, or
ten trillion trillion. A FLOP is just an
arithmetic addition or multiplication
of numbers with some precision. Note
that AI hardware performance can
vary by a factor of ten more depending
upon the precision of the arithmetic
and the architecture of the computer.
Counting logic-gate operations (ANDS,
ORS, AND NOTS) would be funda-
mental but these are not commonly
available or benchmarked; for present
purposes it is useful to standardize
on 16-bit operations (FP16), though
appropriate conversion factors should
be established.
ries, Claude, Gemini, etc.17 (For comparison, if every human on Earth
17 A collection of estimates and hard
data is available from Epoch AI and
indicates about 2 × 1025 16-bit FLOP for
GPT-4; this roughly matches numbers
that were leaked for GPT-4. Estimates
for other mid-2024 models are all
within a factor of a few of GPT-4.
worked non-stop doing one calculation every five seconds, it would
take around a billion years to accomplish this.) This huge amount of
computation enables training of models with up to trillions of model
weights on terabytes of data – a large fraction of all of the quality text
that has ever been written alongside large libraries of sounds, images
and video. Complementing this training with additional extensive
training reinforcing human preferences and good task performance,
models trained in this way exhibit human-competitive performance
across a significant span of basic intellectual tasks, including reason-
ing and problem solving.
We also know (very, very roughly) how much computation speed,
in operations per second, is sufficient for the inference speed18 of such
18 Inference is simply the process of
generating an output from a neural
network. Training can be considered
a succession of many inferences and
model-weight tweaks.
a system to match the speed of human text processing. It is about
1015 −1016 FLOP per second.19
19 For text production, the original GPT-
4 required 560 TFLOP per token gen-
erated. Around 7 tokens/s is needed
to keep up with human thought, so
this gives ≈3 × 1015 FLOP/s. But ef-
ficiencies have driven this down; this
NVIDIA brochure for example indi-
cates as little as 3 × 1014FLOP/s for a
comparably-performing Llama 405B
model.
While powerful, these models are by their nature limited in key
ways, quite analogous to how an individual human would be limited
if forced to simply output text at a fixed rate of words per minute,
without stopping to think or using any additional tools. More recent
AI systems address these limitations through a more complex process
and architecture combining several key elements:
• One or more neural networks, with one model providing the core
cognitive capacity, and up to several others performing other more
narrow tasks;
• Tooling provided to and usable by the model – for example ability
to search the web, create or edit documents, execute programs, etc.
• Scaffolding that connects input and outputs of neural networks.
A very simple scaffold might just allow two "instances" of an AI
model to converse with each other, or one to check the work of
another.20
20 As a slightly more complex example,
an AI system might first generate
several possible solutions to a math
problem, then use another instance to
check each solution, and finally use a
third to synthesize the results into a
clear explanation. This allows for more
thorough and reliable problem-solving
than a single pass.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
14
• Chain-of-thought and related prompting techniques do something
similar, causing a model to for example generate many approaches
to a problem, then process those approaches for an aggregate
answer.
• Retraining models to make better use of tools, scaffolding, and
chain-of-thought.
Because these extensions can be very powerful (and include AI
systems themselves), these composite systems can be quite sophis-
ticated and dramatically enhance AI capabilities.21 And recently,
21 See for example details on OpenAI’s
"Operator", Claude’s tool capabilities,
and AutoGPT. OpenAI’s Deep Research
probably has a quite sophisticated ar-
chitecture but details are not available.
techniques in scaffolding and especially chain-of-thought prompting
(and folding results back into retraining models to use these better)
have been developed and employed in o1, o3, and DeepSeek R1 to
do many passes of inference in response to a given query.22 This in
22 Deepseek R1 relies on iteratively
training and prompting the model so
that the final trained model creates
extensive chain-of-thought reasoning.
Architectural details are not available
for o1 or o3, however Deepseek has
revealed that there is no particular
"special sauce" required to unlock
capability scaling with inference. But
despite receiving a great deal of press
as upending the "status quo" in AI, it
does not impact the core claims of this
essay.
effect allows the model to "think about" its response and dramatically
boosts these models’ ability to do high-caliber reasoning in science,
math, and programming tasks.23
23 These models significantly outper-
form standard models on reasoning
benchmarks. For instance, in the GPQA
Diamond Benchmark—a rigorous test
of PhD-level science questions—GPT-4o
scored 56%, while o1 and o3 achieved
78% and 88%, respectively, far exceed-
ing the 70% average score of human
experts.
For a given AI architecture, increases in training computation can
be reliably translated into improvements in a set of clearly-defined
metrics. For less crisply defined general capabilities (such as those
discussed below), the translation is less clear and predictive, but it
is almost certain that larger models with more training computation
will have new and better capabilities, even if it is hard to predict
what those will be.
Similarly, composite systems and especially advances in "chain
of thought" (and training of models that work well with it) have
unlocked scaling in inference computation: for a given trained core
model, at least some AI system capabilities increase as more compu-
tation is applied that allows them to "think harder and longer" about
complex problems. This comes at a steep computing speed cost, re-
quiring hundreds or thousands of more FLOP/s to match human
performance.24
24 OpenAI’s O3 probably expended
∼1021 −1022 FLOP to complete each
of the ARC-AGI challenge questions,
which competent humans can do in
(say) 10-100 seconds, giving a figure
more like ∼1020 FLOP/s.
While only a part of what is leading to rapid AI progress,25 the
25 While computation is a key measure
of AI system capability, it interacts with
both data quality and algorithmic im-
provements. Better data or algorithms
can reduce computational requirements,
while more computation can some-
times compensate for weaker data or
algorithms.
role of computation and the possibility of composite systems will
prove crucial to both preventing uncontrollable AGI and developing
safer alternatives.
What are AGI and superintelligence?
The term "artificial general intelligence" has been around for some
time to point to "human level" general-purpose AI. It has never been
a particularly well-defined term, but in recent years it has paradoxi-
cally become no better defined yet even more important, with experts
simultaneously arguing about whether AGI is decades away or al-

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
15
ready achieved, and trillion-dollar companies racing "to AGI." (The
ambiguity of "AGI" was highlighted recently when leaked documents
reportedly revealed that in OpenAI’s contract with Microsoft, AGI
was defined as AI that generates $100 billion in revenue for OpenAI –
a rather more mercenary than highbrow definition.)
There are two core problems with the idea of AI with "human level
intelligence." First, humans are very, very different in their ability to
do any given type of cognitive work, so there is no "human level."
Second, intelligence is very multi-dimensional; although there may
be correlations, they are imperfect and may be quite different in AI.
So even if we could define "human level" for many capabilities, AI
would surely be far beyond it in some even while quite below in
others.26
26 For instance, current AI systems
far exceed human capability in rapid
arithmetic or memory tasks, while
falling short in abstract reasoning and
creative problem-solving.
It is, nonetheless, quite crucial to be able to discuss types, levels,
and thresholds of AI capability. The approach taken here is to em-
phasize that general-purpose AI is here, and that it comes – and will
come – at various capability levels at which it is convenient to attach
terms even if they are reductive, because they correspond to crucial
thresholds in terms of AI’s effects on society and humanity.
We’ll define "full" AGI to be synonymous with "super-human
general-purpose AI" meaning an AI system that is able to perform
essentially all human cognitive tasks at or above top human ex-
pert level, as well as acquire new skills and transfer capability to
new domains. This is in keeping with how "AGI" is often defined
in the modern literature. It’s important to note that this is a very
high threshold. No human has this type of intelligence; rather it is
the type of intelligence that large collections of top human experts
would have if combined. We can term "superintelligence" a capability
that goes beyond this, and define more limited levels of capability
by "human-competitive" and "expert-competitive" GPAI, which per-
form a broad range of tasks at typical professional, or human expert
level.27
27 Very importantly, as a competitor
such AI would have several major
structural advantages including: it
would not tire or have other individual
needs like humans; it can be run at
higher speeds just by scaling computing
power; it can be copied along with any
expertise or knowledge it acquires –
and neural networks’ acquired knowl-
edge can even be "merged" to transfer
whole skillsets amongst themselves; it
could communicate at machine speed;
and it could self-modify or self-improve
in more significant ways and higher
speed than any human.
These terms and some others are collected in the table below. For a
more concrete sense of what the various grades of system can do, it is
useful to take the definitions seriously and consider what they mean.
We’re already experiencing what having GPAIs up to human com-
petitive level is like. This has integrated relatively smoothly, as most
users experience this as having a smart but limited temp worker who
makes them more productive with mixed impact on the quality of
their work.28
28 If you have not spent time using
current top-of-the-line AI systems,
I recommend it: they are genuinely
useful and capable, and it is also
important for calibrating the effect AI
will have as they get more powerful.
What would be different about expert-competitive GPAI is that it
wouldn’t have the core limitations of present-day AI, and would do
the things experts do: independent economically valuable work, real
knowledge creation, technical work you can count on, while rarely

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
16
AI Type
Related Terms
Definition
Examples
Narrow AI
Weak AI
AI trained for a specific task or family of tasks.
Excels in its domain but lacks general intelligence
or transfer learning ability.
Image recognition software; Voice as-
sistants (e.g., Siri, Alexa); Chess-playing
programs; DeepMind’s AlphaFold
Tool AI
Augmented Intelli-
gence, AI Assistant
(Discussed later in essay.) AI system enhanc-
ing human capabilities. Combines human-
competitive general-purpose AI, narrow AI,
and guaranteed control, prioritizing safety and
collaboration. Supports human decision-making.
Advanced coding assistants; AI-powered
research tools; Sophisticated data anal-
ysis platforms. Competent but narrow
and controllable agents
General-
purpose AI
(GPAI)
AI system adaptable to various tasks, including
those not specifically trained for.
Language models (e.g., GPT-4, Claude);
Multimodal AI models; DeepMind’s
MuZero
Human-
competitive
GPAI
AGI [weak]
General-purpose AI performing tasks at average
human level, sometimes exceeding it.
Advanced language models (e.g., O1,
Claude 3.5); Some multimodal AI sys-
tems
Expert-
competitive
GPAI
AGI [partial]
General-purpose AI performing most tasks at
human expert level, with significant but limited
autonomy
Possibly a tooled and scaffolded O3, at
least for mathematics, programming,
and some hard sciences
AGI [full]
Super-human GPAI
AI system capable of autonomously perform-
ing roughly all human intellectual tasks at or
beyond expert level, with efficient learning and
knowledge transfer.
[No current examples - theoretical]
Super-
intelligence
Highly super-
human GPAI
AI system far surpassing human capabilities
across all domains, outperforming collective
human expertise. This out-performance could
be in generality, quality, speed, and/or other
measures.
[No current examples - theoretical]
Terms for different types and capability levels of AI systems used in this essay. These categories represent points along continuous
spectra rather than sharp divisions. Note that the term "AGI" is defined in particularly diverse ways.
(though still occasionally) making dumb mistakes.
The idea of full AGI is that it really does all of the cognitive things
even the most capable and effective humans do, autonomously and
with no needed help or oversight. This includes sophisticated plan-
ning, learning new skills, managing complex projects, etc. It could
do original cutting-edge research. It could run a company. What-
ever your job is, if it is predominantly done by computer or over the
phone, it could do it at least as well as you. And probably much faster
and more cheaply. We’ll discuss some of the ramifications below, but
for now the challenge for you is to really take this seriously. Imagine
the top ten most knowledgeable and competent people you know
or know of – including CEOs, scientists, professors, top engineers,
psychologists, political leaders, and writers. Wrap them all into one,
who also speaks 100 languages, has a prodigious memory, operates
quickly, is tireless and always motivated, and works at below mini-
mum wage.29 That’s a sense of what AGI would be.
29 Consider a major research hospital:
fully-realized AGI could simultaneously
analyze all incoming patient data, keep
up with every new medical paper, sug-
gest diagnoses, design treatment plans,
manage clinical trials, and coordinate
staff scheduling – all while operating
at a level matching or exceeding the
hospital’s top specialists in each area.
And it could do this for multiple hos-
pitals simultaneously, at a fraction of
the current cost. Unfortunately, you
must also consider an organized crime
syndicate: fully realized AGI could
simultaneously hack, impersonate, spy
on, and blackmail thousands of victims,
keep up with law enforcement (which
automates much more slowly), design
new money-making schemes, and coor-
dinate staff scheduling – if there is any
staff.
For superintelligence the imagining is harder, because the idea is
that it could perform intellectual feats that no human or even collec-
tion of humans can – it is by definition unpredictable by us. But we

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
17
can get a sense. As a bare baseline, consider lots of AGIs, each much
more capable than even the top human expert, running at 100 times
human speed, with enormous memory and terrific coordination ca-
pacity.30 And it goes up from there. Dealing with superintelligence
30 In his essay, Dario Amodei, CEO of
Anthropic, called to mind a "Country of
[a million] geniuses".
would be less like conversing with a different mind, more like negoti-
ating with a different (and more advanced) civilization.
So how close are we to AGI and superintelligence?
At the threshold
The past ten years have seen dramatic advances in AI driven by huge
computational, human, and fiscal resources. Many narrow AI ap-
plications are better than humans at their assigned tasks, and are
certainly far faster and cheaper.31 And there are also narrow super-
31 You use a lot more of this AI than
you probably think, driving speech
generation and recognition, image
processing, newsfeed algorithms, etc.
human agents that can trounce all people at narrow-domain games
such as Go, Chess, and Poker, as well as more general agents that
can plan and execute actions in simplified simulated environments as
effectively as humans can.
Most prominently, current general AI systems from OpenAI/Micro-
soft, Google/Deepmind, Anthropic/Amazon, Facebook/Meta,
X.ai/Tesla and others32 have emerged since early 2023 and steadily
32 While relationships between these
pairs of companies are quite complex
and nuanced, I have explicitly listed
them to indicate both the vast overall
market capitalization of firms now
enjoined in AI development, and also
that behind even "smaller" companies
like Anthropic sit enormously deep
pockets via investments and major
partnership deals.
(though unevenly) increased their capabilities since then. All of these
have been created via token-prediction on huge text and multimedia
datasets, combined with extensive reinforcement feedback from hu-
mans and other AI systems. Some of them also include extensive tool
and scaffold systems.
Strengths and weaknesses of current general systems
These systems perform well across an increasingly broad range of
tests designed to measure intelligence and expertise, with progress
that has surprised even experts in the field:
• When first released, GPT-4 matched or exceeded typical human
performance on standard academic tests including SATs, GRE, en-
trance exams, and bar exams. More recent models likely perform
significantly better, though results are not publicly available.
• The Turing test – long considered a key benchmark for "true" AI
– is now routinely passed in some forms by modern language
models, both informally and in formal studies.33
33 It has become fashionable to dis-
parage the Turing test, but it is quite
powerful and general. In weak versions
it indicates whether typical people
interacting with an AI (which is trained
to act human) in typical ways for brief
periods can tell whether it is an AI.
They cannot. Second, a highly adver-
sarial Turing test can probe essentially
any element of human capability and
intelligence – by e.g. comparing an AI
system to a human expert, evaluated by
other human experts. There is a sense
in which much of AI evaluation is a
generalized form of Turing test.
• On the comprehensive MMLU benchmark spanning 57 academic
subjects, recent models achieve domain-expert level scores (∼
90%)34
34 This is per domain - no human could
plausibly achieve such scores across all
subjects simultaneously.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
18
• Technical expertise has advanced dramatically: The GPQA bench-
mark of graduate-level physics saw performance jump from near-
random guessing (GPT-4, 2022) to expert level (o1-preview, 2024).
• Even tests specifically designed to be AI-resistant are falling: Ope-
nAI’s O3 reportedly solves the ARC-AGI abstract problem-solving
benchmark at human level, achieves top-expert coding perfor-
mance, and scores 25% on Epoch AI’s "frontier math" problems
designed to challenge elite mathematicians.35
35 These are problems that would
take even excellent mathematicians
substantial time to solve, if they could
solve them at all.
• The trend is so clear that MMLU’s developer has now created "Hu-
manity’s Last Exam" – an ominous name reflecting the possibility
that AI will soon surpass human performance on any meaningful
test. As of writing this, there are claims of AI systems achieving
27% (according to Sam Altman) and 35% (according to this pa-
per) on this extremely difficult exam. It is quite unlikely that any
individual human could do so.
Despite these impressive numbers (and their obvious intelligence
when one interacts with them)36 there are many things (at least the
36 If you are of a skeptical bent, retain
your skepticism but really take the most
current models for a spin, as well as try
for yourself some of the test questions
they can pass. As a physics professor, I
would predict with near certainty that,
for example, the top models would pass
the graduate qualifying exam in our
department.
released versions of) these neural networks cannot do. Currently most
are disembodied – existing only on servers – and process at most
text, sound and still images (but not video.) Crucially, most cannot
carry out complex planned activities requiring high accuracy.37 And
37 This and other weaknesses like
confabulation have slowed market
adoption and led to a gap between
perceived and claimed capabilities
(which must also be viewed through
the lens of intense market competition
and the need to attract investment.)
This has confused both the public and
policymakers about the actual state
of AI progress. While perhaps not
matching the hype, the progress is very
real.
there are a number of other qualities strong in high-level human
cognition currently low in released AI systems.
The following table lists a number of these, based on mid-2024
AI systems such as GPT-4o, Claude 3.5 Sonnet, and Google Gemini
1.5.38 The key question for how rapidly general AI will become more
38 The major advance since then has
been development of systems trained
for top-quality reasoning, leveraging
more computation during inference
and greater reinforcement learning.
Because these models are new and
their capabilities less tested, I’ve not
wholly revamped this table except
for "reasoning", which I regard as
essentially solved. But I have updated
predictions based on experienced and
reported capabilities of those systems.
powerful is: to what degree will just doing more of the same produce
results, versus adding additional but known techniques, versus de-
veloping or implementing really new AI research directions. My own
predictions for this are given in the table, in terms of how likely each
of these scenarios is to get that capability to and beyond human level.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
19
Capability
Description of capability
Status/prognosis
Scaling/
known/new
Core Cognitive Capabilities
Reasoning
People can do accurate, multistep reasoning,
following rules and checking accuracy.
Dramatic recent progress using extended chain-of-
thought and retraining
95/5/5
Planning
People exhibit long-term and hierarchical plan-
ning.
Improving with scale; can be strongly aided using
scaffolding and better training techniques.
10/85/5
Truth-
grounding
GPAIs confabulate ungrounded information to
satisfy queries.
Improving with scale; calibration data available within
model; can be checked/improved via scaffolding.
30/65/5
Flexible
problem-
solving
Humans can recognize new patterns and invent
new solutions to complex problems; current ML
models struggle.
Improves with scale but weakly; may be solvable with
neurosymbolic or generalized "search" techniques.
15/75/10
Learning and Knowledge
Learning &
memory
People have working, short-term, and long-term
memory, all of which are dynamic and inter-
related.
All models learn during training; GPAIs learn within
context window and during fine-tuning; "continual
learning" and other techniques exist but not yet inte-
grated into large GPAIs.
5/80/15
Abstraction
& recursion
People can map and transfer relation sets into
more abstract ones for reasoning and manipula-
tion, including recursive "meta" reasoning.
Weakly improving with scale; could emerge in neu-
rosymbolic systems.
30/50/20
World
model(s)
People have and continually update a predic-
tive world model within which they can solve
problems and do physical reasoning
Improving with scale; updating tied to learning;
GPAIS weak in real-world prediction.
20/50/30
Self and Agency
Agency
People can take actions in order to pursue goals,
based on planning/prediction.
Many ML systems are agentic; LLMs can be made
agents via wrappers.
5/90/5
Self-
direction
People develop and pursue their own goals, with
internally-generated motivation and drive.
Largely composed of agency plus originality; likely
to emerge in complex agential systems with abstract
goals.
40/45/15
Self-
reference
People understand and reason about themselves
as situated within an environment/context.
Improving with scale and could be augmented with
training reward.
70/15/15
Self-
awareness
People have knowledge of and can reason regard-
ing their own thoughts and mental states.
Exists in some sense in GPAIs, which can arguably
pass the classic "mirror test" for self-awareness. Can
be improved with scaffolding; but unclear if this is
enough.
20/55/25
Interface and Environment
Embodied
intelligence
People understand and actively interact with
their real-world environment.
Reinforcement learning works well in simulated and
real-world (robotic) environments and can be inte-
grated into multimodal transformers.
5/85/10
Multi-sense
processing
People integrate and real-time process visual,
audio, and other sensory streams.
Training in multiple modalities appears to "just work,"
and improve with scale. Realtime video processing
is difficult but e.g. self-driving systems are rapidly
improving.
30/60/10
Higher-order Capabilities
Originality
Current ML models are creative in transforming
and combining existing ideas/works, but peo-
ple can build new frameworks and structures,
sometimes tied to their identity.
Can be hard to discern from "creativity," which may
scale into it; may emerge from creativity plus self-
awareness.
50/40/10
Sentience
People experience qualia; these can be positive,
negative or neutral valence; it is "like something"
to be a person.
Very difficult and philosophically fraught to determine
whether a given system has this.
5/10/85
Key capabilities currently below human expert level in modern GPAI systems, grouped by type. The third column summarizes current
status. Final column shows predicted likelihood (%) that human-level performance will be achieved through: scaling current techniques
/ combining with known techniques / developing new techniques. These capabilities are not independent, and increase in any one typ-
ically goes along with increases in others. Note that not all (particularly sentience) are necessary for AI systems capable of advancing AI
development, highlighting the possibility of powerful but non-sentient AI.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
20
Breaking down what is "missing" in this way makes it fairly clear
that we are quite on-track for broadly above-human intelligence by
scaling existing or known techniques.39
39 Previous waves of AI optimism in
the 1960s and 1980s ended in "AI win-
ters" when promised capabilities failed
to materialize. However, the current
wave differs fundamentally in having
achieved superhuman performance
in many domains, backed by massive
computational resources and commer-
cial success.
There could still be surprises. Even putting aside "sentience," there
could be some of the listed core cognitive capabilities that really can’t
be done with current techniques and require new ones. But consider
this. The present effort being put forth by many of the world’s largest
companies amounts to multiple times the Apollo project’s and tens of
times the Manhattan project’s spend,40 and is employing thousands
40 The full Apollo project cost about
$250bn USD in 2020 dollars, and the
Manhattan project less than a tenth
that. Goldman Sachs projects a trillion
dollars of spend just on AI data centers
over the next few years.
of the very top technical people at unheard of salaries. The dynamics
of the past few years have now brought to bear more human intellec-
tual firepower (with AI now being added) to this than any endeavor
in history. We should not bet on failure.
The big target: generalist autonomous agents
The development of general AI over the past several years has fo-
cused on creating general and powerful but tool-like AI: it functions
primarily as a (fairly) loyal assistant, and generally does not take ac-
tions on its own. This is partly by design, but largely because these
systems have simply not been competent enough at the relevant skills
to be entrusted with complex actions.41
41 Although humans make plenty of
mistakes, we underestimate just how
reliable we can be! Because probabilities
multiply, a task requiring 20 steps to do
correctly requires each step to be 97%
reliable just to get it done right half the
time. We do such tasks all the time.
AI companies and researchers are, however, increasing shifting
focus toward autonomous expert-level general-purpose agents.42 This
42 A strong move in this direction
has very recently been taken with
OpenAI’s "Deep Research" assistant
that autonomously performs general
research, described as "a new agentic
capability that conducts multi-step
research on the internet for complex
tasks."
would allow the systems to act more like a human assistant to which
the user can delegate real actions.43 What will that take? A num-
43 Things like fill in that pesky PDF
form, book flights, etc. But with a PhD
in 20 fields! So also: write that thesis
for you, negotiate that contract for you,
prove that theorem for you, create that
ad campaign for you, etc. What do you
do? You tell it what to do, of course.
ber of the capabilities in the "what’s missing" table are implicated,
including strong truth-grounding, learning and memory, abstrac-
tion and recursion, and world-modeling (for intelligence), planning,
agency, originality, self-direction, self-reference, and self-awareness
(for autonomy), and multi-sense-processing, embodied intelligence,
and flexible problem-solving (for generality).44
44 Note that sentience is not clearly
required, nor does AI in this triple-
intersection necessarily imply it.
This triple-intersection of high autonomy (independence of ac-
tion), high generality (scope and task breadth) and high intelligence
(competence at cognitive tasks) is currently unique to humans. It is
implicitly what many probably have in mind when they think of AGI
– both in terms of its value as well as its risks.
This provides another way to define A-G-I as Autonomous-
General-Intelligence, and we’ll see that this triple intersection pro-
vides a very valuable lens for high-capability systems both in under-
standing their risks and rewards, and in governance of AI.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
21
The transformative A-G-I power and risk zone emerges from the intersection of three key properties: high Autonomy,
high Intelligence at tasks, and high Generality.
The AI (self-)improvement cycle
A final crucial factor in understanding AI progress is AI’s unique
technological feedback loop. In developing AI, success – in both
demonstrated systems and deployed products – brings additional in-
vestment, talent, and competition, and we are currently in the midst
of an enormous AI hype-plus-reality feedback loop that is driving
hundreds of billions, or even trillions, of dollars in investment.
This type of feedback cycle could happen with any technology,
and we’ve seen it in many, where market success begets investment,
which begets improvement and better market success. But AI devel-

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
22
opment goes further, in that now AI systems are helping to develop
new and more powerful AI systems.45 We can think of this feedback
45 A close analogy here is chip tech-
nology, where development has main-
tained Moore’s law for decades, as
computer technologies help people
design the next generation of chip
technology. AI will be far more direct.
loop in five stages, each with a shorter timescale than the last, as
shown in the table.
Stage
Timescale
Key Drivers
Current Status
Rate-Limiting
Factors
Infrastructure
Years
AI success →investment →
better hardware/infrastructure
Ongoing; massive
investment
Hardware
development
cycle
Model
Development
1-2 Years
Human-led research with AI
assistance
Active across major labs
Training run
complexity
Data
Generation
Months
AI systems generating
synthetic training data
Beginning phase
Data quality
verification
Tool
Development
Days
Weeks
AI systems creating their own
scaffolding/tools
Early experiments
Software
integration time
Network Self
Improvement
Hours
weeks
Groups of AI systems innovate
"social" institutions
Unknown
Inference rate
Recursive
Improvement
Unknown
AGI/superintelligent systems
autonomously self-improving
Not yet possible
Unknown/
unpredictable
The AI improvement cycle operates across multiple timescales, with each stage potentially accelerating subsequent
stages. Earlier stages are well underway, while later stages remain speculative but could proceed very rapidly once
unlocked.
Several of these stages are already underway, and a couple clearly
getting started. The last stage, in which AI systems autonomously
improve themselves, has been a staple of the literature on the risk of
very powerful AI systems, and for good reason.46 But it is important
46 It’s important to let it sink in for
a moment that AI could – soon – be
improving itself on a timescale of
days or weeks. Or less. Keep this in
mind when someone tells you an AI
capability is definitely far away.
to note that it is just the most drastic form of a feedback cycle that
has already started and could lead to more surprises in the rapid
advancement of the technology.
The race for AGI
The recent fast progress in AI has resulted both from and in an ex-
traordinary level of attention and investment. This is driven in part
by success in AI development, but more is going on. Why are some
of the largest companies on Earth, and even countries, racing to build
not just AI, but AGI and superintelligence?
What has driven AI research toward human-level AI
Until the past five years or so, AI has been largely an academic and
scientific research problem, thus largely driven by curiosity and the

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
23
drive to understand intelligence and how to create it in a new sub-
strate.
In this phase, there was relatively little attention paid to the ben-
efits or perils of AI among most researchers. When asked why AI
should be developed, a common response might be to list, some-
what vaguely, problems that AI could help with: new medicines, new
materials, new science, smarter processes, and in general improving
things for people.47
47 A more precise list of worthy goals is
the UN Sustainable Development Goals.
These are, in a sense, the closest we
have to a set of global consensus goals
for what we’d like to see improved in
the world. AI could help.
These are admirable goals!48 Although we can and will question
48 Technology in general has a trans-
formative economic and social power
for human betterment, as thousands
of years attest. In this vein, a long and
compelling explication of a positive
AGI vision can be found in this essay
by Anthropic founder Dario Amodei.
whether AGI – rather than AI in general – is necessary for these
goals, they exhibit the idealism with which many AI researchers
started.
Over the past half-decade, however, AI has transformed from a
relatively pure research field into much more of an engineering and
product field, largely driven by some of the world’s largest compa-
nies.49 Researchers, while relevant, are no longer in charge of the
49 Private AI investment started to boom
in 2018-19, crossing public investment
around then, and has hugely outpaced
it since.
process.
Why are companies trying to build AGI?
So why are giant corporations (and even more so investors) pouring
vast resources into building AGI? There are two drivers that most
companies are quite honest about: they see AI as drivers of produc-
tivity for society, and of profits for them. Because general AI is by
nature general-purpose, there is a huge prize: rather than choosing a
sector in which to create products and services, one can try all of them
at once. Big Tech companies have grown enormous by producing dig-
ital goods and services, and at least some executives surely see AI as
simply the next step in providing them well, with risks and benefits
that expand upon but echo those provided by search, social media,
laptops, phones, etc.
But why AGI? There is a very simple answer to this, which most
companies and investors shy away from discussing publicly.50
50 I can attest that behind more closed
doors, they have no such compunction.
And it’s becoming more public; see for
example Y-combinator’s new "request
for startups", many parts of which
explicitly call for wholesale replacement
of human workers. To quote them,
"The value prop of B2B SaaS was to
make human workers incrementally
more efficient. The value prop of
vertical AI agents is to automate the
work entirely...It’s entirely possible
this opportunity is big enough to mint
another 100 unicorns." (For those not
versed in Silicon Valley speak, "B2B"
is business-to-business and a unicorn
is a $1 billion company. That is they
are talking about more than a hundred
billion-plus-dollar businesses that
replace workers for other businesses.)
It is that AGI can directly, one-for-one, replace workers.
Not augment, not empower, not make more productive. Not even
displace. All of these can and will be done by non-AGI. AGI is specifi-
cally what can fully replace thought workers (and with robotics, many
physical ones as well.) As support for this view one need look no
further than OpenAI’s (publicly stated) definition of AGI, which
is "a highly autonomous system that outperforms humans at most
economically valuable work."
The prize here (for companies!) is enormous. Labor costs are a
substantial percentage of the world’s ∼$100 trillion global economy.
Even if only a fraction of this is captured by replacement of human

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
24
labor by AI labor, this is trillions of dollars of annual revenue. AI
companies are also cognizant of who is willing to pay. As they see
it, you are not going to pay thousands of dollars a year for produc-
tivity tools. But a company will pay thousands of dollars per year to
replace your labor, if they can.
Why countries feel they have to race to AGI
Countries’ stated motivations for pursuing AGI focus on economic
and scientific leadership. The argument is compelling: AGI could
dramatically accelerate scientific research, technological development,
and economic growth. Given the stakes, they argue, no major power
can afford to fall behind.51
51 See for example a recent US-China
Economic and Security Review Com-
mission report. Although there was
surprisingly little justification within
the report itself, the top-line recom-
mendation was that the US "Congress
establish and fund a Manhattan Project-
like program dedicated to racing to
and acquiring an Artificial General
Intelligence (AGI) capability."
But there are also additional and largely unstated drivers. There
is no doubt that when certain military and national security leaders
meet behind closed doors to discuss an extraordinarily potent and
catastrophically risky technology, their focus is not on "how do we
avoid those risks" but rather "how do we get this first?" Military
and intelligence leaders see AGI as a potential revolution in military
affairs, perhaps the most significant since nuclear weapons. The fear
is that the first country to develop AGI could gain an insurmountable
strategic advantage. This creates a classic arms race dynamic.
We’ll see that this "race to AGI" thinking,52 while compelling, is
52 Companies are now adopting this
geopolitical framing as a shield against
any constraint on their AI development,
generally in ways that are blatantly self-
serving, and sometimes in ways that
don’t even make basic sense. Consider
Meta’s Approach to Frontier AI, which
simultaneously argues that America
must "[Cement its] position as a leader
in technological innovation, economic
growth and national security" and also
that it must do so by openly releasing
its most powerful AI systems – which
includes giving them directly to its
geopolitical rivals and adversaries.
deeply flawed. This is not because racing is dangerous and risky –
though it is – but due to the nature of the technology. The unstated
assumption is that AGI, like other technologies, is controllable by the
state that develops it, and is a power-granting boon to the society that
has the most of it. As we will see, it probably won’t be either.
Why superintelligence?
While companies publicly focus on productivity, and countries on
economic and technological growth, for those deliberately pursuing
full AGI and superintelligence these are just the start. What do they
really have in mind? Although seldom said out loud, they include:
1. Cures for many or all diseases;
2. Stopping and reversal of aging;
3. New sustainable energy sources like fusion;
4. Human upgrades, or designer organisms via genetic engineering;
5. Nanotechnology and molecular manufacturing;
6. Mind uploads;

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
25
7. Exotic physics or space technologies;
8. Super-human advice and decision-support;
9. Super-human planning and coordination.
The first three are largely "single-edge" technologies – i.e. likely
to be quite strongly net positive. It’s hard to argue against curing
diseases or being able to live longer if one chooses. And we have
already reaped the negative side of fusion (in the form of nuclear
weapons); it would be lovely now to get the positive side. The ques-
tion with this first category is whether getting these technologies
sooner compensates for the risk.
The next four are clearly double-edged: transformative technolo-
gies with both potentially huge upsides and immense risks, much
like AI. All of these, if they sprung out of a black-box tomorrow and
were deployed, would be incredibly difficult to manage.53
53 Thus we’d likely have to leave man-
agement of these technologies to the
AIs. But this would be a very problem-
atic delegation of control, which we’ll
return to below.
The final two concern the super-human AI doing things itself
rather than just inventing technology. More precisely, putting eu-
phemisms aside, these involve powerful AI systems telling people
what to do. Calling this "advice" is disingenuous if the system do-
ing the advising is far more powerful than the advised, who can-
not meaningfully understand the basis of decision (or even if this is
provided, trust that the advisor would not provide a similarly com-
pelling rationale for a different decision.)
This points to a key item missing from the above list:
10. Power.
It is abundantly clear that much of what is underlying the current
race for super-human AI is the idea that intelligence = power. Each
racer is banking on being the best holder of that power, and that they
will be able to wield it for ostensibly benevolent reasons without it
slipping or being taken from their control.
That is, what companies and nations are really chasing is not just
the fruits of AGI and superintelligence, but the power to control who
gets access to them and how they’re used. Companies see themselves
as responsible stewards of this power in service of shareholders and
humanity; nations see themselves as necessary guardians preventing
hostile powers from gaining decisive advantage. Both are danger-
ously wrong, failing to recognize that superintelligence, by its na-
ture, cannot be reliably controlled by any human institution. We will
see that the nature and dynamics of superintelligent systems make
human control extremely difficult, if not impossible.
These racing dynamics – both corporate and geopolitical – make
certain risks nearly inevitable unless decisively interrupted. We turn

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
26
now to examining these risks and why they cannot be adequately
mitigated within a competitive54 development paradigm.
54 Competition in technology develop-
ment often brings important benefits:
preventing monopolistic control, driv-
ing innovation and cost reduction,
enabling diverse approaches, and cre-
ating mutual oversight. However, with
AGI these benefits must be weighed
against unique risks from racing dy-
namics and pressure to reduce safety
precautions.
What happens if we build AGI on our current path?
The development of full artificial general intelligence – what we will
call here AI that is "outside the Gates" – would be a fundamental
shift in the nature of the world: by its very nature it means adding a
new species of intelligence to Earth with greater capability than that
of humans.
What will then happen depends on many things, including the
nature of the technology, choices by those developing it, and the
world context in which it is being developed.
Currently, full AGI is being developed by a handful of massive
private companies in a race with each other, with little meaningful
regulation or external oversight,55 in a society with increasingly
55 The EU AI act is a significant piece
of legislation but would not directly
prevent a dangerous AI system from
being developed or deployed, or even
openly released, especially in the US.
Another significant piece of policy, the
US Executive order on AI, has been
rescinded.
weak and even dysfunctional core institutions,56 in a time of high
56 This Gallup poll shows a bleak de-
cline in trust in public institutions since
2000 in the US. European numbers
are varied and less extreme, but also
on a downward trend. Distrust does
not strictly mean institutions really are
dysfunctional, but it is an indication as
well as a cause.
geopolitical tension and low international coordination. Although
some are altruistically motivated, many of those doing it are driven
by money, or power, or both.
Prediction is very difficult, but there are some dynamics that are
well enough understood, and apt-enough analogies with previ-
ous technologies to offer a guide. And unfortunately, despite AI’s
promise, they give good reason to be profoundly pessimistic about
how our current trajectory will play out.
To put it bluntly, on our present course developing AGI will have
some positive effects (and make some people very, very rich). But the
nature of the technology, the fundamental dynamics, and the context
in which it is being developed, strongly indicate that: powerful AI
will dramatically undermine our society and civilization; we will lose
control of it; we may well end up in a world war because of it; we
will lose (or cede) control to it; it will lead to artificial superintelli-
gence, which we absolutely will not control and will mean the end of
a human-run world.
These are strong claims, and I wish they were idle speculation or
unwarranted "doomer"ism. But this is where the science, the game
theory, the evolutionary theory, and history all point. This section
develops these claims, and their support, in detail.
We will undermine our society and civilization
Despite what you may hear in Silicon Valley boardrooms, most dis-
ruption – especially of the very rapid variety – is not beneficial. There
are vastly more ways to make complex systems worse than better.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
27
Our world functions as well as it does because we have painstak-
ingly built processes, technologies, and institutions that have made it
steadily better.57 Taking a sledgehammer to a factory rarely improves
57 And major disruptions we now
endorse – such as expansion of rights
to new groups – were specifically
driven by people in a direction towards
making things better.
operations.
Here is an (incomplete) catalog of ways AGI systems would dis-
rupt our civilization.
• They would dramatically disrupt labor, leading at bare minimum to
dramatically higher income inequality and potentially large-scale
under-employment or unemployment, on a timescale far too short
for society to adjust.58
58 Let me be blunt. If your job can be
done from behind a computer, with rel-
atively little in-person interaction with
people outside of your organization,
and does not entail legal responsibility
to external parties, it would by defini-
tion be possible (and likely cost-saving)
to completely swap you out for a digital
system. Robotics to replace much phys-
ical labor will come later – but not that
much later once AGI starts designing
robots.
• They would likely lead to the concentration of vast economic, so-
cial, and political power – potentially more than that of nation
states – into a small number of massive private interests unac-
countable to the public.
• They could suddenly make previously difficult or expensive ac-
tivities trivially easy, destabilizing social systems that depend on
certain activities remaining costly or requiring significant human
effort.59
59 For example, what happens to our
judicial system if lawsuits are nearly-
free to file? What happens when
bypassing security systems through
social engineering becomes cheap, easy,
and risk-free?
• They could flood society’s information gathering, processing,
and communication systems with completely realistic yet false,
spammy, overly-targeted, or manipulative media so thoroughly
that it becomes impossible to tell what is physically real or not,
human or not, factual or not, and trustworthy or not.60
60 This article claims that 10% of all in-
ternet content is already AI-generated,
and is Google’s top hit (for me) to
the search query "estimates of what
fraction of new internet content is AI-
generated." Is it true? I have no idea! It
cites no references and it wasn’t written
by a person. What fraction of new im-
ages indexed by Google, or Tweets, or
comments on Reddit, or Youtube videos
are generated by humans? Nobody
knows – I don’t think it is a knowable
number. And this less than two years
into the advent of generative AI.
• They could create dangerous and near total intellectual depen-
dence, where human understanding of key systems and technolo-
gies atrophies as we increasingly rely on AI systems we cannot
fully comprehend.
• They could effectively end human culture, once nearly all cultural
objects (text, music, visual art, film, etc.) consumed by most people
are created, mediated, or curated by nonhuman minds.
• They could enable effective mass surveillance and manipulation
systems usable by governments or private interests to control a
populace and pursue objectives in conflict with the public interest.
• By undermining human discourse, debate, and election systems,
they could reduce the credibility of democratic institutions to the
point where they are effectively (or explicitly) replaced by others,
ending democracy in states where it currently exists.
• They could become, or create, advanced self-replicating intelligent
software viruses and worms that could proliferate and evolve,
massively disrupting global information systems.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
28
• They can dramatically increase the ability of terrorists, bad actors,
and rogue states to cause harm via biological, chemical, cyber,
autonomous, or other weapons, without AI providing a coun-
terbalancing ability to prevent such harm. Similarly they would
undermine national security and geopolitical balances by making
top-tier nuclear, bio, engineering, and other expertise available to
regimes that would not otherwise have it.
• They could cause rapid large-scale runaway hyper-capitalism, with
effectively AI-run companies competing in largely electronic finan-
cial, sales, and services spaces. AI-driven financial markets could
operate at speeds and complexities far beyond human comprehen-
sion or control. All of the failure modes and negative externalities
of current capitalist economies could be exacerbated and sped far
beyond human control, governance, or regulatory capability.
• They could fuel an arms race between nations in AI-powered
weaponry, command-and-control systems, cyberweapons, etc.,
creating very rapid buildup of extremely destructive capabilities.
These risks are not speculative. Many of them are being realized as
we speak, via existing AI systems! But consider, really consider, what
each would look like with dramatically more powerful AI.
Consider labor displacement when most workers simply cannot
provide any significant economic value beyond what AI can, in their
field of expertise or experience – or even if they retrain! Consider
mass surveillance if everyone is being individually watched and
monitored by something faster and cleverer than themselves. What
does democracy look like when we cannot reliably trust any digital
information that we see, hear, or read, and when the most convincing
public voices are not even human, and have no stake in the outcome?
What becomes of warfare when generals have to constantly defer to
AI (or simply put it in charge), lest they grant a decisive advantage to
the enemy? Any one of the above risks represents a catastrophe for
human61 civilization if fully realized.
61 Also worth adding is that there
is "moral" risk that we might create
digital beings that can suffer. As we
currently do not have a reliable theory
of consciousness that would allow us
to distinguish physical systems that
can and cannot suffer, we cannot rule
this out theoretically. Moreover, AI
systems’ reports of their sentience are
likely unreliable with respect to their
actual experience (or non-experience) of
sentience.
You can make your own predictions. Ask yourself these three
questions for each risk:
1. Would super-capable, highly autonomous, and very general AI al-
low it in a way or at a scale that would not otherwise be possible?
2. Are there parties who would benefit from things that cause it to
happen?
3. Are there systems and institutions in place that would effectively
prevent it from happening?

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
29
Where your answers are "yes, yes, no" you can see we have got a
big problem.
What is our plan for managing them? As it stands there are two
on the table regarding AI in general.
The first is to build safeguards into the systems to prevent them
from doing things they shouldn’t. That’s being done now: commer-
cial AI systems will, for example, refuse to help build a bomb or
write hate speech.
This plan is woefully inadequate for systems outside the Gate.62
62 Technical solutions in this field of AI
"alignment" are unlikely to be up to
the task either. In present systems they
work at some level, but are shallow and
can generally be circumvented without
significant effort; and as discussed
below we have no real idea how to do
this for much more advanced systems.
It may help decrease risk of AI providing manifestly dangerous as-
sistance to bad actors. But it will do nothing to prevent labor disrup-
tion, concentration of power, runaway hyper-capitalism, or replace-
ment of human culture: these are just results of using the systems
in permitted ways that profit their providers! And governments will
surely obtain access to systems for military or surveillance use.
The second plan is even worse: simply to openly release very
powerful AI systems for anyone to use as they like,63 and hope for
63 Such AI systems may come with
some built-in safeguards. But for any
model with anything like current
architecture, if full access to its weights
are available, safety measures can be
stripped away via additional training
or other techniques. So it is virtually
guaranteed that for each system with
guardrails there will also be a widely
available system without them. Indeed
Meta’s Llama 3.1 405B model was
openly released with safeguards. But
even before that a "base" model, with no
safeguards, was leaked.
the best.
Implicit in both plans is that someone else, e.g. governments, will
help to solve the problems through soft or hard law, standards, reg-
ulations, norms, and other mechanisms we generally use to manage
technologies.64 But putting aside that AI corporations already fight
64 Could the market manage these risks
without government involvement? In
short, no. There are certainly risks that
companies are strongly incentivized to
mitigate. But many others companies
can and do externalize to everyone
else, and many of the above are in
this class: there are no natural market
incentives to prevent mass surveillance,
truth decay, concentration of power,
labor disruption, damaging political
discourse, etc. Indeed we have seen
all of these from present-day tech,
especially social media, which has
gone essentially unregulated. AI would
just hugely amp up many of the same
dynamics.
tooth-and-nail against any substantial regulation or externally im-
posed limitations at all, for a number of these risks it’s quite hard to
see what regulation would even really help. Regulation could impose
safety standards on AI. But would it prevent companies from replac-
ing workers wholesale with AI? Would it forbid people from letting
AI run their companies for them? Would it prevent governments
from using potent AI in surveillance and weaponry? These issues
are fundamental. Humanity could potentially find ways to adapt to
them, but only with much more time. As it is, given the speed that
AI is reaching or exceeding the capabilities of the people trying to
manage them, these problems look increasingly intractable.
We will lose control of (at least some) AGI systems
Most technologies are very controllable, by construction. If your car
or your toaster starts doing something you don’t want it to do, that’s
just a malfunction, not part of its nature as a toaster. AI is different: it
is grown rather than designed, its core operation is opaque, and it is
inherently unpredictable.
This loss of control isn’t theoretical – we see early versions already.
Consider first a prosaic, and arguably benign example. If you ask
ChatGPT to help you mix a poison, or write a racist screed, it will
refuse. That’s arguably good. But it is also ChatGPT not doing what

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
30
you’ve explicitly asked it to do. Other pieces of software do not do that.
That same model won’t design poisons at the request of an OpenAI
employee either.65 This makes it very easy to imagine what it would
65 OpenAI likely has more obedient
models for internal use. It’s unlikely
that OpenAI has built some sort of
"backdoor" so that ChatGPT can be
better controlled by OpenAI itself,
because this would be a terrible security
practice, and be highly exploitable
given AI’s opacity and unpredictability.
be like for future more powerful AI to be out of control. In many
cases, they will simply not do what we ask! Either a given super-
human AGI system will be absolutely obedient and loyal to some
human command system, or it won’t. If not, it will do things it may
believe are good for us, but that are contrary to our explicit commands.
That isn’t something that is under control. But, you might say, this
is intentional – these refusals are by design, part of what is called
"aligning" the systems to human values. And this is true. However
the alignment "program" itself has two major problems.66
66 Also of crucial importance: align-
ment or any other safety features only
matter if they are actually used in an
AI system. Systems that are openly
released (i.e. where model weights and
architecture are publicly available) can
be transformed relatively easily into
systems without those safety measures.
Open-releasing smarter-than-human
AGI systems would be astonishingly
reckless, and it is hard to imagine how
human control or even relevance would
be maintained in such a scenario.
There would be every motivation, for
example, to let loose powerful self-
reproducing and self-sustaining AI
agents with the goal to make money
and send it to some cryptocurrency
wallet. Or to win an election. Or over-
throw a government. Could "good" AI
help contain this? Perhaps – but only by
delegating huge authority to it, leading
to control loss as described below.
First, at a deep level we have no idea how to do it. How do we
guarantee that an AI system will "care" about what we want? We can
train AI systems to say and not say things by providing feedback;
and they can learn and reason about what humans want and care
about just as they reason about other things. But we have no method
– even theoretically – to cause them to deeply and reliably value
what people care about. There are high-functioning human psy-
chopaths who know what is considered right and wrong, and how
they are supposed to behave. They simply don’t care. But they can
act as if they do, if it suits their purpose. Just as we don’t know how
to change a psychopath (or anyone else) into someone genuinely,
completely loyal or aligned with someone or something else, we have
no idea67 how to solve the alignment problem in systems advanced
67 For book-length expositions of the
problem see e.g. Superintelligence,
The Alignment Problem, and Human-
Compatible. For a huge pile of work at
various technical levels by those who
have toiled for years thinking about the
problem, you can visit the AI alignment
forum. Here is a recent take from
Anthropic’s alignment team on what
they consider unsolved.
enough to model themselves as agents in the world and potentially
manipulate their own training and deceive people. If it proves impos-
sible or unachievable either to make AGI fully obedient or to make it
deeply care about humans, then as soon as it is able (and believes it
can get away with it) it will start doing things we do not want.68
68 This is the "rogue AI" scenario. In
principle the risk could be relatively
minor if the system can still be con-
trolled by shutting it down; but the
scenario could also include AI decep-
tion, self-exfiltration and reproduction,
aggregation of power, and other steps
that would make it difficult or impossi-
ble to do so.
Second, there are deep theoretical reasons to believe that by na-
ture advanced AI systems will have goals and thus behaviors that are
contrary to human interests. Why? Well it might, of course, be given
those goals. A system created by the military would likely be delib-
erately bad for at least some parties. Much more generally, however,
an AI system might be given some relatively neutral ("make lots of
money") or even ostensibly positive ("reduce pollution") goal, that
almost inevitably leads to "instrumental" goals that are rather less
benign.
We see this all the time in human systems. Just as corporations
pursuing profit develop instrumental goals like acquiring political
power (to de-fang regulations), becoming secretive (to disempower
competition or external control), or undermining scientific under-
standing (if that understanding shows their actions to be harmful),

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
31
powerful AI systems will develop similar capabilities – but with far
greater speed and effectiveness. Any highly competent agent will
want to do things like acquire power and resources, increase its own
capabilities, prevent itself from being killed, shut-down, or disem-
powered, control social narratives and frames around its actions,
persuade others of its views, and so on.69
69 There is a very rich literature on
this topic, going back to formative
writings by Steve Omohundro, Nick
Bostrom, and Eliezer Yudkowsky. For
a book-length exposition see Human
Compatible by Stuart Russell; here is a
short and up-to-date primer.
And yet it is not just a nearly unavoidable theoretical prediction,
it is already observably happening in today’s AI systems, and in-
creasing with their capability. When evaluated, even these relatively
"passive" AI systems will, in appropriate circumstances, deliberately
deceive evaluators about their goals and capabilities, aim to disable
oversight mechanisms, and evade being shut down or retrained by
faking alignment or copying themselves to other locations. While
wholly unsurprising to AI safety researchers, these behaviors are
very sobering to observe. And they bode very badly for far more
powerful and autonomous AI systems that are coming.
Indeed in general, our inability to ensure that AI "cares" about
what we care about, or behaves controllably or predictably, or avoids
developing drives toward self-preservation, power acquisition, etc.,
promise only to become more pronounced as AI becomes more
powerful. Creating a new airplane implies greater understanding
of avionics, hydrodynamics, and control systems. Creating a more
powerful computer implies greater understanding and mastery of
computer, chip, and software operation and design. Not so with an
AI system.70
70 Recognizing this, rather than slowing
down to get better understanding,
AGI companies have come up with a
different plan: they will get AI to do it!
More specifically, they will have AI N
help them figure out how to align AI
N + 1, all the way to superintelligence.
Although leveraging AI to help us
align AI sounds promising, there is a
strong argument that it simply assumes
its conclusion as a premise, and is in
general an incredibly risky approach.
See here for some discussion. This
"plan" is not one, and has undergone
nothing like the scrutiny appropriate
to the core strategy of how to make
super-human AI go well for humanity.
To sum up: it is conceivable that AGI could be made to be com-
pletely obedient; but we don’t know how to do so. If not, it will be
more sovereign, like people, doing various things for various reasons.
We also don’t know how to reliably instill deep "alignment" into AI
that would make those things tend to be good for humanity, and in
the absence of a deep level of alignment, the nature of agency and
intelligence itself indicates that – just like people and corporations –
they will be driven to do many deeply antisocial things.
Where does this put us? A world full of powerful uncontrolled
sovereign AI might end up being a good world for humans to be in.71
71 After all, humans, flawed and willful
as we are, have developed ethical
systems by which we treat at least some
other species on Earth well. (Just don’t
think about those factory farms.)
But as they grow ever more powerful, as we’ll see below, it wouldn’t
be our world.
That’s for uncontrollable AGI. But even if AGI could, somehow, be
made perfectly controlled and loyal, we’d still have enormous prob-
lems. We’ve already seen one: powerful AI can be used and misused
to profoundly disrupt our society’s functioning. Let’s see another:
insofar as AGI were controllable and game-changingly powerful (or
even believed to be so) it would so threaten power structures in the
world as to present a profound risk.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
32
We radically increase the probability of large-scale war
Imagine a situation in the near-term future, where it became clear
that a corporate effort, perhaps in collaboration with a national gov-
ernment, was on the threshold of rapidly self-improving AI. This
happens in the present context of a race between companies, and
a geopolitical competition in which recommendations are being
made to the US government to explicitly pursue an "AGI Manhattan
project" and the US is controlling export of high-powered AI chips to
non-allied countries.
The game theory here is stark: once such a race begins (as it has,
between companies and somewhat between countries), there are only
four possible outcomes:
1. The race is stopped (by agreement, or external force).
2. One party "wins" by developing strong AGI then stopping the
others (using AI or otherwise).
3. The race is stopped by mutual destruction of the racers’ capacity
to race.
4. Multiple participants continue to race, and develop superintelli-
gence, roughly as quickly as each other.
Let’s examine each possibility. Once started, peacefully stopping
a race between companies would require national government inter-
vention (for companies) or unprecedented international coordination
(for countries). But when any closing down or significant caution is
proposed, there would be immediate cries: "but if we’re stopped, they
are going to rush ahead", where "they" is now China (for the US), or
the US (for China), or China and the US (for Europe or India). Under
this mindset,72 no participant can stop unilaterally: as long as one
72 There is, fortunately, an escape here:
if the participants come to understand
that they are engaged in a suicide race
rather than a winnable one. This is
what happened near the end of the cold
war, when the US and USSR came to
realize that due to nuclear winter, even
an unanswered nuclear attack would be
disastrous for the attacker. With the
realization that "nuclear war cannot
be won and must never be fought"
came significant agreements on arms
reduction – essentially an end to the
arms race.
commits to racing, the others feel they cannot afford to stop.
The second possibility has one side "winning." But what does this
mean? Just obtaining (somehow obedient) AGI first is not enough.
The winner must also stop the others from continuing to race – oth-
erwise they will also obtain it. This is possible in principle: whoever
develops AGI first could gain unstoppable power over all other ac-
tors. But what would achieving such a "decisive strategic advantage"
actually require? Perhaps it would be game-changing military capa-
bilities?73 Or cyberattack powers?74 Perhaps the AGI would just be
73 War, explicitly or implicitly.
74 Escalation, then war.
so amazingly persuasive that it would convince the other parties to
just stop?75 So rich that it buys the other companies or even coun-
75 Magical thinking.
tries?76
76 I’ve also got a quadrillion dollar
bridge to sell you.
How exactly does one side build an AI powerful enough to disem-
power others from building comparably powerful AI? But that’s the
easy question.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
33
Because now consider how this situation looks to other powers.
What does the Chinese government think when the US appears to
be obtaining such capability? Or vice-versa? What does the US gov-
ernment (or Chinese, or Russian, or Indian) think when OpenAI or
DeepMind or Anthropic appears close to a breakthrough? What hap-
pens if the US sees a new Indian or UAE effort with breakthrough
success? They would see both an existential threat and – crucially –
that the only way this "race" ends is through their own disempow-
erment. These very powerful agents – including governments of
fully equipped nations that surely have the means to do so – would
be highly motivated to either obtain or destroy such a capability,
whether by force or subterfuge.77
77 Such agents presumably would
prefer "obtaining," with destruction a
fallback; but securing models against
both destruction and theft by powerful
nations is difficult to say the least,
especially for private entities.
This might start small-scale, as sabotage of training runs or attacks
on chip manufacturing, but these attacks can only really stop once
all parties either lose the capacity to race on AI, or lose the capac-
ity to make the attacks. Because the participants view the stakes as
existential, either case is likely to represent a catastrophic war.
That brings us to the fourth possibility: racing to superintelligence,
and in the fastest, least controlled way possible. As AI increases in
power, its developers on both sides will find it progressively harder
to control, especially because racing for capabilities is antithetical to
the sort of careful work controllability would require. So this scenario
put us squarely in the case where control is lost (or given, as we’ll see
next) to the AI systems themselves. That is, AI wins the race. But on
the other hand, to the degree that contol is maintained, we continue
to have multiple mutually hostile parties each in charge of extremely
powerful capabilities. That looks like war again.
Let’s put this all another way.78 The current world simply does not
78 For another perspective on the na-
tional security risks of AGI, see this
RAND report.
have any institutions that could be entrusted to house development
of an AI of this capability without inviting immediate attack.79 All
79 Perhaps we could build such an
institution! There have been proposals
for a "CERN for AI" and other similar
initiatives, where AGI development is
under multilateral global control. But at
the moment no such institution exists
or is on the horizon.
parties will correctly reason that either it will not be under control
– and hence is a threat to all parties, or it will be under control, and
hence is a threat to any adversary who develops it less quickly. These
are nuclear-armed countries, or are companies housed within them.
In the absence of any plausible way for humans to "win" this race,
we’re left with a stark conclusion: the only way this race ends is
either in catastrophic conflict or where AI, and not any human group,
is the winner.
We give control to AI (or it takes it)
Geopolitical "great powers" competition is just one of many compe-
titions: individuals compete economically and socially; companies
compete in markets; political parties compete for power; movements

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
34
compete for influence. In each arena, as AI approaches and exceeds
human capability, competitive pressure will force participants to del-
egate or cede more and more control to AI systems – not because
those participants want to, but because they cannot afford not to.
As with other risks of AGI, we are seeing this already with weaker
systems. Students feel pressure to use AI in their assignments, be-
cause clearly many other students are. Companies are scrambling to
adopt AI solutions for competitive reasons. Artists and programmers
feel forced to use AI or else their rates will be undercut by others that
do.
These feel like pressured delegation, but not control loss. But
let’s dial up the stakes and push forward the clock. Consider a
CEO whose competitors are using AGI "aides" to make faster, bet-
ter decisions, or a military commander facing an adversary with AI-
enhanced command and control. A sufficiently advanced AI system
could autonomously operate at many times human speed, sophisti-
cation, complexity, and data-processing capability, pursuing complex
goals in complicated ways. Our CEO or commander, in charge of
such a system, may see it accomplish what they want; but would they
understand even a small part of how it was accomplished? No, they
would just have to accept it. What’s more, much of what the system
may do is not just take orders but advise its putative boss on what to
do. That advice will be good –– over and over again.
At what point, then, will the role of the human be reduced to
clicking "yes, go ahead"?
It feels good to have capable AI systems that can enhance our pro-
ductivity, take care of annoying drudgery, and even act as a thought-
partner in getting things done. It will feel good to have an AI assis-
tant that can take care of actions for us, like a good human personal
assistant. It will feel natural, even beneficial, as AI becomes very
smart, competent, and reliable, to defer more and more decisions to
it. But this "beneficial" delegation has a clear endpoint if we continue
down the road: one day we will find that we are not really in charge
of much of anything anymore, and that the AI systems actually run-
ning the show can no more be turned off than oil companies, social
media, the internet, or capitalism.
And this is the much more positive version, in which AI is simply
so useful and effective that we let it make most of our key decisions
for us. Reality would likely be much more of a mix between this
and versions where uncontrolled AGI systems take various forms of
power for themselves because, remember, power is useful for almost
any goal one has, and AGI would be, by design, at least as effective
at pursuing its goals as humans.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
35
Whether we grant control or whether it is wrested from us, its loss
seems extremely likely. As Alan Turing originally put it, "...it seems
probable that once the machine thinking method had started, it
would not take long to outstrip our feeble powers. There would
be no question of the machines dying, and they would be able to con-
verse with each other to sharpen their wits. At some stage therefore
we should have to expect the machines to take control..."
Please note, although it is obvious enough, that loss of control by
humanity to AI also entails loss of control of the United States by the
United States government; it means loss of control of China by the
Chinese Communist party, and the loss of control of India, France,
Brazil, Russia, and every other country by their own government.
Thus AI companies are, even if this is not their intention, currently
participating in the potential overthrow of world governments, in-
cluding their own. This could happen in a matter of years.
AGI will lead to superintelligence
There’s a case to be made that human-competitive or even expert-
competitive general-purpose AI, even if autonomous, could be man-
ageable. It may be incredibly disruptive in all of the ways discussed
above, but there are lots of very smart, agential people in the world
now, and they are more-or-less manageable.80
80 And while alignment is very difficult,
getting people to behave is even harder!
But we won’t get to stay at roughly human level. The progres-
sion beyond is likely to be driven by the same forces we’ve already
seen: competitive pressure between AI developers seeking profit and
power, competitive pressure between AI users who can’t afford to fall
behind, and – most importantly – AGI’s own ability to improve itself.
In a process we have already seen start with less powerful systems,
AGI would itself be able to conceive and design improved versions
of itself. This includes hardware, software, neural networks, tools,
scaffolds, etc. It will, by definition, be better than us at doing this,
so we don’t know exactly how it will intelligence-bootstrap. But we
won’t have to. Insofar as we still have influence in what AGI does, we
merely would need to ask it to, or let it.
There’s no human-level barrier to cognition that could protect us
from this runaway.81
81 Imagine a system that can speak
50 languages, have expertise in all
academic subjects, read a full book in
seconds and have all of the material
immediately in mind, and produce
outputs at ten times human speed.
Actually, you don’t have to imagine it:
just load up a current AI system. These
are super-human in many ways, and
there’s nothing stopping them from
being even more super-human in those
and many others.
The progression of AGI to superintelligence is not a law of nature;
it would still be possible to curtail the runaway, especially if AGI is
relatively centralized and to the extent it is controlled by parties that
do not feel pressure to race each other. But should AGI be widely
proliferated and highly autonomous, it seems nearly impossible to
prevent it deciding it should be more, and then yet more, powerful.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
36
What happens if we build (or AGI builds) superintelligence
To put it bluntly, we have no idea what would happen if we build
superintelligence.82 It would take actions we cannot track or perceive
82 This is why this has been termed a
technological "singularity," borrowing
from physics the idea that one cannot
make predictions past a singularity.
Proponents of leaning into such a
singularity may also wish to reflect
that in physics these same sort of
singularities tear apart and crush those
that go into them.
for reasons we cannot grasp toward goals we cannot conceive. What
we do know is that it won’t be up to us.83
83 The problem was comprehensively
outlined in Bostrom’s Superintelligence,
and nothing since then has significantly
changed the core message. For a more
recent volume collecting formal and
mathematical results on uncontrollabil-
ity see Yampolskiy’s AI: Unexplainable,
Unpredictable, Uncontrollable
The impossibility of controlling superintelligence can be under-
stood through increasingly stark analogies. First, imagine you are
CEO of a large company. There’s no way you can track everything
that’s going on, but with the right setup of personnel, you can still
meaningfully understand the big picture, and make decisions. But
suppose just one thing: everyone else in the company operates at one
hundred times your speed. Can you still keep up?
With superintelligent AI, people would be "commanding" some-
thing not just faster, but operating at levels of sophistication and
complexity they cannot comprehend, processing vastly more data
than they can even conceive of. This incommensurability can be
put on a formal level: Ashby’s law of requisite variety (and see the
related "good regulator theorem") state, roughly, that any control
system must have as many knobs and dials as the system being con-
trolled has degrees of freedom.
A person controlling a superintelligent AI system would be like
a fern controlling General Motors: even if "do what the fern wants"
were written into the corporate bylaws, the systems are so different
in speed and range of action that "control" simply does not apply.
(And how long until that pesky bylaw gets rewritten?)84
84 This also makes clear why the current
strategy of AI companies (iteratively let-
ting AI "align" the next most powerful
AI) cannot work. Suppose a fern, via
the pleasantness of its fronds, enlists a
first grader to take care of it. The first
grader writes some detailed instruc-
tions for a 2nd grader to follow, and a
note convincing them to do so. The 2nd
grader does the same for a 3rd grader,
and so on all the way to a college grad,
a manager, an executive, and finally the
GM CEO. Will GM then "do what the
fern wants"? At each step this might
feel like it’s working. But putting it all
together, it will work almost exactly to
the degree to which the CEO, Board,
and shareholders of GM happen to care
about children and ferns, and have little
to nothing to do with all those notes
and sets of instructions.
As there are zero examples of plants controlling fortune 500 corpo-
rations, there would be exactly zero examples of people controlling
superintelligences. This approaches a mathematical fact.85 If super-
85 The reason I say "approaches" is
that the various formal(ish) results
are not as thorough or vetted as in the
pure mathematics case, and because
I’d like to hold out hope that some
very carefully constructed general
intelligence, using totally different
methods than ones currently employed,
could have some mathematically
provable safety properties, per the
sort of "guaranteed safe" AI program
discussed below.
intelligence were constructed – regardless of how we got there – the
question would not be whether humans could control it, but whether
we would continue to exist, and if so, whether we would have a good
and meaningful existence as individuals or as a species. Over these
existential questions for humanity we would have little purchase. The
human era would be over.
Conclusion: we must not build AGI
There is a scenario in which building AGI may go well for humanity:
it is built carefully, under control and for the benefit of humanity,
governed by mutual agreement of many stakeholders,86 and pre-
86 At the moment, most stakeholders
– that is, nearly all of humanity – is
sidelined in this discussion. That is
deeply wrong, and if not invited in,
the many, many other groups will be
affected by AGI development should
demand to be let in.
vented from evolving to uncontrollable superintelligence.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
37
That scenario is not open to us under present circumstances. As dis-
cussed in this section, with very high likelihood, development of AGI
would lead to some combination of:
• Massive societal and civilizational disruption or destruction;
• Conflict or war between great powers;
• Loss of control by humanity of or to powerful AI systems;
• Runaway to uncontrollable superintelligence, and the irrelevance
or cessation of the human species.
As an early fictional depiction of AGI put it: the only way to win is
not to play.
How to not build AGI
If the road we are currently on leads to the likely end of our civiliza-
tion, how do we change roads?
Suppose the desire to stop developing AGI and superintelligence
were widespread and powerful,87 because it becomes common un-
87 Most likely, the spread of this real-
ization will take either intense effort
by education and advocacy groups
making this case, or a pretty significant
AI-caused disaster. We can hope it will
be the former.
derstanding that AGI would be power-absorbing rather than power-
granting, and a profound danger to society and humanity. How
would we close the Gates?
At present we know of only one way to make powerful and general
AI, which is via truly massive computations of deep neural net-
works. Because these are incredibly difficult and expensive things
to do, there is a sense in which not doing them is easy.88 But we
88 Paradoxically, we are used to Nature
limiting our technology by making it
very hard to develop, especially scientif-
ically. But that’s no longer the case for
AI: the key scientific problems are turn-
ing out to be easier than anticipated.
We cannot count on Nature saving us
from ourselves here – we will have to
do so.
have already seen the forces that are driving toward AGI, and the
game-theoretic dynamics that make it very difficult for any party to
unilaterally stop. So it would take a combination of intervention from
the outside (i.e. governments) to stop corporations, and agreements
between governments to stop themselves.89 What could this look
89 Where, exactly, do we stop in devel-
oping new systems? Here, we should
adopt a precautionary principle. Once
a system is deployed, and especially
once that level of system capability
proliferates, it is exceedingly difficult to
roll back. And if a system is developed
(especially at great cost and effort),
there will be enormous pressure to use
or deploy it, and temptation for it to be
leaked or stolen. Developing systems
and then deciding whether they are
deeply unsafe is a dangerous road.
like?
It is useful first to distinguish between AI developments that must
be prevented or prohibited, and those that must be managed. The first
would primarily be runaway to superintelligence.90 For prohibited
90 It would also be wise to forbid AI
development that is intrinsically dan-
gerous, such as self-replicating and
evolving systems, those designed to
escape enclosure, those that can au-
tonomously self-improve, deliberately
deceptive and malicious AI, etc.
development, definitions should be as crisp as possible, and both ver-
ification and enforcement should be practical. What must be managed
would be general, powerful AI systems – which we already have, and
that will have many gray areas, nuance, and complexity. For these,
strong effective institutions are crucial.
We may also usefully delineate issues that must be addressed
at an international level (including between geopolitical rivals or
adversaries)91 from those that individual jurisdictions, countries, or
91 Note this does not necessarily mean
enforced at the international level by
some sort of global body: instead
sovereign nations could enforce agreed-
upon rules, as in many treaties.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
38
collections of countries can manage. Prohibited development largely
falls into the "international" category, because a local prohibition on
the development of a technology can generally be circumvented by
changing location.92
92 As we’ll see below, the nature of AI
computation would allow something of
a hybrid; but international cooperation
will still be needed.
Finally, we can consider tools in the toolbox. There are many,
including technical tools, soft law (standards, norms, etc., hard law
(regulations and requirements), liability, market incentives, and so on.
Let’s put special attention on one that is particular to AI.
Compute security and governance
A core tool in governing high-powered AI will be the hardware it
requires. Software proliferates easily, has near-zero marginal pro-
duction cost, crosses borders trivially, and can be instantly modified;
none of these are true of hardware. Yet as we’ve discussed, huge
amounts of this "compute" are necessary during both training of AI
systems and during inference to achieve the most capable systems.
Compute can be easily quantified, accounted, and audited, with
relatively little ambiguity once good rules for doing so are devel-
oped. Most crucially, large amounts of computation are, like enriched
uranium, a very scarce, expensive and hard-to-produce resource. Al-
though computer chips are ubiquitous, the hardware required for AI
is expensive and enormously difficult to manufacture.93
93 For example, the machines required
to etch AI-relevant chips are made
by only one firm, ASML (despite
many other attempts to do so), the
vast majority of relevant chips are
manufactured by one firm, TSMC
(despite others attempting to compete),
and the design and construction of
hardware from those chips done by just
a few including NVIDIA, AMD, and
Google.
What makes AI-specialized chips far more manageable as a scarce
resource than uranium is that they can include hardware-based secu-
rity mechanisms. Most modern cellphones, and some laptops, have
specialized on-chip hardware features that allow them to ensure that
they install only approved operating system software and updates,
that they retain and protect sensitive biometric data on-device, and
that they can be rendered useless to anyone but their owner if lost or
stolen. Over the past several years such hardware security measures
have become well-established and widely adopted, and generally
proven quite secure.
The key novelty of these features is that they bind hardware and
software together using cryptography.94 That is, just having a partic-
94 Most importantly, each chip holds a
unique and inaccessible cryptographic
private key it can use to "sign" things.
ular piece of computer hardware does not mean that a user can do
anything they want with it by applying different software. And this
binding also provides powerful security because many attacks would
require a breach of hardware rather than just software security.
Several recent reports (e.g. from GovAI and collaborators, CNAS,
and RAND) have pointed out that similar hardware features embed-
ded in cutting edge AI-relevant computing hardware could play an
extremely useful role in AI security and governance. They enable a
number of functions available to a "governor"95 that one might not
95 By default this would the company
selling the chips, but other models are
possible and potentially useful.
guess were available or even possible. As some key examples:

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
39
• Geolocation: Systems can be set up so that chips have a known
location, and can act differently (or be shut off altogether) based
upon location.96
96 A governor can ascertain a chip’s
location by timing the exchange of
signed messages with it: the finite
speed of light requires the chip to be
within a given radius r of a "station"
if it can return a signed message in
a time less than r/c, where c is the
speed of light. Using multiple stations,
and some understanding of network
characteristics, the location of the chip
can be determined. The beauty of this
method is that most of its security
is supplied by the laws of physics.
Other methods could use GPS, inertial
tracking, and similar technologies.
• Allow-listed connections: each chip can be configured with a hardware-
enforced allow-list of particular other chips with which it can net-
work, and be unable to connect with any chips not on this list.97
97 Alternatively, pairs of chips could
be allowed to communicate with each
other only via explicit permission of a
governor.
This can cap the size of communicative clusters of chips.98
98 This is crucial because at least cur-
rently, very high bandwidth connection
between chips is needed to train large
AI models on them.
• Metered inference or training (and auto-offswitch): A governor can
license only a certain amount of training or inference (in time,
or FLOPs, or possibly tokens) to be performed by a user, after
which new permission is required. If the increments are small,
then relatively continuous re-licensing of a model is required. The
model can then be "turned off" simply by withholding this license
signal.99
99 This could also be set up to require
signed messages from N of M different
governors, allowing multiple parties to
share governance.
• Speed limit: A model is prevented from running at higher inference
speed than some limit that is determined by a governor or other-
wise. This could be implemented via a limited set of allow-listed
connections, or by more sophisticated means.
• Attested training: A training procedure can yield cryptographically
secure proof that a particular set of codes, data, and amount of
compute usage were employed in generation of the model.
How to not build superintelligence: global limits on training and infer-
ence compute
With these considerations – especially regarding computation – in
place, we can discuss how to close the Gates to artificial superin-
telligence; we’ll then turn to preventing full AGI, and managing AI
models as they approach and exceed human capability in different
aspects.
The first ingredient is, of course, the understanding that super-
intelligence would not be controllable, and that its consequences
are fundamentally unpredictable. At least China and the US must
independently decide, for this or other purposes, not to build su-
perintelligence.100 Then an international agreement between them
100 This is far from unprecedented – for
example militaries have not developed
armies of cloned or genetically engi-
neered supersoldiers, though this is
probably technologically possible. But
they have chosen not to do this, rather
than being prevented by others. The
track record isn’t great for major world
powers being prevented from develop-
ing a technology they strongly wish to
develop.
and others, with a strong verification and enforcement mechanism,
is needed to assure all parties that their rivals are not defecting and
deciding to roll the dice.
To be verifiable and enforceable the limits should be hard limits,
and as unambiguous as possible. This seems like a virtually impos-
sible problem: limiting the capabilities of complex software with un-
predictable properties, worldwide. Fortunately the situation is much

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
40
better than this, because the very thing that has made advanced AI
possible – a huge amount of compute – is much, much easier to con-
trol. Although it might still allow some powerful and dangerous
systems, runaway superintelligence can likely be prevented by a hard
cap on the amount of computation that goes into a neural network,
along with a rate limit on the amount of inference that an AI system
(of connected neural networks and other software) can perform. A
specific version of this is proposed below.
It may seem that placing hard global limits on AI computation
would require huge levels of international coordination and intru-
sive, privacy-shattering surveillance. Fortunately, it would not. The
extremely tight and bottle-necked supply chain provides that once
a limit is set legally (whether by law or executive order), verifica-
tion of compliance to that limit would only require involvement and
cooperation of a handful of large companies.101
101 With a couple of notable excep-
tions (in particular NVIDIA) the AI-
specialized hardware is a relatively
small part of these companies’ overall
business and revenue model. Moreover,
the gap between hardware used in
advanced AI and "consumer grade"
hardware is significant, so most con-
sumers of computer hardware would be
largely unaffected.
A plan like this has a number of highly desirable features. It is
minimally invasive in the sense that only a few major companies
have requirements placed on them, and only fairly significant clus-
ters of computation would be governed. The relevant chips already
contain the hardware capabilities needed for a first version.102 Both
102 For more detailed analysis, see the
recent reports from RAND and CNAS.
These focus on technical feasibility,
especially in the context of US export
controls seeking to constrain other
countries’ capacity in high-end com-
putation; but this has obvious overlap
with the global constraint envisaged
here.
implementation and enforcement rely on standard legal restrictions.
But these are backed up by terms-of-use of the hardware and by
hardware controls, vastly simplifying enforcement and forestalling
cheating by companies, private groups, or even countries. There is
ample precedent for hardware companies placing remote restrictions
on their hardware usage, and locking/unlocking particular capa-
bilities externally,103 including even in high-powered CPUs in data
103 Apple devices, for example, are
remotely and securely locked when
reported lost or stolen, and can be
re-activated remotely. This relies on
the same hardware security features
discussed here.
centers.104 Even for the rather small fraction of hardware and orga-
104 See e.g. IBM’s capacity on demand
offering, Intel’s Intel on demand., and
Apple’s private cloud compute.
nizations affected, the oversight could be limited to telemetry, with
no direct access to data or models themselves; and the software for
this could be open to inspection to exhibit that no additional data
is being recorded. The schema is international and cooperative, and
quite flexible and extensible. Because the limit chiefly is on hardware
rather than software, it is relatively agnostic as to how AI software
development and deployment occurs, and is compatible with variety
of paradigms including more "decentralized" or "public" AI aimed
combating AI-driven concentration of power.
A computation-based Gate closure does have drawbacks as well.
First, it is far from a full solution to the problem of AI governance in
general. Second, as computer hardware gets faster, the system would
"catch" more and more hardware in smaller and smaller clusters (or
even individual GPUs).105 It is also possible that due to algorithmic
105 This study shows that historically the
same performance has been achieved
using about 30% less dollars per year.
If this trend continues, there may be
significant overlap between AI and
"consumer" chip use, and in general
the amount of needed hardware for
high-powered AI systems could become
uncomfortably small.
improvements an even lower computation limit would in time be
necessary,106 or that computation amount becomes largely irrelevant
106 Per the same study, given per-
formance on image recognition has
required 2.5x less computation each
year. If this were to also hold for the
most capable AI systems as well, a com-
putation limit would not be a useful
one for very long.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
41
and closing the Gate would instead necessitate a more detailed risk-
based or capability-base governance regime for AI. Third, no matter
the guarantees and the small number of entities affected, such a sys-
tem is bound to create push-back regarding privacy and surveillance,
among other concerns.107
107 In particular, at the country level this
looks a lot like a nationalization of com-
putation, in that the government would
have a lot of control over how com-
putational power gets used. However,
for those worried about government
involvement, this seems far safer than
and preferable to the most powerful AI
software itself being nationalized via
some merger between major AI compa-
nies and national governments, as some
are starting to advocate for.
Of course, developing and implementing a compute-limiting gov-
ernance scheme in a short time period will be quite challenging. But
it absolutely is doable.
A-G-I: The triple-intersection as the basis of risk, and of policy
Let us now turn to AGI. Hard lines and definitions here are more
difficult, because we certainly have intelligence that is artificial and
general, and by no extant definition will everyone agree if or when
it exists. Moreover, a compute or inference limit is a somewhat blunt
tool (compute being a proxy for capability, which is then a proxy for
risk) that – unless it is quite low – is unlikely to prevent AGI that is
powerful enough to cause social or civilizational disruption or acute
risks.
I’ve argued that the most acute risks emerge from the triple-
intersection of very high capability, high autonomy, and great gener-
ality. These are the systems that – if they are developed at all – must
be managed with enormous care. By creating stringent standards
(through liability and regulation) for systems combining all three
properties, we can channel AI development toward safer alternatives.
As with other industries and products that could potentially harm
consumers or the public, AI systems require careful regulation by ef-
fective and empowered government agencies. This regulation should
recognize the inherent risks of AGI, and prevent unacceptably risky
high-powered AI systems from being developed.108
108 A major regulatory step in Europe
was taken with the 2024 passage of
the EU AI Act. It classifies AI by risk:
prohibiting unacceptable systems, reg-
ulating high-risk ones, and imposing
transparency rules, or no measures
at all, upon low-risk systems. It will
significantly reduce some AI risks,
and boost AI transparency even for
US firms, but has two key flaws. First,
limited reach: while it applies to any
company providing AI in the EU,
enforcement over US-based firms is
weak, and military AI is exempt. Sec-
ond, while it covers GPAI, it fails to
recognize AGI or superintelligence as
unacceptable risks or prevent their de-
velopment—only their EU deployment.
As a result, it does little to curb the
risks of AGI or superintelligence.
However, large-scale regulation, especially with real teeth that are
sure to be opposed by industry,109 takes time110 as well as political
109 Companies often represent that they
are in favor of reasonable regulation.
But somehow they nearly always seem
to oppose any particular regulation; wit-
ness the fight over the quite low-touch
SB1047, which most AI companies
publicly or privately opposed.
110 It was about 3.5 years from the time
the EU AI act was proposed until it
went into effect.
conviction that it is necessary.111 Given the pace of progress, this may
111 It’s sometimes expressed that it’s
"too early" to start regulating AI. Given
the last note, that hardly seems likely.
Another expressed concern is that
regulation would "harm innovation."
But good regulation just changes the
direction, not amount, of innovation.
take more time than we have available.
On a much faster timescale and as regulatory measures are being
developed, we can give companies the necessary incentives to (a)
desist from very high-risk activities and (b) develop comprehensive
systems for assessing and mitigating risk, by clarifying and increas-
ing liability levels for the most dangerous systems. The idea would
be to impose the very highest levels of liability – strict and in some
cases personal criminal – for systems in the triple-intersection of high
autonomy-generality-intelligence, but to provide "safe harbors" to
more typical fault-based liability for systems in which one of those
properties is lacking or guaranteed to be manageable. That is, for ex-

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
42
ample, a "weak" system that is general and autonomous (like a capa-
ble and trustworthy but limited personal assistant) would be subject
to lower liability levels. Likewise a narrow and autonomous system
like a self-driving car would still be subject to the significant regu-
lation it already is, but not enhanced liability. Similarly for a highly
capable and general system that is "passive" and largely incapable of
independent action. Systems lacking two of the three properties are
yet more manageable and safe harbors would be even easier to claim.
This approach mirrors how we handle other potentially dangerous
technologies:112 higher liability for more dangerous configurations
112 An interesting precedent is in the
transport of hazardous materials,
which might escape and cause damage.
Here, regulation and case law have
established strict liability for very
hazardous materials like explosives,
gasoline, poisons, infectious agents,
and radioactive waste. Other examples
include warnings on pharmaceuticals,
classes of medical devices, etc.
creates natural incentives for safer alternatives.
The default outcome of such high levels of liability, which act to
internalize AGI risk to companies rather than offload it to the public,
is likely (and hopefully!) for companies to simply not develop full
AGI until and unless they can genuinely make it trustworthy, safe,
and controllable given that their own leadership are the parties at risk.
(In case this is not sufficient, the legislation clarifying liability should
also explicitly allow for injunctive relief, i.e. a judge ordering a halt,
for activities that are clearly in the danger zone and arguably pose
a public risk.) As regulation comes into place, abiding by regulation
can become the safe harbor, and the safe harbors from low autonomy,
narrowness, or weakness of AI systems can convert into relatively
lighter regulatory regimes.
Key provisions of a Gate closure
With the above discussion in mind, this section provides proposals
for key provisions that would implement and maintain prohibition
on full AGI and superintelligence, and management of human-
competitive or expert-competitive general-purpose AI near the full
AGI threshold.113 It has four key pieces: 1) compute accounting and
113 Another comprehensive proposal
with similar aims put forth in "A
Narrow Path" advocates for a more
centralized, prohibition-based approach
that funnels all frontier AI development
through a single international entity,
overseen by strong international institu-
tions, with clear categorical prohibitions
rather than graduated restrictions.
I’d also endorse that plan; however it
will take even more political will and
coordination than the one proposed
here.
oversight, 2) compute caps in training and operation of AI, 3) a lia-
bility framework, and 4) tiered safety and security standards defined
that include hard regulatory requirements. These are succinctly de-
scribed next, with further details or implementation examples given
in three accompanying tables. Importantly, note that these are far
from all that will be necessary to govern advanced AI systems; while
they will have additional security and safety benefits, they are aimed
at closing the Gate to intelligence runaway, and redirecting AI devel-
opment in a better direction.
1. Compute accounting, and transparency
• A standards organization (e.g. NIST in the US followed by ISO/
IEEE internationally) should codify a detailed technical standard

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
43
for the total compute used in training and operating AI models, in
FLOP, and the speed in FLOP/s at which they operate. Details for
what this could look like are given in Appendix A.114
114 Some guidelines for such a standard
were published by the Frontier Model
Forum. Relative to the proposal here,
those err on the side of less precision
and less compute included in the tally.
• A requirement – either by new legislation or under existing au-
thority115 – should be imposed by jurisdictions in which large-
115 The 2023 US AI executive order (now
rescinded) required similar but less
fine-grained reporting. This should be
strengthened by a replacing order.
scale AI training takes place to compute and report to a regulatory
body or other agency the total FLOP used in training and operat-
ing all models above a threshold of 1025 FLOP or 1018 FLOP/s.116
116 Very roughly, for now-common H100
chips this corresponds to clusters of
about 1000 doing inference; it is about
100 (about USD $5M worth) of the very
newest top-of-the line NVIDIA B200
chips doing inference. In both cases the
training number corresponds to that
cluster computing for several months
month.
• These requirements should be phased in, initially requiring well-
documented good-faith estimates on a quarterly basis, with later
phases requiring progressively higher standards, up to crypto-
graphically attested total FLOP and FLOP/s attached to each
model output.
• These reports should be complemented by well-documented es-
timates of marginal energy and financial cost used in generating
each AI output.
Rationale: These well-computed and transparently reported num-
bers would provide the basis for training and operation caps, as well
as a safe harbor from higher liability measures (see Appendixes C
and D).
2. Training and operation compute caps
• Jurisdictions hosting AI systems should impose a hard limit on
the total compute going into any AI model output, starting at 1027
FLOP117 and adjustable as appropriate.
117 This amount is larger than any
currently trained AI system; a larger or
smaller number might be justified as
we better understand how AI capability
scales with compute.
• Jurisdictions hosting AI systems should impose a hard limit on the
compute rate of AI model outputs, starting at 1020 FLOP/s and
adjustable as appropriate.
Rationale: Total computation, while very imperfect, is a proxy for
AI capability (and risk) that is concretely measurable and verifiable,
so provides a hard backstop for limiting capabilities. A concrete
implementation proposal is given in Appendix B.
3. Enhanced liability for dangerous systems
• Creation and operation118 of an advanced AI system that is highly
118 This applies to those creating and
providing/hosting the models, not end
users.
general, capable, and autonomous, should be legally clarified via
legislation to be subject to strict, joint-and-several, rather than
single-party fault-based, liability.119
119 Roughly, "strict" liability means that
developers are held responsible for
harms done by a product by default
and is a standard used for "abnormally
dangerous" products, and (somewhat
amusingly but appropriately) wild
animals. "Joint and several" liability
means that liability is assigned to
all of the parties responsible for a
product, and those parties have to sort
out amongst themselves who carries
what responsibility. This is important
for systems like AI with a long and
complex value chain.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
44
• A legal process should be available to make affirmative safety
cases, which would grant safe harbor from strict liability for sys-
tems that are small (in terms of compute), weak, narrow, passive,
or that have sufficient safety, security, and controllability guaran-
tees.
• An explicit pathway and set of conditions for injunctive relief to
stop AI training and inference activities that constitute a public
danger should be outlined.
Rationale: AI systems cannot be held responsible, so we must
hold human individuals and organizations responsible for harm they
cause (liability).120 Uncontrollable AGI is a threat to society and civ-
120 Standard fault-based single-party li-
ability is not enough: fault will be both
difficult to trace and assign because AI
systems are complex, their operation
is not understood, and many parties
may be involved in creation of a dan-
gerous system or output. In addition,
lawsuits will take years to adjudicate
and likely result merely in fines that
are inconsequential to these companies,
so personal liability for executives is
important as well.
ilization and in the absence of a safety case should be considered
abnormally dangerous. Putting the burden of responsibility on devel-
opers to show that powerful models are safe enough not to be con-
sidered "abnormally dangerous" incentivizes safe development, along
with transparency and record-keeping to claim those safe harbors.
Regulation can then prevent harm where deterrence from liability
is insufficient. Finally, AI developers are already liable for damages
they cause, so legally clarifying liability for the most risky of systems
can be done immediately, without highly detailed standards being
developed; these can then develop over time. Details are given in
Appendix C.
4. Safety regulation for AI
A regulatory system that addresses large-scale acute risks of AI
will require at minimum:
• The identification or creation of an appropriate set of regulatory
bodies, probably a new agency;
• A comprehensive risk assessment framework;121
121 There should be no exemption from
safety criteria for open-weight models.
Moreover, in assessing risk it should
be assumed that guardrails that can be
removed will be removed from widely
available models, and that even closed
models will proliferate unless there is
a very high assurance they will stay
secure.
• A framework for affirmative safety cases, based in part on the risk
assessment framework, to be made by developers, and for auditing
by independent groups and agencies;
• A tiered licensing system, with tiers tracking levels of capability.122
122 The scheme proposed here has reg-
ulatory scrutiny triggered on general
capability; however it makes sense
for some especially risky use cases to
trigger more scrutiny – for example an
expert virology AI system, even if nar-
row and passive, should probably go in
a higher tier. The former US executive
order had some of this structure for
biological capabilities.
Licenses would granted on the basis of safety cases and audits, for
development and deployment of systems. Requirements would
range from notification at the low end, to quantitative safety, se-
curity, and controllability guarantees before development, at the
top end. These would prevents release of system until they are
demonstrated safe, and prohibit the development of intrinsically
unsafe systems. Appendix D provides a proposal for what such
safety and security standards could entail.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
45
• Agreements to bring such measures to the international level,
including international bodies to harmonize norms and standards,
an potentially international agencies to review safety cases.
Rationale: Ultimately, liability is not the right mechanism for pre-
venting large-scale risk to the public from a new technology. Com-
prehensive regulation, with empowered regulatory bodies, will be
needed for AI just as for every other major industry posing a risk to
the public.123
123 Two clear examples are aviation and
medicines, regulated by the FAA and
FDA, and similar agencies in other
countries. These agencies are imperfect,
but have been absolutely vital for
the functioning and success of those
industries.
Regulation toward preventing other pervasive but less acute risks
is likely to vary in its form from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. The cru-
cial thing is to avoid developing the AI systems that are so risky that
these risks are unmanageable.
What then?
Over the next decade, as AI becomes more pervasive and the core
technology advances, two key things are likely to happen. First, regu-
lation of existing powerful AI systems will become more difficult, yet
even more necessary. It is likely that at least some measures address-
ing large-scale safety risks will require agreement at the international
level, with individual jurisdictions enforcing rules based on interna-
tional agreements.
Second, training and operation compute caps will become harder
to maintain as hardware becomes cheaper and more cost efficient;
they may also become less relevant (or need to be even tighter) with
advances in algorithms and architectures.
That controlling AI will become harder does not mean we should
give up! Implementing the plan outlined in this essay would give us
both valuable time and crucial control over the process that would
put us in a far, far better position to avoid the existential risk of AI to
our society, civilization, and species.
In the yet longer term, there will be choices to make as to what we
allow. We may choose still to create some form of genuinely control-
lable AGI, to the degree this proves possible. Or we may decide that
running the world is better left to the machines, if we can convince
ourselves that they will do a better job of it, and treat us well. But
these should be decisions made with deep scientific understanding
of AI in hand, and after meaningful global inclusive discussion, not
in a race between tech moguls with most of humanity completely
uninvolved and unaware.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
46
Summary of A-G-I and superintelligence governance via liability and regulation. Liability is highest, and regulation
strongest, at the triple-intersection of Autonomy, Generality, and Intelligence. Safe harbors from strict liability and
strong regulation can be obtained via affirmative safety cases demonstrating that a system is weak and/or narrow
and/or passive. Caps on total Training Compute and Inference Compute rate, verified and enforced legally and us-
ing hardware and cryptographic security measures, backstop safety by avoiding full AGI and effectively prohibiting
superintelligence.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
47
Engineering the future: What we should do instead
If we successfully choose not to supplant humanity by machines – at
least for a while! – what can we do instead? Do we give up the huge
promise of AI as a technology? At some level the answer is a simple
no: close the Gates to uncontrollable AGI and superintelligence, but
do build many other forms of AI, as well as the governance structures
and institutions we’ll need to manage them.
But there’s still a great deal to say; making this happen would be
a central occupation of humanity. This section explores several key
themes:
• How we can characterize "Tool" AI and the forms it can take.
• That we can get (almost) everything humanity wants without AGI,
with Tool AI.
• That Tool AI systems are (probably, in principle) manageable.
• That turning away from AGI does not mean compromising on
national security – quite the opposite.
• That power concentration is a real concern. Can we mitigate it
without undermining safety and security?
• That we will want – and need – new governance and social struc-
tures, and AI can actually help.
AI inside the Gates: Tool AI
The triple-intersection diagram gives a good way to delineate what
we can call "Tool AI": AI that is a controllable tool for human use,
rather than an uncontrollable rival or replacement. The least prob-
lematic AI systems are those that are autonomous but not general or
super capable (like an auction bidding bot), or general but not au-
tonomous or capable (like a small language model), or capable but
narrow and very controllable (like AlphaGo).124 Those with two in-
124 That said, staying away from the
triple-intersection is unfortunately not
as easy as one might like. Pushing
capability very hard in any one of the
three aspects tends to increase it in the
others. In particular, it may be hard to
create an extremely general and capable
intelligence that can’t be easily turned
autonomous. One approach is to train
models "myopic" systems with hobbled
planning ability. Another would to
focus on engineering pure "oracle"
systems that would shy away from
answering action-oriented questions.
tersecting features have wider application but higher risk and will
require major efforts to manage. (Just because an AI system is more
of a tool does not mean it is inherently safe, merely that is isn’t in-
herently unsafe – consider a chainsaw, versus a pet tiger.) The Gate
must remain closed to (full) AGI and superintelligence at the triple
intersection, and enormous care must be taken with AI systems ap-
proaching that threshold.
But this leaves a lot of powerful AI! We can get huge utility out
of smart and general passive "oracles" and narrow systems, general
systems at human but not superhuman level, and so on. Many tech

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
48
companies and developers are actively building these sorts of tools
and should continue; like most people they are implicitly assuming
the Gates to AGI and superintelligence will be closed.125
125 Many companies fail to realize that
they too would eventually be displaced
by AGI, even if it takes longer – if they
did, they might push on those Gates a
bit less!
As well, AI systems can be effectively combined into composite
systems that maintain human oversight while enhancing capability.
Rather than relying on inscrutable black boxes, we can build systems
where multiple components – including both AI and traditional soft-
ware – work together in ways that humans can monitor and under-
stand.126 While some components might be black boxes, none would
126 AI systems could communicate in
more efficient but less intelligible ways,
but maintaining human understanding
should take priority.
be close to AGI – only the composite system as a whole would be
both highly general and highly capable, and in a strictly controllable
way.127
127 This idea of modular, interpretable
AI has been developed in detail by sev-
eral researchers; see e.g. the "Compre-
hensive AI Services" model by Drexler,
the "Open Agency Architecture" of
Dalrymple and others. While such sys-
tems might require more engineering
effort than monolithic neural networks
trained with massive computation,
that’s precisely where computation
limits help – by making the safer, more
transparent path also the more practical
one.
Meaningful and guaranteed human control
What does "strictly controllable" mean? A key idea of the "Tool"
framework is to allow systems – even if quite general and powerful
– that are guaranteed to be under meaningful human control. What
does this mean? It entails two aspects. First is a design consideration:
humans should be deeply and centrally involved in what the system
is doing, without delegating key important decisions to the AI. This is
the character of most current AI systems. Second, to the degree that
AI systems are autonomous, they must have guarantees that limit
their scope of action. A guarantee should be a number characterizing
the probability of something happening, and a reason to believe that
number. This is what we demand in other safety critical fields, where
numbers like "mean time between failure"s and expected numbers of
accidents are computed, supported, and published in safety cases.128
128 On safety cases in general see this
handbook. Pertaining to AI in particu-
lar, see Wasil et al., Clymer et al., Buhl
et al., and Balesni et al.
The ideal number for failures is zero, of course. And the good news
is that we might get quite close, albeit using quite different AI archi-
tectures, using ideas of formally verified properties of programs (in-
cluding AI). The idea, explored at length by Omohundro, Tegmark,
Bengio, Dalrymple, and others (see here and here) is to construct
a program with certain properties (for example: that a human can
shut it down) and formally prove that those properties hold. This
can be done now for quite short programs and simple properties,
but the (coming) power of AI-powered proof software could allow
it for much more complex programs (e.g. wrappers) and even AI it-
self. This is a very ambitious program, but as pressure grows on the
Gates, we’re going to need some powerful materials reinforcing them.
Mathematical proof may be one of the few that is strong enough.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
49
Wither the AI industry
With AI progress redirected, Tool AI would still be an enormous
industry. In terms of hardware, even with compute caps to prevent
superintelligence, training and inference in smaller models will
still require huge amounts of specialized components. On the soft-
ware side, defusing the explosion in AI model and computation size
should simply lead to companies redirecting resources toward mak-
ing the smaller systems better, more diverse, and more specialized,
rather than simply making them bigger.129 There would be plenty of
129 We are in fact already seeing this
trend driven just by the high cost of
inference: smaller and more specialized
models "distilled" from larger ones and
capable of running on less expensive
hardware.
room – more probably – for all those money-making Silicon Valley
startups.130
130 I understand why those excited
about the AI tech ecosystem may
oppose what they see as onerous
regulation on their industry. But it
is frankly baffling to me why, say, a
venture capitalist would want to allow
runaway to AGI and superintelligence.
Those systems (and companies, while
they remain under company control)
will eat all of the startups as a snack.
Probably even sooner than eating
other industries. Anyone invested in a
thriving AI ecosystem should prioritize
ensuring that AGI development does
not lead to monopolization by a few
dominant players.
Tool AI can yield (almost) everything humanity wants, without AGI
Intelligence, whether biological or machine, can be broadly con-
sidered as the ability to plan and execute activities bringing about
futures more in line with a set of goals. As such, intelligence is of
enormous benefit when used in pursuit of wisely chosen goals. Ar-
tificial intelligence is attracting huge investments of time and effort
largely because of its promised benefits. So we should ask: to what
degree would we still garner the benefits of AI if we contain its run-
away to superintellience? The answer: we may lose surprisingly little.
Consider first that current AI systems are already very powerful,
and we have really only scratched the surface of what can be done
with them.131 They are reasonably capable of "running the show" in
131 As economist and former Deepmind
researcher Michael Webb put it, "I think
if we stopped all development of bigger
language models today, so GPT-4 and
Claude and whatever, and they’re the
last things that we train of that size –
so we’re allowing lots more iteration
on things of that size and all kinds of
fine-tuning, but nothing bigger than
that, no bigger advancements – just
what we have today I think is enough
to power 20 or 30 years of incredible
economic growth."
terms of "understanding" a question or task presented to them, and
what it would take to answer this question or do that task.
Next, much of the excitement about modern AI systems is due to
their generality; but some of the most capable AI systems – such as
ones that generate or recognize speech or images, do scientific pre-
diction and modeling, play games, etc. – are much narrower and well
"within the Gates" in terms of computation.132 These systems are
132 For example, DeepMind’s alphafold
system used only 100,000th of GPT-4’s
FLOP number.
super-human at the particular tasks they do. They may have edge-
case133 (or exploitable) weaknesses due to their narrowness; however
133 The difficulty of self-driving cars is
important to note here: while nominally
a narrow task, and achievable with fair
reliability with relatively small AI sys-
tems, extensive real-world knowledge
and understanding is necessary to get
reliability to the level needed in such a
safety-critical task.
totally narrow or fully general are not the only options available: there
are many architectures in between.134
134 For example, given a computation
budget, we’d likely see GPAI models
pre-trained at (say) half that budget,
and the other half used to train up very
high capability in a more narrow range
of tasks. This would give super-human
narrow capability backstopped by
near-human general intelligence.
These AI tools can greatly speed advancement in other positive
technologies, without AGI. To do better nuclear physics, we don’t
need AI to be a nuclear physicist – we have those! If we want to
accelerate medicine, give the biologists, medical researchers, and
chemists powerful tools. They want them and will use them to enor-
mous gain. We don’t need a server farm full of a million digital ge-
niuses; we have millions of humans whose genius AI can help bring

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
50
out. Yes, it will take longer to get immortality and the cure to all
diseases. This is a real cost. But even the most promising health
innovations would be of little use if AI-driven instability leads to
global conflict or societal collapse. We owe it to ourselves to give
AI-empowered humans a go at the problem first.
And suppose there is, in fact, some enormous upside to AGI that
cannot be obtained by humanity using in-Gate tools. Do we lose
those by never building AGI and superintelligence? In weighing the
risks and rewards here, there is an enormous asymmetric benefit in
waiting versus rushing: we can wait until it can be done in a guar-
anteed safe and beneficial way, and almost everyone will still get to
reap the rewards; if we rush, it could be – in the words of the OpenAI
CEO Sam Altman – lights out for all of us.
But if non-AGI tools are potentially so powerful, can we manage
them? The answer is a clear...maybe.
Tool AI systems are (probably, in principle) manageable
But it will not be easy. Current cutting-edge AI systems can greatly
empower people and institutions in achieving their goals. This is, in
general, a good thing! However, there are natural dynamics of having
such systems at our disposal – suddenly and without much time for
society to adapt – that offer serious risks that need to be managed. It
is worth discussing a few major classes of such risks, and how they
may be diminished, assuming a Gate closure.
One class of risks is of high-powered Tool AI allowing access to
knowledge or capability that had previously been tied to a person
or organization, making a combination of high capability plus high
loyalty available to a very broad array of actors. Today, with enough
money a person of ill intent could hire a team of chemists to design
and produce new chemical weapons – but it isn’t so very easy to
have that money or to find/assemble the team and convince them
to do something pretty clearly illegal, unethical, and dangerous.
To prevent AI systems from playing such a role, improvements on
current methods may well suffice,135 as long as all those systems
135 The current dominant alignment
technique is "reinforcement learn-
ing by human feedback" (RLHF) and
uses human feedback to create a re-
ward/punishment signal for reinforce-
ment leaning of the AI model. This and
related techniques like constitutional AI
are working surprisingly well (though
they lack robustness and can be circum-
vented with modest effort.) In addition,
current language models are generally
competent enough at common-sense
reasoning that they will not make fool-
ish moral mistakes. This is something
of a sweet spot: smart enough to under-
stand what people want (to the degree
it can be defined), but not smart enough
to plan elaborate deceptions or cause
huge harm when they get it wrong.
and access to them are responsibly managed. On the other hand, if
powerful systems are released for general use and modification, any
built-in safety measures are likely removable. So to avoid risks in
this class, strong restrictions as to what can be publicly released –
analogous to restrictions on details of nuclear, explosive, and other
dangerous technologies – will be required.136
136 In the long run, any level of AI
capability that gets developed is likely
to proliferate, since ultimately it is
software, and useful. We’ll need to have
robust mechanisms to defend against
the risks such systems posed. But we
do not have that now so we must be very
measured in how much powerful AI
models are allowed to proliferate.
A second class of risks stems from the scaling up of machines that
act like or impersonate people. At the level of harm to individual
people, these risks include much more effective scams, spam, and

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
51
phishing, and the proliferation of non-consensual deepfakes.137 At a
137 The vast majority of these are non-
consensual pornographic deepfakes,
including of minors.
collective level, they include disruption of core social processes like
public discussion and debate, our societal information and knowl-
edge gathering, processing, and dissemination systems, and our po-
litical choice systems. Mitigating this risk is likely to involve (a) laws
restricting the impersonation of people by AI systems, and holding
liable AI developers that create systems that generate such imper-
sonations, (b) watermarking and provenance systems that identify
and classify (responsibly) generated AI content, and (c) new socio-
technical epistemic systems that can create a trusted chain from data
(e.g. cameras and recordings) through facts, understanding, and
good world-models.138 All of this is possible, and AI can help with
138 Many ingredients for such solutions
exist, in the form of "bot-or-not" laws
(in the EU AI act among other places),
industry provenance-tracking tech-
nologies, innovative news aggregators,
prediction aggregators and markets, etc.
some parts of it.
A third general risk is that to the degree some tasks are auto-
mated, the humans presently doing those tasks can have less finan-
cial value as labor. Historically, automating tasks has made things
enabled by those tasks cheaper and more abundant, while sorting
the people previously doing those tasks into those still involved in
the automated version (generally at higher skill/pay), and those
whose labor is worth less or little. On net it is difficult to predict in
which sectors more versus less human labor will be required in the
resulting larger but more efficient sector. In parallel, the automation
dynamic tends to increase inequality and general productivity, de-
crease the cost of certain goods and services (via efficiency increases),
and increase the cost of others (via cost disease). For for those on
the disfavored side of the inequality increase, it is deeply unclear
whether the cost decrease in those certain goods and services out-
weighs the increase in others, and leads to overall greater well-being.
So how will this go for AI? Because of the relative ease with which
human intellectual labor can be replaced by general AI, we can ex-
pect a rapid version of this with human-competitive general-purpose
AI.139 If we close the Gate to AGI, many fewer jobs will be wholesale
139 The automation wave may not follow
previous patterns, in that relatively
high-skill tasks such as quality writing,
interpreting law, or giving medical
advice, may be as much or even more
vulnerable to automation than lower-
skill tasks.
replaced by AI agents; but huge labor displacement is still probable
over a period of years.140 To avoid widespread economic suffering,
140 For careful modeling of the effect of
AGI on wages, see the report here, and
gory details here, from Anton Korinek
and collaborators. They find that as
more pieces of jobs are automated,
productivity and wages go up – to a
point. Once too much is automated,
productivity continue to increase,
but wages crater because people are
replaced wholesale by efficient AI. This
is why closing the Gates is so useful:
we get the productivity without the
vanished human wages.
it will likely be necessary to implement both some form of universal
basic assets or income, and also engineer a cultural shift toward valu-
ing and rewarding human-centric labor that is harder to automate
(rather than seeing labor prices to drop due to the rise in available la-
bor pushed out of other parts of the economy.) Other constructs, such
as that of "data dignity" (in which the human producers of training
data are auto-accorded royalties for the value created by that data in
AI) may help. Automation by AI also has a second potential adverse
effect, which is of inappropriate automation. Along with applications
where AI simply does a worse job, this would include those where

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
52
AI systems are likely to violate moral, ethical, or legal precepts – for
example in life and death decisions, and in judicial matters. These
must be treated by applying and extending our current legal frame-
works.
Finally, a significant threat of in-gate AI is its use in personalized
persuasion, attention capture, and manipulation. We have seen in
social media and other online platforms the growth of a deeply en-
trenched attention economy (where online services battle fiercely for
user attention) and "surveillance capitalism" systems (in which user
information and profiling is added to the commodification of atten-
tion.) It is all but certain that more AI will be put into the service of
both. AI is already heavily used in addictive feed algorithms, but
this will evolve into addictive AI-generated content, customized to be
compulsively consumed by a single person. And that person’s input,
responses, and data, will be fed into the attention/advertising ma-
chine to continue the vicious cycle. As well, as AI helpers provided
by tech companies become the interface for more online life, they will
likely replace search engines and feeds as the mechanism by which
persuasion and monetization of customers occurs. Our society’s fail-
ure to control these dynamics so far does not bode well. Some of
this dynamic may be lessened via regulations concerning privacy,
data rights, and manipulation. Getting more to the problem’s root
may require different perspectives, such as that of loyal AI assistants
(discussed below.)
The upshot of this discussion is that of hope: in-Gate tool-based
systems – at least as long as they stay comparable in power and ca-
pability to today’s most cutting-edge systems – are probably man-
ageable if there is will and coordination to do so. Decent human
institutions, empowered by AI tools,141 can do it. We could also fail
141 There are many ways AI can be
used as, and to help build, "defensive"
technologies to make protections and
management more robust. See this
influential post describing this "D/acc"
agenda.
in doing it. But it is hard to see how allowing more powerful systems
would help – other than by putting them in charge and hoping for
the best.
National security
Races for AI supremacy – driven by national security or other mo-
tivations – drive us toward uncontrolled powerful AI systems that
would tend to absorb, rather than bestow, power. An AGI race be-
tween the US and China is a race to determine which nation superin-
telligence gets first.
So what should those in charge of national security do instead?
Governments have strong experience in building controllable and
secure systems, and they should double-down on doing so in AI,
supporting the sort of infrastructure projects that succeed best when
done at scale and with government imprimatur.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
53
Instead of a reckless "Manhattan project" toward AGI,142 the US
142 Somewhat ironically, a US Manhattan
project would likely do little to speed
timelines toward AGI – the dial of
human and fiscal investment in AI
progress is already pinned at 11. The
primary results would be to inspire a
similar project in China (which excels at
national-level infrastructure projects), to
make international agreements limiting
AI’s risk much harder, and to alarm
other geopolitical adversaries of the US
such as Russia.
government could launch an Apollo project for controllable, secure,
trustworthy systems. This could include for example:
• A major program to (a) develop the on-chip hardware security
mechanisms and (b) the infrastructure, to manage the compute
side of powerful AI. These could build off of the US CHIPS act and
export control regime.
• A large-scale initiative to develop formal verification techniques
so that particular features of AI systems (like an off-switch) can
be proven to be present or absent. This can leverage AI itself to
develop proofs of properties.
• A nation-scale effort to create software that is verifiably secure,
powered by AI tools that can recode existing software into verifi-
ably secure frameworks.
• A national investment project in scientific advancement using
AI,143 running as a partnership between the DOE, NSF, and NIH.
143 The "National AI Research Resource"
program is a good current step in this
direction and should be expanded.
In general, there is an enormous attack surface on our society
that makes us vulnerable to risks from AI and its misuse. Protecting
from some of these risks will require government-sized investment
and standardization. These would provide vastly more security than
pouring gasoline on the fire of races toward AGI. And if AI is going
to be built into weaponry and command-and-control systems, it
is crucial that the AI be trustworthy and secure, which current AI
simply is not.
Power concentration and its mitigations
This essay has focused on the idea of human control of AI and its
potential failure. But another valid lens through which to view the AI
situation is through concentration of power. The development of very
powerful AI threatens to concentrate power either into the very few
and very large corporate hands that have developed and will control
it, or into governments using AI as a new means to maintain their
own power and control, or into the AI systems themselves. Or some
unholy mix of the above. In any of these cases most of humanity
loses power, control, and agency. How might we combat this?
The very first and most important step, of course, is a Gate closure
to smarter-than-human AGI and superintelligence. These explicitly
can directly replace humans and groups of humans. If they are under
corporate or government control they will concentrate power in those
corporations or governments; if they are "free" they will concentrate

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
54
power into themselves. So let’s assume the Gates are closed. Then
what?
One proposed solution to power concentration is "open-source"
AI, where model weights are freely or widely available. But as
mentioned earlier, once a model is open, most safety measures or
guardrails can be (and generally are) stripped away. So there is an
acute tension between on the one hand decentralization, and on the
other hand safety, security, and human control of AI systems. There
are also reasons to be skeptical that open models will by themselves
meaningfully combat power concentration in AI any more than they
have in operating systems (still dominated by Microsoft, Apple, and
Google despite open alternatives).144
144 See this analysis of the various
meanings and implications of "open" in
tech products and how some have led
to more, rather than less, entrenchment
of dominance.
Yet there may be ways to square this circle – to centralize and mit-
igate risks while decentralizing capability and economic reward. This
requires rethinking both how AI is developed and how its benefits
are distributed.
New models of public AI development and ownership would help.
This could take several forms: government-developed AI (subject to
democratic oversight),145 nonprofit AI development organizations
145 Plans in the US for a National AI
Research Resource and the recent
launch of a European AI Foundation
are interesting steps in this direction.
(like Mozilla for browsers), or structures enabling very widespread
ownership and governance. Key is that these institutions would
be explicitly chartered to serve the public interest while operating
under strong safety constraints.146 Well-crafted regulatory and stan-
146 The challenge here is not technical
but institutional – we urgently need
real-world examples and experiments
in what public-interest AI development
could look like.
dards/certifications regimes will also be vital, so that AI products
offered by a vibrant market stay genuinely useful rather than ex-
ploitative toward their users.
In terms of economic power concentration, we can use provenance
tracking and "data dignity" to ensure economic benefits flow more
widely. In particular, most AI power now (and in the future if we
keep the Gates closed) stems from human-generated data, whether
direct training data or human feedback. If AI companies were re-
quired to compensate data providers fairly,147 this could at least help
147 This goes against current big tech
business models and would require
both legal action and new norms.
distribute the economic rewards more broadly. Beyond this, another
model could be public ownership of significant fractions of large
AI companies. For example, governments able to tax AI companies
could invest a fraction of receipts into a sovereign wealth fund that
holds stock in the companies, and pays dividends to the populace.148
148 Only some governments will be
able to do so. A more radical idea is a
universal fund of this type, under joint
ownership of all humans.
Crucial in these mechanisms is to use the power of AI itself to help
distribute power better, rather than simply fighting AI-driven power
concentration using non-AI means. One powerful approach would
be through well-designed AI assistants that operate with genuine
fiduciary duty to their users – putting users’ interests first, especially
above corporate providers’.149 These assistants must be truly trust-
149 For a lengthy exposition of this
case see this paper on AI loyalty.
Unfortunately the default trajectory of
AI assistants is likely to be one where
they are increasingly disloyal.
worthy, technically competent yet appropriately limited based on

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
55
use case and risk level, and widely available to all through public,
nonprofit, or certified for-profit channels. Just as we would never
accept a human assistant who secretly works against our interests
for another party, we should not accept AI assistants that surveil,
manipulate, or extract value from their users for corporate benefit.
Such a transformation would fundamentally alter the current dy-
namic where individuals are left to negotiate alone with vast (AI
powered) corporate and bureaucratic machines that prioritize value
extraction over human welfare. While there are many possible ap-
proaches to redistributing AI-driven power more broadly, none will
emerge by default: they must be deliberately engineered and gov-
erned with mechanisms like fiduciary requirements, public provision,
and tiered access based on risk.
Approaches to mitigate power concentration can face significant
headwinds from incumbent powers.150 But there are paths toward AI
150 Somewhat ironically, many in-
cumbent powers are also at risk of
AI-backed disempowerment; but it may
be difficult for them to perceive this
until and unless the process gets quite
far along.
development that don’t require choosing between safety and concen-
trated power. By building the right institutions now, we could ensure
that AI’s benefits are widely shared while its risks are carefully man-
aged.
New governance and social structures
Our current governance structures are struggling: they are slow
to respond, often captured by special interests, and increasingly
distrusted by the public. Yet this is not a reason to abandon them –
quite the opposite. Some institutions may need replacing, but more
broadly we need new mechanisms that can enhance and supplement
our existing structures, helping them function better in our rapidly
evolving world.
Much of our institutional weakness stems not from formal govern-
ment structures, but from degraded social institutions: our systems
for developing shared understanding, coordinating action, and con-
ducting meaningful discourse. So far, AI has accelerated this degra-
dation, flooding our information channels with generated content,
pointing us to the most polarizing and divisive content, and making
it harder to distinguish truth from fiction.
But AI could actually help rebuild and strengthen these social
institutions. Consider three crucial areas:
First, AI could help restore trust in our epistemic systems – our
ways of knowing what is true. We could develop AI-powered sys-
tems that track and verify the provenance of information, from raw
data through analysis to conclusions. These systems could combine
cryptographic verification with sophisticated analysis to help people
understand not just whether something is true, but how we know

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
56
it’s true.151 Loyal AI assistants could be charged with following the
151 Some interesting efforts in this
direction are represented by the c2pa
coalition on cryptographic verification;
Verity and Ground news on better
news epistemics; and Metaculus and
prediction markets on grounding
discourse in falsifiable predictions.
details to ensure that they check out.
Second, AI could enable new forms of large-scale coordination.
Many of our most pressing problems – from climate change to an-
tibiotic resistance – are fundamentally coordination problems. We’re
stuck in situations that are worse than they could be for nearly ev-
eryone, because no individual or group can afford to make the first
move. AI systems could help by modeling complex incentive struc-
tures, identifying viable paths to better outcomes, and facilitating the
trust-building and commitment mechanisms needed to get there.
Perhaps most intriguingly, AI could enable entirely new forms of
social discourse. Imagine being able to "talk to a city"152 – not just
152 See this fascinating pilot project.
viewing statistics, but having a meaningful dialogue with an AI sys-
tem that processes and synthesizes the views, experiences, needs,
and aspirations of millions of residents. Or consider how AI could
facilitate genuine dialogue between groups that currently talk past
each other, by helping each side better understand the other’s actual
concerns and values rather than their caricatures of each other.153 Or
153 See Kialo, and efforts of the Col-
lective Intelligence Project for some
examples.
AI could offer skilled, credibly neutral intermediation of disputes
between people or even large groups of people (who could all inter-
act with it directly and individually!) Current AI is totally capable of
doing this work, but the tools to do so will not come into being by
themselves, or via market incentives.
These possibilities might sound utopian, especially given AI’s cur-
rent role in degrading discourse and trust. But that’s precisely why
we must actively develop these positive applications. By closing the
Gates to uncontrollable AGI and prioritizing AI that enhances human
agency, we can steer technological progress toward a future where AI
serves as a force for empowerment, resilience, and collective advance-
ment.
The choice before us
The last time humanity shared the Earth with other minds that
spoke, thought, built technology, and did general-purpose problem
solving was 40,000 years ago in ice-age Europe. Those other minds
went extinct, wholly or in part due to the efforts of ours.
We are now re-entering such a time. The most advanced prod-
ucts of our culture and technology – datasets built from our entire
internet information commons, and 100-billion-element chips that
are the most complex technologies we have ever crafted – are being
combined to bring advanced general-purpose AI systems into being.
The developers of these systems are keen to portray them as tools
for human empowerment. And indeed they could be. But make

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
57
no mistake: our present trajectory is to build ever-more powerful,
goal-directed, decision-making, and generally capable digital agents.
They already perform as well as many humans at a broad range of
intellectual tasks, are rapidly improving, and are contributing to their
own improvement.
Unless this trajectory changes or hits an unexpected roadblock,
we will soon – in years, not decades – have digital intelligences that
are dangerously powerful. Even in the best of outcomes, these would
bring great economic benefits (at least to some of us) but only at
the cost of a profound disruption in our society, and replacement of
humans in most of the most important things we do: these machines
would think for us, plan for us, decide for us, and create for us. We
would be spoiled, but spoiled children. Much more likely, these
systems would replace humans in both the positive and negative
things we do, including exploitation, manipulation, violence, and
war. Can we survive AI-hypercharged versions of these? Finally,
it is more than plausible that things would not go well at all: that
relatively soon we would be replaced not just in what we do, but
in what we are, as architects of civilization and the future. Ask the
neanderthals how that goes. Perhaps we provided them with extra
trinkets for a while as well.
We don’t have to do this. We have human-competitive AI, and
there’s no need to build AI with which we can’t compete. We can
build amazing AI tools without building a successor species. he
notion that AGI and superintelligence are inevitable is a choice mas-
querading as fate.
By imposing some hard, global limits, we can keep AI’s general
capability to approximately human level while still reaping the ben-
efits of computers’ ability to process data in ways we cannot, and
automate tasks none of us wants to do. These would still pose many
risks, but if designed and managed well, be an enormous boon to
humanity, from medicine to research to consumer products.
Imposing limits would require international cooperation, but less
than one might think, and those limits would still leave plenty of
room for an enormous AI and AI hardware industry focused on
applications that enhance human well-being, rather than on the raw
pursuit of power. And if, with strong safety guarantees and after
a meaningful global dialogue, we decide to go further, that option
continues to be ours to pursue.
Humanity must choose to close the Gates to AGI and superintelli-
gence.
To keep the future human.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
58
Appendixes
Appendix A: Compute accounting technical details
Compute accounting technical details
A detailed method for both "ground truth" as well as good approximations for the total compute used in training
and inference is required for meaningful compute-based controls. Here is an example of how the "ground truth"
could be tallied at a technical level.
Definitions:
Compute causal graph: For a given output O of an AI model, there is a set of digital computations for which changing
the result of that computation could potentially change O. (This should be conservatively assumed, i.e. there should
be a clear reason to believe that a computation is independent of a precursor that both occurs earlier in time and
has a physical potential causal path of effect.) This includes computation done by the AI model during inference, as
well as computations that went into input, data preparation, and training of the model. Because any of these may
itself be output from an AI model, this is computed recursively, cut off where a human has provided a significant
change to the input.
Training Compute: The total compute, in FLOP or other units, entailed by the compute causal graph of a neural net-
work (including data preparation, training, and fine-tuning, and any other computations.)
Output Compute: The total compute in the compute causal graph of a given AI output, including all neural networks
(and including their Training Compute) and other computations going into that output.
Inference Compute Rate: In a series of outputs, the rate of change (in FLOP/s or other units) of Output Compute
between outputs, i.e. the compute used to produce the next output, divided by the timed interval between the out-
puts.
Examples and approximations:
• For a single neural network trained on human-created data, the Training Compute is simply the total training
compute as customarily reported.
• For such a neural network doing inference at a steady rate, the Inference Compute Rate is approximately total
speed of computation cluster performing the inference in FLOP/s.
• For model fine-tuning, Training Compute of the complete model is given by the Training Compute of the non-
fine-tuned model plus the computation done during fine-tuning and to prepare any data used in fine-tuning.
• For a distilled model, the Training Compute of the complete model includes training of both the distilled model
and the larger model used to provide synthetic data or other training input.
• If several models are trained, but many "trials" are discarded on the basis of human judgment, these do not
count toward the Training or Output Compute of the retained model.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
59
Appendix B: Example implementation of a gate closure
Implementation Example: Here is one example of how a gate closure could work, given a limit of 1027 FLOP for training and
1020 FLOP/s for inference (running the AI):
1. Pause: For reasons of national security, the US Executive branch asks all companies based in the US, doing business in the US,
or using chips manufactured in the US, to cease and desist from any new AI training runs that might exceed the 1027 FLOP Train-
ing Compute limit. The US should commence discussions with other countries hosting AI development, strongly encouraging
them to take similar steps and indicating that the US pause may be lifted should they choose not to comply.
2. US oversight and licensing: By executive order or action of an existing regulatory agency, the US requires that within (say) one
year:
• All AI training runs estimated above 1025 FLOP done by companies operating in the US be registered in a database maintained
by a US regulatory agency. (Note: A slightly weaker version of this had already been included in the now-rescinded 2023 US
executive order on AI, requiring registration for models above 1026 FLOP.)
• All AI-relevant hardware manufacturers operating in the US or doing business with the USG adhere to a set of requirements
on their specialized hardware and the software driving it. (Many of these requirements could be built into software and
firmware updates to existing hardware, but longterm and robust solutions would require changes to later generations of hard-
ware.) Among these is a requirement that if the hardware is part of a high-speed-interconnected cluster capable of executing
1018 FLOP/s of computation, a higher level of verification is required, which includes regular permission by a remote "gover-
nor" who receives both telemetry and requests to perform additional computation.
• The custodian reports the total computation performed on its hardware to the agency maintaining the US database.
• Stronger requirements are phased in to allow both more secure and more flexible oversight and permissioning.
3. International oversight:
• The US, China, and any other countries hosting advanced chip manufacturing capability negotiate an international agreement.
• This agreement creates a new international agency, analogous to the International Atomic Energy Agency, charged with over-
seeing AI training and execution.
• Signatory countries must require their domestic AI hardware manufacturers to comply with a set of requirements at least as
strong as those imposed in the US.
• Custodians are now required to report AI computation numbers to both agencies in their home countries as well as a new
office within the international agency.
• Additional countries are strongly encouraged to join the existing international agreement: export controls by signatory counties
restrict access to high-end hardware by non-signatories while signatories can receive technical support in managing their AI
systems.
4. International verification and enforcement:
• The hardware verification system is updated so that it reports computation usage to both the original custodian and also di-
rectly to the international agency office.
• The agency, via discussion with the signatories of the international agreement, agrees on computation limitations which then
take legal force in the signatory countries.
• In parallel, a set of international standards may be developed so that training and running of AIs above a threshold of compu-
tation (but below the limit) are required to adhere to those standards.
• The agency can, if necessary to compensate for better algorithms etc., lower the computation limit. Or, if it is deemed safe and
advisable (at say the level of provable safety guarantees), raise the computation limit.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
60
Appendix C: Details for a strict AGI liability regime
Details for a strict AGI liability regime
• Creation and operation of an advanced AI system that is highly general, capable, and autonomous, is considered
an "abnormally dangerous" activity.
• As such, the default liability for training and operating such systems level is strict, joint and several liability (or
its non-US equivalent) for any harms done by the model or its outputs/actions.
• Personal liability will be imposed for executives and board members in cases of gross negligence or willful mis-
conduct. This should include criminal penalties for the most egregious cases.
• There are numerous safe-harbors under which liability reverts to the default (fault-based, in the US) liability to
which people and companies would normally be subject.
– Models trained and operated below some compute threshold (which would be at least 10x lower than the caps
described above.)
– AI that is "weak" (roughly, below human expert level at the tasks for which it is intended) and/or
– AI that is "narrow" (having a fixed and quite limited scope of tasks and operations that it is specifically de-
signed and trained for) and/or
– AI that is "passive" (very limited in its ability – even under modest modification – to take actions or perform
complex multistep tasks without direct human involvement and control.)
– An AI that is guaranteed to be safe, secure, and controllable (provably safe, or a risk analysis indicates a negli-
gible level of expected harm.)
• Safe harbors may be claimed on the basis of a safety case prepared by the AI developer and approved by an
agency or auditor credentialed by an agency. To claim a safe harbor based on compute, the developer must
just supply credible estimates of total Training Compute and maximal Inference Rate
• Legislation would explicitly outline situations under which injunctive relief from the development of AI systems
with a high risk of public harm would be appropriate.
• Company consortia, working with NGOs and government agencies, should develop standards and norms defin-
ing these terms, how regulators should grant safe harbors, how AI developer should develop safety cases, and
how courts should interpret liability where safe harbors are not proactively claimed.

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
61
Appendix D: A tiered approach to AGI safety & security standards
A tiered approach to AGI safety & security standards
Risk
Tier
Trigger(s)
Requirements for training
Requirement for deployment
RT-0
AI weak in autonomy, general-
ity, and intelligence
none
none
RT-1
AI strong in one of autonomy,
generality, and intelligence
none
Based on risk and use, potentially
safety cases approved by national au-
thorities wherever the model can be
used
RT-2
AI strong in two of autonomy,
generality, and intelligence
Registration with national
authority with jurisdiction
over the developer
Safety case bounding risk of major
harm below authorized levels plus
independent safety audits (including
black-box and white-box redteam-
ing) approved by national authorities
wherever the model can be used
RT-3
AGI strong in autonomy, gener-
ality, and intelligence
Pre-approval of safety and
security plan by national
authority with jurisdiction
over the developer
Safety case guaranteeing bounded risk
of major harm below authorized levels
as well as required specifications, in-
cluding cybersecurity, controllability,
a non-removable killswitch, alignment
with human values, and robustness to
malicious use.
RT-4
Any model that also exceeds
either 1027 FLOP Training or
1020 FLOP/s Inference
Prohibited pending in-
ternational agreed lift of
compute cap
Prohibited pending international
agreed lift of compute cap
Risk classifications and safety/security standards, with tiers based on compute thresholds as well as combinations of
high autonomy, generality, and intelligence:
• Strong autonomy applies if the system is able to perform, or can easily be made to perform, many-step tasks and/or
take complex actions that are real-world relevant, without significant human oversight or intervention. Examples:
autonomous vehicles and robots; financial trading bots. Non-examples: GPT-4; image classifiers
• Strong generality indicates a wide scope of application, performance of tasks for which the model was not deliber-
ately and specifically trained, and significant ability to learn new tasks. Examples: GPT-4; mu-zero. Non-examples:
AlphaFold; autonomous vehicles; image generators
• Strong intelligence corresponds to matching human expert-level performance on the tasks for which the model
performs best (and for a general model, across a broad range of tasks.) Examples: AlphaFold; mu-zero; o3. Non-
examples: GPT-4; Siri

anthony aguirre
Keep the Future Human
62
Acknowledgments
This work reflects the opinions of the author and should not be taken
as official position of the Future of Life Institute (though they are
compatible; for FLI’s official position see this page), or any other
organization with which the author is affiliated.
I’m grateful to humans Mark Brakel, Ben Eisenpress, Anna Hehir,
Carlos Gutierrez, Emilia Javorsky, Richard Mallah, Jordan Scharn-
horst, Elyse Fulcher, Hamza Chaudhry, Max Tegmark, Jaan Tallinn,
and others for comments on the manuscript; to Tim Schrier for help
with some references; to Taylor Jones and Elyse Fulcher for beautifi-
cation of the manuscript and diagrams.
This work made limited use of generative AI models (Claude and
ChatGPT) in its creation, for some editing and red-teaming. In the
well-established standard of levels of AI involvement of creative
works, this work would probably rate a 3/10. (There is in fact no
such standard! But there should be.)

